University of Bradford eThesis 
This thesis is hosted in Bradford Scholars  The University of Bradford Open Access 
repository. Visit the repository for full metadata or to contact the repository team 
 University of Bradford. This work is licenced for reuse under a Creative Commons 
Licence. 
https://bradscholars.brad.ac.uk/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/3.0/
A LONGITUDINAL EXPLORATION OF THE 
EXPERIENCE OF FRONTO-TEMPORAL 
DEMENTIA IN INTERGENERATIONAL FAMILIES 
Jenny Helen LA FONTAINE PAPADOPOULOS 
Submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Faculty of Health Studies 
University of Bradford 
Abstract 
Jenny Helen La Fontaine Papadopoulos 
A longitudinal exploration of the experience of fronto-temporal dementia in 
intergenerational families 
Key words:  
Family relations, frontotemporal dementia, longitudinal, qualitative research, 
coping 
Background: 
Dementia presents challenges for whole families requiring on-going 
adaptation. Family relationships provide important benefits, thus 
understanding the impact of dementia for families is critical to facilitating their 
wellbeing. Behavioural variant Frontotemporal Dementia (bvFTD) brings 
specific challenges for relationships, however little is understood about how 
these are experienced or how families adjust.  
Aims: 
This research sought to develop an in-depth understanding of the inter-
generational family experience of bvFTD over time.  
Method: 
Using a qualitative design, nineteen people were interviewed from seven 
families, including people living with bvFTD. Interviews occurred over three 
time points. Narrative analysis and grounded theory were used to understand 
how relationships are affected and the psycho-social coping processes 
involved in adjustment over time.  
Results: 
Four themes emerged;  
 Cohesive and connected --- distant and disconnected  
 Challenges to we/ I  
 Assimilating, adjusting and reconstructing --- resisting, denying, being 
stuck  
 A changing we / I --- an entrenched we / I  
Results illustrate the influence of pre-existing relationships on family 
experiences of bvFTD. Challenges to family relationships occurred, including 
changes in mutuality and increased responsibility. Levels of awareness and 
understanding, influenced by factors such as proximity impacted upon 
individual and family adjustment. Assimilating these changes was critical to 
developing strategies for managing the impact on the relationship and 
adapting to a changing we. For closest family members including partners, 
grief and loss were experienced resulting in the need for a parallel adaptation 
to a changing I. Acceptance and adaptation was critical to supporting the 
wellbeing of the person with bvFTD.  
Acknowledgements  
There are a number of people that I wish to thank for their contribution to this 
endeavour. I particularly wish to extend my gratitude and appreciation to the 
seven families who have taken part in my PhD research. Without their 
courage, openness and ongoing willingness to contribute their perspectives 
and experiences I would not have been able to realise this goal. I am also 
very appreciative of the support offered by Jayne as her insights have been 
incredibly valuable over these six years.  
I would like to thank my supervisor Professor Jan Oyebode, whose care, 
kindness, encouragement, thought provoking questions and considerable 
knowledge enabled me to maintain my enthusiasm for this research and 
reach the end. I also wish to thank Dr Michael Larkin, who has been an 
advisor throughout this journey and has offered a critical and insightful 
listening ear, enhancing my learning and thinking. I am certain that I could 
not have achieved this PhD without the guidance provided by Jan and 
Michael, not least because their encouragement enabled me to keep going 
Similarly the support of Hazel and Viv has been a boost to my emotional 
wellbeing through this journey.  
It would also not have been possible to do this PhD without the love, support 
and encouragement I have received from my husband Andrew, my daughter 
Gemma, my four grandchildren, my stepchildren, Mike and Alethea, my 
family and my friends. Andrew in particular has been a guiding and loving 
presence during some difficult times, lending his considerable knowledge, 
patience and creativity. Reaching the end of my studies means that many 
opportunities for returning their patience, hugs and love are finally within 
sight Thanks are also due to many of my work colleagues, particularly Anna 
Buckell, whose values, insight, interest and encouragement serve to remind 
me why it is that I have done this PhD.  
Finally, I wish to thank The Florence Nightingale Foundation, The General 
Nursing Council for England and Wales Trust and The Atkinson Morley and 
Amandus Club Neuroscience, whose funding supported me for three years of 
my PhD.  
Dedication 
This thesis is dedicated to Andrew, Gemma and my family whom I love more 
than its possible to express. It is also dedicated to all of the people living with 
dementia and their families who I have had the honour to work with 
throughout my career. Your strength and courage is an inspiration to me.  
Contents 
2.4 Existing research concerning the reciprocal influence of dementia 
2.5 Family Relationships and dementia: a synthesis of qualitative 
2.8 The experience of living with bvFTD from the perspective of the 
Chapter Six: We / I before Behavioural Variant Frontotemporal Dementia 
Chapter Seven: Challenges experienced over time by we / I, brought about 
Chapter Eight: coping processes used by families to address the 
challenges brought about by behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia 
Chapter Nine: relational outcomes associated with living with behavioural 
variant frontotemporal dementia: a changing we/ I --- an entrenched we / I
9.4 Relational outcomes for partners, adult daughters and their 
10.2 Links between the current study and the results of the systematic 
10.4  The unique contribution of these findings: The reciprocal 
10.6 Reflexivity and reflection on the research and my contribution to 
Appendices 
These are contained on a CD at the back of the thesis. They comprise the 
following documents: 
Appendix 1 La Fontaine J and Oyebode J (2014) Systematic Synthesis 
PDF document 
Appendix 2 Systematic Synthesis, papers review tables PDF document 
Appendix 3 Assessment of quality of studies, family relationships and 
dementia PDF document 
Appendix 4 bvFTD and family/ personal experience review tables PDF 
document 
Appendix 5 Assessment of quality of studies bvFTD and family/ personal 
experience review tables PDF document 
Appendix 6 NRES approval letter PDF document 
Appendix 7 Approval of amendments to NRES PDF document 
Appendix 8 Florence Nightingale Report 2012-13 PDF document 
Appendix 9  Participant information sheet PDF document 
Appendix 10 Participant consent form PDF document 
Appendix 11 Participant information sheet FTD short version PDF document 
Appendix 12 Interview map fieldwork PDF document 
Appendix 13 Interview guide questions time point 1 PDF document 
Appendix 14 Interview guide questions example time point 2 PDF document 
Appendix 15 Interview guide questions example time point 3 PDF document 
Appendix 16 Florence Nightingale report 2013-14 PDF document 
Appendix 17 Lewin NA and GT coding tables Excel document 
Appendix 18 Description of Narrative thematic analysis process PDF 
document 
Appendix 19  Description of grounded theory analysis process PDF 
document 
Appendix 20 Independent checking of analysis Hugh Family Summary PDF 
document 
Appendix 21 Family relationships prior to bvFTD PDF document 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
1.1  Personal statement 
I came to this research study as a result of a long journey, having worked 
with people living with dementia and their families since qualifying as a 
Mental Health Nurse in 1982. In the mid 1980s I was introduced to working 
therapeutically with families by Alison Roper Hall, a Consultant Clinical 
Psychologist with expertise in family therapy. This was an important learning 
opportunity for me and influenced my thinking and my practice going forward. 
For example, I undertook a small research study exploring how families 
understood and coped with dementia for my MA dissertation in 1995. This 
research emphasised for me how important it was to view dementia in the 
context of family relationships, recognising that all family members including 
the person with dementia actively influenced how dementia was experienced.  
During this time, opportunities for learning and developing my practice 
encompassed working therapeutically with families living with dementia 
including those families experiencing young onset dementia. Working with 
people living with young onset dementia and their families brought the need 
for a relational context to practice into sharp focus for me because family 
members such as children, young people and parents were highly visible and 
had needs that were not always met by services.  Furthermore, people living 
with less common forms of dementia such as frontotemporal dementia (FTD) 
appeared to experience particular challenges to relationships. Their 
experience appeared markedly different from families living with Alzheimers 
disease, because FTD impacted directly on relationships due to its effect on 
social and emotional functioning. The challenges these families faced 
represented a steep learning curve for me as I tried to understand how to 
help them, particularly in the context of an absence of relevant research to 
guide and support interventions.  
While research into FTD gained momentum between 2000 and 2010, this 
rarely translated to a focus on interventions which supported people living 
with FTD and their families. Furthermore, the perspectives of people living   
with bvFTD remained unheard in this research, despite a broader 
acknowledgement in research and practice of the need to achieve this 
(Wilkinson 2002). Thus my efforts to develop my understanding and support 
families including the person with bvFTD were often challenged and there 
were times when it felt I could offer little more than a listening ear. Over time I 
realised that this was a significant gap that needed to be addressed. Thus in 
2010, I began this research study to explore the family experience of living 
with bvFTD. 
My experience as a practitioner, researcher and educator has influenced my 
reasons for undertaking this study and has affected the way that I have 
carried it out. Additionally it influences what I hope this study will achieve. 
This research has inevitably influenced my perceptions of myself as a 
partner, mother, step-mother and grandmother within my own family, with all 
the joys and challenges this brings and therefore influenced the way in which 
I have interpreted the data and developed the stories being told. In this 
thesis, I provide an account of a qualitative longitudinal study with seven 
families who live with behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD). 
Furthermore I consider the practice implications of their experience.   
1.2 Background and context to this research  
Dementia is identified as one of the most serious health challenges facing the 
world at this time (Prince et al. 2015). Current evidence suggests that there 
are 46.8 million people worldwide who live with dementia. Furthermore, it is it 
is suggested that there are around 850,000 people in the UK who experience 
Dementia Syndrome (Prince et al. 2014). These authors also identify that of 
those 850,000, 42,325 people are living with young onset dementia in the 
UK, although Lambert et al. (2014), suggest that accurate estimations of the 
prevalence of young onset dementia are complex and difficult to achieve. 
Prevalence rates are expected to continue to rise and by 2025, it is estimated 
that over 1 million people in the UK will live with dementia (Prince et al. 
2015).  In this context, it is widely acknowledged that research and practice 
development need to occur in order to provide effective, person and family 
centred interventions and care for people living with dementia and their 
families. Various authors have suggested that research considering the   
experience and needs of people living with dementia and family members 
and the interventions that might be required has developed in three phases 
(Ablitt et al. 2009; Whitlach 2001; Woods 2001). These phases (focus on 
caregivers, focus on people with dementia and a relational focus) are 
summarised below to give context to the place of the current study.  
The first phase involved research into family caregiving. It has been 
acknowledged that family members provide the majority of care and support 
needed by people living with dementia (Prince et al. 2015; Luengo-
Fernandez et al. 2010). Furthermore it is suggested that one in three of us 
will provide care to a family member with dementia at some point in our lives 
(Dowrick and Southern 2014). As well as providing much needed support 
and care, families are thought to facilitate wellbeing and maintain self-esteem 
and identity of people living with dementia (Livingston et al. 2008). Research 
suggests that caregiving for a family member with dementia is associated 
with satisfactions including the opportunity to reciprocate and having a close 
relationship with the person with dementia (de Labra et al. 2015; Andrn and 
Elmsthl 2005; Lloyd et al. 2014).  However, evidence also attests to the 
negative outcomes that occur, including poor physical and mental health 
(Gallagher-Thompson et al. 2012).  
Furthermore, despite increasing recognition of the challenges of caring in the 
context of dementia, some have suggested that there has been a failure to 
meet the needs of family caregivers (Knapp and Prince 2007). In recent 
years, government guidance and policy has sought to address this. Indeed 
the most recent Prime Ministers challenge 2020 (Department of Health 
2014) identified that services should work towards greater personalisation of 
care and support for the person with dementia, their carer and their family.  
Alongside this focus on the needs of family caregivers, various authors have 
increasingly stressed the need to involve and include people living with 
dementia in research and practice in order to better understand the support 
and interventions needed (Kitwood 1997; Woods 2001; Whitlach 2001). 
These and other authors have emphasised that people living with   
dementia are active agents in addressing the impact of dementia on their 
lives. Furthermore, Woods (2001) suggested that the interrelationship 
between people with dementia and their family caregivers cannot be ignored, 
as they have a reciprocal influence on each others wellbeing.  
Consequently, over the last decade, a second phase of research has 
emerged concerning the experience of dementia from the perspective of the 
person with the diagnosis, highlighting their needs and demonstrating their 
ability to actively contribute to research and practice development (Ablitt et al. 
2009).  
For example, in a recent systematic review and synthesis, Wolverson et al. 
(2016: 697) established that people have the ability to live well with 
dementia which involves retaining strengths and positive experiences in spite 
of their diagnosis. They also suggest that dementia care and research needs 
to explore ways in which these strengths and positive opportunities can be 
sustained to help the person to live as well as possible.  Furthermore, given 
the acknowledged link between the wellbeing of the person with dementia 
and their family caregivers, it is feasible that active strategies to improve the 
wellbeing of the person with dementia are likely to have an additional effect 
of improving the wellbeing of family caregivers (Ablitt et al. 2009).  
Given this increasing body of research evidence, it is perhaps unsurprising 
that the third and most recent phase of research has involved an exploration 
of the impact of dementia upon relationships (Ablitt et al. 2009; Quinn et al. 
2009). The focus on relationships between the person with dementia and 
their family caregiver has established that factors such as shared coping 
strategies and the quality of the prior relationship impact upon the experience 
of dementia (Ablitt et al. 2009; Hellstrm et al. 2007a; Keady and Nolan 
2003).  However, the majority of studies in this area have concentrated upon 
the relationship between couples (c.f. Hellstrm et al. 2007a; Wawrziczny et 
al. 2014; Davies 2011) and have rarely considered other family relationships. 
Furthermore, the perspective of the person with dementia has often been 
missing from such research.   
Nevertheless, this research confirms that a range of family members are 
affected by dementia. These include young people with a parent with 
dementia and adult daughters and sons (Camden et al. 2011; McDonnell and 
Ryan 2011; McDonnell and Ryan 2014; Ward-Griffin et al. 2007; Piercy 2007; 
Sechrist et al. 2012; Svanberg et al. 2011; Denny et al. 2012; Gelman and 
Greer 2011). Furthermore, this research suggests that all family members, 
including the person with dementia, seek to actively address the impact of 
dementia on their lives (Hellstrm et al. 2007a; Allen et al. 2009; Roach et al. 
2014b).  
However there is limited research concerning the experience of dementia 
from the perspective of whole families. Studies by Garwick et al (1994) and 
Roach et al. (2014b) are two of only a small number that have addressed the 
family experience and explicitly acknowledged the need for such a focus. 
Furthermore, family centred interventions have rarely been adopted within 
dementia care (Benbow and Sharman 2014). Indeed it is suggested that the 
focus of care services has commonly been on caregiving thus reducing 
relationships to a functional role involving care for the person with dementia 
(Roach et al. 2014b; Braun et al. 2009). A risk of this reductionist approach is 
that the person with dementia is also reduced to the role of care-recipient 
with the resulting loss of power that this can entail (Wadham et al. 2016).  
Research into living with other health and long-term conditions supports the 
suggestion that a focus on family relationships would be beneficial. For 
example, Kissane and Bloch (2002) describe family focused grief 
interventions for families affected by cancer. Similarly, Fadden and Smith 
(2009) describe family interventions in the context of psychosis. A recent 
review has confirmed the value of family interventions in schizophrenia in 
reducing relapse rates and admission to hospital (Bucci et al. 2016). 
Nevertheless it would be inappropriate to transfer family experiences of these 
conditions given the differences associated with dementia, such as the 
unpredictable, lengthy and changing course (Sheilds 1992). Consequently, 
given the limited evidence concerning the reciprocal influence between family 
relationships and dementia, it is necessary to develop our understanding of 
the whole family experience. I aimed to address this in the current study by   
involving all core family members as defined by the person with dementia 
and his/ her care partner. 
Furthermore, the development of our understanding needs to acknowledge 
that dementia is not a unitary experience and that less common forms of 
dementia and dementia occurring at a younger age involve special needs 
that are currently under-researched and under-served. Thus a focus on 
family relationships in this context is an important step forward in advancing 
the knowledge base and ultimately informing interventions. In the current 
study, I have taken this into account by focusing on bvFTD, a particular and 
rare form of dementia that has a younger age of onset than that of the more 
common forms of dementia. 
1.3 What is Dementia Syndrome? 
Considerable support exists for a holistic, biopsychosocial construction of 
dementia in which the person and their family are not defined by dementia 
but live with it (Kitwood 1997; Brooker 2007; Nolan et al. 2002; Spector and 
Orrel 2010). A biopsychosocial construction of dementia involves 
consideration of the multiple factors that influence the lives of the person and 
their family, including for example, their biography, their health, the 
relationships they have and the nature of the neurological changes they 
experience (Kitwood 1997). A biomedical formulation of dementia is an 
important feature of this construction and contributes to our understanding of 
the persons experience of living with dementia.  
Accordingly, within this biomedical formulation, dementia is considered to be 
an acquired deficit of cognitive function(s) which may include complex 
attention, executive ability, learning and memory, language, visuospatial-
perceptual ability praxis and social cognition. The cognitive deficits may or 
may not be accompanied by behavioural disorders and must be sufficient to 
interfere with functional independence (Sorbi et al. 2012: 1160-61)
Furthermore, dementia is a progressive and degenerative condition which is 
life limiting, particularly for younger people below the age of 65.  
Establishing a diagnosis of dementia at any age, is a complex process that 
requires integration of the results of screening assessments, imaging and   
neuropsychological assessment together with knowledge of the person with 
suspected symptoms. Knowledge of the person necessarily includes their 
usual and current level of functioning and their history. 
Diagnosis, particularly 
early in the experience of cognitive and other symptoms is not 
straightforward and variations in the manifestation of symptoms are 
commonplace (Eschweiler et al. 2010). Accordingly, active involvement of the 
person with symptoms and their family members is essential to ensure that 
the process is inclusive and rigorous. A clinical diagnosis of dementia 
typically follows a two-stage process, identifying the presence of dementia 
syndrome and then determining the subtype (Eschweiler et al. 2010).  
Although there are acknowledged to be over 100 different types of dementia 
(Milne 2010) the most common forms are listed in the table below (table 1.1):  
Table 1 Dementia Subtypes 
Alzheimers Disease 
accounting for 62% of 
all dementia diagnoses 
Alzheimers disease can be further split into the 
following subtypes although the amnestic 
presentation is the most common 
 Amnestic  (Primary impairment in memory 
plus at least one other cognitive 
impairment) 
 Executive dysfunction (Primary impairment 
in reasoning, judgement and problem 
solving) 
 Posterior Cortical Atrophy (PCA) (Primary 
impairment in spatial cognition) 
 Language presentation (Primary impairment 
in word finding)  
Vascular Dementia  
Accounting for 17% of 
all dementia diagnoses 
Mixed Alzheimers 
disease and vascular 
dementia accounting 
for 10% of all dementia 
diagnoses 
Dementia with Lewy 
Bodies or Dementia 
associated with 
Parkinsons disease 
Accounting for 6% of all 
diagnoses  
Frontotemporal 
Dementia 
Accounting for 2% of all 
diagnoses 
Frontotemporal dementia is split into the following 
subtypes although bvFTD is the most common 
1. Behavioural variant FTD (bvFTD) 
2. Primary Progressive Aphasias; 
a. Semantic Dementia (or Semantic 
variant PPA) (SD) 
b. Progressive non-fluent aphasia 
(PNFA) 
c. Logopenic Aphasia (LA)  
(Knapp and Prince 2007; McKhann et al. 2011; Rascovsky et al. 2011; 
Snowden et al. 2011; Gorno-tempini et al. 2011). 
As can be seen above, significant variation exists in the types of dementia 
that are most commonly diagnosed and as indicated earlier, variability in 
symptom experience, even within these subtypes is not uncommon. However 
dementia is not well understood and is commonly associated with memory 
loss (Alzheimers Research UK 2016). Consequently, people who live with 
less common forms of dementia, as identified in table 1.1, may struggle to 
gain a diagnosis and appropriate advice and support. Furthermore their 
needs may be less well understood by others within their family, social circle 
and community. It is for these reasons and the challenges I experienced in 
my clinical role that I have chosen to focus on bvFTD in this thesis.  
1.4 Structure of the thesis 
In Chapter 1, I have considered my personal reasons for undertaking this 
research. I have provided an overview of the background and context to this 
research study and have briefly introduced the demography influencing 
current policy in regard to dementia. I have summarised the reasons why a 
focus on family relationships could be beneficial. Finally, I have provided an 
overview of dementia syndrome. 
In Chapter 2 I provide an integrative literature review. In the introduction, I 
summarise the existing literature concerning family relationships and 
dementia. Following this, I present a systematic synthesis of qualitative 
research exploring the reciprocal influence between dementia and family 
relationships. Articles which have been published since the synthesis was  
completed for publication in 2012 are added to the review to ensure that it is 
up-to-date. I then describe behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia, 
considering the key features of the condition and its psychosocial impact. 
Finally, I review relevant literature concerning the impact and experience of 
living with bvFTD for both the person with dementia and family members.  
In Chapter 3, I review the epistemological and ontological position of this 
research and provide a rationale for the methodology chosen for this study.  
In Chapter 4, I provide a description of the methods, including the process of 
ethical approval, recruitment, data collection and analysis. I also provide an 
overview of the participating families.  
In Chapter 5, I provide an introduction and overview of the results 
In Chapter 6, I present the findings associated with the first superordinate 
theme; Cohesive and connected --- Disconnected and distant which 
concerns the nature of families prior to the onset of bvFTD.  I provide a 
summary portrait of each family and individuals within the family of their 
relationships prior to the onset of bvFTD. Furthermore, I offer an account of 
the interview context for each family and consider my influence on the 
research. 
In Chapter 7, I present the findings associated with the second superordinate 
theme; challenges to we/ I which encapsulates the four challenges that the 
seven families experienced in living with bvFTD. Two challenges were 
experienced by the whole family; awareness and understanding of the 
changes and managing everyday life. One challenge was experienced by 
partners and adult daughters; were not the same anymore. A final challenge 
was experienced by the person with bvFTD; being me in the context of 
bvFTD. I also consider the influencing elements associated with each of 
these challenges.  
In Chapter 8, I present the findings associated with the superordinate theme 
assimilating, adjusting and reconstructing --- resisting, denying or being stuck 
which addresses the psychosocial and practical coping processes used by 
these seven families to manage the impact of the challenges described in 
Chapter 7.  
In Chapter 9, I present the findings associated with the final superordinate 
theme; A changing we / I ---- An entrenched we / I. This relates to the 
relational outcomes associated with the experience of bvFTD for these seven 
families. 
In Chapter 10, I explore the links between the current study and the 
systematic synthesis described in Chapter 1. I also consider the added value 
this study brings to existing research as well as exploring the limitations of 
the study. Finally, I discuss the implications of these results for research and 
for interventions to support families to live well with bvFTD. 
Chapter 2: Literature Review  
2.1. Introduction 
In this chapter I present an integrative literature review to provide a 
preliminary conceptualisation of the interplay between relationships and 
dementia, given that research in this field is at an early stage of development 
(Torraco 2005). The review is divided into ten sections. After describing the 
method for the review in section 2.2, I outline the search strategy for family 
relationships and dementia in section 2.3. In section 2.4, I summarise 
existing research concerning the connections between family relationships 
and dementia, the majority of which focuses on those in relationship with a 
person with dementia such as a partner or adult child.  
In section 2.5, I present the findings of a systematic synthesis of qualitative 
research which explores the reciprocal influence of dementia and family 
relationships which includes the person with dementia. This synthesis was 
undertaken in 2012. Much of the research to that date that had explored the 
impact of dementia on relationships involved in-depth, qualitative studies that 
had rarely been included in systematic reviews. The goals of the review were 
to illuminate what was known about reciprocal influences between family 
relationships and dementia from the perspectives of the family (including the 
person with dementia); and to consider the implications of these findings for 
research and practice. A thematic analysis was conducted of 11 qualitative 
articles considering the impact of dementia upon relationships. The findings 
were written up for publication in Ageing and Society and the article was 
published in 2014 (La Fontaine and Oyebode 2014). This thesis will describe 
the search strategy; summarise the findings of the review and explore the 
implications for research. As the synthesis was completed in 2012, a further 
search was undertaken to establish any additional qualitative studies 
published since that date. These studies are also reviewed.  
In sections 2.6 to 2.9, I move on to consider behavioural variant 
frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) more specifically. Section 2.6 provides an 
overview of behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), 
summarising the main features of the condition. Section 2.7 describes the  
search strategy for this section of the review. Sections 2.8 and 2.9 of the 
review involve an analysis of research which considers the specific 
experience of bvFTD for the person with dementia and for family members. 
Finally, in 2.10 and 2.11, the results of these sections are combined to 
consider the gaps in current research and therefore the aims of this current 
study.  
2.2 Method 
Integrative literature reviews are suggested to be a particular method of 
review that can provide a comprehensive conceptualisation of a specific area 
(Whittemore and Knafl 2005) by bringing together different sources of 
evidence including experimental and qualitative research.  
One widely accepted approach to conducting an integrative review is to 
follow a set of steps that seek to demonstrate methodological rigour. These 
are as follows: 
1. Problem formulation 
2. Literature search 
3. Data evaluation 
4. Data analysis 
5. Presentation (Whittemore and Knafl 2005) 
While I have broadly followed these steps for the whole review, they have 
been specifically applied to sections three, five and six to nine.   
2.3 Search Strategy Family Relationships and Dementia 
In order to establish what was known about how dementia influences family 
relationships and vice versa, a search strategy was devised that involved the 
process described in table 2.1. The searches were originally conducted in 
2012 and were updated in 2016. A systematic synthesis of the reciprocal 
influence of family relationships and dementia was written using the findings 
of the 2012 search and was published in Ageing and Society (see appendix 1 
PDF on CD). I have quoted extensively from this article on pages 29-44 as 
permitted by university regulations and with permission from Cambridge 
University Press.  
Table 2.1: Search Strategy Family Relationships and Dementia 
Keyword Search:  
Dementia OR Alzheimers Disease  
Caregiv* or Carer 
AND/ OR 
Family Relations* or Relations*, Parent Child relations*, Marriage or Marital 
Relations*, Spouse, Spousal Relations*, Sexual Relations*, Child*, 
Couplehood, Spousal Caregiv*, Mother Daughter Relations* Mother Son 
Relations*  
Databases Searched:  
1) Ovid Search of PsycARTICLES, PsycINFO, CAB, Embase, Medline, = 
individual searches combined resulting in 350 articles after duplicates 
were removed 
2) Cinahl, = 157 articles after duplicates removed 
3) Web of Science = 367 articles 
4) ASSIA = 1 article 
(Limits applied: English language) 
Inclusion Criteria: 
1) This review is concerned with understanding the impact of dementia upon 
family relationships including the person living with dementia, therefore 
the presence of these factors should be a central feature of the article 
2) Qualitative methodology, as the purpose is to develop an in-depth 
understanding of the impact of dementia upon relationships 
3) Actual research studies rather than systematic reviews or literature 
reviews 
Exclusion Criteria 
1) Studies using a quantitative methodology as such methods are concerned 
with breadth and generalisability rather than in-depth understanding 
2) Articles that focused upon relationships between people living with 
dementia and their families and health and social care staff 
3) Use of observational methods rather than qualitative interviews 
Search repeated July 2016.  
Limited to dates between 2012 and current date 
278 abstracts were retrieved after duplicates removed 
A hand search of Dementia and the references used identified a further 2 
articles.  
In the original search in 2012, all articles obtained were subjected to initial 
review based upon the title and abstract. Eighteen articles were identified as 
relevant. A further hand search of these articles and of the journal Dementia, 
identified a further five articles for inclusion. The full text of twenty three  
articles was then subjected to further scrutiny, to assess their inclusion 
according to the criteria outlined in table 2.1 above.  
Eleven articles were selected as meeting the criteria. Their methodologies, 
research questions and key results are summarised in appendix 2 (PDF CD). 
Eight of the studies had the relationship between the person with dementia 
and their family member as a central theme (Daniels et al. 2007; Davies 
2011; Forbat 2003; Hellstrm et al. 2007; Hellstrm et al. 2005; Molyneaux et 
al. 2011; Purves 2010; Ward-Griffin et al. 2007) . The other three included 
methods and results which illustrated the participants reactions to and 
experiences of dementia and its impact upon their dyadic relationship (Clare 
and Shakespeare 2004; Robinson et al. 2005; Svanstrm and Dahlberg 
2004). 
In July 2016, the searches were updated using the same process. Abstracts 
and titles of articles retrieved from the second search (see table 2.1) were 
evaluated. Full text was obtained for seven articles which were subjected to 
further scrutiny. Of these, four were selected as meeting the criteria (Roach 
et al. 2014a; Hydn and Nilsson 2015; Wawrziczny et al. 2014; Merrick et al. 
2016). Their methodologies, research questions and key results are also 
summarised in appendix 2 (PDF CD). All four studies had relationships 
between the person with dementia and their families as the central theme.  
Articles retrieved from the initial searches that had relationships as their 
central theme, but used quantitative methodologies, were systematic reviews 
or meta-syntheses, or did not include the perspective of the person with 
dementia were retained to set the context for the synthesis. In this next 
section, I begin by reviewing these papers, which draw upon a wide range of 
recent research on caregiving, relationships and dementia. Following this the 
results of the systematic synthesis are presented.  
2.4 Existing research concerning the reciprocal influence of dementia and 
relationships.   
Systematic reviews addressing caregiving and relationships 
Various authors emphasise that dementia occurs in the context of a pre-
existing relationship that continues to develop over time, evolving   
dynamically as developmental transitions and challenges occur over the life 
cycle (Ablitt et al. 2009; Woods et al. 2001; Whitlach 2001; Quinn et al. 
2009). As indicated in Chapter 1, most research concerning the reciprocal 
influence of dementia and relationships is relatively recent (Ablitt et al. 2009). 
Studies prior to 2008 primarily considered the perspectives of family 
caregivers, predominantly spouses (Quinn et al. 2009; Ablitt et al. 2009). 
More recent research has extended to considering other family members, 
including adult children, children and young people. Furthermore, research 
has also begun to consider the views of people living with dementia about 
their relationships.  
Two systematic reviews of the interrelationship between dementia and 
relationships were published in 2009 (Ablitt et al. 2009; Quinn et al. 2009). 
Additionally, a review considering the dyadic perspective in dementia 
caregiving in spousal relationships was also published (Braun et al. 2009). 
These three reviews considered the findings of a total of 38 studies (27 
quantitative, 11 qualitative), thirteen of which were common to all of the 
reviews.  
These systematic reviews identified a number of relevant findings 
addressing: 
 The impact of dementia on relationships  
 The impact of the relationship on living with dementia  
 The influence of the caregiving relative on the quality of the 
relationship between the person with dementia and the caregiver  
 The impact of the quality of the relationship between the person with 
dementia and the family caregiver on the wellbeing of them both  
Each of these reviews has concluded that the research studies they have 
reviewed are largely taken from the perspective of the family caregiver. The 
reviews suggest that current relationship quality is evaluated as having 
declined overall in the context of dementia when compared to prior 
relationship quality (Quinn et al. 2009; Ablitt et al. 2009; Braun et al. 2009). 
Specific areas of decline include intimacy, reciprocity, communication and 
happiness. Conversely however, two of the reviews emphasise that some   
studies found an increase in closeness, warmth and mutual affection. They 
further suggested that maintaining a sense of mutuality was an important 
influence on the experience of the person and their family caregiver 
throughout the time they live with dementia (Ablitt et al. 2009; Braun et al. 
2009). In some of the studies reviewed, changes in the quality of 
relationships were noted over time, confirming the dynamic and longitudinal 
nature of the reciprocal influences between dementia and relationships. Thus 
the impact on current relationship quality appeared to be nuanced, subject to 
change and involved potential losses and gains.   
These reviews also considered the influence of the quality of the relationship 
prior to the onset of dementia.  A close prior relationship was positively 
associated with the wellbeing of the caregiving relative. In this context, 
caregiving relatives were found to experience lower burden, less depression, 
greater satisfaction and increased mastery (Quinn et al. 2009; Braun et al. 
2009; Ablitt et al. 2009). These factors appeared to positively influence the 
caregivers response to the person with dementia, with one review 
suggesting that the caregiving relative was less likely to be abusive and that 
there were fewer changes reported by the caregiver in memory and 
personality of the person with dementia (Quinn et al. 2009). Conversely, a 
poor prior relationship was associated with higher levels of depression, 
strain, poor quality of life and caregiving satisfaction (Quinn et al. 2009).  
It also appears that current relationship quality impacts upon the wellbeing of 
the family caregiver and the person with dementia. Findings of one review 
demonstrated that poor current relationship quality was positively correlated 
with higher levels of depression, strain and lower self-efficacy in caregiving 
(Ablitt et al. 2009). Conversely, closer current relationships were found to 
have a positive effect on the caregiving relatives physical health (Quinn et al. 
2009). However one review noted that better quality communication between 
couples was associated with distress in the caregiving relative and high 
levels of cohesion were associated with high resting blood pressure (Ablitt et 
al. 2009). Consequently, it cannot be assumed that all family caregiving 
relationships will follow the pattern described above. Nevertheless, the 
quality of the current relationship was found to be associated with wellbeing  
in the person with dementia and to support their problem solving ability and 
task performance. Thus it appears that a positive relationship can also have 
beneficial effects for the person with dementia (Quinn et al. 2009; Ablitt et al. 
2009). 
Finally, all the reviews considered the small body of research which included 
the perspectives of both the person with dementia and their caregiving 
relative upon each other. Two reviews reported that people with dementia 
rated their current relationship with the caregiving relative more positively 
than their relative did (Ablitt et al. 2009; Quinn et al. 2009).  However Ablitt et 
al. (2009) noted that, as with their caregiving relatives, those with dementia 
also experienced a process of adjustment and adaptation, involving initial 
withdrawal after diagnosis followed by efforts to work together to maintain 
their relationship. Braun et al. (2009) also reported findings suggesting that 
insecure attachment styles of the person with dementia and avoidant 
attachment styles of the spouse resulted in higher levels of problematic 
behaviours being experienced by the spouse caregiver.  
These reviews have highlighted a number of methodological limitations in 
existing research in this area including: 
1. That studies had reported conflicting results concerning the 
experiences of caregiving relatives,  
2. were limited because of their cross-sectional design and;  
3. had not addressed both prior and current relationship quality (Quinn et 
al. 2009; Braun et al. 2009).  
Additionally, Quinn et al. (2009) suggested that existing theoretical models 
relevant to caregiving do not fully account for the influence of prior and 
current relationship quality on carer wellbeing. Furthermore, models that can 
facilitate an understanding of the caregiving experience within a relational 
context had not been applied (Ablitt et al. 2009).  
In many of the studies reviewed, the experiences of caregivers are taken as 
a whole without consideration of the differences that may occur related to the 
nature of the relationship between the person with dementia and their 
caregiver, the gender or culture of the caregiver. While Quinn et al. (2009)   
suggest that evidence is conflicting; a number of authors conclude that there 
are differences (Pinquart and Srenson 2011; Braun et al. 2009; 
Savundranayagam, et al. 2010; Kwak et al. 2012). For example, spousal 
caregiving may not initially be considered as caring by spouses and may be 
connected to the bonds and the commitment that couples had made to each 
other (Camden et al. 2011; Hellstrm et al. 2007a; Barnes et al. 2016). 
Furthermore, evidence suggests that spouses may incur greater negative 
outcomes from caregiving including higher levels of depression (Pinquart and 
Srenson 2011; Shim et al. 2012).   
Additionally, other research suggests that gender also influences coping 
styles (Savundranayagam. et al. 2010; Kwak et al. 2012; Calasanti and King 
2007). For example, female spouse caregivers may experience greater levels 
of stress and burden and are thought to use more emotion focused coping 
(Etters et al. 2008). Conversely, male caregivers are suggested to be more 
likely to use coping strategies such as problem solving, treating caregiving 
roles as work (McDonnell and Ryan 2011; Pysti, et al. 2012; Pretorius et al. 
2009). 
It seems necessary therefore to consider gender and relationship type in 
order to obtain a better understanding of the factors influencing experiences.  
Summary 
It appears from these systematic reviews that the evidence concerning the 
reciprocal influence between dementia and relationships is developing. 
Furthermore, it seems that outcomes for the caregiving relative and the 
person with dementia are nuanced and complex and do not necessarily 
follow a predictable pattern. However existing research is hampered by a 
number of methodological limitations. These include the lack of consideration 
of, or controlling for, different caregiving relationships and gender. 
Furthermore, the perspective of the person with dementia is absent in many 
research studies. Consequently, there are important areas identified which 
require further study. These reviews suggest that studies need to be 
informed by and inform theoretical frameworks of caregiving and that prior 
and current relationship quality need to be included as factors influencing the  
experience of dementia. A further recommendation was that future research 
in this area needed to include the perspectives of people living with 
dementia. I now turn to research considering the perspectives of individual 
family members concerning dementia and relationships.  
The perspectives of spouses 
Recently, there has been an increase in published research concerning 
spouses perspectives on the impact of dementia on their relationship with 
their partner. As qualitative research is concerned with depth rather than 
breadth, their results are not generalisable. Nevertheless they do offer 
necessary depth to our understanding. Similarly, quantitative studies have 
considered the impact on the relationship, although there are acknowledged 
limitations to this research including sampling and cross sectional designs. 
Furthermore, the majority have considered the experience of Alzheimers 
disease and where people with other forms of dementia have been included; 
their experiences have been amalgamated without considering whether there 
might be differences associated with specific forms of dementia. Recent 
qualitative and quantitative studies and meta-syntheses of qualitative 
research are now considered.  
It is suggested that the impact of dementia upon spouses who provide care 
for a partner with dementia is particularly significant because they represent 
the largest group of people caring for those living with dementia. Evidence 
also suggests that they are the group who are most vulnerable to poor health 
outcomes (Shim et al. 2012; Camden et al. 2011; Barnes et al. 2016). 
Spouse caregiving usually occurs in the context of a longstanding 
relationship. However, spousal caregiving increasingly represents a diverse 
group involving second relationships, partnerships and lesbian and gay 
relationships. Additionally, the experiences of spouses of younger people 
with dementia may be different from the older majority (Svanberg et al. 2011; 
van Vliet et al. 2010). Diverse relationships and groups are significantly less 
well represented in the literature, thus this section is largely limited to 
considering the perspectives of older, predominantly female spouse 
caregivers in longstanding relationships.   
Research suggests that spouses who provide care, experience significant 
challenges to their relationship with their partner as a consequence of 
dementia (Shim et al. 2012). These challenges include losses associated 
with the changes in their partner and therefore the changes in their 
relationship (Pozzebon et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2011). Spouses who provide 
care experienced significant changes in role, taking on roles previously 
undertaken by their partner (Youell, et al. 2016; Pozzebon et al. 2016; Lin et 
al. 2011; Shim et al. 2012). Spouses of younger people with dementia 
reported additional difficulties associated with their life stage, including 
feeling that they have been denied the hoped for future with their partner 
(Alzheimers Australia 2007).   
Despite these challenges, spouse caregivers are identified as reporting 
higher pre-caregiving relationship quality and to have higher levels of intrinsic 
and extrinsic motivations and meanings associated with caregiving when 
compared with other relationship types (Quinn et al. 2012). Quinn et al. 
(2012) identified that male spouse caregivers were particularly likely to report 
higher pre-caregiving and current relationship quality. Nevertheless, while 
many spouses sought to maintain continuity in their relationship with the 
person with dementia, it appeared that they also recognised that this was 
increasingly difficult to retain over time (Pozzebon et al. 2016). This 
realisation resulted in changes in self-concept for many partners, reflecting a 
shift from partner to caregiver (Pozzebon et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2011). 
Struggles associated with this change included experiencing isolation and 
loneliness as the relationship had fundamentally altered.  
A number of factors were found to influence the manner in which caregiving 
took place. Adaptation and adjustment was an ongoing process and framed 
within the context of the past relationship, the qualities of the person with 
dementia, the spouses understanding of the impact of dementia and their 
ability to attune their responses to their spouses needs (Pozzebon et al. 
2016; Lin et al 2011; Lloyd et al. 2014; Shim et al. 2012). Where a positive 
prior relationship existed, spouses were motivated to care, they found 
caregiving meaningful, they often saw their actions in the context of 
maintaining their togetherness and were driven by the commitment they had  
to their spouse (Quinn et al. 2012; Pozzebon et al. 2016; Lin et al. 2011, 
Lloyd et al. 2014; Shim et al. 2012). Acceptance of the changes was 
fundamental to their ability to maintain connectedness (Pozzebon et al. 2016; 
Lin et al. 2011; Lloyd et al. 2014; Shim et al. 2012). In this context it appears 
that spouses described increased companionship in their relationship with 
the person with dementia (Lloyd et al. 2014; Shim et al. 2012). However, in 
the context of a previously poor relationship, caregiving was associated with 
positioning the person with dementia as the problem. As a result spouses 
perceived the person as at fault for their behaviour and were focused on their 
own needs rather than those of their partner. (Lin et al. 2011; Shim et al. 
2012). Furthermore, it appeared that those with a negative past and current 
relationship report higher levels of burden (Shim et al. 2012). 
While the evidence above might imply that spouses experiences are largely 
positive or negative, longitudinal qualitative studies in particular suggest that 
it is not as polarised as this and that spouses may oscillate between these 
opposite poles over the duration of their caregiving (Lin et al. 2011).  
Furthermore, Fauth et al. (2012) suggest that over the duration of the 
caregiving experience, closeness in the relationship may be associated with 
poorer physical and mental health outcomes. They suggested therefore that 
for some spousal caregivers, distancing may be an adaptive strategy to cope 
with the changes in their partner (Fauth et al. 2012). Consequently, it seems 
that the experience of caregiving is not a linear process but reflects a 
constant process of change, adaptation and adjustment with dementia over 
time.  
Finally, in some studies, family support to spouses was considered. In their 
qualitative synthesis, Pozzebon et al. (2016) suggested in one study that 
some spouses were unwilling to share with other family members because 
they did not wish to burden others.  However another study suggested that 
spouses found family support to be particularly helpful, providing 
opportunities to express emotions, have a break from caring and help with 
the tasks of caring (Lin et al. 2011). Additionally, it appears that spousal 
caregiving in the context of late life remarriage could be associated with 
intergenerational conflict and rejection in relationships with step children and 
own children (Sherman and Boss, 2007). These authors found that 
relationship difficulties caused these wives to feel alone in caregiving both 
practically and emotionally in their role.  
Summary 
The results of these studies appear to be congruent with the systematic 
reviews described above. In addition to those already described, there are 
methodological limitations in the qualitative research that need to be taken 
into account. For example, Pozzebon et al. (2016) suggest that the 
demographic characteristics of participants are not always adequately 
reported which makes it difficult to consider their transferability.  
Nevertheless, the studies do provide further depth to our understanding of 
the nuanced experience of spouses concerning the impact of dementia on 
the relationship with their partner. Consistent with the results of the 
systematic reviews, prior relationship quality seems to influence current 
relationship quality for spouses. It seemed that the impact on relationships 
involved both significant losses and potential gains. Losses were framed in a 
relational context, thus changes in the person with dementia were described 
in terms of how they impacted on their relationship (Pozzebon et al. 2016). In 
the context of a previously positive relationship, many spouses sought to 
maintain connectedness and mutuality in their relationship and could 
experience satisfaction in their caregiving role. Nevertheless, it appeared that 
spouses engaged in a continual process of adjustment and adaptation and 
over time were at significant risk of loss of identity, isolation and loneliness. 
Some spouses were able to rely on and valued family support but not all 
were able to. Where relationships were conflictual or support was absent, this 
increased isolation. The experiences of spouses with previously poor 
relationships seem to be less well represented in the literature.  
 The perspective of people with dementia 
Studies directly considering the perspective of people living with dementia 
have only recently emerged. However some studies have considered how 
people living with dementia expressed their sense of self or how they lived   
positively with dementia and their findings identify the importance of family to 
those participating. Participants suggested that they valued family most in 
life; appreciated the support offered to them and expressed concern about 
the challenges that dementia would bring for their family (Wolverson, et al. 
2016; Hedman et al. 2013). Furthermore Wolverson et al. (2016) suggested 
that people with dementia strived to maintain connectedness and continued 
to value their relationships with significant others.  
Ablitt et al. (2010) found that a significant proportion of the participants with 
dementia they interviewed were aware of the psychological wellbeing of 
family members who support them and some were aware of their family 
caregivers level of anxiety. Furthermore, some were able to relate their 
caregivers distress to the impact of caring and were able to be more 
supportive of their caregiver as a consequence.  
Ward-Griffin et al (2006) considered the perspectives of women living with 
dementia about their relationships with their caregiving daughters. They 
found that the women mostly reported a positive relationship with their 
daughters. However it was also evident that they did not want to be a burden 
and engaged a number of strategies to resist this, including caring for 
themselves as much as they could and asking as for as little as possible. 
They described deciding what level of care they would accept from their 
daughters while accepting and being grateful for care when this was offered.  
Summary 
The few studies that consider the perspectives of people living with dementia 
about the impact their condition has on their relationships suggest that 
people with dementia value their relationships with family and recognise that 
dementia brought challenges for their family.  Some actively engaged 
strategies to manage the impact on their relationships, offering support to 
their partner, managing the amount of support they expected or asked for 
and expressing gratitude for the care that was given. There is a need to 
address the experiences of a wider range of people living with dementia, for 
example those with experience of more advanced dementia, those from 
migrant communities and those with different relationship types   
(Wolverson et al. 2016), as well as those who have more negative 
relationships. However, a particular value of these studies is that they 
demonstrate that people with dementia can contribute to qualitative and 
quantitative research on relationships.   
The perspective of adult children and young people 
Adult children and young people can be divided into two subgroups in regard 
to the existing research in this area: 
 Adult children in midlife who are caring for an older parent with 
dementia, either solely or as a secondary caregiver supporting their 
other parent 
 Young adult children and young people who commonly have a parent 
with young onset dementia, who may or may not be involved in 
caregiving but may be dependent emotionally and/or financially on 
their parents due to their age. 
The perspectives of these two groups are addressed separately below.  
Adult children in midlife 
Daughters are the most common caregivers for people living with dementia 
after a spouse and social norms have a particular influence, involving for 
example gendered expectation of who will care within families (Quinn, et al. 
2010; Alzheimers Society, 2011). Nevertheless, in recent years it is 
recognized that sons are also increasingly involved in caregiving (McDonnell 
and Ryan 2011). Children-in-law are also providing care although less 
frequently (Pinquart and Srenson, 2011). Adult child caregivers generally 
live separately from the person with dementia and are likely to have other 
demands on their lives including family, financial and employment 
responsibilities (Schoenmakers et al. 2010; Alzheimers Society 2011; 
Pinquart and Srenson, 2011).  
Relationships between parents and adult children are complex and 
multifaceted. Cultural and family norms regarding individuation, 
independence and reciprocity influence the caregiving experience (Dykstra 
and Fokkema 2011, Kjllman-Alm et al. 2013). Providing care in this context  
is associated with many challenges, involving changing roles and 
responsibilities in adult childrens relationship with parents with dementia, 
which are grounded in the quality and nature of the past relationship. 
Additionally, caregiving responsibilities impact upon other relationships in the 
adult childs life, including with their partners and children (Pinquart and 
Srenson 2011; Piercy 2007; Sechrist et al. 2012; McDonnell and Ryan 
2014; Sherrell et al. 2001). 
Adult children are motivated to care due to past and/or current relationship 
closeness, from a sense of duty or because they live in close proximity 
(Camden et al. 2011; McDonnell and Ryan 2011; McDonnell and Ryan, 
2014; Ward-Griffin et al. 2007; Piercy 2007). The quality of the previous 
relationship appears to have a significant influence on current relationship 
quality and the outcomes associated with caregiving for both children and 
their parents (Ward-Griffin et al. 2007; Piercy 2007; McDonnell and Ryan 
2014). Evidence suggests that previously positive relationships can continue 
to be meaningful for both the parent and the child. However in addition, it 
seems that the need for care can cause past conflicts and difficulties to re-
emerge which may cause conflict in the current relationship. (Ward-Griffin et 
al. 2007; McDonnell and Ryan 2014; Sherrell et al. 2001).   
The current relationship with the parent is complicated by normative 
boundaries, for example it may be expected that parents would continue to 
support the welfare of their adult children (Sechrist et al. 2012). Yet in some 
studies, adult children reflect that they now feel they are parenting their 
parent with dementia (Kjllman-Alm et al. 2013; Sherrell et al. 2001). This 
change may be associated with feelings of abandonment, loss and anger, as 
well as yearning for the past relationship (Kjllman-Alm et al. 2013).  
The impact of caregiving on adult children is known to be significant. 
Negative outcomes include increased stress, poor physical and mental health 
and undesirable changes in the relationship with the parent with dementia 
(Pinquart and Srenson 2011; Kwak et al. 2012; Savundranayagam et al. 
2010). These outcomes are associated with an increased risk that the person 
with dementia will be placed in long term care, particularly where the 
behaviour of the parent with dementia is experienced as difficult  
(Savundranayagam, et al. 2010). Furthermore, adult child caregiving is 
correlated with greater levels of wider family conflict, as adult children may 
expect help and assistance from other family members and experience 
conflict when this isnt forthcoming (Kwak et al. 2012; Alvira et al. 2015; 
Tolkacheva et al. 2011). Children-in-law may experience less satisfaction 
with caregiving, possibly because they are likely to have less closeness with 
the person with dementia (Pinquart and Srenson 2011). 
Summary 
As with the previous two sections there are methodological limitations to 
existing research. In particular, McDonnell and Ryan (2014) emphasise the 
need for more studies which specifically explore the relationship between 
sons and their parent with dementia. Furthermore, it seems that longitudinal 
quantitative and qualitative studies would further enhance our understanding, 
as many of the studies reviewed here are cross-sectional.  
Nevertheless, research evidence suggests that there are differences in the 
experience of caregiving for midlife adult children when compared with 
spousal relationships. Furthermore, it appears that social and familial norms 
influence the nature of the relationship and caregiving in this context. 
Previous and current relationship quality are important factors influencing the 
experience of dementia for both the adult child and their parent. While 
satisfactions may be present, it also appears that adult children experience 
complex emotions concerning the changes in their parent. When combined 
with the challenges engendered by caregiving this can lead to negative 
outcomes, including poor physical and mental health, conflict in family 
relationships and placement of the person in long term care. 
 Young adult children  
This research is a relatively recent addition to the literature and largely 
reflects an increasing need to develop an understanding of the experience 
and needs of young people who have a parent living with young onset 
dementia. These studies are generally qualitative in nature and reflect the 
specific difficulties associated with the life stage of young people. This 
includes that they are often living with or still financially dependent upon their  
parents, may still be in full time education and may be negotiating their own 
development transitions (Hutchinson et al. 2016; Allen et al. 2009; Lage 
Barca et al. 2014; Sikes and Hall 2016). Given the numbers of younger 
people living with dementia, the samples of young people recruited to these 
studies is diverse and small in number. Most of the participants were over the 
age of 18, although for some their parents illness began before they reached 
this age. Three of the studies included children below the age of 18 but the 
numbers of these were significantly smaller (Allen et al. 2009; Hutchinson et 
al. 2016; Sikes and Hall 2016). The age range of the participants included 
children as young as 10 and young adults as old as 33. There are inevitably 
difficulties in combining the results of interviews with young people who are 
at different developmental life points (Allen et al. 2009).  
These studies all emphasise the changes that participants experienced to 
their family relationships (Hutchinson et al. 2016; Allen et al. 2009; Lage 
Barca et al. 2014; Sikes and Hall 2016). Relationships with their parent with 
dementia were fundamentally altered as a consequence of dementia and 
young adults and children described the person as not the same or not their 
real parent (Allen et al. 2009, Sikes and Hall 2016). Participants described a 
profound sense of loss at the changes in their parent (Hutchinson et al. 2016; 
Sikes et al. 2016). Furthermore, changes in relationships with their well 
parent were also discussed, as young people seemed to balance caregiving 
responsibilities and a sense of being responsible for their well parent with 
their own needs and development transitions (Allen et al. 2009; Lage Barca 
et al. 2014).  
Outcomes for these family members involved physical strain including lack of 
sleep (Allen et al. 2009). Similarly psychological strain was also identified. 
This included fear of losing the well parent due to the level of strain they were 
experiencing, being unable to focus on their own needs and overwhelming 
emotions associated with the changes.  On occasions this lead to self-
harming behaviour (Allen et al. 2009; Hutchinson et al. 2016; Sikes et al. 
2016; Lage Barca et al. 2014). Furthermore, some identified that there had 
been a breakdown in relationships within the family as a consequence.  
In two studies this resulted in the adult child or young person distancing 
themselves emotionally and sometimes involved leaving the family home at a 
time when they were potentially highly vulnerable (Hutchinson et al. 2016; 
Allen et al. 2009).  
Summary 
Only a small number of studies consider the experiences and perspectives of 
young adult children and young people and these draw on a wide age range. 
Their results suggest that dementia in a parent impacts significantly on 
relationships with both parents. Due to the life stage of these participants 
they are often reliant on their parents for financial, practical and emotional 
support. The experience of dementia in this context seems to disrupt 
normative developmental transitions and involve participants in increased 
responsibility for the parent with dementia as well as increased concern for 
the well parent. Negative outcomes are considerable, involving psychological 
and physical strain.  
Conclusion 
The studies reviewed above offer an insight into the reciprocal influence of 
dementia and relationships and demonstrate that a broad range of family 
relationships are influenced by dementia and in turn influence the way in 
which dementia is experienced. Additionally, they suggest that family 
members are active in shaping how they experience dementia and that they 
influence each others experience of dementia. For example, it seems that 
the experience of spouses and adult children can be negatively or positively 
influenced by the supportiveness of other family members and the extent to 
which such support is sought and welcomed. Indeed in a recent European 
study, lack of family support was correlated with poor caregiver outcomes 
including burden and psychological wellbeing (Alvira et al. 2015).  
However they are also limited because they consider the perspective of only 
one person within the relationship. By their very nature, relationships are 
negotiated between individuals and as the results above suggest, the onset 
of dementia is managed within the context of a family, whether that be a 
marital relationship and/ or an extended family. Furthermore, the   
perspectives of people living with dementia have often been excluded from 
this research, even though the small numbers of studies that do exist 
demonstrate that they value relationships with their families and actively 
contribute to them. These findings correspond with the views of Kitwood 
(1997) and others in confirming that there is a need to consider how 
dementia impacts upon relationships and how relationships impact on the 
experience of dementia.  
In addition, this research has largely considered the influence of dementia 
upon couples and has rarely explored the experience for other family 
relationships, or indeed the relationship of the family as a whole. The above 
would suggest that the whole family are likely to be affected by dementia and 
that existing family relationships may influence how dementia is experienced 
and how it is managed. In light of this, it seems pertinent to consider what the 
family experience of dementia might be. This next section reports the results 
of a systematic synthesis which explores family relationships and dementia, 
including the person with dementia.  
2.5 Family Relationships and dementia: a synthesis of qualitative research 
including the person with dementia 
As described earlier, a qualitative synthesis was undertaken in 2012, 
considering research evidence concerning the reciprocal influence between 
family relationships and dementia.  The synthesis was completed in 2012 
and was subsequently published in Ageing and Society. Its methods and 
findings are reproduced in brief below with the permission of Cambridge 
University Press (La Fontaine and Oyebode 2014 p.1246-1268). 
Following the search strategy described in 2.1, eleven articles were selected 
for inclusion. Thematic synthesis (Thomas and Harden 2008) was selected 
as the methodology, since it is suitable for synthesising studies using a range 
of methodologies (Braun and Clarke 2006).  
A range of methodologies, including constructivist grounded theory, 
discourse analysis and phenomenological methodologies informed ten of the 
eleven studies with one not stating what sort of methodology was used.  In-
depth interviews were the main method utilised for data collection, with seven  
interviewing participants together. Eight used a cross-sectional design, 
interviewing participants at one point in time. 
In all but three studies the participants were co-habiting couples. The three 
other studies involved adult-daughter and mother relationships (Forbat 2003; 
Ward Griffin et al. 2007) or a three-generational family (Purves 2010). 
Participants were generally recruited from service providers including 
memory clinics. In eight studies, participants with dementia had received a 
diagnosis of Alzheimers disease. In the other studies, diagnoses were 
dementia, mixed dementia or vascular dementia. In over half, the length of 
time dementia had been experienced is not clear. With the exception of two 
studies, the type and level of support services received by participants is not 
described.  
Each article was subjected to an assessment of quality of the research 
according to the 14 criteria identified by Elliott et al. (1999, see table 2.2).  
Table 2.2: Criteria for evaluation of qualitative research studies in 
psychology and related fields (Elliott et al. 1999: 220) 
Criteria 
relevant to all 
research 
1 Explicit scientific context and purpose 
2 Appropriate Methods 
3 Respect for participants 
4 Specification of methods 
5 Appropriate discussion 
6 Clarity of presentation 
7 Contribution to knowledge 
Criteria 
relevant to 
Qualitative 
Research 
1 Owning ones perspective 
2 Situating the sample 
3 Grounding in examples 
4 Providing credibility checks 
5 Coherence 
6 Accomplishing general vs. specific 
research tasks 
7 Resonating with readers 
The table showing the quality rating of each article is included in appendix 3 
(PDF CD). Each article was assessed as: Achieving (y), partially achieving 
(p) or not (n) achieving the criteria. In order to check the reliability of this 
process three of the papers were independently rated. This process revealed   
agreement on 13/14 ratings on 2 of the 3 papers. On the third, on 8/14 
criteria, one rater viewed the criterion as met where the other viewed it as 
partially met. Discussion occurred to understand the discrepancies and arrive 
at agreement. Overall it was felt that the system was good enough to give a 
general overview of the quality of the papers, although it must be recognised 
that, to some extent this is a subjective process and others might make 
different judgements on some of the criteria.  
The articles were generally considered to be of good quality, meeting the 
criteria either wholly or partially. Limitations included the lack of 
representation of different relationships, such as parent-child (of both 
genders), intergenerational families or gay relationships and different forms 
of dementia. The age of the person with dementia was rarely reported and 
the ethnic and cultural background of participants was not addressed in the 
majority of articles. A final limitation involves the predominant cross-sectional 
design. As dementia is a dynamic journey in which progressive changes, loss 
and adjustment is not a static process, a longitudinal design is perhaps more 
likely to illustrate the impact of dementia.   
The articles were uploaded onto NVivo (QSR 2010). Thematic synthesis was 
applied to the text in the findings sections of each of the papers (Thomas and 
Harden 2008; Braun and Clarke 2006). As this review was particularly 
concerned with the participants perspectives of the impact of dementia upon 
their relationships, it was the participants data that was given priority. Only 
segments of text, therefore, that included quotes of participants were 
subjected to coding.  
Summary of results 
Four super-ordinate themes emerged from the synthesis; a shared history; 
negotiating the impact of dementia upon the relationship, openness and 
awareness and shifting sands.   Taken separately, some of the articles 
present a largely positive or negative account of the impact of dementia upon 
relationships. In synthesising the accounts, a more nuanced view emerges, 
reflected in the way that the first 3 themes have both positive and negative 
poles. Table 2.3 illustrates the spread of themes across the studies:  
Table 2.3: Incidence of themes across studies in systematic synthesis 
 Superordinate  
Theme 1: 
A shared 
History 
Superordinate 
Theme 2: 
Negotiating 
the impact of 
dementia 
upon the 
relationship 
Superordinate 
Theme 3: 
Openness and 
Awareness 
Super- 
ordinate 
Theme 
Shifting  
Sands 
 A good 
Disconn 
-ected 
problem 
shared 
Working 
apart 
Making 
meaning 
Minimising  
Clare 
et al. 2004 
       
Daniels 
et al. 2007 
       
Davies 
       
Forbat 
       
Hellstrm 
et al. 2007a 
       
Hellstrm 
et al. 2005 
       
Molyneaux 
et al. 2011 
       
Purves 
       
Robinson 
et al. 2005 
       
Svanstrm 
et al. 2004 
       
Ward-
Griffin 
et al. 2007 
       
A shared history 
The first super-ordinate theme, A Shared History, involved 2 subthemes, a 
good life together and disconnectedness. Eight articles contributed to this 
theme, the majority of which addressed couple relationships.   
A good life together appeared to reflect emotional connectedness, in which 
open communication, negotiation, compromise, sharing of roles and the 
ability to resolve challenges within the relationship featured. The participants 
linked their shared positive history with current connectedness and 
commitment to each other. 
Where this was not present, (in two articles exploring mother-daughter 
relationships and one exploring couple relationships), a negative shared 
history emerged. This gave rise to the subtheme disconnectedness and 
involved evidence of past conflict and disagreement, which was also evident 
in the current relationship. Links between past and current relationship quality 
were made in all the articles addressed in this super-ordinate theme.  
Negotiating the impact of dementia upon the relationship 
All 11 articles contributed to this super-ordinate theme and two sub-themes 
emerged, A Problem Shared and Working Apart. Under the subtheme of a 
problem shared, it seemed that the diagnosis of dementia and the resulting 
challenges were viewed as something to be managed together, with 
participants emphasising their continued commitment to each other and 
emotional connectedness. Although less frequently, this was also evident in 
mother-daughter relationships. Furthermore open communication, managing 
things together and compromise to sustain couplehood was a feature of 
couple relationships. Participants also reflected upon the importance of 
mutual respect, appreciation and reciprocity. In the context of their shared 
lives, in order to manage the impact of dementia and maintain the 
relationship, participating dyads described various strategies, such as 
supporting the continuation of valued activities. Strategies sought to maintain 
the identity and functioning of the person with dementia, sometimes without 
their knowledge.  
However, although evident in only six of the articles and with less frequency, 
the impact of dementia upon relationships also resulted in family members 
working apart. The way in which this manifested corresponded closely to the 
theme of working apart described by Keady and Nolan (2003: 30). These 
authors suggest that where previous relationship quality is poor or where it 
has not been possible to work together in the context of dementia, the 
experience leads to strained relationships. Consequently a feeling of 
entrapment in the family caregiver may also occur.  
It appeared in this synthesis that family members and couples experienced a 
loss of connectedness and may also have experienced feelings of 
powerlessness and an inability to influence the course of their life. Further 
breakdown in relationships appeared to occur. Additionally it seemed that the 
person with dementia was positioned as the problem and strategies such as 
blaming, deception and confrontation were used.  
Openness and Awareness  
Nine articles contributed to the third super-ordinate theme, with seven of 
these concerning couple relationships. Openness and Awareness involved 
the extent to which it was possible for the participants to negotiate and share 
their understanding of what was happening (sub-theme of Making Meaning) 
or, at the other extreme, minimise it and thus deny the impact of it (sub-
theme of Minimising). Making meaning was illustrated by open 
communication which included conversations about the changes, even 
though this might be difficult. Furthermore it appeared that couples in this 
context saw dementia as the problem rather than the person and sought to 
live each day as it comes. Minimising was illustrated by the use of denial by 
either or both of the parties in the relationship and seemed to involve denying 
the experience of the other person and therefore perhaps shielding 
themselves from the situation or the others distress.   In such circumstances, 
individual and interpersonal responses appeared to involve resisting 
acknowledgement of the reasons for the changes, the eventual diagnosis 
and the difficulties it brought. Resistance took the form of normalizing the 
difficulties or actively choosing not to think about them. However not all 
parties in the relationship were synchronous in their ways of understanding 
and coping with the changes. Thus on occasions, the strategies of resistance 
and confrontation were used and appeared to be challenging for both parties,   
particularly where this involved a denial of the difficulties experienced as a 
consequence of dementia. 
Shifting Sands...  
This final super-ordinate theme addresses the challenges that dementia 
brought to relationships. All 11 articles included in the review contributed to 
this theme. Seven articles (one wider family and seven couple relationships) 
made reference to the change in roles and responsibilities that dementia 
brought for the relationship. Such changes involved a complex process of 
negotiation involving noticing and managing the risks associated with 
changes in the persons abilities; negotiating the forms of help that were 
needed, while maintaining the identity of the person with dementia. The 
process of negotiation appeared less challenging where the person with 
dementia was able to accept that they were no longer able to carry out 
particular activities or tasks independently. Nevertheless, some family 
members found this to be a difficult adjustment to make as it entailed extra 
responsibility. 
Early in the experience of dementia, the continuation of valued activities and 
independent time was possible and desired. However, particularly for 
couples, the consequence of shifting roles and responsibilities tended to 
result in couples necessarily having to spend more time together as dementia 
progressed, rather than being able to spend time on their own independent 
activities.  While spending time together was viewed positively, it appeared 
also to have negative consequences for wellbeing. Participants expressed 
the need for time apart and for independence and had difficulty engaging in 
actions that were previously not part of the relationship. This had the 
potential to be a source of conflict. Such conflict seemed likely where levels 
of awareness and openness were not synchronous.  
In five articles, reflecting couples, mothers-daughters and wider families, 
participants accounts appeared to reflect the loss they experienced as a 
consequence of the impact of dementia. These accounts were primarily from 
the family member involved in caring and included losses such as memories 
of shared history, remembering who the spouse was and changes in roles.  
The updated search and analysis 
The methodologies of the four additional articles identified in the updated 
search included Interpretive Phenomenological Analysis (Merrick et al. 2016; 
Wawrziczny et al. 2014), Narrative Analysis (Roach et al. 2014a) and 
conversation analysis (Hydn et al. 2016). Hydn et al. (2016) also 
determined the frequency of use of I and we pronouns. One study involved 
families (Roach et al. 2014a) and the three others involved couples living with 
dementia, with two explicitly exploring the experience of young onset 
dementia (Roach et al. 2014a; Wawrziczny et al. 2014). One study was 
longitudinal (Roach et al. 2014a) the remainder were cross-sectional. 
Diagnoses were similar to those in the original studies, although in two of the 
studies, a participant was diagnosed with frontotemporal dementia and in one 
study a participant was diagnosed with dementia with Lewy bodies. Length of 
time since diagnosis was indicated in all four studies and ranged from less 
than 1 year to 9 years. Articles were assessed according to the quality 
criteria above and identified as of good quality, meeting the criteria wholly. 
Limitations were similar to those identified above.  
The analysis of the four articles yielded findings that were largely congruent 
with the original themes of the systematic synthesis. Table 2.4 shows the 
incidence of themes across the four studies.  
Table 2.4: Incidence of themes across studies 
 Superordinate  
Theme 1: 
A shared 
History 
Superordinate 
Theme 2: 
Negotiating the 
impact of 
dementia upon 
relationship 
Superordinate 
Theme 3: 
Openness and 
Awareness 
Super- 
ordinate 
Theme 4: 
Shifting  
Sands 
 A good 
Disconn 
-ected 
problem 
shared 
Working 
apart 
Making 
meaning 
Minimising  
Hydn and 
Nilsson 
       
Merrick 
et al. 2016 
       
Roach 
et al. 2014 
       
Wawrziczny 
et al. 2014 
       
Three noteworthy subjects emerged from the consideration of these 
additional four studies. Firstly, a new subtheme of distancing arose from the 
study that explored whole family relationships (Roach et al. 2014a), which 
contributed to the theme of working apart. This appeared to reflect an 
intentional distancing between generations (Roach et al. 2014a). Similarly, 
this was evident in the Wawrziczny et al. (2014) study, when discussing the 
couples relationships with their family and wider social circle. It appeared in 
both studies to be born out of a desire to protect, although the reasons for 
protection varied. In the Roach et al. (2014a) study, a couple sought to 
protect their children from the challenges they were facing: 
Irene  I believe ... I dont know about your Mom and Dad, but I 
believe that we brought the kids into the world, we dont give 
them our problems. And we are really, really bad for hiding 
things. (Roach et al. 2014a: 17) 
This was also cited as a reason in the Wawrziczny et al. (2014) study. 
However in the latter it also seemed that self-protection against stigma and 
embarrassment or against the perceived decline in the couple relationship 
was a motivation:   
Couple 16: We try to be discrete. This way, nobody knows, nothing at 
all, we get by as we can (Person with dementia) 
(Wawrziczny et al. 2014: 9) 
Couple 06: I could stay home, because I had a planned layoff 
schedule that I was in and I refused. I got another job that 
earned me less, but I got the other job because staying home 
is something I wouldnt know how to do. I still have three 
years to go and then Ill get my retirement. Afterwards, thats 
when its going to be harder. (Caregiver) (Wawrziczny et al. 
2014: 10-11) 
As with the occurrence of the more negative subthemes in the original 
systematic synthesis, this subtheme was present in only two studies. It 
seems possible that this arose because both studies considered wider family 
relationships in the research interviews. However, distancing appeared to 
have deleterious consequences, increasing the risk of isolation and 
loneliness.  
Secondly, in the Roach et al. (2014a) study, a theme of fabricating storylines 
emerged from their analysis. This did not feature in any of the other studies 
and may reflect their use of a longitudinal approach combined with the nature 
of their research method. This seemed to result in the development of a close 
relationship between researcher and participants which may have facilitated 
greater opportunities to reveal life as it is lived and a greater depth of 
understanding.   
Finally, people living with dementia in all four studies reflected on the 
changes to their relationships and the losses both they and their partners 
experienced. Furthermore, they described active strategies to mitigate the 
impact of these losses for their partner: 
June Well, really I think that sometimes he gets a bit worried and if 
he gets worried about things Ill say yeah thats fine, fine, 
just so that he doesnt worry about me so much. (Merrick et 
al. 2016: 46)  
Therefore, these four studies further reinforced the need to involve people 
living with dementia in such research and highlighted their active contribution 
to negotiating the impact of dementia within their relationships. 
Discussion 
The theme of shifting sands illustrates the particular psychosocial challenges 
that dementia brought for all family members in the studies. These included 
the alterations in roles and relationships and the resulting need for strategies 
to manage the impact of dementia highlighted in the second and third super-
ordinate themes. Recent studies have similarly highlighted the extent to 
which loss is experienced by family members, involving a loss of we for  
couples, (Evans and Lee 2014; Wadham et al. 2016) and for adult children 
(Madsen and Birkelund 2013; Kjllman-Alm et al. 2013).  
Consistent with the findings of the synthesis, the above studies also suggest 
that family members take increased responsibility as the person with 
dementia becomes unable to undertake relational work associated with their 
togetherness. These findings have significant parallels with Rollands (1994) 
work on the development of a psychosocial typology of chronic and life 
threatening illnesses. In particular, indicating that it is necessary to focus 
upon the duration, course, degree of incapacity and outcome of the changes, 
the life stage at which they occur and their impact upon the relationships 
rather than solely on the diagnosis.   
This synthesis supports the findings of existing research which emphasises 
that the nature and quality of the previous and current relationship appear to 
be important factors influencing the experience of dementia for all family 
members. Similarly, research suggests that family closeness, reciprocity, 
love and affection may be important influencers on adaptation to dementia, 
particularly where family members actively discuss their situation and work 
together to agree strategies (Deist et al. 2015; Trujillo et al. 2016; Chesla et 
al. 1994; Sutter et al. 2014; Tremont et al. 2006). Furthermore, although 
studying specific populations where the values of family are viewed as more 
important than individual needs, some studies have found that positive family 
dynamics were correlated with the personal strengths and mental health of 
family caregivers and have concluded that healthy family dynamics are 
protective (Trujillo et al. 2016; Sutter et al. 2014; Tremont et al. 2006). This 
appears therefore to support the value of a focus upon family relationships. 
Recent research also supports the superordinate theme of negotiating the 
impact of dementia. For example, as with the theme a problem shared, Braun 
et al (2010) found that awareness of each others feelings and continued 
reciprocity was supportive of current relationship quality. Additionally, where 
the person with dementia was aware of the needs of their partner, this also 
appeared to contribute to current relationship quality (Spector et al. 2016; 
Clare et al. 2012). Consistent with the theme of working apart, in research 
where poor relationships were evident in participants, it seemed that working   
apart involved an emotional disconnection in relationships, which may 
contribute to positioning the person as the problem (Chesla et al. 1994; Clare 
et al. 2012). However some studies suggests that emotional disconnection 
may be an adaptive strategy, reflecting the need to protect oneself in the face 
of the changes taking place over time (Clare et al. 2012; Wadham et al. 
2016; Fauth et al. 2012). However a limitation of some of the studies 
reporting such results is that they have not necessarily considered the prior 
relationship and how this might impact upon current relationship quality. Thus 
this requires further study.  
It seems in the results of the synthesis, that the coping strategies used by 
family members were important in either providing support to scaffold the 
identity and self-esteem of the person with dementia or indeed position them 
in such a way as to undermine their personhood (Kitwood 1997). These 
strategies were used by both partners and adult-children in the articles 
reviewed and are supported by the findings of recent research and reviews. 
For example, in their meta-synthesis, Wadham et al (2016) found that 
couples sought ways to continue to live life and hold distress at bay. 
Similarly, Walmsley and McCormack (2014) described family strategies to 
support continued family membership in people with advanced experience of 
dementia. They found that in some circumstances families were able to 
support communication and find ways of understanding the person with 
dementia. Conversely they also found that there were occasions when 
families appeared out of tune with the person with dementia and positioned 
them as diminished.   
Furthermore, this synthesis brings together research which has included the 
person with dementia as an active participant, a voice which has previously 
largely been absent from such research (Ablitt et al. 2009). People with early 
experience of dementia demonstrated that they continued to actively work 
with others in their family to maintain their relationships; to make sense of the 
impact of dementia and to manage the changes that it brought. Consistent 
with previous research, the accounts of people with dementia demonstrated 
continued emotional awareness and awareness of the impact of dementia 
upon the family member involved in caring for them (Ablitt et al. 2010;   
Burgener and Twigg 2002). Such insight and awareness facilitated 
opportunities for the relationship to continue to grow and for compromise and 
adjustment to take place, thus appearing to contribute to well-being and 
meaningful lives.  
People with dementia contributed less to those themes where the experience 
of the impact of dementia upon the relationship was challenging. Where they 
contributed, their perspectives appeared to reflect positions of denial and 
resistance. This seemed to be as a consequence of a previously poor 
relationship; poor communication; being positioned by the other as a 
problem; or a lack of synchronicity in awareness and understanding, 
combined with the use of control by the family member involved in 
caregiving. Although this is less well developed in the synthesis and as such 
must be treated with caution, it has parallels with findings from Burgener and 
Twigg (2002) in highlighting that lower quality of relationship and caregiving 
relative stress predicted lower quality of life in the person living with 
dementia.  
This synthesis largely reflected research considering couple relationships. 
The contributions from couples have significant parallels with the dynamics of 
dementia discussed by Keady and Nolan (2003) and the outcomes of recent 
systematic reviews of quantitative research (Ablitt et al. 2009; Quinn et al. 
2009). In particular, this synthesis supports that, in the context of a previously 
positive relationship, effective adaptation to the impact of dementia involves 
emotional connectedness and open communication between the person with 
dementia and their spouse (Keady and Nolan 2003). Furthermore, working 
together (Keady and Nolan, 2003) involves positioning dementia as the 
problem rather than the person. Thus couples appeared to engage in a 
complex process of holding the dementia apart from the relationship while 
managing its impact on their day-to-day lives. One specific contribution of this 
synthesis is that it demonstrates the active participation of the person with 
dementia in this process.  
The majority of the research studies focused upon the strengths and adaptive 
characteristics of couple relationships, with minimal material about negative 
impact, or about how past conflict influences current experiences.  This may   
reflect challenges in recruitment, as couples with a less positive relationship 
may be reluctant to participate and in the context of being interviewed 
together, may be less willing to discuss difficulties. However, it also seems 
possible that the desire to move away from an emphasis on burden and 
negativity may have resulted in less attention being given to those couples 
where such outcomes occur.  
A lesser number of articles within this review address the experience of other 
family relationships. However the findings suggest that concepts such as 
commitment, quality of previous relationship and emotional connectedness 
are relevant across various relationships, as also found in previous 
qualitative research from the perspective of family caregivers (Piercy 2007).  
Implications for research 
This synthesis has highlighted possible directions for further research.  
Firstly, the more negative sub-themes (disconnectedness, working apart and 
minimising) occurred significantly less frequently in participants accounts. 
Although small in number, the accounts that populated these themes were 
largely from research in which the person with dementia and their family 
member were interviewed separately. Additionally, the accounts were 
predominantly from the perspective of the family member, with significantly 
fewer quotations coming from a person living with dementia. Previous 
research has been criticised for its uni-dimensional focus on negative 
outcomes. However if negative and positive outcomes (Nolan et al. 2002), 
are not recognised by researchers, there is a risk of a shift to a similar uni-
dimensional focus on positive experiences. Future research needs to give 
consideration to how to recruit and interview families, including the person 
with dementia, where relationships are less positive and to present a 
balanced view. To give freedom for expression of both positive and negative 
experiences it may be necessary to interview participants both together and 
apart, as well as to use methodologies which focus on live interactions 
between the family members involved in the research. It is also important to 
reflexively consider whether a desire to represent the impact of dementia in a  
positive light results in a lesser focus on material which contradicts this 
desire.  
Secondly, a limitation of current research is that the focus has largely been 
on couple relationships. Evidence from this synthesis and more recent 
research addressing family relationships suggests that intergenerational 
relationships including adult child-parent relationships are also affected by 
dementia. Furthermore, this synthesis has highlighted that family members 
across generations are actively engaged in a process of negotiation and 
renegotiation of roles and relationships. However, research has rarely 
considered how intergenerational family relationships manage and mediate 
the impact of dementia, in spite of evidence demonstrating that multiple 
generations are affected (Allen et al. 2009; Roach et al. 2014b; Garwick et al. 
1994; Tolkacheva et al. 2011; Tremont et al. 2006). Further research is 
therefore required to provide an in-depth insight into the impact and 
management of dementia in a context of intergenerational family 
relationships.  
Thirdly, existing research has largely focused upon people who have 
received a diagnosis of Alzheimers disease, where the potential for 
maintaining the emotional relationship appeared to contribute to the positive 
relational experiences highlighted. However this has implications for less 
common forms of dementia. For example, behavioural variant frontotemporal 
dementia (bvFTD), involves changes in empathy, emotional warmth and 
understanding (Fernandez-Duque et al. 2010) and as a consequence, 
potential loss of an emotional relationship early in the experience of 
dementia. Further research studies are required to address possible 
differences in adjustment that arise from the psycho-social implications of 
these forms of dementia for family relationships.  
Fourthly, many of the studies utilised a cross sectional design and many of 
the participants were early in their experience of dementia. Relationship 
quality and strategies to maintain the relationship have been shown to 
change over time, as the person finds it more difficult to engage in the 
conventions and strategies used previously to sustain relationships 
(Hellstrm et al. 2007; Nolan et al. 2002). As dementia has a progressive and   
changing course, more longitudinal studies of its impact on relationships are 
required. 
Finally, it is important to recognise that a significant limitation of current 
research is its focus on traditional family relationships. Family relationships 
are influenced by ethnicity, sexual orientation and divorce. Different family 
constellations and dimensions of difference remain an area for further 
research.   
In light of the above conclusions, it seems that research exploring the 
reciprocal influence between dementia and family relationships is required. 
While a small number of studies exist in this area, there are a number of 
limitations to this research. These limitations include that they: 
 Study specific cultures and are not necessarily directly transferrable to 
a UK based population 
 Have not always included the perspective of the person with dementia, 
or indeed other, wider family members, despite evidence highlighting 
their active involvement in managing the impact of dementia upon 
their relationships 
 Generally focus on families living with Alzheimers disease. As 
indicated above, it would appear that less common forms of dementia 
may impact on relationships differentially thus specific studies in this 
area would be a valuable addition to the evidence base.  
Accordingly, the next section considers the specific features of behavioural 
variant frontotemporal dementia, following which the experience of bvFTD is 
considered for the person with dementia and their families. 
2.6  Behavioural Variant Frontotemporal Dementia 
Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is a particularly challenging and rare form of 
dementia, although it is the third most common form of young onset dementia 
(Harvey et al. 2003). FTD also occurs in older people (aged 65 and over) 
although with less frequency, however it remains underdiagnosed in this 
population (Warren et al. 2013; Baborie et al. 2012). Three subtypes of FTD 
occur, the most common of which is bvFTD which is caused by underlying  
degenerative disease processes which specifically impact on frontal lobe 
functioning (Rascovsky et al. 2011; Warren et al. 2013; Gorno-Tempini et al. 
2011). Warren et al. (2013) suggest that while the numbers of people with 
bvFTD are small, the disease is highly significant due to its wide ranging 
impact on the lives of those who experience it, in particular through changes 
in social cognition, aspects of cognitive function and behaviour (Warren et al. 
2013). Each of these three areas is briefly outlined below. 
Impact on Social Cognition 
Social cognition involves the ability to understand the social world and apply 
this knowledge in everyday interactions with others. A number of aspects of 
social cognition are affected by bvFTD. These include: 
 Theory of mind, involving the ability to;  
o Understand ones own and infer others beliefs, desires and 
knowledge,  
o take anothers perspective and, 
o infer the emotions of others (Kipps and Hodges 2006; 
Fernandez-Duque et al. 2010; Sturm et al. 2011) 
 Empathy, involving the ability to;  
o perceive anothers emotional experience (affective component),  
o understand that experience (cognitive component) and, 
o take account of anothers and ones own state in determining 
appropriate actions (Cuff et al. 2016; Lough et al. 2006).  
 Unawareness of the emotional impact of bvFTD on oneself (Mendez 
and Shapira 2011) 
 Emotional blunting, involving declining extraversion, loss of emotional 
warmth, unconcern or indifference to the experience of others (Bott et 
al. 2014; Joshi et al. 2014) 
Impact on Cognitive Function 
The frontal lobes govern many aspects of cognitive function involved in 
ensuring that it is possible to make sense of the external world and combine   
this with internal states in order to engage in appropriate behaviour (ECDC 
2011). The main areas of cognitive function affected include: 
 Executive Function, which involves the ability to problem solve and 
plan ahead to decide on an appropriate course of action. This 
includes determining the sequence of steps needed to achieve a goal; 
initiating actions; monitoring actions and switching plans as needed. 
Finally, stopping actions when they are no longer required (ECDC 
2011; Rascovsky et al. 2011) 
 Impaired attention and concentration (distractibility) (Stopford et al. 
2012).  
 Changes in memory are contentious and are not included in the most 
recent diagnostic criteria for bvFTD (Bott et al. 2014; Rascovsky et al. 
2011). However some suggest that deficits may be present as a result 
of impaired attention and others suggest that impaired anterograde 
memory is present in older people with bvFTD (Stopford et al. 2012; 
Baborie et al. 2012). 
 Changes in insight and awareness, involving lesser or no awareness 
of deficits in multiple areas of functioning including language, 
executive function and activities of daily living (Massimo et al. 2013a; 
Salmon et al. 2008; Bott et al. 2014; Hutchings et al. 2015) 
 Impairment in metacognition, involving awareness of own thought 
processes (Bott et al. 2014; Massimo et al. 2013a). 
Impact on Behaviour 
The impact upon social cognition and cognitive function described above 
combine together to affect the behaviour of the person with bvFTD. Changes 
in behaviour include: 
 Knowing what is acceptable in social situations and conducting 
oneself appropriately (i.e. disinhibition; Hutchings et al. 2015; Bott et 
al. 2014; Warren et al. 2013). 
 Apathy, involving distinct deficits in planning, initiation, motivation and 
self-care (Massimo et al. 2014).  
 Impulsivity (Rascovsky et al. 2011). 
 Perseverative, stereotyped or ritualistic behaviours (Rascovsky et al. 
2011)  
 Changes in eating habits, commonly involving preferences for sweet 
foods or fixations on particular types of food (Bott et al. 2014). 
As a consequence of these changes, bvFTD is known to present particular 
difficulties for the person and their family (Merilees et al. 2013; Mioshi et al. 
2013a; van Vliet et al. 2011; Ascher et al. 2010; Warren et al. 2013; Oyebode 
et al. 2013).  
In addition to the symptoms described above, the point in the life cycle at 
which bvFTD occurs is significant. As it commonly affects younger people, 
there are psychosocial and practical implications associated with this life 
stage, including employment and financial consequences. Furthermore, 
young onset dementia may have relational consequences associated with 
having dependent children or caregiving responsibilities for parents. Wider 
family relationships and friendships are also likely to be affected (Roach, et 
al. 2014a; Allen et al. 2009; Svanberg et al. 2011; Oyebode et al. 2013). The 
next two sections therefore consider research which explores the experience 
of living with bvFTD for the person with the condition and their family 
members.  
2.7  Search Strategy bvFTD and family relationships 
A search was completed to identify the specific literature concerning family 
experiences of living with bvFTD in 2012 and then repeated in 2016 (table 
2.5).  
Table 2.5: Search strategy: frontotemporal dementia or frontal symptoms and family 
caregiving.  
Keyword Search: 
Frontotemporal dementia OR Frontal Variant Frontotemporal dementia 
AND Family Caregiv* OR Caregiv* OR Family Functioning OR Carers OR Care* 
OR Identity OR Relationships OR Personal Experience 
Databases searched:  
1. Assia 
2. Cinahl (EBSCO) 
3. Web of Science 
4. Ovid Search of BNI, Medline, Embase, Psychinfo, PsychARTICLES, CAB, 
Fulltext 
5. Swetswise 
6. IBSS 
7. Pubmed 
8. ISI 
Inclusion Criteria: 
1. No limits placed on disease stage 
2. Any age of caregiver and any stage of caregiving as anticipated small number of 
studies 
3. Methodologies including Cross Sectional or Longitudinal, RCT, Peer Review 
Studies 
4. Limited to English Language 
5. Published from 2010 
Exclusion Criteria:  
Studies purely addressing Alzheimers Disease or Dementia in the absence of focus 
upon frontal symptoms common in FTD 
90 articles were retrieved.  
The articles obtained were subjected to review based upon the title and abstract. 
The full text of 27 articles was obtained.  
A further hand search of these articles and of other relevant journals identified a 
further 1 articles for inclusion.  
A further search was repeated in July 2016, limited to dates between 2012 and 
current date 
2386 abstracts were retrieved after duplicates were removed and subjected to a 
review of abstract and title. Of these 17 were selected and full text obtained. 2 
further studies were identified from a hand search of references contained in articles 
and the journal Dementia. 
The full text of 47 articles was reviewed and considered for inclusion in this 
literature review. Fifteen studies met the criteria for inclusion (Ascher et al. 
2010; Avineri 2013; Brioschi Guevara et al. 2015; Chow et al. 2011; Diehl-
Schmid et al. 2013; Griffin et al. 2015; Hsieh et al. 2013; Massimo et al. 
2013; Mioshi et al. 2013a; Nichols et al. 2013; Oyebode et al. 2013; Roche et 
al. 2015; Wong et al. 2012a; Wong et al. 2012b; Wong et al. 2014). Given the 
limitations regarding thesis length, details of their methodologies, research 
questions and key results are summarised in appendix 4 (PDF CD). 
However, in the next two sections I present a narrative summary of their 
findings in relation to the experience of the person with bvFTD and the family 
experience of bvFTD.  
2.8 The experience of living with bvFTD from the perspective of the 
person with the diagnosis 
In the main and as noted earlier in this review, research on the subjective 
experience of living with dementia has largely focused on people living with 
the more common forms of dementia such as Alzheimers disease. Where 
they have been included, the numbers of people with bvFTD are small and 
their experience has not been differentiated from that of people with more 
common forms of dementia. Griffin et al. (2015) suggest that researchers 
may have assumed that people with bvFTD lack insight and are therefore 
unable to reflect on their experience. However they contend that similar 
views used to be held about people with Alzheimers disease, consequently it 
cannot be assumed that such research is impossible. Furthermore, the 
distinct differences in bvFTD warrant a specific focus.  
While the search strategy described earlier (table 2.5) elicited articles 
considering the impact upon family caregivers, no studies considering the 
personal experience of bvFTD were identified from the database searches. A 
hand search of the journal Dementia identified one study and one further 
study which has some relevance to the personal experience of bvFTD was 
identified from a hand search of articles cited in recent studies. Both of these 
studies are qualitative and focus on one and five participants respectively 
(Avineri 2013; Griffin et al. 2015) and are therefore not generalisable. 
Nevertheless, they provide important insights and potential areas for further 
study. An assessment of the quality of these studies is contained in appendix 
In a single case study, Avineri (2013) demonstrated that a person living with 
bvFTD was able to recognise that while they may not have awareness of 
their difficulties, others around them might have a more accurate 
understanding. Conducting research using naturalistic rather than 
experimental conditions allowed the person with bvFTD to demonstrate 
aspects of insight and theory of mind, from which Avineri (2013) concluded 
that insight may be more appropriately represented as a continuum rather 
than entirely present or absent. Avineri (2013) also suggested that the 
participant actively sought to create a representation of her experience of   
bvFTD and furthermore that this was influenced by the interactional 
environment of the study in which the participants daughter and a doctor 
were present.  
Griffin et al. (2015) undertook a qualitative study, exploring the perspectives 
of five people living with bvFTD using Interpretive Phenomenological 
Analysis. Four of the five people were interviewed alone and one with a 
spouse. Two superordinate themes were identified, Bewilderment and 
Relationships with others. Griffin et al. (2015) found that while participants 
were often able to report changes, they appeared to have difficulty in 
emotionally appreciating the impact and effect of the changes on themselves. 
The diagnosis, a reduction in abilities and restrictions on activities they had 
previously engaged in negatively impacted upon their sense of self. This was 
particularly because they did not necessarily accept the legitimacy of the 
restrictions and struggled with the loss of control associated with changes 
such as loss of employment and driving. In the second superordinate theme, 
it appeared that the disparity between theirs and others understanding 
continued. Participants appeared to struggle to appreciate that others might 
be affected by their difficulties and in the context of threats posed to self by 
others perspectives, chose to avoid or blame others for their actions.  
These two studies appear to suggest firstly, that people with bvFTD are able 
to actively participate in research of this kind, although as Griffin et al. (2015) 
highlight, modifications to interview style may be necessary in order to 
maximise opportunities for participation. Similarly, Avineri (2013) points to the 
interactional environment of their research which may have supported the 
person with bvFTD to provide a more detailed perspective. Secondly, both 
studies highlight that awareness and insight are complex and nuanced 
experiences. In particular, Griffin et al. (2015) suggest that while cognitive 
awareness may be present, emotional appreciation of changes may not be. 
Consequently, this has implications for sense of self when interpreting the 
reactions of others as well as social behaviour. Further research studies are 
required to further elucidate the personal experience of bvFTD. As Avineri 
(2013) suggests, undertaking such research in naturalistic environments 
seems more likely to achieve the depth of understanding needed.   
Additionally, these studies imply that a fruitful area for further research and 
intervention development could be to consider ways in which self-concept 
can be supported within a familial and social context.  
2.9 Family experiences of Frontotemporal Dementia 
Thirteen articles were located for review from the search strategy described 
above (table 2.5). Of the studies that were selected, three utilised qualitative 
methodologies, involving focus groups, (Nichols et al. 2013) and Interpretive 
Phenomenological Analysis (Massimo et al. 2013b; Oyebode et al. 2013). Of 
the ten articles using quantitative methodologies, one used descriptive 
statistics (Chow et al 2011) and one used a text analysis methodology 
(Ascher et al. 2010). The remainder used correlational research designs.  
The ten quantitative studies were assessed for their quality according to the 
guidelines for critiquing quantitative research developed by Coughlan et al 
(2007) in table 2.6 below. Studies were assessed against the questions 
asked about each of these elements and assessed as meeting (y) partially 
meeting (p) or not meeting (n) each. Quantitative studies were highly variable 
in quality. The three qualitative articles were assessed according to the 
criteria described earlier (table 2.2). These studies largely met the criteria for 
assessment of qualitative research fully. The full results of the assessment 
are contained in appendix 5 (PDF CD).  
Table 2.6 Guidelines for critiquing a quantitative research study Coughlan et al. 
2007: 659 
Elements influencing the believability of the research 
1. Writing style 
2. Author 
3. Report title 
4. Abstract 
Elements influencing the robustness of the research 
1. Purpose/ research problem 
2. Logical consistency 
3. Literature review 
4. Theoretical framework 
5. Aims/ objectives/ research question/ hypothesis 
6. Sample 
7. Ethical considerations 
8. Operational definitions 
9. Methodology 
10. Data analysis/ results 
11. Discussion 
12. References 
Of the thirteen studies, five contributed to aspects of the family experience of 
living with bvFTD, which included the impact on their relationships. Seven 
studies were concerned with the impact of bvFTD on family members who 
were primarily involved in caregiving for the person with bvFTD and their 
coping styles; and one study considered both. The results of these studies 
are therefore presented in two sections.  
The family experience of bvFTD  
Six studies contributed to understanding family members experiences of 
bvFTD (Ascher et al. 2010; Chow et al. 2011; Diehl-Schmid et al. 2013; 
Massimo et al. 2013b; Nichols et al. 2013; Oyebode et al. 2013). Participants 
included spouses, siblings, children and young people and adult children. 
Five of the six studies did not involve the person living with bvFTD. Two of 
the three quantitative studies sought to identify the overall needs of family 
caregivers of people living with bvFTD (Chow et al. 2011; Diehl-Schmid et al. 
2013) and their approach is complemented by the three studies using 
qualitative methods, which assist in the development of an in-depth 
understanding of family members experiences of living with bvFTD 
(Massimo et al. 2013b; Nichols et al. 2013; Oyebode et al. 2013).  
Changes in identity of the person with bvFTD were described in all three of 
the qualitative studies, with a common theme of not the same person 
emerging. The emotional impact of these changes was evident, with all three 
studies identifying the experience of loss associated with this change. These 
changes impacted upon the nature of the relationship, with participants 
describing the loss of emotional connectedness, shared communication and 
affection (Massimo et al. 2013b; Nichols et al. 2013; Oyebode et al. 2013). 
Additionally, in one study, spouses described changes in sexual intimacy 
(Oyebode et al. 2013). Nichols et al. (2013) also referred to changes in 
relationship with other family members, including the well parents which 
were consistent with the perspectives of young people described earlier in 
this review.   
Family members in all three studies also described changes to self, involving 
becoming a caregiver and taking on increased responsibility for the person 
with bvFTD. Furthermore in two of the studies some participants appeared to 
feel that their lives and their hoped for future had been irreparably damaged 
(Oyebode et al. 2013; Massimo et al. 2013b).  
Five of the studies (Chow et al. 2011; Diehl-Schmid et al. 2013; Massimo et 
al. 2013b; Nichols et al. 2013; Oyebode et al. 2013) described changes in 
behaviour as being challenging. Such changes included; loss of insight and 
awareness, loss of empathy, aggression, changes in personality, social 
behaviour, judgement and risk taking and loss of inhibition. Diehl-Schmid et 
al. (2013) highlighted that difficult behaviours were associated with outcomes 
such as increases in depressive symptoms in family caregivers. Four studies 
highlighted that family members had developed strategies to cope with these 
difficulties and had developed self-efficacy as a consequence (Chow et al. 
2011; Massimo et al. 2013b; Nichols et al. 2013; Oyebode et al. 2013). Three 
studies provided detailed examples including promoting the quality of life of 
the person with bvFTD, developing skills in new areas, learning about bvFTD 
and finding ways to maintain aspects of the relationship (Massimo et al. 
2013b; Nichols et al. 2013; Oyebode et al. 2013). Participants also 
highlighted the importance of understanding bvFTD in order to reframe the 
behaviour of the person and find ways of maintaining some connectedness.  
A gap in existing evidence was that of the impact of bvFTD on relationships 
which includes the perspective of the person living with dementia. Ascher et 
al. (2010) found that bvFTD has a significant impact on the relationship 
between couples, including lower relationship satisfaction. They 
recommended that further research is needed involving people living with 
bvFTD and those that care for them (Ascher et al. 2010).  
Impact of caregiving on family members caring for a person with 
bvFTD and their coping styles 
Eight studies considered the impact of caregiving for a person with bvFTD on 
the wellbeing of the caregiver and their coping styles (Brioschi Guevara et al. 
2015; Diehl-Schmid et al. 2013; Hsieh et al. 2013; Mioshi et al. 2013a; Roche   
et al. 2015; Wong et al. 2012a; 2012b; 2014). Two of the studies drew results 
from the same cohort, although reporting findings concerning two separate 
but linked research questions (Wong et al. 2012b; Wong et al. 2014). In the 
majority of studies the participants were female and spouse caregivers. All of 
the studies used a cross-sectional design and the majority used validated 
tools.  
Some studies sought to isolate individual symptoms of bvFTD associated 
with relational functioning and in particular changes in theory of mind and 
empathy and explore their relationship to caregiver outcomes. One study 
found that loss of empathy was associated with a perceived lack of care 
(Hsieh et al. 2013). Another found that loss of theory of mind was positively 
associated with caregiver burden (Brioschi Guevara et al. 2015). There are 
however, conflicting results concerning the relationship between caregiver 
burden and lack of care in the relationship (Hsieh et al. 2013; Mioshi et al. 
2013a). Furthermore, some studies suggest that it is likely that multiple 
factors acting in combination are responsible for outcomes, for example 
Diehl-Schmid et al. (2013) found in their survey, that caregivers experienced 
changes in personality, the need for care and supervision as most 
burdensome. Consistent with their findings, Mioshi et al. (2013a) found that it 
was the experience of behavioural changes when combined with disease 
severity that was the main predictor of caregiver burden.  
Some of the studies sought to compare caregiving for different types of FTD 
and other forms of dementia. Mioshi et al (2013a) found that family 
caregivers of people with bvFTD were significantly more burdened and 
depressed than those caring for people with other FTD subtypes or 
Alzheimers disease. Similarly, Hsieh et al. (2013) did not observe any 
significant associations concerning empathy loss and carer variables in 
Alzheimers disease. They suggested that these symptoms appear later in 
the course of Alzheimers disease, in contrast to bvFTD where early changes 
in these functions are apparent. Wong et al (2012a) found that caregivers of 
people with bvFTD experienced significantly more strain, distress, depression 
and had less perceived control than caregivers of people with Alzheimers  
disease. Thus it would appear from these studies that bvFTD may create 
specific and significant challenges for family members in caregiving roles.  
Finally, two of the studies explored the role of coping strategies in mediating 
outcomes for family caregivers (Roche et al. 2015; Wong and Wallhagen, 
2014). Roche et al (2015) considered the role that emotion-focused, problem-
focused and dysfunctional coping had in mediating the experience of 
depression and quality of life for caregivers of people with bvFTD. They 
found that caregiver strain was common and that problem focused and 
emotion focused coping did not alleviate strain. Furthermore, dysfunctional 
coping when combined with low financial resources and the need for high 
levels of care was found to increase strain. However they also found that 
coping could mediate the effect of strain, for example problem focused 
coping alongside a younger age of caregiver was found to be most beneficial, 
reducing the effect of strain on quality of life. Conversely, emotion-focused 
coping was not found to provide a mediating effect between strain and 
depression or quality of life.  The findings of Wong and Wallhagen (2014) 
contrasted with these findings. They also considered these three types of 
coping and found that emotion focused coping was associated with mental 
health issues and problem-focused coping was associated with physical 
health issues. Furthermore they found a significant association between 
coping style and gender, with women more likely to use emotion-focused 
coping. It remains clear that further research is needed to identify which 
coping strategies are likely to be most effective for family caregivers of 
people with bvFTD.  
These studies have some methodological limitations. Sample sizes in many 
of the studies are small, resulting in difficulties with identifying differences 
between types of caregiving relationships, gender effects, subtypes of FTD, 
being able to control for length of time caring and achieving statistical rigour. 
Many participants were recruited from caregiver support groups or were 
already in contact with services and may therefore be considered help-
seekers or be people who have significant need for assistance (Roche et al. 
2015). Consequently the results of these studies need to be interpreted with 
caution and cannot necessarily be generalised.   
Furthermore, some of the studies acknowledge the difficulties associated 
with quantitative research in this field (e.g. Mioshi et al. 2013a; Hsieh et al. 
2013; Diehl-Schmid et al. 2013). The challenge of research of this nature is 
the complexity of relational functioning and the difficulty of isolating individual 
components against a specific dependent variable. Indeed, variables may be 
operating both separately and together within a relational context but some of 
the research is only able to show linear associations between independent 
and dependent variables. Furthermore, as Hsieh et al. (2013) suggest, 
conducting research into discreet symptoms such as empathy based on 
standardised questionnaires may not facilitate an in-depth understanding of 
the nuanced way in which changes occur or how these are experienced. 
Thus, as described earlier, Hsieh et al (2013) suggests that observation in 
natural environments is required to strengthen such research.  
Summary 
BvFTD brings unique challenges associated with the nature of the symptoms 
and their impact upon relational functioning, behaviour and activities of 
everyday life. Current research considering the experience of bvFTD for the 
person and their family and its impact upon their wellbeing is still in its 
infancy. Qualitative studies are emerging which although not generalisable; 
provide opportunities to deepen understanding of the similarities and 
differences associated with bvFTD. Two studies demonstrate that it is 
possible for people with bvFTD to share their perspectives and to participate 
in research. They also indicate that while people with bvFTD may have 
difficulties with awareness and insight these are not all or nothing concepts 
consequently, it is possible for them to be aware of the changes in 
relationships that may be occurring.  Studies considering family experience 
highlight early changes in relationship quality and associated distress. 
Furthermore, they emphasise that family members experience significant 
changes in roles and identity as a consequence of the impact of bvFTD. 
Although these experiences also appear in studies considering other forms of 
dementia, it seems that they occur at an earlier point in the course of bvFTD 
and when combined with the significant changes in behaviour, create 
particular challenges for family members.   
Quantitative studies have fundamental challenges with sampling and 
recruitment due to the relative rarity of bvFTD in comparison with other more 
common forms of dementia. Furthermore, it would seem that a simple 
application of concepts from existing caregiving research, such as burden, is 
problematic. Research is beginning to acknowledge the multiplicity of factors 
that may influence the outcomes associated with caregiving in the context of 
bvFTD, but needs to achieve greater sample sizes. Additionally, matching of 
family caregivers and persons with bvFTD is needed in regard to length of 
time experiencing dementia, gender and relationship type in order to advance 
understanding. Nevertheless, it would seem that there are areas of 
significance, which while requiring further study, are important. These include 
the higher levels of depression, strain and burden evident when caregiving 
for a person with bvFTD when compared with caregiving in other forms of 
dementia. Furthermore, that it is the combination of behavioural changes and 
disease severity that predicts poor outcomes. Finally, problem-focused and 
emotion-focused coping are important areas for further study when 
considering how family caregivers cope with bvFTD.  
2.10 Conclusion 
Research is still limited in studying bvFTD, its impact and the experience of 
living with it and it is clear that further research is required. The results of the 
small number of bvFTD studies reviewed above have parallels with the 
findings of the synthesis and the research described earlier. They reinforce 
the need for a focus on family relationships, as these studies highlighted that 
a range of family members including the person with dementia are affected. 
However this research also highlights differences, not least of which is the 
specific and direct impact upon relational functioning at an early point in the 
experience of bvFTD. As Ascher et al. (2010) suggest it seems possible that 
people with Alzheimers disease can work together with their family to 
maintain relationships in the early experience of the illness. However in 
bvFTD, such relational work is fundamentally affected by changes in 
empathy, awareness, theory of mind and reciprocity. Attributes such as 
reciprocity and empathy are important in healthy relationships (Cox, 2009) 
and research which considers the reciprocal relationship between bvFTD and  
family relationships, which includes the person living with dementia, would 
therefore seem to be necessary.  
2.11 Rationale and objectives for this study 
In light of the above, the primary objectives of this research study are to:  
 Develop an in-depth and detailed understanding of the inter-
generational family experience of bvFTD over time. Considering in 
particular the emotional experience, impact upon relationships and the 
strategies that families use to make sense of and cope with the impact 
of the changes associated with bvFTD such as loss of empathy and 
theory of mind.  
 Furthermore, to use the results of this research to inform the 
development of interventions which seek to enable families to live well 
with bvFTD.  
The following research questions were formed from these objectives: 
1. How were family relationships experienced prior to bvFTD occurring 
(considering processes of reciprocity, cohesion, collaboration, 
communication, conflict, allegiances, roles and responsibilities)? 
2. How have families made sense of and understood the changes 
associated with bvFTD beginning with the early signs before diagnosis 
and continuing throughout their involvement in the research? 
3. What are the implications of this process of sense making for coping with 
the experience of bvFTD within a relational context over time (considering 
the verbal, embodied and emotional aspects of coping)? 
4. How has bvFTD affected and impacted upon family relationships over 
time (considering processes of reciprocity, cohesion, collaboration, 
communication, conflict, allegiances, roles and responsibilities)? 
5. What are the reciprocal influences between family relationships and 
coping processes in the context of bvFTD? 
6. What does this tell us about the facilitators and barriers to living well with 
bvFTD and what interventions might be needed in order to support 
families to live well with bvFTD? 
Chapter 3: Methodological Approach 
3.1  Introduction 
In order to answer the research questions identified at the end of Chapter 2 
and achieve an in-depth and longitudinal understanding of the experiences of 
families living with bvFTD, I chose to utilise a qualitative research design. It is 
suggested that qualitative research: 
 Involves the studied use and collection of a variety of 
empirical materials that describe routine and problematic 
moments and meanings in individuals lives. Accordingly, 
qualitative researchers deploy a wide range of interpretive 
practices, hoping always to get a better understanding of the 
subject matter at hand. (Denzin and Lincoln 2003: 5) 
Thus a qualitative design is well suited to achieving answers to the research 
questions raised by the review of the literature and my professional 
experience. Furthermore, as identified in the literature review, the 
methodological limitations and challenges associated with existing research 
supports this decision. In particular, research has commonly focused on 
discreet aspects of bvFTD without recognising the multiple factors that are 
likely to act together to influence the experience of bvFTD for people living 
with the diagnosis and their family.  
Furthermore, research which seeks to understand the perspectives of people 
living with bvFTD and the nuanced nature of their experience seems most 
likely to be gained from inquiry that is conducted in their natural environment 
(Griffin et al. 2015; Hsieh et al. 2013; Avineri 2013). Although it must be 
acknowledged that the presence of a researcher will influence that natural 
environment. Additionally, qualitative research can be flexible and responsive 
to the particular challenges faced as a consequence of dementia (Nygard, 
2006; Hellstrm, et al. 2007b; Pesonen, et al. 2011). I chose to employ a 
pluralistic research design involving narrative analysis and grounded theory 
within a constructivist paradigm. This chapter reviews the ontological and 
epistemological position informing the research design and provides a 
rationale for the methodological approach.   
3.2  Methodological approaches in qualitative research 
Qualitative and quantitative research is underpinned by theoretical paradigms 
that are described as:  
 The basic belief system or worldview that guides the 
investigator, not only in the choices of method but in 
ontologically and epistemologically fundamental ways (Guba 
and Lincoln 1994: 105).  
These authors identify four paradigms which have specific ontological 
positions (Table 3.1):  
Table 3.1 Four paradigms of research (Guba and Lincoln 1994) 
Paradigm Ontological Position 
Positivism Nave realism: Within this position, it is suggested that a 
measurable reality exists that can be directly measured 
Post-positivism Critical realism: Within this position, reality is thought to 
exist but measurement is suggested to be flawed due to 
the limitations of the world in which we exist and the 
fallibility of human intellect 
Critical theory Historical realism: Within this position it is suggested that a 
reality exists which has been shaped over time by social, 
political, cultural, economic, ethnic and gender factors 
such that it has formed into specific constructions which 
are open to measurement 
Constructivism Relativism: within this position, it is suggested that multiple 
realities exist, which are fluid and open to change as they 
are grounded in individual and cultural experiences 
Each of these ontological positions is informed by an epistemology which 
articulates the means through which knowledge is constructed. Each position 
is associated with specific methodologies as described in table 3.2:  
Table 3.2: Epistemological positions and their associated methodologies 
Guba and Lincoln 1994 (109-111) 
Ontology Epistemology Methodology 
Positivism Dualist/ Objectivist 
Findings are true 
Experimenter is independent 
of concept being studied. It is 
possible to control for threats 
to validity. 
Experimental research hypotheses 
are proposed and tested.  
Generally uses quantitative methods 
Post-positivism Objectivist position. Emphasis 
on key tenants of objectivity 
including fit with prior 
knowledge and views of peers 
Findings are probably true. 
Modified experimental/ manipulative.  
Seeks to disprove hypotheses. 
Inquiry occurs in natural settings. 
Acceptance of need to gain insider 
knowledge so also associated with 
qualitative inquiry, specifically 
Glasers approach to Grounded 
theory. 
Critical Theory Transactional and subjectivist 
position recognises that the 
researcher and the focus of 
inquiry are linked. Researcher 
influences the inquiry. 
Findings are influenced by the 
researchers values and 
beliefs, i.e. knowledge is 
influenced by values and 
implicitly defined by those 
values.  
Dialogic and Dialectical. 
Methodology involves interaction 
between researcher and focus of 
inquiry to achieve a consensus, 
which could be perceived as a truth. 
Methodologies seek to achieve a 
critical understanding of factors 
influencing the experience, such as 
discrimination. 
Associated with action research or 
transformative research. Also 
ideology critique. Empowerment is 
viewed as an important outcome 
Constructivism Transactional and Subjectivist 
position. 
As with critical theory, 
assumes a link between 
researcher and participants.  
The findings of inquiry are co-
constructed. 
Hermeneutical and dialectical 
Methodologies generate findings 
through interactions between 
researcher and participants. Results 
achieve an outcome that is more 
informed, however not a truth. 
Belief in multiple realities that 
develop and change over time as 
new experiences emerge. 
Associated methodologies include 
Grounded theory (Corbin and 
Strauss 2008, Charmaz 2006) and 
Narrative Analysis (Riessman 2008).  
In considering which paradigm I aligned myself to and therefore which 
approach I should take to this research, I considered my personal and 
professional values and experiences alongside the arguments I have already 
made earlier in this chapter for adopting a qualitative approach to the study. 
The limitations of existing positivist research in this area led me to discount 
this paradigm. Similarly, I struggled with the perception inherent within post-
positivism, that there exists an unassailable truth that can be uncovered, 
even if only partially. Furthermore, it seemed to me that the researchers 
values and beliefs cannot be contained in such a way that they do not 
influence the research.  
Additionally, as a mature professional in midlife, I have been regularly 
confronted with different realities, in working with families living with dementia 
and in my personal life. Equally, in my work I have been regularly reminded 
of the way in which my values and beliefs and those of the service within 
which I operate, influence the way in which families living with dementia are 
constructed. For example, when I commenced nursing in 1979, people with 
dementia were constructed within a biomedical paradigm. The predominant 
reality was that people with dementia were perceived as less than human 
and in this context; care was reductionist and focused on meeting physical 
needs. Care was not about communicating because it was assumed that 
they wouldnt understand. I experienced many moments which challenged 
this view, where peoples essential humanity and experience of the world 
shone through in their efforts to make themselves heard. It appeared to me 
that their reality and my own seemed very different from that of some of the 
professionals that I worked with. In the early 1990s the advent of person 
centred care (Kitwood 1997) challenged this dominant narrative. 
Consequently, my world view broadened over that time period as did my 
understanding of what it meant to be a nurse working with people who lived 
with dementia. Similarly my experience of families, as referred to in chapter 
1, underwent a comparable process.  
Consequently, I explored whether critical theory or constructivism should 
inform my research. It could be argued that critical theory has considerable 
relevance to the experience of families living with bvFTD. Indeed it may be 
appropriate to consider the historical, institutional, cultural and discriminatory 
practices that influence the family experience of bvFTD. However in 
considering the experiences that had brought me to this research, I was 
increasingly uncomfortable with the idea that there was a single insight to be 
uncovered. The nature of working with families illustrates as Jessop (1981) 
identifies:  
 There may well be as many valid realities as there are 
interacting individuals, with no reason to consider one 
version more authoritative than another (Jessop 1981: 102) 
Although it is possible that this research could be transformative, I was 
concerned with providing a space for the multiple perspectives of families in 
this context to be heard, albeit that this would inevitably be my interpretation 
of that experience. Consequently, in light of the above, I chose a 
constructivist paradigm to inform my approach.  
However, this does not mean that I ascribe to the position of ontological 
relativism. Unlike Guba and Lincoln (1994), Willig (2016) suggests that it is 
important to see ontology and epistemology in constructivism as separate 
although linked. She proposes that adopting realist ontology does not 
automatically mean a commitment to an unassailable truth. Corbin (Corbin 
and Strauss 2008) also raises this, indicating that while she believes there is 
no single reality to be discovered, she does believe that there are external 
events which occur. She further articulates that:  
 It is not the event itself that is the issue in our studies, 
because each person experiences and gives meaning to 
events in light of his or her own biographies or experiences 
(10).  
Therefore, Corbin (Corbin and Strauss 2008) and Willig (2016) suggest that 
constructivist research seeks to uncover the meanings and multiple realities 
that individuals might give to events. These are then constructed by 
researchers into narratives, concepts or theories which assist us to make 
sense of these multiple realities. Willig (2016) therefore proposes that 
qualitative research is often based upon a combination of ontological critical 
realism and epistemological relativism. She provides the example of AIDS 
suggesting that as a condition, it exists although it is also socially 
constructed. I have adopted a position in this research which is consistent 
with her perspective. I believe that bvFTD as a condition exists (although I 
accept that this may be challenged by others). However, in undertaking this 
research, I have sought to uncover the way in which families and individuals 
within families make sense of and construct bvFTD. I have therefore elicited 
multiple and sometimes conflicting realities within and between families 
concerning the meaning of bvFTD and the actions these actors engage in to 
manage their reality of living with bvFTD.   
Finally, within the constructivist paradigm, there is an open acknowledgement 
that the products of such research are constructed in a dialogue between 
researcher and participant. Consequently the values and beliefs of 
researchers are unavoidably central to the way in which the findings are 
created and constructed. Guba and Lincoln (1994) suggest that to exclude 
the researchers values from the products of this research would be 
inexcusable. Therefore reflexivity of the researcher is a central component of 
the process of constructivist research. In this study, I have used reflexivity 
and reflection to consider my influence on the research at all stages. 
Discussion of this occurred in Chapter 1 and is explored further in Chapters 
4, 6 and 10, where I consider my influence on the research process and 
outcomes.  
3.3  Methodology 
In selecting a methodology, I discounted phenomenological methodologies 
such as Interpretative Phenomenological Analysis as they are largely 
concerned with individual lived experience and seek to understand the 
persons internal world (Shinebourne 2011). As the aim of the research was 
to uncover the reciprocal influences between family relationships and bvFTD, 
the focus of study was largely exploring the meaning created between 
individuals. Consequently methodologies which were influenced by 
theoretical positions involving human action and interaction were best suited 
to this study. Possibilities included: 
 Constructivist Grounded Theory (Charmaz 2006, Corbin and Strauss 
2008) 
 Narrative Analysis (Riessman 1993, 2008)  
 Ethnography (Chicago school approach, Deegan 2001) 
I was already familiar with ethnography, having carried out a research study 
exploring the experience of grandchildren and grandparents when the 
grandparent had dementia. Its benefits include that it is particularly suitable 
for studying groups who are hard to reach and for understanding the often 
hidden meanings and assumptions informing everyday life (Harper and La 
Fontaine 2009). However there are also challenges to implementing an   
ethnographic approach. It is time consuming and usually involves long 
periods of time in the field of study (Murphy 2005; Lders 2004). 
Ethnographys main approach to data collection is participant observation 
and this is frequently carried out in workplace, community or institutional 
settings, such as Goffmans study in psychiatric hospitals (Goffman 1961). 
While participant observation would provide an opportunity to study life as it 
is lived (Hammersley and Atkinson 1963), I was concerned that conducting 
observations in a persons private home would be difficult without significantly 
impacting upon the natural environment. Furthermore, from my experience 
of the previous research study, maintaining a detailed fieldwork journal in 
such circumstances is very difficult due to the nature of the setting. 
Consequently this methodology was discounted.  
Both Narrative Analysis and Grounded Theory had characteristics which 
were suited to the research questions I had identified and each of these 
methodologies is now considered in turn. 
 Narrative Analysis 
Esin (2011) defines narratives as stories with a clear sequential order, that 
connect events in a meaningful way for a definite audience Narratives are 
powerful forms of giving meaning to experience (93) 
Narrative analysis (NA) is therefore a process that can assist us to 
understand the intricacies of human lives and relationships (Esin 2011). NA 
draws from constructivist and naturalist epistemological positions; the latter 
being described as suggesting that narratives are a direct representation of 
the reality of an individual and are concerned with what their experience is. 
Alternatively, constructivist NA is suggested to be concerned with how social 
order is created through talk and interaction. Consequently, it is particularly 
useful for considering how identity is constructed within certain contexts such 
as the family. She further suggests that constructivist NA is concerned with 
how people make sense of their experiences (Esin 2011). 
Riessman (2008) suggests that NA is a family of analytical approaches that 
interpret oral, written and visual narratives. The focus of NA is the narrative, 
the story created to provide meaning to experiences and events (Esin 2011;  
Lal et al 2012). Narratives are therefore used to communicate our experience 
of the world. They are co-constructed, assist in creating reality between the 
narrator and the wider world and are influenced by the world in which the 
narrator exists (Esin 2011). Generally, NA involves case centred research, 
although what is considered to be a case can range from individuals to 
communities (Riessman 2008). Narrative methods have a long history of use 
in studies concerning health and ill health (Frank 1995; Riessman 1993) and 
are particularly useful in examining the ways in which an individuals self-
identity is challenged and changed through the impact of traumatic life-
events, such as being diagnosed with a chronic or terminal illness (Thomas 
et al. 2009: 789). Bingley et al. (2008) suggest that storytelling (i.e. the 
construction of narratives) is often a fundamental part of making sense of 
disruptions to our everyday lives, such as ill-health or disability.  
Four different versions of narrative analysis have been described, including, 
thematic, structural, dialogic or visual. Although more than one approach may 
be used (Riessman 2008) and each may subsume multiple methods of 
analysis. Indeed Mishler (1995) proposes that there is no single way to 
analyse texts. It is nonetheless the case that NA seeks to preserve the 
whole of the narrative text, rather than thematically fragment it (Riessman 
2008). Nevertheless Riessman (2008) suggests that NA can generate 
categories from which theoretical interpretations can be made. NA is thought 
to facilitate opportunities to uncover multiple realities which may be 
complementary or divergent (Esin 2011). 
 Grounded Theory 
Grounded theory (GT) emerged from the work of two sociologists, Glaser and 
Strauss (1967), although subsequently, they took divergent paths in their 
development of the methodology (Nolas 2011). It was developed as a 
consequence of the many criticisms of qualitative research such as a lack of 
a systematic approach. A number of forms of GT have arisen from the 
original methodology including Constructivist GT methodology and 
Straussian GT (Charmaz 2006; Corbin and Strauss 2008). The main 
proponent of constructivist GT is Charmaz (2006).   
Grounded theory arose from symbolic interactionism which suggests that 
people construct selves, society and reality through interaction (Charmaz 
2006: 189). As a consequence, GT is focused upon studying social and 
psychological processes, actions, interactions and structures (Charmaz 
2006; Burck 2005). GT also has a history of use in studies concerning health 
and ill health and is useful for learning about areas that are less well 
understood (Burck 2005).   
Charmaz (2006) suggests that constructivist GT involves a set of principles 
and practice rather than prescriptive methods. Nevertheless, there are core 
practices involved in the process of all methods of GT (Table 3.3):  
Table 3.3: Core practices associated with Grounded Theory  
(Nolas 2011; Charmaz 2006) 
Constant comparison involving the generation of codes and categories through 
a process of comparison within and between different 
sets of data to advance conceptual understanding 
Abductive inference considering all possible explanations for the data, 
forming ideas about the data and then subjecting these 
ideas to rigorous scrutiny empirically and by returning to 
the data to identify the most likely explanation 
Reflexivity the researcher intrinsically influences the process and 
outputs of GT and must therefore account for the 
decisions they make and the influence they have on the 
production of the research, the way in which they relate 
to participants and how they represent participants in the 
report 
Within the context of these practices, Charmaz (2006) indicates that 
constructivist GT involves an interpretation of how and sometimes why 
participants construct meanings and act in particular ways. Data collection 
methods are flexible and can involve participant observation and interviewing 
(Nolas 2011). Data is fragmented in order to develop analysis, but ultimately 
brought back together to form a coherent story (Charmaz 2006). The ultimate 
goal is the production of substantive theory, although it is acknowledged that 
some do such research without intending to produce a theory (Charmaz 
2006; Corbin and Strauss 2008). Finally, within constructivist GT, it is 
acknowledged that the products of such research are influenced by and 
dependent upon the researchers view and thus can only be partial 
representations of the realities of participants (Charmaz 2006).  
3.4 Rationale for the chosen methodologies 
I recognised that both of these methodologies had advantages when 
considering the nature of the research I sought to undertake and during the 
process of refining and developing my approach, I vacillated between the 
two. I was drawn towards NA because it offered the opportunity to use 
flexible research methods. I wanted where possible to involve all family 
members who wished to take part, yet there are known difficulties in using 
more structured methods of data collection with people experiencing 
cognitive challenges (van Baalen et al. 2010). Furthermore, bvFTD impacts 
upon the whole family and presents significant challenges to family as well as 
individual identity. As described above, narrative methods are believed to be 
particularly relevant as a method of gaining insights into the ways in which 
identity is constructed. However, it seemed that GT also allowed for such 
flexibility. Furthermore, although Reissman (1993) suggests that NA can 
facilitate research exploring psychological and social processes, GT is 
particularly positioned to do this given its focus upon actions and interactions 
(Charmaz 2006).  
After consideration of the early and emerging data from the interviews I 
moved from using one methodology to using a pluralistic approach. Frost 
(2009) suggests that combining methodologies facilitates opportunities to 
achieve the richest experience possible (11) and to provide multiple 
perspectives on the same issue (e.g. Burck 2005). Furthermore, Lal et al. 
(2012) suggest that as long as the ontological and epistemological positions 
adopted are commensurable then combining GT and NA is possible. 
Therefore I chose to use narrative analysis to guide my analysis of family 
relationships (research questions 1 and 4) and grounded theory to guide my 
analysis of the psychosocial coping processes used by families to make 
sense of and manage the impact of bvFTD (research questions 2 and 3). The 
results of these analyses were brought together to answer questions 5 and 6.  
Furthermore consistent with the views of Riessman (1993) and Charmaz 
(2006), I recognised that constructivism proposes that our reality is constantly 
being reworked and revised. Therefore, as discussed in Chapter 2, it seems 
likely that the meanings and realities of families living with bvFTD will change  
over time, particularly as bvFTD is a progressive and unpredictable condition. 
Accordingly I chose to undertake a qualitative longitudinal design as a means 
of capturing the temporal nature of this experience.  
3.5  Conclusion 
In seeking to address the aims of the research as identified at the end of 
Chapter 2 and in light of the challenges existing in the current literature, I 
chose to undertake a qualitative inquiry with a longitudinal design. Having 
reviewed the ontological and epistemological paradigms influencing 
qualitative research, I chose to align my approach within the constructivist 
paradigm. This recognises that we do not have direct access to a single 
truth but that multiple realities exist and are subject to change and 
reconstruction over time. While placing my research within epistemological 
relativism, I chose to align myself with ontological critical realism.   
I reviewed the methodologies associated with constructivism that are 
particularly suited to addressing the research aims. Although initially adopting 
a single methodology, after considering the data emerging from early 
interviews, I chose to use a pluralistic approach, involving grounded theory 
and narrative analysis as the methodologies informing my study.  
The next chapter considers the way in which these methodologies were 
operationalised within this research study, including describing the research 
participants, the way in which data was obtained, analytical methods and 
reflexivity.  
Chapter 4: Methods  
4.1 Introduction 
In this chapter I describe the overarching research design and the processes 
used to address the research aims including ethical approval, recruitment, 
data collection and analysis.  
4.2 Overarching research design 
As described in the previous chapter, a qualitative, pluralistic longitudinal 
design was planned, using grounded theory and narrative analysis. The 
methods associated with each of these methodologies are now described, 
following which the research design is outlined.  
Narrative Analysis (NA) 
As briefly mentioned in Chapter 3, a range of methods of analysis can be 
used in NA. Each of these is described in table 4.1: 
Table 4.1 Forms of Narrative Analysis (Riessman 2008) 
Thematic 
Narrative Analysis 
Exclusively concerned with the content of the narrative, 
rarely includes how, to whom or for what purpose. The 
story is kept intact by theorizing from the case. Prior 
theory can be used to inform interpretation. Often pays 
attention to societal context, but not necessarily to the 
context in which the narrative was generated. 
Structural analysis Concerned with content, but attends to the form, how a 
narrative is told. Data reduction is employed thus 
narratives are ordered in particular ways, for example 
using Labovs (1972) elements: abstract, orientation, 
complicating action, evaluation and resolution. Rarely 
pays attention to societal context. 
Dialogic / 
Performance 
analysis 
Makes selective use of previous two forms as well as 
considering how narratives are produced and enacted 
between speakers. It considers who the story is for, 
when and why it is said. The researcher has an active 
presence in the text. Focus in detail on a single 
narrative. Pays attention to local and societal context.  
Visual analysis Makes use of all three of the previous forms of analysis, 
but explores visual representations of narrative as well 
as textual. Seeks to critically consider how identities are 
composed and performed visually (Riessman 2008: 
179).  
While separating these methods for the purposes of writing about them, 
Riessman (2008) invites researchers to consider what best fits their research, 
suggesting that it is possible and appropriate to use a combination of 
approaches. Nonetheless, whichever approach is used, Riessman (1993) 
suggests that the representation and organisation of these stories in research 
should acknowledge that we cannot directly give voice to these narratives, 
rather that there are layers of representation of experience (8). She 
suggests that the stories that we tell about others experiences and their 
narratives are always partial representations. As such, we cannot have direct 
and unambiguous access to the meanings of others. As researchers, we 
make choices about which aspects of a narrative we focus upon and give 
prominence to. There is no set of strict guidelines as to how NA should be 
undertaken (Mishler 1995; Esin 2011). Rather, it is suggested that 
researchers are required to interpret the methodology and creatively apply it 
to their specific research context (Esin 2011).  
In the current study, I chose to focus upon what was being said and 
collaboratively constructed within an interactional context. I considered how 
the narrative illuminated the ways in which families constructed their 
relationships with other family members and the meanings they held about 
these relationships. I also considered how the narratives were 
communicated.  
I was also conscious that narrative analysis frequently focuses on small 
numbers of narratives, whereas I intended to collect a corpus of data that 
involved interviews with a range of family members over time. Consequently I 
needed to consider methods that would allow for the analytical approach to 
be manageable. I therefore chose to undertake Narrative thematic analysis, 
as this method has some parallels with Grounded Theory (GT) methodology 
(Riessman 2008; Ross and Green 2011) and would facilitate a 
complementary approach to data. In adopting this analytical method, I also 
considered Riessmans (2008) description of the limitations of this approach. 
She suggested that the researchers role in the construction of the narrative 
is often absent, that assumptions may be made across cases about the 
universality of a particular meaning and that local contextual characteristics  
are often not addressed. Therefore in adopting a constructivist approach, I 
recognised the need to ensure that my presence in the research was evident 
and that I paid attention to the diversity of meanings across families and 
individuals within families. Finally I also acknowledged the importance of 
taking account of the context in which the narratives are produced.  
Grounded Theory 
In contrast to NA, GT has developed technical and rigorous procedures 
concerning the methodology and method, although initially Glaser and 
Strauss (1967) suggested that readers use GT strategies flexibly (Charmaz 
2006).  
In developing constructivist GT, Charmaz (2006) proposed a return to a 
flexible approach with an emphasis on action as central to the process of 
analysis. Thus she provided guidelines rather than techniques through which 
GT can be applied (Charmaz 2006:9). Charmaz (2014) provides a 
description of the process of analysis GT which is summarised later in this 
chapter. 
Application of the concepts and processes involved in GT is described as an 
iterative and cyclical process, in which researchers develop insights and 
enrich categories as they engage in the process of analysis and further 
theoretical sampling (Charmaz 2014). Ultimately Charmaz (2014) suggests 
that theory development occurs. She defines theory in this context as aiming 
to understand meanings and actions and how people construct them. Thus 
these theories bring in the subjectivity of the actor and may recognise the 
subjectivity of the researcher (Charmaz 2014: 231).  
Finally, Charmaz (2014) describes nine key actions that determine whether a 
piece of research has utilised GT methodology (Table 4.2): 
Table 4.2: Distinctive strategies used by grounded theorists (Charmaz 2014: 
1. Conduct data collection and analysis simultaneously in an iterative process 
2. Analyse actions and processes rather themes and structure 
3. Use comparative methods 
4. Draw on data (e.g. narratives and descriptions) in service of developing 
new conceptual categories 
5. Develop inductive abstract analytic categories through systematic data 
analysis 
6. Emphasise theory construction rather than description or application of 
current theories 
7. Engage in theoretical sampling 
8. Search for variation in the studied categories or process 
9. Pursue developing a category rather than covering a specific empirical 
topic  
In the current study, I chose to adopt a constructivist approach to GT. I 
sought to use GT to identify the meanings families gave to the challenges 
associated with bvFTD and the actions they engaged in to address its impact 
upon their lives and their relationships, using the strategies described in table 
Research design 
Figure 4.1 below outlines the process engaged in to explore the research 
aims and questions identified in Chapter 2.  
Figure 4.1 
Recruit at 
least  
4 families 
Contact with 
professionals to 
recruit families 
Research ethics 
Site selection 
First contact visit to introduce 
research, achieve consent and 
identify who is family with a view to 
recruiting other family members 
Field Work Phase 
1) First Time Point 
Interview (together and/ or 
separately) record field 
notes after interview 
2) Transcription of interview. Sent to 
participant for member checking (if 
agreed) contact made to revisit if 
needed 
3) Review transcript, if revisit 
required, identify themes to 
follow up. Revisit and record 
interview, followed by further 
transcription 
4) Listen repeatedly making notes on 
transcript 
Initial coding of each interview within the 
family/ Narrative thematic analysis 
(identification of narrative moments) 
Further first contact visits 
with other family members 
to inform and determine 
participation 
5) Bring coding of individual family 
interviews together within families, 
developing focused codes and 
narrative themes; acknowledge 
areas of similarity and difference 
Determine questions for next time 
point interview 
Repeat of process steps 1 to 5 
for second and third time point. 
Developing categories/ narrative 
themes as coding develops 
Further development of coding, bringing 
together coding across families to 
develop categories and superordinate 
themes, returning to data as needed to 
interrogate for further refinement of 
thematic structure, properties and 
dimensions for both GT and NA 
Figure 4.1 outlines in broad detail the research design. The following sections 
provide detail concerning each of the steps.  
4.3 Ethical Approval 
The NRES ethical approval process for recruitment within NHS sites was 
completed. This included applying for NHS ethical approval for participants 
who may lack capacity to consent. NHS Ethical approval was given on the 
2nd December 2011 (see appendix 6 PDF on CD). Amendment to ethical 
approval was required and approved on the 25
 of October 2013 following 
transfer to the University of Bradford (see appendix 7 PDF on CD).  
4.4 Recruitment 
The research population 
The family were considered to be the unit of study. Within this context, the 
research population involved people who had received a diagnosis of bvFTD 
from an NHS dementia assessment and diagnosis service and their family 
members.  
Site selection 
A rural county within the West Midlands was chosen as the site for 
recruitment. This area was selected because I was familiar with and known to 
the NHS services and professionals within the area and would be able to 
provide signposting for support should this be needed.  
Sampling and inclusion criteria  
I used a combination of purposive (selection of a population with specific 
characteristics) and snowballing sampling (using existing participants to 
recruit others known to them). I sought to recruit people who had received a 
diagnosis of bvFTD from a specialist mental health or neurology service. 
Additionally, I sought to involve their family members as defined by the 
person and their closest family. This included partners, children, parents, 
siblings and other close relationships (Kendall et al. 2010; Roach et al. 
2014b). Where relevant to the person with bvFTD and their close family, the 
research would involve two or more generations in each family. Furthermore I   
aimed to recruit families who reflected a range of experiences associated 
with bvFTD, including those; 
 Who had just received their diagnosis or were just beginning their 
experience of living with the condition.  
 Who were later in the experience of living with bvFTD and the person 
is still living at home or;  
 Where the person living with bvFTD had moved into institutional care 
or was reaching end of life.  
The exclusion criteria were: 
 If the person diagnosed with bvFTD already had a pre-existing, 
unrelated neurological condition such as Parkinsons disease, as it 
would not have been clear what impact this additional condition would 
have had upon the family experience 
 Children within participating families who were below the age of 6, as 
it would have been difficult to ensure true assent to participate and 
there are acknowledged challenges for children as young as this to 
participate in the demands of qualitative interviews (Allmark, 2002, 
Balen et al. 2006). 
 Families where the first language spoken was not English and where 
interpreters would be required. The use of interpreters is known to be 
problematic in regard to effective data collection and poses great 
challenges to authenticity and rigour (Squires 2009). 
This type of research frequently involves small sample sizes. However, due 
to the nature of the methodology involved, it generates a significant data set, 
particularly when interviewing every six to nine months as was the intention 
in this study (Holland et al. 2006, Yates, 2003). The sample size was 
therefore selected to reflect the quantity of data commonly collected in 
qualitative longitudinal research (QLL). 
Recruitment 
Recruitment occurred through NHS services, including dementia assessment 
and diagnosis services, community mental health services, specialist nursing   
services and peer support. Meetings were held with professionals to explain 
the study and written information was provided. Recruitment, packs were 
supplied and contact could be made directly with the researcher or via a 
professional. 
Initial contact with interested families 
Seven families were ultimately recruited. Contact with all of the families came 
through a professional, who contacted me directly. I asked professionals for 
general information concerning the families (within the boundaries of 
confidentiality). This included; 
 How the diagnosis of bvFTD had been established and who had made 
the diagnosis  
 Whether they believed the person with bvFTD was able to give 
informed consent 
 Whether there was specific information I needed to know to support 
the family and in particular the person with bvFTD appropriately during 
the consent process 
 What terms were used by the family and the person with bvFTD 
concerning their diagnosis 
I made contact with families to arrange a convenient date, time and location 
to see them. Initial contact was generally with the person with bvFTD and 
their closest family member. During this contact, the use of the term bvFTD 
or dementia only occurred if such terms were used directly by the person with 
dementia and their family in order to avoid inadvertent diagnostic disclosure 
and distress (Cowdell 2006).  
If the person with bvFTD and their closest family member were interested in 
participating, recruitment of additional family members was discussed with 
them and they were provided with information sheets and consent forms to 
give to family members. On some occasions this resulted in contact details 
being passed to me, so I could approach them directly. I had varying degrees 
of success in facilitating contact with more than one generation through these 
processes. It seems likely that a range of factors influences the participation   
of wider family members when using a snowballing strategy (Ribbens 
McCarthy et al. 2003). (This is further discussed in Appendix 8 pages 12-15. 
PDF CD).  
 Consent 
Consent was sought from all family members, including the person with 
bvFTD. Consent was treated as an on-going process (Wilkinson 2002; 
Dewing 2007; Hellstrm et al. 2007b). That is, I sought to provide information 
and clarify the views of individuals within the family about their continued 
participation in the research each time a visit took place. In this context I 
used a reflexive approach, maintaining vigilance throughout with regard to 
the verbal and non-verbal indicators of consent. Furthermore, I maintained a 
research diary to record reflections. I discussed these as appropriate in 
research supervision to ensure that the rights of participating families were 
upheld. Consent was addressed in the following stages; 
Consent with Family Members  
I provided an information sheet (appendix 9 PDF CD) and discussed the 
research aims and process with family members. During this process, I 
assessed the capacity of each family member to give informed consent in 
accordance with accepted practice (Department of Health 2005). This 
involves determining if a person: 
 Can understand the information provided  
 Is able to retain the information for sufficient time in order that; 
 They can consider the request being asked and make a judgement 
about their participation and;  
 Can communicate their decision (by any means)  
I offered family members time to consider their participation in the research, 
however most were happy to provide written consent at the end of the 
meeting (appendix 10 PDF CD). I nevertheless indicated that I would be 
checking at each contact if they were happy to continue. Furthermore, I 
informed them that they could stop at any time and that their non-
participation would not result in any changes to the care that they received at   
that time or in the future. 
Consent with Person with bvFTD 
As a consequence of my professional and research experience, I was aware 
that consent with people with bvFTD could be challenging. Previous studies 
have found changes in a persons capacity to consent and awareness of the 
research during the course of the research and in their willingness to 
participate (Pratt and Wilkinson 2001; van Baalen et al. 2011; Nygrd 2006; 
Hellstrm et al. 2007b). I sought to establish ongoing consent through 
providing explanations and observation of verbal and non-verbal cues at 
each point of contact with the person with bvFTD (Hubbard et al. 2002). This 
was particularly important when I changed employment, as this resulted in 
some research participants being in contact with me through my service 
development work. I was therefore very careful to clarify the purpose of my 
visit and the nature of the work we would be doing together.  
Achieving informed consent was a two stage process with people with 
bvFTD. Firstly, I sought the views of referring professionals concerning 
capacity to consent in order to determine if consultee consent was required 
prior to contact with a family. I also asked for any information from 
professionals concerning indicators of well-being and ill-being in the person 
with bvFTD that would enable me to judge the impact of the discussion on 
them (Dewing 2007). In the opinion of the referring professional, all of the 
persons with bvFTD who ultimately participated were considered able to give 
informed consent.  
Secondly, I arranged to meet with the person with bvFTD and provide a 
tailored information sheet (appendix 11 PDF CD). People with bvFTD were 
given a choice about who they wanted to be present during these meetings; 
all but one chose to have a trusted family member present. Capacity to 
consent was assessed in accordance with the criteria outlined above. All who 
participated were able to give written consent and capacity was assessed on 
an ongoing basis at each contact.  
The participating families 
Seven families were recruited over a period of 18 months. All names and 
identifying details of participating families have been changed to preserve 
confidentiality. Pseudonyms have been used. Details are provided in table 
4.3 below.  
Table 4.3 Characteristics of participating families 
Family Name Age 
Relationship 
to person  
living with  
bvFTD 
Length of time 
since 
symptoms 
first 
acknowledged 
by family 
Length of 
time since 
diagnosis 
Receipt of 
Services at 
time of 
research 
Burton 
Anthony* 64  3 years 2 years One to one 
support  
Mollie 62 Wife   Admiral 
Nurse 
Jane 35 Daughter   None 
Horton 
Penny* # 64  12 years 4 years Care home  
Phil  65 Husband   Admiral 
Nurse (T1) 
Elizabeth * # 81  7 years 5 years Home care 
Pamela 55 Daughter   Admiral 
Nurse 
Jonathan 57 Son in law    
Lewin 
Ray * 64  5 years 4 years Home Care 
Sarah 35 Daughter    
Alex 43 Son in law    
Morris 
Bert* 66  3 years 2 years None 
Melinda 64 Wife   None 
Perrin 
Alistair * 54  7 years 4 years One to one 
support (T3) 
Kate 53 Wife   None 
Rachel 27 Daughter   None 
Rena 78 Mother in law    
Dave 79 Father in law    
Stuart 
Terry * 65  2 years 2 months One to one 
support 
Sue 66 Wife   Admiral 
Nurse (T1) 
Carole 35 Daughter   None 
(* person diagnosed with bvFTD, # person did not take part in research)  
As can be seen from the table above, the seven families included five people 
living with bvFTD, five partners, five adult children, two sons-in-law (to the 
person with bvFTD) and two parents-in-law (to the person with bvFTD). Time 
from first noticing symptoms to diagnosis ranged from one to eight years.   
Time since diagnosis ranged from two to five years at the first time point of 
the research. All participants with bvFTD and their closest relative were in 
receipt of services at the beginning of the research but not all continued to 
receive support over its duration. All participants were of white European 
ethnic origin.   
Of the nineteen individual family members, all but three took part at all three 
time points. Two people (a couple) withdrew after the second time point due 
to family circumstances. One daughter also chose not to continue to 
participate after the second time point. Appendix 12 (PDF CD) contains 
details of my contact with family members over the duration of the fieldwork.  
4.5 Data collection 
Interviews 
I chose to use a semi-structured interview as my main method for data 
collection. I interviewed family members separately and/ or together 
(depending upon their wishes) at 6 monthly intervals over a period of 14 to 24 
months following recruitment, resulting in a total of 46 interviews at the end of 
data collection. Interview duration was 20 minutes to 1hour 40 minutes, with 
the majority lasting around one hour.  
In keeping with both GT and NA, I chose a flexible, narrative biographical 
approach to interviewing (Charmaz 2006; Riessman 2008) in which I sought 
to facilitate opportunities for families to provide extended narratives 
concerning their experiences.  
Both GT and NA acknowledge the value of sensitising concepts and 
disciplinary perspectives in informing the research process (Charmaz 2006). I 
developed a flexible interview guide which was informed by my professional 
experience, existing literature concerning family functioning and relationships 
in the context of dementia (c.f. Rolland 1994; Hellstrm et al. 2007a) and 
discussion with my supervisors and professional colleagues (Appendix 13 
PDF CD). Interview topics included the nature of family relationships, 
understanding of bvFTD, the experience of living with bvFTD and the 
strategies that family members used to cope with these experiences. As a 
part of the process of development of the interview structure, I considered my   
own responses as a way of addressing possible areas of bias I may have 
held (Birks and Mills 2011).  
My approach to the interviews was to allow families to approach the topic in 
the manner best suited to them. Thus I often asked an opening question and 
prompted exploration of specific areas as appropriate (Charmaz 2006). This 
meant that families generally covered topics in the order that was most 
meaningful to them in a conversational style. Family members were 
interviewed together or separately depending upon their choice. This was 
reviewed at each time point. Second and subsequent interviews were 
informed by previous interviews. Thus interview themes were specifically 
developed for each individual or family group while maintaining a perspective 
on issues and themes that might have relevance across families or 
individuals (see appendices 14 and15 for an example of second and third 
time point interview guide PDF CD). All interviews were audio recorded with 
the permission of participants. Feedback was sought at the end of interviews 
and where necessary, information was provided to respond to any areas of 
concern or well-being needs of participants.  
On occasions, follow-up interviews were needed. The possibility that this 
might occur had been discussed with families. Follow-up interviews reflected 
the needs of the person with bvFTD, the needs of the family or my own 
feeling that there were areas that had not been covered. Furthermore, I also 
explored sharing written copies of transcripts with them, in order that they 
had control over what was included in the transcript, as well as providing 
them with the opportunity to provide further details if they wished to. Not all of 
the families wanted to see their transcripts or felt that there was a need to 
have a further meeting.  
While my role was clearly defined as a researcher in these interviews, my 
practitioner status was a strong influence on my conduct. Given the 
challenges experienced by people with bvFTD, my knowledge and 
experience enabled me to be sensitive to signs that they needed a break or 
wanted to stop as well as being vigilant for signs that they might be 
distressed. Additionally, given the sensitive nature of the discussions, it was 
important to be aware of this for all family members.   
My practitioner experience and knowledge was particularly valuable during 
these times as I was able to attend to distress and explore support needs 
where this was necessary. Wherever possible, discussions about support 
needs were contained to the end of the interview. However there were 
occasions where it was appropriate to stop the interview and address 
participants needs before checking whether they were ready or wished to 
continue. The challenges of managing the interface between my role as a 
researcher and my position as a Nurse is further considered in the section on 
reflexivity and reflection in this chapter and in Chapter 6.  
Observational and Field Notes 
To address the limitations identified by Riessman (2008) in narrative thematic 
analysis, in addition to interviews as the primary method of data collection, I 
kept a field diary which was used as an additional source of data in analysis. 
There were two purposes to this. Firstly I used it to record thoughts and 
observations at each contact with the family, in particular noting any relevant 
actions or interactions that might reveal their experience as it is lived. 
Secondly, it supported reflection on the impact of the research upon the 
families involved and was used within supervision (Murray et al. 2009, 
Holland et al. 2006).  
Data Storage and Security 
All data arising from interviews and contact with participating families was 
stored in a password protected file on a computer. Consent forms and 
identifying details were kept in a locked cabinet within the University 
department hosting the research. All identifying details including names and 
locations were changed at transcription and details of pseudonyms used 
were known only to my supervisors and I. Pseudonyms were used in field 
notes and in discussions within personal supervision. In accordance with the 
requirements of ethical approval, all audio recordings were deleted at the end 
of the writing up phase of the research.  
Researcher Reflexivity and Reflection 
I am a registered Nurse and therefore governed by the Nursing and 
Midwifery code (NMC 2015) in regard to my standards of practice and 
conduct. In professional practice reflexivity requires a person to reflect on 
and in action (Schn 1991). Thus I needed to consider how I would conduct 
myself while undertaking the research and consider methods to reflect on my 
practice.  
I chose firstly to engage in personal as well as research supervision to 
address the emotional impact of the research on myself and to consider how 
my responses might impact upon the research process (Hollway and 
Jefferson 2013; Murray et al. 2009; Holland et al. 2006). This form of 
reflexivity is of particular importance in qualitative longitudinal research, 
where families may be vulnerable and become dependent on the researcher 
(Holland et al. 2006).   
Furthermore, consistent with my professional practice, in which it is expected 
that I would reflect while engaging in action, I chose to adopt ethical 
mindfulness (Warin 2011; Bowtell et al. 2013), an approach which requires a 
researcher to be open to discomfort or difficult feelings within themselves that 
may indicate that an incident has raised an ethical challenge. It is suggested 
that researchers should view these as important moments in which openness 
and reflexivity is required in order to consider how best to respond in the 
moment (Warin 2011; Bowtell et al. 2013).   
Given the sensitive nature of the research, there were specific ethical issues 
that I could prepare for. These included how I planned to conduct and end 
each interview. Thus in all periods of contact, I sought to be reflexive in 
considering the impact of the research and the needs of the family, allowing 
for breaks and ending the process as appropriate. Furthermore, at the end of 
the interview, I sought feedback and offered debriefing where necessary to 
discuss any issues that might have arisen. I also provided information about 
support services as this was required by research participants. In addition, I 
sought to facilitate appropriate endings to meetings, often by discussing  
pleasurable events that had been raised by the family during the interview 
(Mason and Wilkinson 2002).  
I also explored methods of addressing appropriate endings to the research 
relationship, given the particular challenges associated with longitudinal 
research. This included addressing support needs, gaining feedback on their 
experience of participating and providing them with feedback on the ways in 
which the research had already been used. Many of the participating families 
had expressly identified that their reason for participating was to assist and 
help others living with bvFTD. Therefore the provision of information about 
the ways in which the research was being used was particularly valued by 
them. The majority of families also requested a summary of the research 
when this was completed.  
Additional ethical issues which occurred prior to and during the interviews 
specifically required me to reflect upon and adjust the approach I used. 
These included: 
 What is considered to be data? 
 Interviewing families separately or together  
 The use of power in research interviews and specifically: 
o The needs of people living with bvFTD in interviews and their 
ability to control what they share 
o The sharing of transcripts with participating families 
 Confidentiality within and across families.  
The majority of these are addressed in Chapter 6 when considering the 
research context for each of the families. Therefore I shall address only two 
of them here.  
 What is considered to be data? 
Interviewing people with bvFTD alongside their closest family member 
highlighted specific moments that caused me to consider whether 
interviewing could capture the complexity of the experience of bvFTD. A 
specific incident in which this occurred is outlined in appendix 8 (PDF p15-
18). Although I had sought to record observations as a part of my fieldwork   
diary, these incidents caused me to reflect on my interview style and how this 
complexity could be captured. Accordingly, I reviewed my practice and 
adopted techniques from the free association narrative interview method 
described by Hollway and Jefferson (2013). This enabled me to consider 
ways of addressing topics that might facilitate participants to consider life as 
it is lived. It also assisted me to be sensitised to moments which reflected 
this, particularly when interviewing family members together. I wasnt always 
successful in using this very open approach; indeed it wasnt always 
appropriate, particularly for people with bvFTD. However, the feedback I 
received from participating families suggested that they appreciated the 
conversational style that I adopted and the freedom they had to discuss the 
issues of importance to them.  
Interviewing families separately or together  
Various authors have discussed the advantages of interviewing couples 
together, including providing opportunities to see the relationship in action, 
thus reflecting life as it is lived (Holstein and Gubrium 1995; Bjrnholt and 
Farstad 2014). However, there are also potential disadvantages including the 
risk of conflict between couples in interview (Sakellariou et al. 2013). One 
such moment is described in appendix 16 (PDF p.18-21 CD). I utilised 
research and personal supervision to consider ways in which I should 
address possible conflict. This included reinforcing the need to provide 
opportunities for breaks or to stop the interview, as well as providing space 
for those participating to debrief and consider support needs at the end of the 
interview (Sakellariou et al. 2013). It also highlighted the value of supervision 
in being able to identify and address difficult feelings to limit their enactment 
within the research interview. Finally, it was important to acknowledge the 
need for flexibility. There is considerable value in carrying out serial 
interviews as this facilitates the opportunity to follow up issues arising in 
earlier interviews. However, a primary consideration should be the needs and 
capacity of the family to engage in this way. Not all families felt able to 
commit to this and I was mindful when this was the case. 
4.6 Analysis of data 
Transcription 
All interviews were independently transcribed. Verbatim transcripts were 
produced. Where participants agreed, transcripts were sent to them and 
contact was made to check if they were acceptable, if there was more that 
needed to be included, or if particular issues needed removing. Only two 
family members asked for some content to be removed from two interviews. 
Following this, names and identifying details were changed to preserve 
confidentiality. After this process, tapes were repeatedly listened to and notes 
made on written transcripts, including reflecting on tone of voice, significant 
moments and pauses or gaps. Fieldwork notes were consulted and added 
where necessary to the written copy of the transcript.  Electronic versions of 
transcripts were loaded onto NVivo 10 (QSR 2010).  
Process of narrative thematic analysis 
Riessman (2008) suggests that narrative thematic analysis should not 
fracture the data, but rather interpret the narrative as a whole. Furthermore, 
she indicates that researchers should seek to work with one interview at a 
time to identify narrative moments following which, coding occurs to illustrate 
general patterns across cases. In order to achieve this, she suggests that the 
processes of transcription and analysis cannot easily be distinguished as the 
researcher is required to develop an in-depth familiarity with the data through 
repeated immersion in it (Riessman 1993).  
Gubrium and Holstein (2009) describe specific features of analysis when 
considering narrative accounts of close families. These include that the 
researcher should: 
 Be aware of the metaphors about family life that might influence the 
telling of the story and the researchers approach to analysis 
 Take account of the way in which stories about family life are 
constructed and the purpose they might serve. How do these stories 
reflect the familys sense of who they were and are?  
 Consider how particular members of the family are characterised, e.g. 
the person you can rely upon to support you or not 
 Consider how these accounts within families differ or complement 
each other; are there different accounts and if so how are these 
expressed? 
 Consider how stories are told in terms of we, us, I, you and them, as 
well as temporal references, for example, us then and us now 
Gubrium and Holstein (2009) also suggest that the task of analysis is to 
explore areas of similarity and difference within and across family narratives. 
However, as Ribbens McCarthy et al. (2003) indicate, this is a privileged and 
powerful position for the researcher and requires that they reflexively 
consider their influence. This is particularly important when considering the 
themes that are identified, as it may be difficult to determine whether 
participants accounts mean the same thing when grouping their narratives 
together (Esin 2011). Accordingly, Esin suggests that it is important to 
provide detailed descriptions of the thematic categories as well as the context 
so congruence can be judged. Finally, it is explicitly acknowledged in NA that 
relevant theory can be helpful in developing analysis; for example thematic 
categories can be informed by existing theory (Esin 2011). In the current 
study, the characteristics of families drew on systemic theory to inform the 
development of the continuum from cohesive and connected to distant and 
disconnected (Rolland 1994; Kissane and Bloch 2002).  
NA was an iterative process in which interviews were subjected to initial 
analysis and the results used to inform subsequent interviews with family 
members throughout the study (Murray et al. 2009; Holland et al. 2006).  The 
process of narrative analysis is outlined in Table 4.4: 
Table 4.4: process of narrative thematic analysis 
1. At each time point, interviews for each family member were transcribed 
individually  
2. Repeated listening to transcript, making notes on a written copy. Notes 
included identification of narrative moments in the text, intonation, 
pauses and researcher influence on production of narrative. Also 
considered others influence on speaker where present in interview. 
Notes made concerning narrative context in which research occurred 
3.  Identification of areas for further exploration with family/ individuals 
within family at next time point interviews 
4. Identification of core narrative moments in the transcript, relating to 
research questions 1 and 4, however these werent separated from the 
whole textual account to preserve context. 
Listened to audiotape at the same time as considering meaning 
associated with narrative moment, as outlined by Gubrium and 
Holstein (2009) 
5. Thematic coding of narrative moments in NVivo, including the context 
within which the narrative theme was framed (Ross and Green 2011) 
(taking account of written notes). Where coding joint interviews, care 
was taken to identify who was narrating, whether it was a shared or an 
individual narrative 
6.  Where more than one interview within a family was undertaken, 
themes identified were compared with each other to develop a 
thematic structure for the family narrative, which acknowledged 
similarities and differences in perspectives (Gubrium and Holstein 
2009; Esin 2011) Themes were transferred to excel spreadsheets and 
colour coding was used to illustrate the perspectives of individual 
family members and shared narratives within the narrative thematic 
structure 
7.  Following completion of interviews at all three time points, narrative 
moments for each individual and then each family were reviewed and 
brought together to form an overall narrative thematic structure for that 
family on an excel spreadsheet. Colour coding was used to represent 
individual family members and time points where codes occurred. (See 
appendix 17 for an example Excel CD) 
8. Comparison across all families to identify similarities and difference in 
the nature of the relationships. Development of superordinate and sub-
themes: 
1. Cohesive and connected ---- disconnected and distant 
2. A changing we / I --- An entrenched we / I 
9.  Revisiting transcripts and coding to verify thematic structure and refine 
analysis for each family and across families.  
10.  Production of an account that details the research context, including 
the influence I had on the relationship with families.  
Appendix 18 contains a description of the process of NA in this study, using 
the steps outlined above.  
Process of grounded theory analysis 
The processes which acted as guidelines for the conduct of the constructivist 
GT analysis are described in table 4.5:  
Table 4.5: Main Steps in Constructivist Grounded Theory (Charmaz 2014: 18-20) 
Identification of 
research problem and 
initial research 
questions 
Informed by sensitising concepts and general perspectives 
Data collection Following initial sampling  
Initial Coding Sticking close to the data, identifying codes line by line or incident 
by incident. Recognition that initial codes are provisional  
Coding is action focused (use of gerunds) 
Asking questions about the data to identify actions and processes 
An iterative process (coding one interview may lead to returning 
to another, to explore similarities and differences or gaps in the 
data) 
Use of participants words to code data (in vivo codes) 
Memo writing Informal notes that allowed me to begin the process of 
interpretation and analysis of data early in the research 
Identifying ideas and insights and beginning to develop tentative 
categories. comparing codes and identifying links between codes 
This directed further data gathering, including returning to data 
collection and analysis of other data sets 
Focused coding Separating, sorting and synthesising data  
Theoretical sampling Obtaining more specific and selected data to further develop and 
refine emerging theory 
Theoretical saturation This occurs when no new conceptual relationships emerge that 
add further depth and dimensions to the categories that have 
been developed 
Theory Building Development of interpretive theory, to understand meanings and 
actions and how people construct them. Theory may involve 
multiple realities, acknowledges subjectivity 
offers an imaginative theoretical interpretation that makes sense 
of the studied phenomenon (231)  
A more detailed account of the process of GT analysis in the current study is 
provided in Appendix 19 (PDF CD). The guidelines described above were 
adopted, although due to the heterogeneity within the small sample 
theoretical saturation was not reached and theory building was very limited 
(see chapter 10).  
A pluralistic process 
Frost (2011) suggests that a pluralistic approach can sometimes further 
enrich insight and provide a more holistic view of a phenomenon than can 
one method alone (191). In using narrative thematic analysis and grounded 
theory, I have sought to illuminate the reciprocal influence of family 
relationships and bvFTD. Using these two methodologies has facilitated a 
focus on how relationships are constructed over time as a consequence of   
 and in response to, the experience of bvFTD. Thus enacting the two 
methodologies has been a cyclical process, moving fluidly between each 
form of analysis when considering each transcript, each family and when 
bringing the results together. Ultimately this is reflected in the presentation of 
the results. For example, while the results of GT analysis is foregrounded in 
the presentation of the challenges experienced (Chapter 7) and the coping 
processes (Chapter 8), the influence of family relationships is evident. 
Similarly, in presenting the relational outcomes (Chapter 9), the coping 
processes illustrate how these outcomes are enacted within the family. 
However Frost (2011) indicates that pluralistic approaches can be accused of 
weakening the findings unless researchers are transparent in presenting how 
they achieved the results. With this in mind I now turn to consider the 
trustworthiness of the findings  
4.7 Trustworthiness of the findings 
The concept of quality in qualitative research is a contested area, influenced 
initially by debates more commonly associated with positivist research 
concerning constructs of validity and reliability (Elliott et al. 1999; Steinke 
2004). These authors suggest that such debates have been flawed, as they 
fail to account for the underpinning philosophies of particular methodologies. 
Identifying criteria for qualitative research is further complicated by the range 
of methodologies and epistemological/ ontological foundations of such 
research (Elliott et al. 1999; Yardley 2000; Riessman 2008). However 
methods of evaluating quality are nevertheless essential in order to legitimise 
the value and meaningfulness of such research to those who might use it or 
benefit from it (Yardley 2000). Additionally, quality criteria can support 
reflexivity in researchers when undertaking qualitative studies (Elliott et al. 
1999).  
In Chapter 2, (table 2.2) a set of criteria for evaluating the quality of 
qualitative studies was presented (Elliott et al. 1999). The authors identify 
seven criteria which are especially important in qualitative research. Six of 
these are considered here. The final one, resonating with readers can only 
be judged by the readers of this thesis.  
Owning ones perspective  
In this and earlier chapters, I have described my theoretical position, the 
personal and professional motivation for doing the research and my 
experience while undertaking the current study. I have considered the impact 
of my actions and strategies to address these in my relationships with the 
participating families. In Chapter 6, I provide an account of the research 
context for each of the families, which includes my feelings and experiences 
while working with them. While I have not used a first person narrative in the 
results sections, I have nevertheless sought to include my influence on 
participants by including my questions and prompts where appropriate. 
Furthermore, in the final chapter, I have considered my contribution to the 
findings. In addressing reflexivity throughout this thesis, I have aimed to 
provide an account of my influence, acknowledging that ultimately this 
account represents my interpretation of the experiences of these seven 
families.  
Situating the sample 
In this chapter, I have provided details of the participating families in order 
that the findings can be judged against similar situations or populations. This 
has included their age, gender, relationship type, time since first noticing 
symptoms and time since diagnosis.  
Grounding in examples 
I have provided examples of how I have undertaken analysis using grounded 
theory and narrative thematic analysis. Chapters 7 to 9 and the appendices 
to Chapter 6 provide a range of examples to illustrate the findings concerning 
the experiences of the seven participating families. A layered account is 
therefore provided (Frost 2011) that illustrates experiences within and 
between families and provides an account of the experience over time. 
Providing credibility checks 
A number of methods were used to provide credibility checks. Firstly, a family 
member of a person living with bvFTD agreed to be an advisor for my 
research. She has provided critical and supportive insights at all stages of   
this research. Additionally she offered opportunities for reflexive discussions 
concerning the research process and emerging findings.  
During the process of early analysis of transcripts, I provided my supervisors 
with my initial analysis of four interviews from one family. The emerging 
themes were discussed and consideration given to those that required further 
development. Supervision provided an important place throughout the 
analysis, for thematic development to be discussed and critiqued.  
Following the tentative development of the narrative thematic and grounded 
theory coding frameworks, I produced an account of the grounded theory 
analysis and narrative thematic analysis for one family. I chose this family 
because their experience was significantly different from the others, thus 
providing a negative case through which the coding framework could be 
considered and challenged. These two accounts, the transcripts for this 
family and the categories I had developed were reviewed by a clinical 
psychologist with practice expertise and research experience in the field of 
dementia care. A summary of his coding is contained in appendix 20 (PDF on 
CD). We discussed the coding framework he had identified. His analysis was 
largely congruent with my own, with one area, concerning a theme of 
resentment that I had not considered. This theme seemed important in 
relation to this family and was incorporated in my analysis.  
The written accounts, transcripts and categories were also shared with the 
family caregiver described above. I also provided her with the research 
questions to guide her thinking following which, we met and discussed her 
thoughts about the transcripts and my coding. She considered the coding to 
be congruent with the issues identified within the transcripts.  
Coherence 
I have provided an overarching framework which integrates the results of the 
narrative thematic analysis with the results of grounded theory analysis. The 
resulting framework aims to provide a coherent, dimensional and nuanced 
representation of the experience within and between these seven families 
over time.   
Accomplishing general vs specific research tasks 
Elliott et al (1999) indicate that qualitative research seeks either to achieve a 
general or a specific understanding of a phenomenon. Where a general 
understanding is required, a broad range of experiences within that 
phenomenon should have been selected. Where a specific understanding is 
required, then the researcher should be able to demonstrate a systematic 
and comprehensive approach in which limitations are also discussed. In this 
research study, I set out to explore a specific phenomenon; considering the 
reciprocal influence of bvFTD and relationships for seven families over time. 
These seven families provided rich and detailed narratives concerning their 
experiences of living with bvFTD which I have analysed and interpreted to 
provide answers to the research questions. Strengths, unique findings and 
limitations of the research are discussed in Chapter 10, from which the extent 
to which the research has achieved the research aims can be judged. 
4.8 Conclusion 
In this chapter I have provided an account of the methods used to deliver a 
pluralistic, qualitative longitudinal research study which sought to explore the 
research aims and questions identified at the end of Chapter 2. I have 
described the way in which participating families were recruited, the methods 
used to obtain data and the process of analysis. I have also provided a 
reflexive account of my influence on the research and the way in which this 
was managed. Finally, I have considered the extent to which quality criteria 
for qualitative research have been addressed within this study. The next 
chapter provides an overview of the findings of this research.  
Chapter 5 Introduction to the results 
The next four chapters describe the findings of the research I undertook with 
the seven families. Four superordinate themes emerged. Additionally, a 
range of influencing elements were identified which impacted upon the 
experience of the challenges for family members. These themes had a 
reciprocal influence on each other as demonstrated in fig 5.1 below: 
We / I before FTD 
Challenges 
experienced by 
we/ I (GT) 
Elements 
Influencing 
challenges (GT)  
Coping processes 
to address 
challenges (GT) 
Outcomes for 
relationship (NA)  
A description of the family relationship and 
individuals within the family prior to bvFTD 
Cohesive and Connected -------- 
Disconnected and Distant 
The Psychosocial, Cognitive, Behavioural and 
Relational Challenges brought about by FTD for the 
family and for individuals within the family including 
the person with FTD e.g. to identity and self-concept, 
to togetherness, self-efficacy 
The elements that impact upon and influence those 
challenges, including for example, proximity, 
(emotional and physical) ability to process and 
undertake complex activities, empathy etc. 
The coping processes that are invoked by the 
family and by individuals within that family to 
address the challenges, e.g. scaffolding, denial, 
open communication, self-care, grieving 
Assimilating, Adjusting Reconstructing ------ 
Resisting, Denying, Being stuck 
What each of these challenges, the influencing 
elements and processes of coping mean for the way 
in which the relationship is now on a continuum of  
A changing we/ I--------------- An entrenched we/ I 
Table 5.1 provides an overview of the superordinate themes and the 
associated subthemes. It should be noted that theme 1 does not have 
subthemes whilst the sub-themes for themes 2 and 3 dovetail with each 
other, so are shown in parallel across the page. The sub-themes of theme 4 
are shown at the bottom of the table.  
Table 5.1 Superordinate Themes and Subthemes Overview 
Superordinate 
theme 1: 
We/ I before 
bvFTD 
Cohesive and 
connected 
-------- 
Disconnected 
and distant 
Superordinate 
theme 2: 
Superordinate theme 3: 
Challenges 
experienced 
by we/ I 
Influencing 
Elements 
Assimilating, 
adjusting, 
reconstructing 
-------- 
Resisting, 
denying, being 
stuck 
Awareness and 
understanding 
of the changes 
Emotional and 
physical proximity, 
Its really subtle and 
difficult for others to 
Readiness to see and 
hear the changes, 
Prior relationship, 
Availability of 
knowledgeable and 
supportive 
professionals, 
Understanding of 
bvFTD. 
Accepting and 
Assimilating 
Its dementia, we 
have to find a 
way through this 
-------- 
Resisting and 
Blaming 
Resisting 
knowing, 
They are the 
problem, 
Youre the 
problem, you 
dont work with us 
or help us, 
Distancing. 
Managing 
everyday life 
Availability of 
knowledgeable and 
supportive 
professionals, 
Accepting  
resistingrejecting, 
Awareness  
Unawareness, 
Its really subtle and 
difficult for others to 
Past experiences of 
similar difficulties, 
Peer support, 
Prior relationship. 
Enabling and 
Facilitating 
Distancing, 
Managing and 
Controlling 
Avoiding and 
Reacting 
Underpinned by Collaboration, Adaptation, 
Communication, Addressing Conflict and Cohesion 
Were not the 
same anymore/ 
Im not the 
same anymore 
Awareness  
Unawareness, 
Its really subtle and 
difficult for others to 
Living together by 
choice, 
Prior relationship. 
Accepting and 
Adapting                                                                        
Accepting the 
changes and 
finding new ways 
of being together  
Fighting  
Resisting the 
changes, were 
going to fight 
this together 
Distancing and 
being stuck 
Achieving 
Distance, 
Being stuck. 
Accepting the need for a changing I 
 Grieving for a changing you and a changing we 
 Acknowledging the need for a changing I 
 Accepting the need for a changing I 
Being me in the 
context of 
bvFTD 
In step or out of step 
in our awareness of 
changes, 
Family coping 
processes, 
I trust my familys 
ways of supporting 
Sense of self, 
The impact of bvFTD 
on social and 
cognitive functioning, 
An important person 
in our lives --- he was 
just there really, 
Understanding their 
emotional world. 
Maintaining Self:  
o Im still me, still active and engaged with life  
o Im still me theres nothing wrong  
o Im still me, resisting negative perceptions 
Maintaining Wellbeing: 
o Supporting safety and security (a collaborative 
process) 
o Holding them (family members) 
o Resisting and restricting (person with bvFTD) 
o Controlling, positioning and distancing (family 
members) 
Superordinate 
theme 4: 
Relational 
Outcomes 
entrenched 
we / I 
-------- 
A changing 
we / I 
Relational outcomes for close 
family members including the 
person with bvFTD (along the 
continuum) 
 A changing we, stronger in a different 
 Losing we, but still connected  
 Losing you so losing we, together but 
separate 
 There is no we, just getting through it 
Relational outcomes for 
partners, adult daughters and 
their partners: the need for a 
changing I  
Becoming a new I ----- An entrenched I 
Relational outcomes for wider 
family members (along the 
continuum) 
 Closer together 
 Conflicted 
 Losing we 
The first superordinate theme, Cohesive and Connected ---- Disconnected 
and Distant represented the bedrock of pre-existing family relationships upon 
which family members, both together and individually, sought to address the 
experience of bvFTD. Consequently, this is the first theme and is discussed 
in Chapter 6, which gives a summary of the relationships between family 
members as described by them prior to the onset of behavioural variant 
frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD). A full account of these relationships along 
with quotes is available in appendix 21 (PDF document CD). In this chapter I 
also consider the influence I had on the research.  
In Chapter 7, the four challenges brought by the experience of bvFTD for 
these seven families are discussed, along with the influencing elements that 
impacted upon them and influenced them.  
In Chapter 8, the coping processes that are invoked by the family and by 
individuals within that family to address the challenges are discussed on a 
continuum of Assimilating, Adjusting Reconstructing ------ Resisting, Denying, 
Being stuck. Coping processes associated with each of the challenges are 
addressed in turn. It is necessary to recognise that the challenges and coping 
processes reciprocally influence each other, thus strategies used by one 
family member may impact on others, sometimes posing new challenges and 
sometimes influencing their ways of coping. This complex dialectic is 
reflected in the close inter-connections between these two chapters.  
Finally, in Chapter 9, I discuss the last of the superordinate themes; A 
changing we/ I ----- An entrenched we/ I. This chapter considers the relational 
outcomes associated with challenges and coping processes for the family as 
a whole and for individuals within the family. While the term outcome is used, 
this is not to imply that an end point has been reached, rather it represents 
the point at which the research ended. It is clear from the longitudinal nature 
of the research that relational outcomes in turn influence the way in which the 
challenges are experienced and coping processes are developed in a cyclical 
manner. A copy of table 5.1 is included on two A3 sheets at the end of 
chapter 9 which can be opened out and referred to as the results chapters 
are read.   
Chapter Six: We / I before Behavioural Variant Frontotemporal Dementia 
(bvFTD): Cohesive and Connected  Disconnected and Distant 
6.1 Introduction 
In this chapter I present findings concerning the relationships of the 7 
participating families prior to the onset of behavioural variant frontotemporal 
dementia (bvFTD). At the beginning of the first time point interview, where 
possible and appropriate, I asked the person with bvFTD and their primary 
family supporter to identify those who they considered to be part of their 
family. We progressed to exploring their perspectives on their family 
relationships prior to the onset of bvFTD.  Similarly, other family members 
who had agreed to participate were also encouraged to discuss their family 
relationships and their relationship with the person with bvFTD prior to the 
onset of bvFTD. Beginning the interviews in this way proved to be an 
important cue for the focus of the research and appeared to support family 
members including the person with bvFTD to understand the relational focus 
of the interviews. For the majority of family members, this approach appeared 
to be experienced as non-threatening and was possibly a way of easing into 
the interview process.  
A list of those family members mentioned in the family narrative is provided 
together with a genogram. Those family members participating in the 
research are highlighted in bold. A summary portrait of each family is then 
provided; Appendix 21 (PDF CD) contains the full portrait of each family 
supported by quotes from their interviews. Family members perspectives are 
presented individually within each family, following which family relationships 
are summarised, bringing individual perspectives together. In keeping with 
narrative analysis (Reissman 2009; 1993), I go on to discuss the interview 
context and my own experiences of interviewing the family members in order 
to provide a basis upon which my analysis can be judged for coherence, 
authenticity and trustworthiness.   
6.2 Burton Family 
The Burton family are a 3 generation family comprising of; 
Anthony (who has bvFTD, aged 64) 
Joe (aged 16, son of Jane) 
Mollie (wife of Anthony, 62) Isla (daughter of Diane, aged 2) 
Annie (daughter of Anthony from a 
previous marriage) 
Chloe (daughter of Diane, aged 8) 
Jane (35, daughter of Anthony from a 
previous marriage) 
Diane (daughter of Mollie from a 
previous marriage) 
The Family Relational History: A reconstituted family involving closeness and 
disconnectedness 
Anthony and Mollie Burton 
Anthony and Mollie first met in the late 1990s. They were both divorced with 
grown-up children and described having reached a point in their lives where 
they sought a new relationship. Anthony and Mollie married in 2000 and 
appeared to be close and strongly connected to each other. They described 
their lives as revolving around each other and the boat that they shared, with 
every opportunity taken to share the pleasures of life together.   
Mollie appeared to experience her relationship with Anthony as different from 
her previous relationship and described how he had looked after her and 
cared for her. Prior to the onset of bvFTD, they were transitioning to a new 
phase of life, in which they were working towards retirement and appeared to 
have plans to spend increasing amounts of time together pursuing their 
shared leisure interests. This seemed to be a very significant decision for 
both of them, reflecting a hoped for future together as a couple.  
While they described family as being important, relationships with wider 
family members do not appear to have been central to their lives together as 
a couple. For example they described spending Christmases together on 
their boat rather than with their family. Nevertheless, both appeared to enjoy 
their relationship with their grandchildren Isla and Chloe (Dianes daughters) 
and considered this to be a meaningful and positive relationship. Mollie also 
indicated that she had regular contact with her children and also with her 
brother and his wife. However Anthony appeared to be less connected to his 
family. He described distant and disconnected relationships with his siblings, 
his eldest daughter and her children and Janes son. His younger daughter, 
Jane is the only person from Anthonys family of origin that they appeared to 
have regular contact with.  
Jane Burton 
Jane was the only other member of Anthony and Mollies family who 
consented to take part in the research. However, while she participated in 
two of the time points and is happy for her data generally to be included, she 
requested that specific quotes were not used to safeguard her privacy. While 
it is possible to include some examples from her participation in subsequent 
results chapters, including material about her in this chapter may 
compromise her confidentiality were it to be read by people who are close to 
her. Therefore her description of her relationships with her family are not 
included here.  
Interview Context 
Anthony, Mollie and Anthonys daughter Jane consented to participate in the 
research. Anthony seemed to understand the purpose of the research and 
was agreeable to his participation; however I revisited consent with him at 
each time point. Interviews were carried out with Mollie and Anthony 
together, although this was reviewed between us at the second time point of 
the research. Anthony and Mollie participated through all three time points, in 
a total of 6 interviews over 2 years which took place at their home. I was 
made to feel very welcome by them and it was evident from the outset that 
they were keen to participate.  
A strong feature of the interviews was the level of commitment that the 
couple appeared to have towards each other, the happiness they 
experienced in meeting each other and literally as they put it, sharing the 
pleasures of life together. Our discussions were largely dominated by their 
experience of their relationship and the way in which they had adapted to the 
changes associated with bvFTD. I found their interviews to be very powerful 
and I experienced a strong emotional connection to them. Through reflection 
and discussion with my personal supervisor I was able to locate the powerful 
emotional connection to two major issues. Firstly I am also part of a blended 
family. I was aware that I also shared some common ground including the 
hopes I held for the future with my husband.  
Secondly, I reflected upon the way in which this couple were managing the 
challenges brought about by bvFTD. Through supervision, I realised that 
because of my previous experience of working with people with advanced 
experience of bvFTD and their families, I held a strongly negative perception 
of what bvFTD might be like. I realised that this was influencing my reflection 
on the interviews with Anthony and Mollie, in that I tended to focus largely on 
the losses being experienced and was initially surprised by their apparent 
adaptation. Recognition of this allowed me to consider their experience and   
those of other families in a more balanced way and furthermore, be 
conscious of how these issues might influence my relationship with them and 
the analysis of their interviews.  
As Anthony and Mollie were the first family to take part in the research, I was 
very conscious of trying out my interview approach with them. Reflections 
on the approach I used with them after the interview and when I returned to 
see them to review the first time point transcript resulted in an opportunity to 
consider how I interviewed people with bvFTD. Anthony and Mollie reflected 
that sometimes I needed to give him more time to process and answer my 
questions. This was an important opportunity for me to learn from them. 
Furthermore, my initial approach to describing family relationships was to 
draw a genogram with them. Having reflected upon the experience with 
Anthony and Mollie, I changed to using a simple diagram and gave it to the 
families to draw, thus giving them control.  
Jane Burton participated in interviews at two time points over 7 months, at a 
separate venue, away from her home or workplace at her request. Janes 
engagement with the research felt tenuous from the outset. It took some time 
for her to consider whether she wanted to take part and I experienced some 
concern about whether she felt under pressure to participate. I stressed the 
importance of her right to choose, the confidentiality of her responses and 
her right to stop at any time, following which she consented to participate.  
During the first interview it appeared that Jane experienced a high level of 
anxiety and sadness and although I gave her opportunity to withdraw or stop, 
she elected to continue. In the second interview, I was again concerned that 
Jane was not comfortable with the process, her answers were often short 
and she appeared to find it difficult to answer. I felt that the interview was at 
risk of becoming interrogative and unduly pressuring. Consequently I made 
the decision to end it. Following this, I discussed the concerns I had within 
personal and research supervision and decided to make email contact with 
Jane to reinforce her rights in regard to participation. I indicated that I was 
concerned that she was uncomfortable and consequently I would leave it   
up to her to make contact with me should she wish to participate in a third 
time point interview. Jane did not take part in any further interviews.  
6.3 Horton Family 
The Horton family are a 3 generation family comprising of; 
Penny (aged 64, who lives with bvFTD) 
Phil (65, Husband of Penny) 
Leanne (43, daughter of Penny and Phil) 
Mark (aged 5, Grandson) 
James (aged 6, Grandson) 
The Family Relational History: It was just us but it was fine that way 
Phil Horton was the only person in this family to participate in the research. 
Phil described a long-standing relationship of 50 years with Penny and 
appeared to feel strongly committed to her. He described a close and strong 
partnership in which many activities of married life were shared.  
Phil and Penny also had independent careers that seemed to involve 
significant demands on their time as well as having active social lives. While 
it appeared that his work was an important part of his life and involved long 
hours and frequent international travel, it seemed that outside of work Phil 
had no desire to be apart from Penny.   
Phil held a largely positive view of their lives together and indeed of Penny. 
When describing Penny, he focused on the many positive qualities he 
believed she had, including her sociability and her willingness to give of 
herself to him and to others. He felt that her career had been important to her 
and that she had established a life for herself while he was working, including 
undertaking voluntary work prior to and after she retired from her PA position. 
He also suggested that throughout their marriage, Penny was significantly 
involved in managing the day to day running of the house due to Phils work 
commitments.  
When discussing their wider family, Phil suggested that they had always had 
regular and frequent contact with their siblings who lived close by, although in 
recent years some of their siblings had passed away. Their daughter Leanne 
was born when they were 22 and 21 respectively. Although he didnt describe 
his daughters childhood, he seemed to suggest that they had not had regular 
and frequent contact since she had left home. He felt that the relationship 
between Penny and Leanne was characterised by some distance. Leanne 
has subsequently had two children, James and Mark, however they were not 
born until after Penny had been diagnosed. Consequently although Phil 
described having a relationship with them, this appeared to be largely 
mediated through his contact with Leanne and did not appear to have been a 
shared grand-parenting experience with Penny.  
Interview Context 
My initial contact with this family was in meeting Phil after he had offered to 
participate in the research. At the time of meeting him to consider his 
participation and provide information, his wife Penny was in hospital and had 
been an inpatient for four months following a brief but difficult transition into a 
care home from their marital home. At that point in time Penny was very frail, 
had lost a significant amount of weight and Phil was concerned that she was 
nearing the end of her life. Phil and I explored whether it would be possible 
for Penny to participate, but due to her increasing frailty, lack of 
communication and her distress with unfamiliar people we agreed that it 
would not be appropriate. Phil however was happy to participate. I discussed  
with Phil the possibility of Leanne being involved however ultimately, she did 
not take part.  
Phil participated in all three time points over a period of 14 months, with 
these interviews being undertaken at his home. The consent visit and the first 
two interviews took place at the home that he had shared with Penny. Each 
time I visited his home during the first two time points, I experienced a sense 
of coldness and emptiness about the house. We sat in the lounge where the 
curtains were often drawn and I was aware of feeling that the house felt cold 
and unlived in. I found it significant that Phil suggested at the end of the 
consent visit, that it would have been better for us to meet in a local pub, 
which made me wonder if he was experiencing a sense of emptiness and 
loneliness. At the end of the first interview once I had switched the tape off, 
he described having brief relationships with other women but finding that this 
was not successful due to his commitment to Penny. My feelings about his 
home and the sense of isolation and loneliness he may have felt seemed to 
have been supported in later interviews. At the third time point interview Phil 
suggested that he had moved house because of the sense of emptiness he 
experienced once Penny had gone into the care home.  
Interviewing Phil was different from the other interviews with family members 
who were primary caregivers as they were all female. Furthermore, the male 
partners with bvFTD lived at home and were earlier in their experience of 
bvFTD. It seemed to me that Phil was quite vulnerable and lonely. 
Consequently l was mindful from first contact that I needed to consider how I 
conducted our relationship and the contact we had. I also felt that I needed to 
consider what he may have wanted to achieve by being involved in the 
research.  
Three issues became apparent in my contact with Phil. Firstly, I noticed in my 
initial contact for consent that Phil rarely appeared to use emotional 
language. Consequently I was mindful of the need to think about the way I 
phrased questions and how I interpreted his responses when undertaking 
analysis. For example, during the interviews, Phil did respond to emotion  
focused questions when I used these, but his narrative frequently focused 
upon the things that they did and how this represented their togetherness. It 
was important that I did not make the assumption that this focus on the 
activities of their relationship implied distance, but may represent a different 
way of expressing how they were connected.  
Secondly, I was also aware that throughout the early meetings with Phil, he 
talked at length about his work. It seemed that his sense of self was strongly 
tied up with his occupation and his identity as a businessman and that it was 
important to Phil that I understood this. This was enacted when I returned 
after the first interview, to review the transcript with him. Phil spent a lot of 
time during that meeting changing the content of the interview, to reflect 
grammatically correct English. For example, correcting when he had started 
a sentence with the word and. Indeed I felt that had I not reassured him, he 
would have changed significantly more than he did.  
Thirdly, in between the first and second time point interviews, my work role 
changed and I became involved in work with people with dementia and their 
families in the area where Phil lived. Consultation exercises brought me into 
direct contact with Phil regarding his anger at the difficult experiences he had 
described with services. I discussed this within research supervision, as I 
was concerned about the boundaries between work and research with Phil, 
particularly given my concerns about his vulnerability. We agreed that if I felt 
that I needed to become significantly involved in the issues Phil had raised as 
a part of my work, then I would need to consider whether to cease data 
collection with him. Ultimately, this was not necessary as ongoing 
involvement with Phil in my work role wasnt required.  
However, it is perhaps significant that as my research relationship with Phil 
progressed, he seemed to relax and appeared more trusting of me. He did 
not feel the need to correct the transcripts from the second and third time 
points and spoke more openly in these interviews about his experiences and 
feelings associated with his wife. It is possible that the contact through work 
had a beneficial effect on his view of me as someone he could trust. I was  
however very aware of the responsibility I had to manage the boundaries with 
him in order that he was able to feel safe and contained while being clear 
about the nature of my work with him. This was particularly evident in the 
final interview, where Phil revealed a very personal and apparently painful 
issue that he had recently discovered about Penny. I elected to stop the 
interview and focus on his wellbeing, as I felt it was unethical to continue at 
that point. Although we did recommence the interview when he felt ready, I 
was concerned about the possible impact that his trust in me would have for 
my imminent withdrawal as the research was ending. Again I reflected upon 
this in supervision, particularly because he had said, albeit in a light-hearted 
tone that I was abandoning him, when I had reinforced that the research 
would be coming to an end. I felt it was important to address this in my final 
meetings with him, therefore I raised it directly with him and supported him to 
explore his options for support going forward. 
 6.4 Hugh Family 
The Hugh family are a 3 generation family comprising of; 
Elizabeth: Mother (who has bvFTD, 81) Stan: Pamelas brother (mid 50s) 
Alfie: Elizabeths third husband 
(deceased) 
Nick: Pamelas elder brother (deceased) 
Pamela: Daughter (56) Adele: Pamelas stepsister from 
Elizabeths third husband 
Jonathan: Pamelas husband (57) Sebastian: Pamela and Jonathans son 
(aged 18) 
The Family Relational History:  A distant and disconnected relationship  
Pamela and her husband Jonathan participated in this research. Pamela 
described a relational history with her mother Elizabeth that had been 
dominated by distance and disconnectedness. While Pamela felt that her 
childhood was unremarkable, she nevertheless felt that her mother was not 
very maternal. Consequently she suggested that her grandmother and aunt 
were significantly involved in their upbringing as young children. However, 
Pamela described a significant shift in her relationship with her mother in her 
early adulthood, in the period during her parents divorce. She experienced a 
sense of abandonment by both parents, but particularly by her mother at a 
time when she was vulnerable and needed their support. As a result of this 
experience of abandonment, she came to see her mother as self-serving. 
Furthermore, she held her mother responsible for the distance that was 
present in their relationship.  
This distance appeared to have continued throughout her adult life. Pamela 
met and married Jonathan and subsequently they had a son. Pamela and 
Jonathan suggested that Elizabeth had little involvement in their sons life 
and was largely unsupportive of them as a family. They described contact 
based on a sense of duty rather than an emotional connection and suggested 
that her business and social life was more important to her. An apparent 
consequence of the difficulties within their relationship is that unmet 
expectations seemed to be a strong feature of their narrative. These 
expectations appeared to influence Pamela and Jonathans view of 
Elizabeth, in that they positioned her as always putting her own needs first. 
Both Pamela and Jonathan provided examples of her behaviour in support of 
this view, which predated the diagnosis of bvFTD and occurred in her 
relationships with others as well as with themselves. Where closer contact 
with Elizabeth was necessary, Pamela equated this with feelings of being 
sucked dry. 
Consequently, Pamela and Jonathan appeared to have experienced a lack of 
reciprocity in their relationship with Elizabeth. An outcome of this lack of 
reciprocity is that they have not felt close or experienced a wish to be close to 
her. Furthermore, Jonathan and Pamela also suggested that they have not 
had an extended network of close family relationships. While both reflected 
upon relationships of importance to them and in particular Pamela referred to 
close friendships, connections to the Church and to her stepsister, they 
nevertheless expressed the view that they have survived together, 
independently of their family.  
Interview Context 
Interviews were with Pamela and Jonathan, although he wasnt present for all 
of them. During my initial contact with them, I asked them to identify and 
approach others to be involved in the interviews. They did not believe that it 
would be possible to involve Elizabeth as Pamela indicated that she did not 
accept that she had dementia and would therefore not agree to being 
involved. I did not feel able to make a direct approach to Elizabeth as I would 
have been reliant on Pamelas introduction of the research to her and I was 
also unsure about the extent to which Elizabeth could have given informed 
consent to my visit. Their son Sebastian and Pamelas brother Stan did not 
participate in the research.  
A total of four interviews were completed over a period of 14 months at three 
time points. Pamela was present for all four interviews; Jonathan was present 
for the first two interviews and half of the final interview. All four interviews 
were undertaken at their family home. A strong feature of all of the interviews 
was the level of intensity of emotion expressed by both Pamela and Jonathan 
concerning their experience of Elizabeths difficulties since the onset of 
bvFTD.  
My initial contact with them both to introduce the research revealed a couple 
who appeared to be experiencing a significant degree of stress. Pamela in 
particular seemed to find it difficult to focus on the consent process as she 
appeared to want to tell their story almost immediately. In the first interview,  
Jonathans narrative appeared to reflect a sense of helplessness, whereas 
Pamelas narrative seemed to contain high expressed emotion.  
Consequently, during the interviews with Pamela and Jonathan I experienced 
considerable pressure to fall out of my role as researcher and be a helper. I 
felt pressure to do this because of my practitioner status and my concerns 
about the difficult relationship they appeared to have with many of the 
services that were involved with Elizabeth. Furthermore, my perceptions of 
their level of need for support to manage the situation they were experiencing 
also contributed to the pressure I felt to help them. I frequently felt that the 
interviews may have been an opportunity for them to offload. Consequently I 
found it difficult to guide the process at times and also felt under pressure to 
offer solutions.  
I attempted to confine any discussions about signposting or interventions that 
they were seeking for Elizabeth to the end of the interview. However, this 
was not always successful and I found myself slipping into responding to 
their experiences at times rather than maintaining an enquiring role.   
I experienced feelings of being overwhelmed at each interview and again 
when transcribing and listening to the tapes during analysis. I particularly 
found the level of emotional intensity challenging. I felt a degree of pressure 
to agree with their view of the world and confirm their experience. 
Consequently, personal and research supervision and reflection were 
particularly important to manage the impact and to consider how my 
responses and analysis were influenced by this pressure. In particular, it was 
helpful to remind myself that their perspective represented only one aspect of 
the whole family narrative, other family members including Elizabeth and 
Stan and professionals are likely to hold different perspectives. Furthermore, 
my position in this research was to hear their story and experience and while 
listening to the tapes is an important aspect of this, there is a point at which I 
needed to bring a level of interpretation to the data, which means that 
immersion needed to be balanced with curiosity and analysis. Nevertheless, 
given the intensity of the interviews, I chose to offer these family interviews   
for independent scrutiny by an experienced researcher and practitioner and 
by a family member who has lived with bvFTD so that I could check the 
veracity and trustworthiness of my analysis. 
6.5 Lewin Family 
The Lewin family are a 4 generational family comprising of; 
Ray (aged 64, Father with bvFTD) Susan and Carrie (Sisters to Ray) 
Sarah (35, Daughter of Ray) Barry and Jim (Close friends of Ray) 
Alex (43, Husband to Sarah) Aiden and Anna (Alexs son and 
daughter from a previous marriage) 
Leo (aged 2, son of Sarah and Alex) Karen and Myles (Rays step-mother and 
half brother) 
Phillipa (aged 9 months, daughter of 
Sarah and Alex) 
Sian (Sarahs mother) 
Joyce and Eddie (Sister and brother in 
law to Ray) 
The Family Relational History: Me and my dad and our family 
Ray Lewin 
Ray Lewin lives with bvFTD and Motor Neurone Disease (MND). Ray 
appeared happy to take part and seemed to understand the research 
context. Nevertheless, it seemed that Rays lived experience largely focused   
on his immediate life in the present. Consequently when asked questions 
about his family and their lives before bvFTD, Rays responses were minimal 
and his narrative largely focused on his own history, rather than a relational 
history within his family. Thus the majority of the reflections on life before 
bvFTD were in terms of the work and activities that he was involved in, in 
which he suggested that he had experienced a full life. However it also 
appeared from his narrative that he believed that he and his ex-wife had led 
quite separate lives when they were together. He also appeared to feel that 
his involvement with Sarah while she was growing up was minimal and that 
his wife had brought her up. It is difficult to determine how much this 
perspective reflects the changes Ray has experienced as a consequence of 
bvFTD, such as changes in social cognition or whether it purely reflects 
different perspectives.  
Sarah Lewin 
In contrast, Sarah suggested that that she had experienced a close and 
connected relationship with Ray through much of her childhood. She felt that 
he was the stronger influence on her life as a young child and that she had a 
greater connection with him than with her mother. Indeed she described 
herself as a daddys girl. However, she explained that her parents divorced 
when she was 14 and suggested that their divorce marked a shift in her 
relationship with her Dad to one that was more conflicted.  
However, in 2000, Sarah moved back home to live with Ray after separating 
from her partner. She suggested that this achieved a renewed closeness in 
their relationship, during which time she felt that he became her best friend, 
someone she relied upon and enjoyed life with. Indeed Sarahs narrative 
appeared to indicate a strong bond and a high level of commitment to her 
father. It was during this time that Sarah and Ray noticed changes in his 
wellbeing, which ultimately resulted in a diagnosis of MND in 2003.  
In 2006, Sarah met Alex. He moved into the family home in 2007 and they 
subsequently married. Following this their two children were born in 2011 and 
2012. Sarah appeared to suggest that they had a close network of   
relationships, both family and friends. However after her grandmother died in 
2011, she indicated that relationships had become distant with some of her 
fathers family. Therefore, while Sarah described close connections with 
some family members, others including two of Rays sisters appeared more 
distant. While Sarah appeared to feel family relationships were important, 
she seemed to suggest that there were some who had not been supportive. 
Given her fathers earlier diagnosis of MND, this lack of support seemed to 
be a source of frustration for her. Nevertheless, she described some family 
and friends as frequent and regular visitors who supported them as a family.  
Interview Context 
The research with the Lewin family involved Ray, Sarah and Alex. They all 
live together with Sarah and Alexs two children, Leo and Phillipa, in a rural 
community in a house which is jointly owned by Ray and Sarah. A total of 8 
interviews were completed over a period of 17 months. Interviews occurred 
with Sarah and Alex together (3 interviews), with Sarah on her own (1 
interview) and with Ray on his own (4 interviews). The interviews took place 
at the family home, Sarah and Alex chose to be interviewed separately from 
Ray and our discussions were largely conducted in the kitchen. I met with 
Ray separately in the lounge. Ray was diagnosed with MND in 2003 and at 
the time of the research, was chair-bound and highly dependent for his 
physical care needs.  
While Ray was happy to take part in the research, he mostly did not appear 
to acknowledge that he had dementia. Nevertheless, I was able to discuss 
the information and consent sheets with Ray and I believe that he was able 
to give informed consent to his involvement in the research. Consent to 
participate was discussed with Ray at each contact.  
There were some challenges involved in interviewing Ray. He experienced 
difficulties with pronunciation given the impact of MND and it was sometimes 
difficult to understand what Ray was saying, particularly towards the end of 
the research, where his speech was markedly slurred. However, I found that   
the main challenge involved Rays apparent difficulty in moving beyond his 
own perspective and responding to questions about how Sarah and Alex 
experienced his difficulties and the impact on their relationship. This meant 
that although I asked these questions, he was rarely able to focus on them 
beyond a few initial comments. It was important that I recognised the 
limitations that bvFTD appeared to create for Ray and manage the questions 
I asked accordingly. Thus I was mindful of the need to accept his responses 
and not dwell on things that he appeared unable to consider. On occasions I 
found this quite a difficult balance to achieve, as he did appear to have 
occasional insights, but would rapidly return to discussing his own situation 
and experience of the world.  
It appeared from my first contact with Sarah and Alex, that they experienced 
considerable difficulties with managing Rays needs and the needs of their 
young family. As well as having two young children, they had explained that 
they both have long term health conditions which have a significant impact on 
their daily lives. However, the challenges they face appeared to be 
compounded by their apparent lack of understanding of Rays condition and 
the absence of support they had received to address this. Consequently a 
feature of these interviews was that both appeared to experience significant 
frustration with Ray and his behaviour.  
I recognised that I experienced a desire to fall into a helping role with them at 
times, given the challenges they appeared to be facing. Additionally, during 
analysis, I was also aware of experiencing some frustration with them 
because of the way in which Ray appeared to be positioned, as if he was to 
blame for the problems they were experiencing. Clearly it was important to 
step back from this to reflect on what might be influencing these feelings and 
consider how this might impact upon my research with this family. I 
discussed these issues in supervision and agreed that providing them with 
information about bvFTD and sources of support should they wish to receive 
these may be a useful response.  I also worked at containing helping 
responses to the end of the interviews where possible. I reflected upon the 
feelings I was experiencing during analysis and what this might mean for my   
interpretation of their experience. It was clearly necessary to avoid a blaming 
response in my analysis and acknowledge that all parties in this family have 
equally valid and different perspectives which need to be highlighted and 
reflected in analysis for it to be meaningful and balanced.   
A specific feature of early interviews with Sarah was that she seemed to hold 
back from exploring her emotional experience of the changes that were 
occurring. Initially I wondered if recording the interviews was the problem, as 
she would on occasions talk about her experience after the recorder had 
been switched off. This presented challenges as due to the location, I was 
not able to record things we had discussed immediately after the interview 
and delays in recording risked that I would forget significant details. On one 
occasion, she reflected on her fathers suggestion that the carers were 
meaningful to him in response to a question I had asked about who was 
important to him. She seemed to feel upset that he had put the carers before 
his family. This was the first time she had openly expressed her sense of 
loss. This revelation highlighted the value of ensuring that I found a way to 
record this as soon as possible to avoid losing valuable data. I therefore 
changed my approach to recording reflective notes by audio recording my 
thoughts as soon as I possibly could after each interview. This allowed for a 
much more immediate reflection on the experience with further notes being 
made later if needed. 
6.6 Morris Family 
The Morris family are a 3 generation family comprising of; 
Bert (aged 66, living with bvFTD) Cameron (grandson) 
Melinda (64, wife to Bert) Orla (granddaughter) 
Idris (eldest son, aged 41) Naomi (granddaughter) 
Adam (son) Gail (granddaughter) 
Sam (son) Laurence (grandson) 
Kelly (daughter) June (granddaughter) 
Margaret (daughter) Carter (grandson) 
Alison (daughter in law) Harvey (grandson) 
Paul (son-in-law) Bella (granddaughter) 
Amy (daughter-in-law) Jack (grandson) 
Eddie (grandson)  
 The Family Relational History: We are family, close and interconnected lives 
Melinda and Bert were the only members of their family to participate. They 
described having had a large family, with 7 children and 11 grandchildren. 
Their role as parents and grandparents seemed to be central to their lives. 
There appeared to be regular and frequent contact with their family which 
was described as important and meaningful to them both. Melinda and Bert 
seemed to feel they were a strongly connected and cohesive family. They 
had an in-depth knowledge and understanding of each of their children and 
grandchildren; valuing them as individuals in their own right and seemed to 
have a strong sense of their worth as individuals. This appeared to guide 
their role within the family, seeing themselves as there to support their 
children. However this did not preclude reciprocity and examples of support 
from their children to them were also evident. 
They experienced considerable adversity in their lives, as two of their 
children had died in young adulthood and they had to contend with disability 
and ill health in 2 others. However, this adversity seems to have been viewed 
as a challenge to be managed together and they appeared to have supported 
each other through these difficult times. Melinda and Bert stressed the   
importance of tolerance, understanding and acceptance of each other and 
their individual needs as fundamental to their way of coping. They also 
suggested that open communication with each other had been a fundamental 
part of the way that they have coped.  
An important recurring theme in their story about their lives seemed to be that 
they have had to fight for the support that they have needed at different 
times. They described experiencing stigma when addressing the needs of 
two of their children and also when Bert was diagnosed with severe 
depression when he was 49.  
Throughout their discussion of their lives together as a family, they did not 
describe their relationship as a couple in any depth. Outside of the interview, 
both reflected upon having been married for 45 years and described plans 
they had previously made to renew their wedding vows on their 50
 wedding 
anniversary, although they had brought this forward due to Berts diagnosis. 
Melinda suggested that Bert had been a loving and calm man before he 
experienced bvFTD. Furthermore, she felt that their children had loved him, 
looked up to him and respected him.  
Beyond those family members described in the initial discussion, Bert and 
Melinda described close relationships with a couple who they had previously 
lived next door to and seemed to feel that they were more like family. They 
also described close relationships with one of their childrens in-laws and 
went on holiday every year with them. 
Interview Context 
Initial contact for the research was with Melinda. During our early 
conversations, we explored participation of family members and initially, she 
indicated that she thought Bert might be reluctant to take part. I also explored 
the possibility of other family involvement, but Melinda felt that her children 
were not yet ready to participate, as it had not been long since his diagnosis. 
When I met with Melinda, Bert was present and did participate in discussions 
about the research. Ultimately Bert agreed to take part, particularly when I   
explained that he could stop at any point. We subsequently explored different 
ways of encouraging family participation, including the possibility of recording 
a form of diary, but ultimately this was unsuccessful.  
Following the consent visit, it was sometime before the first interview could 
take place due to difficulties relating to their housing, thus there was a gap of 
6 months before the first interview. It was therefore necessary to revisit 
consent at the beginning of the first interview, to ensure that Bert was given 
the opportunity to revisit the reasons for my contact and make an informed 
choice about his participation. He agreed to participate. Subsequently, I was 
only able to interview Bert and Melinda at two time points, as a family crisis 
resulted in their withdrawal just before the third time point meeting. 
Therefore, Bert and Melinda took part in 3 interviews over a 12 month period. 
Interviews were together, at their home. My first contact with them was at a 
sheltered housing scheme in a small town in the West Midlands. However 
just after this they moved to a new bungalow with two bedrooms that was 
outside of the catchment area for the services they had previously been in 
receipt of. The interviews were conducted at their new home. Their home 
appeared to reflect the value they held for family life, with many photographs 
of their children and grandchildren in evidence, which they proudly discussed 
with me.   
I was aware from my first contact with Bert and Melinda, that Melinda 
appeared strongly protective of Bert and her family. During the interviews I 
felt that this protectiveness influenced our discussions. It seemed that there 
were times when Melinda actively managed the nature of the discussions we 
had in terms of what was permissible or acceptable to discuss. For example, 
it seemed that it was difficult for Melinda to talk freely about the impact of 
bvFTD on their relationship as a couple. Although she did make a few 
comments in this regard, often they were outside of the interviews, in the 
kitchen or on the telephone rather than in front of Bert. Her comments 
appeared to indicate that the change in Bert had created a lot of conflict and 
tension between them, indeed she seemed to suggest that prior to the 
diagnosis the changes had put their marriage in jeopardy:   
 Gave clear indications that the initial experience was very 
challenging, nearly broke us, nearly split up after 40 years of 
marriage (field notes Bert and Melinda Morris, consent visit) 
Furthermore, it seemed that Melinda actively tried to manage Berts feelings 
during the interview, steering away from topics which might be triggers for 
Berts anxiety and frustration. For example in the first interview she 
repeatedly appeared to try and pacify him when he talked about his 
frustrations with the change in service provision in the new area.  
However after the revisit at the second time point, it seemed to me that Bert 
was struggling with the interviews. Although he appeared to understand and 
want to participate, as we explored their experience, he became frustrated 
and upset about specific difficulties that he perceived were unjust, primarily 
relating to the provision of a wet room in their home. I also noticed that 
Melindas nonverbal reactions seemed to suggest that she was feeling upset 
and frustrated. In order to support him, I listened to his concerns. Once the 
interview was over, at his request, I followed him through to the bathroom so 
he could show me what he was upset about. I then attempted to explore 
options for addressing his concerns about the wet room with them and 
promised to seek out relevant information. After reflecting upon this 
experience, I contacted Melinda to offer some possible contact points and 
also to discuss whether she felt able to continue with the research and to 
gain her views on the impact on Bert of participating.  
She stressed her desire to continue, but agreed that it was distressing for 
Bert. She also appeared to recognise that she was unable to talk freely in 
interviews with Bert about the impact on their lives and their relationship 
because of the effect she thought this might have on him. We recognised that 
we needed to identify a different way of approaching the interviews and 
agreed that it would be better to see her alone initially and then to see Bert if 
he was willing and able to participate again. I was also concerned to ensure 
that Bert was giving informed consent and had therefore intended to address 
consultee consent with Melinda before seeing Bert on the third time point.  
However due to family difficulties, they withdrew from the research before the 
third time point interview. 
6.7 Perrin Family 
The Perrin family are a 4 generation family comprising of; 
Alistair (aged 54, who has bvFTD) Freya (Granddaughter) 
Kate (aged 53, wife of Alistair) Michael (Grandson) 
Rena and Dave (74 and 79 Kates 
parents) 
Ella-Grace (Granddaughter) 
Rachel (27, Daughter) Sally (Kates sister) 
Liz, (Daughter) Betty and Frank (Alistairs late 
parents) 
The Family Relational History: We are family, close and interconnected lives 
Alistair and Kate Perrin 
Alistair and Kate met in 1982 and suggested that they had always been very 
close and did everything together. They further suggested that throughout 
their lives together, they have been quite insular, preferring each others 
company to going out with others. They seemed to know each other well and 
work to each others strengths. For example they indicated that Kate has   
often been the driver of change and that Alistair has implemented them, but 
at the same time he also had clear boundaries about what he was prepared 
to do. 
Furthermore open communication appeared to have been a fundamental part 
of the way they related to each other and within their family. They appeared 
to have shared values in regard to the upbringing of their children and 
worked hard together to ensure that their children had the things that were 
important to them.  
Kate and Alistair appeared to agree on the central importance of family in 
their lives even though they seemed to have different views on who they 
defined as family. Kate appeared to have a broader network of relationships 
than Alistair who seemed particularly insistent that for him family was 
restricted to Kates parents, their children and their partners and their 
grandchildren. They described regular and frequent contact with their family, 
on at least a weekly basis. This contact also included taking holidays 
together. They further described more recently, having regular Sundays 
together for dinner as a family. Indeed they appeared to suggest that being 
parents and more recently grandparents was a central feature of their lives 
together. 
Kate Perrin 
Much of the narrative about their lives together emerged during joint 
interviews between Kate and Alistair and was largely confirmed by Kate in 
her individual interviews. However Kates narrative included further details 
about Alistair and their relationship. Kate suggested that Alistair had always 
been a patient and thoughtful man and was very caring; characteristics which 
she seemed to value greatly. Kate also felt that Alistair had a strong affinity 
with children and that this was an important part of his life, a value she 
seemed to share. Kate also emphasised that his thoughtfulness and care 
was valued by others including her parents, friends and his work colleagues. 
While Kate suggested that he was loving and caring towards his family, these 
feelings did not appear to extend to his family of origin. Alistair himself had   
not included them in discussions about who was important to him in the joint 
interviews. Furthermore, Kate and Alistair alluded to difficult relationships 
with Alistairs family and explained that Alistair had wanted different things for 
his children than he had experienced while growing up. Therefore Alistair 
appeared to have chosen to invest strongly in his relationships with Kates 
family, including her parents, rather than with his family of origin.  
Kate suggested that she has always been quite a practical person who was 
good at problem solving. For example, she described overcoming the 
challenges she faced with dyslexia to become a teacher. She described 
using similar strategies to support her daughter Rachel when she was 
diagnosed with dyslexia and Aspergers. It appeared from her narrative that 
Kate had a strong belief in her ability to overcome challenges. 
Rachel Perrin 
Rachael appeared to share her parents view on the importance of family. 
She seemed to have close connections with her parents and her 
grandparents, with regular and frequent contact being the norm in their 
relationship. Indeed she lived close to her parents at the time of the research. 
Even when she was at university, Rachel described returning home 
frequently and having regular contact. She felt  that being at home or near 
her family was particularly important for her and that being with family made 
her feel safe because of her Aspergers.  
In describing her father, Rachel seemed to affirm much of her mothers 
narrative about her father and his qualities. She described being very close to 
her father, suggesting that she had always been a daddys girl. This did not 
however appear to preclude a close relationship with her mother. Indeed 
Rachel was working full time alongside Kate at the time of the research and 
also described plans they had considered with her sister, to set up a 
business together.  
Rena and Dave 
Both Rena and Dave also suggested that family relationships were close and 
connected, with regular and frequent contact being the norm. Nevertheless,  
as parents they suggested it was important to respect their childrens right to 
lead independent lives. This seemed to reflect a belief in non-interference, 
but involvement when help was requested. Rena in particular confirmed 
Kates assertion that as a family, they have worked things out together and 
openly communicated, even on difficult issues. She further suggested that 
although its likely that any conflict in the family would have been between 
her and Kate, because they are very alike, they generally worked it out 
together.  
They appeared to know Kate well and described her as being a strong 
person who made her own decisions. They suggested that she has always 
been committed to her family, but also has taken on a lot of other 
commitments, sometimes to her detriment. Rena and Dave also appeared to 
have a strong connection to Alistair and described him as a really nice guy. 
They seemed to feel that he was an important part of their lives as a family 
and valued the contributions he made, including having been a good provider 
for his children.  
Interview Context 
My initial contact for participation in the research was with Kate and then 
Rachel. During our discussions to explore their perspectives on participating, 
I discussed with Kate whether it would be possible for her to approach Alistair 
and other family members about the research. Kate agreed to approach 
Alistair and also to discuss the research with her parents and her other 
daughter. Ultimately, five members of the family participated, Alistair and 
Kate, Rachel, Rena and Dave. The family participated for all three time 
points, over a period of 20 months. A total of 13 interviews were completed, 
with Kate and Alistair taking part in five interviews; Kate and Rachel in one 
interview; Kate on her own in one interview; Rachel in a further two 
interviews; and Rena and Dave were interviewed apart on the first occasion 
and then together for the final two time points. 
Interviews were conducted with each of the family members in their homes, 
at their request. I first met Kate and Rachel at Alistair and Kates home. 
Alistair and Kate had been undertaking extensive remodelling of their home   
when I visited on the first occasion and this continued to be the case until 
May 2013. Their daughter Rachel was living next door to Alistair and Kate, 
with her partner Mike. Rena and Dave lived 3 miles away.  
My initial contact with Kate had reminded me that I had previously had 
contact with them when volunteering for the Alz Caf that they attended. Kate 
seemed to feel that this would be beneficial because Alistair did not feel 
comfortable with strangers and may therefore otherwise have been reluctant 
to meet with me to discuss participation. I subsequently met with Alistair and 
Kate at their home and Alistair did appear to recognise me and seemed 
happy to discuss the research. We explored his involvement in the research 
and he appeared able to give informed consent. As with the other people 
living with bvFTD, I continued to explore his understanding and willingness to 
participate throughout the time they were involved in the research. This was 
particularly significant because I changed my work role midway through the 
research to a role in which I was to have direct contact with them in a service 
development context. I therefore needed to ensure that Alistair understood in 
what context I was seeing him and was able to continue to make an informed 
choice about his participation.  
As can be seen from the family narrative, a strong feature of their interviews 
was their closeness and connectedness. This was the largest number of 
family members from one family that I had been able to recruit. While this 
was beneficial in terms of developing a rich and in-depth understanding of 
their family life, it also presented challenges in terms of the level of 
immersion in their lives that I experienced both during the research and 
subsequently during analysis. I was particularly aware of this because they 
seemed to be an articulate and communicative family and also that I 
experienced an emotional connection with them. I found this connection to be 
particularly significant with Alistair and Kate as I also had contact with them 
within my work role. There were inevitably risks associated with this 
immersion. The risks included becoming over involved in their lives; allowing 
their perspective to dominate the final results of analysis and because 
connectedness seemed to be the dominant narrative, it felt difficult to see 
beyond this in my analysis.  
In recognising this risk of over involvement, I was aware of the need to use 
personal and research supervision to reflect upon my relationship with the 
family. During the early part of my involvement with them, just after I changed 
my work role, Kate invited me to their celebration of the completion of their 
work on the house, which occurred two days after Rachels wedding. I 
discussed with my supervisors whether I should attend. I felt that to refuse 
could cause offense and as I was asking a lot from them in committing their 
time to my research, I needed to consider if a refusal would be disrespectful. 
I also recognised that this made me feel uncomfortable and in my practitioner 
role, I would not have considered that it would be appropriate to attend. After 
some discussion I decided to attend, but explained that I would not be able to 
stay for long.  
On reflection, I recognised that it wasnt right for me to attend, particularly 
when I was asked who I was by friends of Kate and Alistair. While it seemed 
important to Kate that I had attended, this caused me to reflect upon my 
boundaries in the research generally and particularly with Kate, who I had 
come to recognise had vulnerabilities despite her apparent strength of 
character. I also wondered if Rachel, Rena and Dave had not been told that I 
had been invited as they seemed surprised at my presence. I therefore left as 
soon as it was possible to do so.  
I reflected in supervision upon my boundaries and motivation for attending. I 
also considered what Kate might have wanted from the relationship and what 
she might need. At the end of my next research interview with Kate, I 
explored what her support needs might be, as it seemed to me that her 
feelings of loss and grief at the changes in Alistair were very challenging for 
her and that she didnt appear to have any source of support for herself. I 
wondered whether the research relationship addressed some of these needs, 
albeit indirectly. Having considered this, I met with Kate and arranged to 
provide her with information about sources of support at her request.   
Considering how I managed their data within the analysis also proved to be 
challenging. The risks involved in portraying an uncritical view and allowing 
those within the family who were most articulate to dominate was an issue I 
needed to consider. It was therefore important that I gave equal credence to 
quieter voices, for example enabling Alistair and Daves voices to be heard in 
the interviews and then subsequently in the analysis. For example, where I 
was aware that Kate had dominated in a response to a particular issue, I 
would specifically address this topic with Alistair when involved in interviews 
with them as a couple. This was respected by Kate and Alistair had the 
space to give his own perspective. In discussion with my supervisors, I also 
recognised the need to foreground the voices of those who were less likely to 
be heard when carrying out analysis. It was also important to be open to 
potential expression of difficulties within their relationships. Even though 
these perspectives may be expressed with a quieter voice it was important 
to highlight the complexity of their experience rather than presenting a one-
dimensional view.  
6.8 Stuart Family 
The Stuart Family are a 3 generation family comprising of: 
Terry (aged 65, living with FTD) Liam husband to Carole 
Sue (aged 66) Wife of Terry Ruth (aged 7) Carole and Liams 
daughter 
Carole (35) daughter  Freddie (aged 2) Marks son 
Mark son  
Bob (Brother to Terry) 
The Family Relational History: Individual stories, together but separate 
Terry and Sue Stuart 
Terry and Sue have been married for 38 years. They discussed their 
respective families of origin and the circumstances in which they met and 
married. Both Terry and Sue appeared to have experienced adversity in their 
early lives. Sue explained that she had been born with a significant disability 
and they both seemed to suggest that Terry had experienced difficult 
relationships with his parents. Sue seemed to feel that their respective 
experiences had impacted upon the way in which their relationship was 
received by her family. She explained that even before they were married 
she had become involved in practically supporting Terry due to his difficult 
family relationships, for example doing his washing. However, this was not 
welcomed by her mother. Sue suggested that her mother had wanted her to 
marry someone who would look after her because of her disability and that 
as a consequence, she was not happy about their relationship. Nevertheless, 
Sue and Terry described her father as having given them a lovely wedding 
and also seemed to feel that her father had been more accepting of Terry. In 
spite of her mothers resistance to their relationship, Sue appeared to feel 
that they had succeeded in their lives together and that she had achieved the 
things she had wanted, but not thought possible, including children and a 
career. Sue seemed to feel that caring and being cared for was an important 
aspect of their relationship.  
Sues perspective appeared to dominate this discussion, however Terry 
seemed to indicate his agreement with her narrative, often briefly 
commenting on or affirming some of the things that she had said. Terry also 
appeared to affirm Sues narrative about his family. Furthermore, he seemed 
disconnected from them, expressing anger towards his parents and some of 
his siblings. Their early life experiences appeared important in understanding 
the context of their relationship.  
Sues health and care needs as a consequence of her disability, also 
appeared to have been an influence on their married life together. Sue   
described having a life threatening condition when their children were 
teenagers. In recent years she described experiencing chronic pain, 
restricted mobility and other difficulties associated with her disability and the 
after effects of the life threatening condition. Thus she needed support and 
assistance herself. She explained that she had recently needed Terrys help 
and assistance more and more due to her unsteadiness which appeared to 
affect many aspects of their daily lives, including shopping and similar 
activities. Furthermore, she described being unable to drive due to the 
restricted mobility she experiences. It seemed therefore that Sue had held 
expectations of Terry in regard to help and assistance throughout their 
married life and that these expectations had increased as her support needs 
had become greater in recent years.  
When discussing their relationship, they appeared to feel that they had pulled 
together for the benefit of themselves and their family and had coped through 
difficult times, including redundancy for Terry. They seemed to feel that they 
had been close, although this closeness was tested by changes in intimacy, 
which appeared to have been associated with diabetes. However despite the 
difficulties they had experienced, Terry and Sue suggested that they had 
rarely argued.  
In 2008, both Terry and Sue described making the decision to retire. Sue 
suggested that she was experiencing increasing difficulties with her health 
and Terry had indicated that he felt that it was the right time for him too. At 
around the same time, they suggested that they had also made a decision to 
move home which appeared to be driven by financial reasons and to be 
nearer Carole. They moved in July 2009. Their son Mark moved out of the 
family home at the same time. They appeared to have made plans about how 
to spend their retirement, including travelling to different places in the UK. It 
therefore seemed as though they were looking forward to a new chapter in 
their life together.  
In describing who was in their immediate family, they identified their two 
children, their childrens partners and their two grandchildren. Terry appeared   
particularly animated when talking about his grandson (Marks son) who was 
two years old at the time of the first interview. They described regular 
telephone contact with both children, although they suggested this was more 
frequent with their son Mark. 
Both Sue and Terry acknowledged that their children lived very busy lives 
with work and children, consequently regular visits were difficult to achieve. 
Furthermore, as indicated above, their son lived some distance away and as 
a consequence of Sues disability, travel was difficult. Nevertheless, they 
appeared to feel that they were close to their children and as indicated 
above, explained that one of the reasons for moving was to be closer to their 
daughter Carole. Indeed they suggested that they had involved both children 
in their decision making around moving home. While acknowledging their 
closeness to both children, Sue identified feeling a particularly close bond 
with their son Mark, who had lived at home until they had moved in 2009. 
Sue and Terry seemed to feel that this was because of his likeness to her 
father whom she was very close to. It appeared that although Sues father 
had died in 1998, she still seemed to struggle with her grief at his loss.  
Sue and Terry indicated that there were some friends from their previous 
area that they had kept in contact with and Sue identified siblings that she 
continued to be close with. Nevertheless, their perception of family seemed 
largely to revolve around their children and grandchildren.  
Carole  
Carole described a lack of closeness with her family and a difficult 
relationship with both of her parents and her brother. She suggested that her 
mother was the more dominant of her parents, was in charge and made most 
of the decisions. She also believed that she and her mother had experienced 
conflict in their relationship in her teenage years because her mother was 
very strong minded.  
However despite this, Carole felt that she had always had to be the adult in 
the relationship with her mother from an early age. She suggested that this   
had impacted upon her relationship with her Mum, indicating that as a 
consequence she had not felt able to share aspects of her own life with her. 
Furthermore, she described a lack of closeness with her father, suggesting 
that although early in her life she had been a Daddys girl, that this had 
changed and that she felt her Dad had not really engaged in family life. She 
also suggested that her mother had favoured her brother over her and that 
her brother had been selfish. Carole had left home when she was 19. She felt 
that the lack of closeness with her family continued into her adult life and that 
her parents had not cared about her in the same way that they had cared for 
her brother. She suggested that her brother had a better relationship with 
them, because he had lived at home until he was 31, whereas she had felt 
distant from them. She appeared to feel that they had not really been 
motivated to be a part of her life.  
Carole described a shift in relationships in recent years, brought about by the 
birth of her daughter and her own need to understand more about her 
relationship with her parents. She suggested that the arrival of Ruth had 
given them some common ground; consequently, they appeared to have 
been able to build a different relationship. It also seemed that Ruths arrival 
heralded a new opportunity for Terry and Carole was able to see a different 
side to her father and appeared to value his relationship with her daughter. 
Carole therefore described feeling closer to her parents now, but recognised 
that it had taken effort on both sides to achieve this.  
It appeared though that Caroles relationship continued to be primarily with 
her mother. She suggested that her mother was the one she had most 
contact with now. However, in spite of the change in their relationship, Carole 
continued to believe that she had to parent her mother, which seemed to be 
demonstrated in her perspective about their future needs. She indicated that 
she believed that she would be the one who ended up caring for her parents. 
However, this was not something Carole welcomed, indeed there seemed to 
be some ambivalence about the possibility that she would become a carer. 
Therefore while Carole described some closeness, there also appeared to be 
some evidence of her imposing a limit to her contact with them. She   
suggested that this was because of the many demands on her life, although it 
seemed that this may also be because of the sense of responsibility she felt 
for them.  
Interview Context 
My initial contact with this family was with Terry and Sue. I explored their 
participation and the possible participation of other family members. Terry 
and Sue were happy to participate and subsequently had discussed the 
research with their two children. Ultimately, Terry, Sue and Carole consented 
to participate. Terry seemed to comprehend the nature of the research and 
described having a family member who had undertaken a PhD. I explored 
consent on an ongoing basis with Terry, to ensure that he was able to make 
an informed choice at each time point.  
The family participated in all three time points and a total of 6 interviews were 
completed over a period of 19 months. I interviewed Terry and Sue at their 
home and interviews were conducted together. Carole chose to be 
interviewed separately at her home, some 10 miles away from her parents. 
Terry and Sue were aware that she was participating.  
In working with this family and in particular Terry and Sue, I was particularly 
reminded of the power that I held as a researcher when interviewing people 
with dementia and their family members. As indicated above, Terry appeared 
able to demonstrate his knowledge of the research; that he could stop at any 
time and the boundaries of his participation. He consented to participate and 
I felt that he understood what we would be doing together and what this 
would be used for. Indeed he mentioned that a family member had 
undertaken a PhD, so seemed to understand the context in which I was 
asking for their participation. We commenced the interview and began by 
talking about their family relationships. I had previously explained that my 
purpose in doing this was to understand their ways of being as a family. 
During this discussion, Sue raised personal experiences from Terrys early 
family life, following which he talked about these at some length.  
Following the interview, as agreed with Terry and Sue, I sent through a 
transcript of the interview. When I contacted them to arrange a further 
appointment to discuss the transcripts, Terry appeared upset by the 
transcript. He said that I had got things wrong and he wasnt at all happy with 
what was in the transcript. On meeting with them, he again reinforced his 
concern about the transcript and I felt that one of his concerns might be 
about his discussion of his family and their history. I emphasised that it was 
not necessary for me to keep this information in the transcript, that I could 
remove it if he wanted me to, which he did. I asked them if they wanted to 
continue with the research, they insisted that they did and Terry seemed 
much calmer after our discussions about what to change in the transcript. 
However, he in particular, told me that he didnt want to see the transcripts 
again.  
This interview caused me to consider what impact my questioning style may 
have had on Terrys revelations of his past and how sharing the transcripts 
may have influenced this. I reviewed my questions and the recording and 
explored this event within supervision. Although Terry did not seem anxious, 
upset or indeed hesitant when talking to me about his experiences, it 
concerned me that he had revealed so much of his vulnerable self. This 
caused me to reflect on what I should do with this information and why he 
might have done it. I had concerns about the possible implications for Terry 
of sharing such information and whether he required support with this. We 
reviewed the ways that he had managed to cope with these experiences at 
the end of the interview and in response, he and his wife described various 
coping strategies and ways of managing the impact on his life. Clearly, I 
cannot be certain of Terrys reasons for sharing this information with me; 
however my discomfort prompted me to recognise that it was important to 
see this as an ethical moment which I needed to address. 
It seems possible that the impact of bvFTD may have influenced how much 
he revealed about himself and I wondered therefore whether he would have 
chosen to share these experiences had he not had bvFTD. As bvFTD 
impacts upon the capacity for abstract thinking, questions which invite open   
discussion may have prompted Terry to offer greater detail than he would 
have normally. While I had prepared carefully to support the involvement of 
people with dementia, including setting the context of the interview, this may 
have had an adverse effect for Terry. In particular, I recognised that while 
open questions are an important feature of qualitative interviewing, their use 
may make it difficult for a person with bvFTD to understand the scope of the 
interviews. Therefore I reflected upon the need to use questions which are 
clearer, specific and concrete, as these are likely to be more successful, as is 
the preparedness to rephrase these questions to ensure they are 
understood.  
A further area for consideration came in my interviews with Carole. At the 
second time point interview, Carole had raised that her father had asked her 
what she had said. This combined with Terrys reaction to the transcript at 
the first time point, highlighted the possibility that Terry had concerns about 
how others viewed him and that he may be trying to manage what I thought 
about him. Furthermore, given Caroles difficult relationship with her parents, 
I recognised that she may be concerned that her parents might hear what 
she had said. I reinforced the boundaries of confidentiality with her and she 
seemed reassured by this. However I was aware that Terrys review of the 
transcript may also have influenced his self-concept as it was evident during 
my discussions with Terry and Sue that there was some conflict between 
them concerning the impact of bvFTD and that Terry on occasions was quite 
upset at Sues perspective. Having considered this in supervision, I offered 
Terry and Sue the opportunity to be interviewed separately although they 
chose to continue to be interviewed together. I also respected Terrys request 
not to review the transcripts again.  
6.9 Chapter Summary 
In this chapter, I have documented the relational history of each of the seven 
families that participated in the research. These summaries are reinforced by 
fuller descriptions which are supported by participant quotes (see CD 
appendix 21). In keeping with narrative analysis, these storylines are 
presented individually, in order that the reader may understand the family 
context in which the experience of bvFTD is grounded. Each family   
experiences a relational history that is unique to them, as a whole family, 
between generations and as individuals. It is important to note that the 
recounting of the relational history differs between participants within the 
same family, particularly when comparing the contributions of the family 
member living with bvFTD and their other family members. While it is 
inevitable that different perspectives will be present, it is necessary to 
acknowledge that the impact of bvFTD may have made it difficult for those 
participants to contribute fully to the recounting of their family relationships. 
While the family storylines point to the uniqueness of each family, it 
nevertheless seems that relationships within and between these 7 families 
exist on a continuum from cohesive and connected ---- disconnected and 
distant. One of the possible challenges of research such as this is that 
recruitment of families with conflictual or distant relationships seems more 
problematic and their perspectives have been less in evidence in qualitative 
studies exploring the impact of dementia upon relationships (La Fontaine and 
Oyebode 2014). It appears that the 7 families in this study represent a range 
of relationships on this continuum and therefore provide the basis upon which 
the impact of bvFTD on diverse family relationships can be considered.  
Furthermore, in this chapter I have summarised my experience of 
interviewing each of the families and in doing so have provided an account of 
the factors influencing the research process, including my own influence as a 
researcher. I have considered the boundaries of researcher participant 
relationships, as well as the interface between the multiple identities I hold 
including those of researcher and nurse practitioner. I have also considered 
some of the environmental and familial factors influencing initial participation 
and ongoing involvement in the research. This has highlighted that ongoing 
reflection and supervision have been critical to an ethically mindful approach 
to undertaking sensitive research such as this (Warin 2011; Bowtell et al. 
2013; Brown-Wilson 2011; Hoskins and White 2013). 
Chapter Seven: Challenges experienced over time by we / I, brought 
about by behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD)  
7.1 Introduction 
In the previous chapter, I have provided a picture of each of the seven 
families view of their relationships prior to the experience of bvFTD. These 
relationships range on a continuum of cohesive and connected --- 
disconnected and distant. In this chapter I present the results of a 
grounded theory analysis which describes a series of psycho-social, 
cognitive, behavioural and relational challenges. These challenges represent 
different aspects of the experience of bvFTD for these families and for 
individuals within the family, including the person with bvFTD. Furthermore, 
there are a number of elements that impact on the experience of these 
challenges and the coping processes used by families and individuals within 
the families. These elements are also described. 
I have identified four challenges. Two of these relate to the experience for the 
whole family, including the person with bvFTD; awareness and 
understanding of the changes and managing everyday life. A further 
challenge relates directly to the experience of living with bvFTD for the 
person with dementia; being me in the context of bvFTD. A final challenge 
relates specifically to partners or adult children who are living with or heavily 
involved in supporting the person with bvFTD; were not the same 
anymore. Table 7.1 outlines these challenges and the issues influencing 
them. The challenges experienced by individuals and families and the 
resulting coping processes are multifaceted and complex. Furthermore they 
appear to have a reciprocal influence on each other. Thus a challenge for 
some may arise from a coping process used by others. For example, the 
experience of being me in the context of bvFTD (for the person with 
dementia) may be significantly influenced by the strategies that are used by 
family members to manage everyday life, including enabling and facilitating, 
or minimising, denying and distancing themselves from the persons 
experience of the world. Thus in presenting this data there are inevitably  
close connections between sections in this chapter and between this and 
other chapters.  
Furthermore, where influencing elements are relevant to more than one of 
the challenges, I have summarised their influence in subsequent challenges, 
although any specific additional factors are also addressed as required.  
Table 7.1 Challenges experienced by we/ I 
Challenges  Subthemes Influencing Elements 
 Awareness and 
understanding 
of the changes 
 Noticing changes/ explaining 
changes 
 Its dementia; moving from 
awareness to understanding 
 Awareness and understanding 
within the wider family 
 Awareness and understanding 
over time 
 Emotional and physical 
proximity 
 Its really subtle and difficult for 
others to see 
 Readiness to see and hear the 
changes 
 Prior relationship 
 Availability of knowledgeable 
and supportive professionals 
 Understanding of bvFTD 
 Managing 
everyday life 
 Changes in cognition 
 Changes in mood 
 Changes in emotional and social 
behaviour 
 Co-ordination 
 Managing everyday roles 
 Managing self-care 
 Motivation 
 Availability of knowledgeable 
and supportive professionals 
 Accepting  resisting
rejecting 
 Awareness  Unawareness 
 Its really subtle and difficult for 
others to see 
 Past experiences of similar 
difficulties 
 Peer support 
 Prior relationship 
 Were not the 
same anymore / 
Im not the 
same anymore 
 Youre not the same so were not 
the same anymore 
a. Youre not the person 
you were to me  
b. Were not the same 
anymore 
 Awareness  Unawareness 
 Its really subtle and difficult for 
others to see 
 Living together by choice 
 Prior relationship 
 Being me in the 
context of 
bvFTD 
 Youre not the same anymore 
 I know Im changing --- Ive not 
changed at all 
 I need to be in control  
 I need to feel safe and secure 
 In step or out of step in our 
awareness of changes 
 Family coping processes 
 I trust my familys ways of 
supporting me 
 Sense of self 
 The impact of bvFTD on social 
and cognitive functioning 
 An important person in our 
lives --- he was just there really 
 Understanding their emotional 
world 
7.2 Awareness and Understanding of the Changes 
Becoming aware of and developing an understanding of bvFTD and its 
impact seemed to be a critical component of family functioning.  The 
challenge of being aware of the changes brought about by bvFTD began 
when symptoms first became apparent and continued beyond diagnosis. It 
seemed that those closest to the person with bvFTD noticed changes first 
and in some families this was followed by the person with bvFTD. Other, 
wider family members awareness seemed to come at a later point. 
Differences in awareness of the changes could be a source of difficulty within 
the families. This theme was present for all seven families who participated. 
Narrative excerpts from all three time points contributed to this theme with 
three subthemes emerging from analysis; 
 Noticing changes/ explaining changes 
 Its dementia; moving from awareness to understanding 
 Awareness and understanding within the wider family 
Noticing Changes / Explaining Changes 
The time before diagnosis began with a gradual realisation that changes 
were occurring. Those closest to the person with bvFTD and sometimes the 
person with early symptoms were most likely to recognise these changes. 
Initial symptoms were described by closest family members, such as difficulty 
with work, with managing complex and everyday tasks and changes in mood 
and personality. For example, Mollie experienced a gradual recognition that 
Anthony was changing in mood and in his ability to manage everyday tasks: 
Mollie But I think what I really noticed was when, I think it was when 
you were coming home and things like this, with the 
showering and things. He was becoming more withdrawn, a 
lot of withdrawn, deep thought; always in deep thought and 
thinking. [] 
 It got to the stage where he couldnt remember how to use 
certain things wed had for years, things like the microwave 
and the shower. [] [T1]  
Although not at the same pace as Mollie, Anthony also developed a gradual 
awareness that he was not functioning as well as he had previously (Table 
7.2):  
Table 7.2: developing a gradual awareness 
Anthony But then some things you just couldnt remember doing. If I was 
taking the wheels off anything you get the wheel brace out the 
back of the van and the wheel brace stays there until youve 
tightened them all up, then the wheel brace goes in the back of the 
van; so very methodical and always aware what were doing. And I 
could go round and tighten all the wheel nuts, Ive got the wheel 
brace in my hand and not an inkling whether or not Ive tightened 
the wheel nuts or not. So, you go round and check them all again 
and yeah, every single one tight. You go to throw the wheel brace 
in the back of the van, Did I tighten the wheel nuts up? Not a 
clue. So, you go round again and you still cant remember doing it. 
So, Id then go in the office, get hold of one of the drivers, Come 
here, stand there and watch me tighten up these wheel nuts and 
tightened all the wheel nuts up. Ive tightened the wheel nuts up, 
havent I? Theyre all tight? [T1] 
However, initially a range of alternative explanations for symptoms were 
found for many of the participants, as most did not appear to consider that it 
might be dementia. Some families seemed to attribute early symptoms to 
changing life circumstances such as changes in employment or stressful life 
events. For example, Phil explained that initially he had thought that the 
changes were related to Penny leaving work: 
Phil And I said when she'd resigned her position, it was like 
somebody flicked a switch and she switched off. But of 
course it was nothing to do with that really. It was the onset 
of this illness. I think. [T1] 
It also appeared that some spouses had thought that these changes may 
have been indicative of a desire to end the marriage, as Kate described 
below: 
Kate I just thought he couldnt be bothered anymore and that, you 
know, he was looking for a way out. [T1] 
Indeed three of the spouses described an increase in conflict with their 
husbands prior to diagnosis, which may have given rise to fears about a 
breakdown in their relationship.  
One family felt that the changes represented exaggerated aspects of existing 
personality traits. For example, Pamela Hugh suggested that Elizabeth had 
always been self-serving: 
Jenny  So what has she always been like and whats different now 
from what she used to be like? 
Pamela Well I think that she's always been selfish, she's always 
wanted her own way [T1] 
Thus it may be that early changes are subtle and therefore interpreted as 
usual for that person. More general assumptions about human behaviour 
may also influence explanations of symptoms. For example, memory 
difficulties raised by Elizabeths husband were attributed to ageing:  
Pamela  Her husband was saying, Oh your mums memorys 
terrible. And we didnt take any notice because in your 70s 
well that's age isnt it? Well this is what we thought; this is 
what we were hoping. [T1] 
While those closest to the person with bvFTD and on occasions, the person 
with dementia experienced an increasing recognition that changes were 
occurring, it seemed that this developed at a different pace for extended 
family members. Family members who had infrequent contact and/ or who 
were less emotionally close appeared to have less awareness prior to 
diagnosis. For example, Anthony and Mollie Burton appeared to have an 
increasing awareness that things werent right. However, they felt that others 
in the family did not notice the changes because they werent in regular 
contact or close to Anthony: 
Jenny Did your children notice there were changes? Was there 
anything that they picked up on?   
Anthony We dont see them frequently enough for them to notice 
really. And also when you do visit them you are not your 
usual self: you go there and you have a conversation with 
them or whatever; and theyre only short visits. [T1] 
Anthonys daughter, Jane, seemed to confirm this, suggesting that because 
they didnt meet regularly, she had not noticed as much change: 
Jenny Were there other things that you noticed? 
Jane Not a great deal, no. But I think its probably because I didnt 
spend so much time with him. No. [T1] 
Other families also experienced variability in awareness and in some this 
difference in perspective had the potential to create tension in relationships. 
For example, Sarah and Alex Lewin reflected on the challenge their different 
levels of awareness had caused, suggesting that some conflict may have 
arisen because of these different perspectives: 
Sarah His sister and brother-in-law came yesterday and you 
wouldnt think there was anything wrong with him, nothing 
whatsoever. 
Alex No, thats why we find it difficult I think with some of the 
family members: they dont believe hes got it.  And we say, 
You dont live with what we see and hear.  And Ive had a 
chat with his sister here, [] and she said, I dont think hes 
got dementia.  And I said, You dont see it. [T1] 
It seemed therefore that awareness was variable within these seven families. 
However, with a growing recognition of changes in behaviour and 
personality, engagement with the difficulties and their consequences became 
necessary for close family members and in some families, the person with 
bvFTD. For some, the decision to seek help arose from a critical event 
surrounding the persons behaviour. For example, in the Hugh family, the 
death of Elizabeths husband served to bring them into closer contact with 
Elizabeth which highlighted increasing risk taking (table 7.3): 
Table 7.3: Increased risk taking 
Pamela Yes so I drove the car and followed her home and she got to the 
traffic lights in [local area] and jumped a red light. 
Jenny Right 
Pamela  So I sat in my car thinking shall I watch or shall I close my eyes 
and wait for the crash ((laughingly)). Anyway she got home and I 
said, Do you realise you jumped a red light? And she said, 
Doesnt everybody? So after that she'd bought all this meat from 
the butchers and she said, Oh Ill put it away later, well she didnt 
she just left it out, she didnt put it away, she didnt put it in the 
fridge or the freezer and she'd left food in the back of the car and 
when they came to section her then they opened the boot of the 
car and there was just these bottles because when she had staff 
they were reporting that she was going out to the car at regular 
intervals and she was going out to the car to swig whisky. [T1] 
In one family, help seeking also appeared to have arisen from a process of 
discussion between family members about the changes they noticed. For 
example, Melinda described discussions with their adult children: 
Melinda And wed lost him in the garden centre and we couldnt find 
him, it took hours to find him, because hed wandered off. 
And then when we thought about it and we were talking as a 
family, we said, Remember when we went to such and such 
and he just didnt know where he was? and things began to 
piece together.  [T1] 
These family conversations also included Bert, who lives with bvFTD, who 
appeared to have accepted that they needed to seek help as in this quote, 
where he acknowledged that he needed to go to the doctors because he 
knew something was wrong: 
Jenny So that was a worry for you, that Melinda wouldn't stay with 
Bert Well, yeah, because that was one of the reasons why in my 
mind we went to the doctors in the first place with what was   
 happening. Because I knew, I felt there was something 
wrong, didn't know what it was, [] [T2] 
Initially help was sought from the persons general practitioner, with referrals 
subsequently being made to specialist services, including mental health 
services. Some families experienced lengthy delays in this process. 
Furthermore, participating families received variable levels of support and 
information from professionals about the diagnosis when this was eventually 
made. The diagnosis was shared with the person with bvFTD and the family 
member who was present during the diagnostic process. None of the 
extended family members were directly involved in the diagnostic process.  
While the diagnosis provided answers and for some a sense of relief, a 
number of the close family members, including the person with bvFTD, 
reflected on the distress they experienced afterwards. For example Anthony 
had explained that he expected to be diagnosed with dementia but when it 
came he described feeling devastated: 
Mollie ((Anthony)) was glad hed got his diagnosis, but it really did 
knock you for six, didnt it love, for a couple of months.  
Anthony Yeah, which was totally unexpected. I couldnt explain why 
on earth it did affect us like that. [T1] 
Mollie reflected upon her own difficulty adjusting too and described becoming 
over-protective of Anthony as a consequence. Kate also described her 
distress at having to tell her children and grandchildren.  
Its dementia, moving from awareness to understanding? 
Awareness within families continued to be variable following diagnosis and 
appeared strongest in those who were in closest contact with the person with 
bvFTD. Four of the spouses viewed the diagnosis as an opportunity to 
understand what was happening and therefore how to support the person 
with bvFTD. For example, Kate described the importance of diagnosis as a 
route to understanding: 
Kate Understanding it, yeah.  Once we knew what we were 
dealing with we were all better able to cope.  It was the not 
knowing, it was those three years of not knowing what was 
 happening to this man and trying to guess all the time. But 
actually, once we got the diagnosis and we could find out 
that actually he wasnt abnormal. Okay, he wasnt doing 
Alistair things, he was doing strange things, but they werent 
abnormal for somebody with frontal temporal dementia. [] 
and once we could start putting things into sensible boxes, 
we could better manage it. [T1] 
Furthermore, the Perrin and Morris families appeared to support the 
development of understanding within their whole family in order to achieve 
this: 
Melinda So, its kind of adapting  were slowly learning  and 
supporting each other, how to adapt. [] [T1]  
While some families sought to understand the nature of the changes and the 
impact these had on the person with bvFTD, it seemed that this did not 
always follow after diagnosis. In three of the families, those directly involved 
in caregiving appeared to have difficulty recognising how bvFTD might affect 
the person throughout the research. For example, even though Pamela and 
Jonathan seemed aware that Elizabeth had difficulty with planning, 
processing and memory, they didnt connect these difficulties with her 
mothers behaviour. 
Jonathan  I mean she's done strange things, we were around at her 
house, Pamela had told me that shed cut a pull-down blind 
in her conservatory, a white pull-down blind she's cut it [] 
And I said, Why did you do that? Oh I don't know. So I 
don't know whether she really couldnt remember or whether 
she really didnt know that she was doing it at the time or 
whether she didnt want to say, but that was very peculiar, 
that was almost inexplicable why anybody should do that. 
[] ((laughs)). [T3]   
An apparent consequence of this lack of understanding appeared to be 
conflict within relationships as described in the quote below (table 7.4) 
Table 7.4: Lack of understanding 
Sue I'll tell you what he did, because I find it hard to do some aspects of my 
cleaning and I said This shower needs cleaning., because it's just, 
doing the tiles, I can't stretch up. So I said Would you do it for me? and I 
was doing some ironing and I left him. I said I'm not going to interfere, 
you don't like me interfering. And I had all of the things for what it's 
needed and other things. And he was squirting the bathroom cleaner on 
the tiles with this grouting brush, but no water. And he says to me This 
cleaner has fumes. And he said Now I've just squirted it and then wiped 
it with another cloth. First of all he starts cleaning the... 
Terry I'm not a domestic. 
Sue No, but since we've been here you have done it numerous times. But he 
just completely forgot how he'd got to do it.  
Jenny So it's sometimes quite difficult to work out how to do things.  
Terry Mm. 
Sue And so of course I had to do it myself. [] So he shouts at me. Oh, I'm 
useless. and all this. I said Why didn't you ask me if you weren't sure 
how to do it? I said I just didn't want to keep coming in, you tell me off. 
'Can't I do anything on my own?' and all this. This is what it's doing to us. 
I'm trying to motivate him to do something, but he makes such a mess of 
doing something and I think I might as well do it myself. 
Jenny So it causes a bit of conflict.   
Terry Mm. 
Sue Yeah. We've never, have we, with all the years we've been married, 
we've never really rowed. We might have just had a slight difference of 
opinion every now and again. [] And like I said, I don't like being 
shouted at so it's very hard. How do you... just let him get on with it?  
Jenny How does that feel for you when you have cross words? What's that like?  
Sue I don't think he really knows he's doing it, do you?   
Terry I just say Four across. Four letters. 
Sue [] Do you see what I mean? But I remember him saying it. [T2] 
The arguments that Sue described may have arisen in part because of Sues 
lack of understanding of the effect of bvFTD on Terrys ability to process and 
sequence. Consequently, she appeared unable to support him and 
positioned him as at fault because he couldnt successfully achieve the task   
in hand. Therefore, differences in understanding were likely to impact upon 
ways of managing the impact of bvFTD and to have consequences for 
relationships. 
Awareness and understanding within the wider family following 
diagnosis 
As described earlier, in some of the participating families, those in the wider 
family network were less aware at diagnosis. Differences in level of 
awareness and understanding continued following diagnosis. For example, in 
the Perrin family, Dave and Rena experienced a lower level of awareness 
than their daughter Kate or granddaughter Rachel. Rena appeared to feel 
that this was because they were on the fringe of things: 
Rena And people say things like, Well we were with him last week 
and theres nothing wrong with him. And of course there isnt 
because you dont see him getting They dont notice the 
difference between when hes suddenly cant cope and 
things. And I realised then that were just on the fringe really 
we dontwe cant really understand how hard it is for them. 
However by time point three, both Rena and Dave had a greater appreciation 
of the difficulties that Alistair was experiencing: 
Jenny So tell me about what sorts of things you've noticed have 
changed. 
Rena He's not as good at making a decision. And he's very quickly 
agitated. Since the building work finished in the spring, I think 
there's been a deterioration. 
Dave Put it this way. I have to slow him down now a little bit more 
than I did before. He can be quite when I say rough... He 
doesn't have the patience he did have.   
Rena Bit of bull at a gate, isn't it. And then if it doesn't go right he 
gets very stressed. [T3] 
Thus while some family members may have lesser awareness and 
understanding at diagnosis, over time this seemed to increase. However,   
despite awareness, some wider family members appeared to deny the 
changes. For example, Mollie discussed her daughters apparent lack of 
understanding (Table 7.5): 
Table 7.5: Lack of understanding in wider family 
Jenny [] So have the relationships that you have 
Mollie Theyve deteriorated since Anthonys been ill. That's being 
truthful isnt it? 
Anthony Yeah. 
Mollie That's beingI'm just beingwe went on holiday with my 
daughter, [] but it seemed to annoy her so much that she could 
not believe how much I actually did for Anthony. She said, Its 
like having another child. []  She said, You've got to remind 
him to have a wash, youre reminding him to come and sit and 
have your breakfast and do this, do this. [] She said, I couldnt 
believe it, she said it was like having another child. She said, Oh 
rather you than me, she was quite annoyed about it all wasn't 
she because I couldnt go to do different things with the children 
because obviously the noise and certain things. We did, we took 
them off to do different things didnt we with Chloe and Isla? But it 
was difficult and if I could have come home after four or five days 
((laughingly)) I would have done. It was awful. We were on 
eggshells. [] [T2] 
She appeared to feel that her daughter did not want to understand because it 
meant the activities they engaged in with the grandchildren were restricted. 
Her quote also suggested that differences in understanding and awareness 
within the family had the potential to create distance and disconnectedness in 
family relationships. However, some families were able to acknowledge the 
reasons for this difference in awareness and make allowances for it: 
Melinda But he finds the difference in his dad; out of all of them, 
Adam finds that difference in you the hardest to cope with, 
doesnt he? []  Adam cant really understand those 
changes, where all the others, [] they kind of accept that 
and can adjust their mood to yours.  I think with Adam,  
 hes got his dad up on a plateau, hasnt he, so hes the one 
thats struggling, hes the one that weve got concerns about. 
Awareness and understanding with progression of bvFTD 
Differences in levels of awareness and understanding were further 
complicated by the progressive nature of bvFTD. It appeared that this 
created a cyclical process of awareness and understanding. For example, 
Alistair and Kate reflected on their experience of the realisation that there 
were new changes (Table 7.6):  
Table 7.6: A cyclical process of awareness and understanding 
Kate To him the scary thing was realising how the disease, how the 
illness is... 
Alistair Hitting. 
Kate Yes. [] 
Alistair Im trying to sort of say well thats how I was, this is how I am now, 
how much has changed. Trying to collate the two and that is the 
frightening scary part. You think, well I used to be able to do that, 
why can't I do that now. I dont feel any different in myself, but... 
and its just... thats the scary bit, when people... yeah... 
Kate Point out. 
Alistair Point out the difference or notice the difference and then you think 
oh, thats not right. [T1] 
Therefore each new change brought an increased awareness that bvFTD 
was progressing, which in turn required a new level of understanding. It 
seems likely that all of the families experienced repeated patterns of 
increasing awareness and understanding as bvFTD progressed and may 
have been regularly out of step with each other as a consequence.  
Thus awareness and understanding of bvFTD is variable within families and 
occurs at a different pace for those closest to the person with bvFTD when 
compared with those who have less frequent contact and/ or who are not as 
emotionally close. Furthermore, there are some who deny that changes are 
taking place or have not been able to make the transition from awareness to   
understanding. Some families appear to have been able to work together to 
understand what is needed whereas it appears that for others a lack of a 
shared understanding has caused distance and disconnectedness in 
relationships.  
7.3 Influencing Elements 
A range of elements would appear to influence this theme. These include: 
 Awareness of the person with bvFTD 
 Emotional and physical proximity 
 Its really subtle and difficult for others to see 
 Readiness to see and hear the changes 
 Prior relationship 
 Availability of knowledgeable and supportive professionals 
It appeared that the level of awareness of the person with bvFTD may also 
influence the awareness of family members. The awareness of the person 
with bvFTD is addressed later in this chapter under the theme, Being me in 
the context of bvFTD. However, their awareness, even if it is not entirely 
congruent with other family members may provide the opportunity to discuss 
and consider the changes occurring as described above (p.143-4, Melinda 
and Bert).  
As discussed earlier, the emotional and/ or physical proximity of family 
members to the person with bvFTD appeared to have an impact on the level 
of awareness and understanding of the changes taking place. As highlighted 
by Rena and Dave (p.147) and Jane Burton (p.142) being on the fringe of 
things appeared to impact upon their ability to see what was occurring. It 
also seems possible that the way in which the person with bvFTD behaves 
with those in their wider family circle impacts upon awareness, For example, 
Anthony appeared to suggest that he behaved differently with family 
members who dont see him often (p.141-2). Furthermore, Melinda 
suggested that initially she had covered up the extent of the changes with 
their children: 
Melinda It was a real big change, because I was living with it and 
covering a lot of it up, they werent kind of quite aware of how 
things were. [T1]  
The subtlety of the changes occurring early in the experience of bvFTD may 
also make it more difficult for others to become aware. It is conceivable that 
the changes in the expression of empathy in intimate relationships would be 
less apparent to those who are not in this type of relationship with the person 
with bvFTD and therefore not as close. For example, Kate discussed the 
change in their relationship and seemed to reflect on a shift from partners to 
parent/ child: 
Kate And you want the physical, the hold, reassurance when 
things dont go right and somethings gone wrong or he's 
forgotten something or somethings not happened right, just 
stands in the kitchen and says 
Alistair Just for reassurance. 
Kate Oh I just need you. And he just needs 
Alistair Yes just the reassurance. 
Kate Like you would when you pick up a child and you hug them 
its kind of like that isnt it? Except he's too big to pick up 
((laughs)) [T1] 
It also seems possible that others would be less aware of the subtlety of this 
change unless it was directly discussed. Indeed Kate seemed to suggest that 
it would not be the norm for discussions about intimacy to take place within 
the wider family circle (Table 7.7): 
Table 7.7: The subtlety of changes  
Kate I think [Friend] expressed it one day she said, Suddenly I hadnt 
got a lover and I got somebody I had to care for. [] and I 
absolutely totally understood that but its not something you share. 
So you can't ever talk to anybody about [the change in intimacy]. I 
couldnt explain how I felt. [] everybodys quite happy to say, 
How are you? Are you stressed? or Youre looking well, or this 
but its not a subject you can just bring up. I mean I realise that 
we're British and we dont talk about these things anyway, no sex 
please and all the rest of it [T1] 
Awareness and understanding also appeared to be actively avoided by 
some. For example, Pamela described the apparent memory difficulties 
reported by her mothers husband: 
Pamela her husband was saying, Oh your mums memorys terrible. 
And we didnt take any notice because in your 70s well that's 
age isnt it? Well this is what we thought; this is what we 
were hoping. [T1] 
At the end of this quote she appeared to imply that they didnt want to take 
his concerns seriously. This seems to suggest that another element 
influencing awareness of changes may be the readiness of others to hear 
and see the changes occurring. Similarly Dave, who is the father-in-law to 
Alistair Perrin, acknowledged that he didnt really want to know because of 
his fear that he might have dementia too. Other family members also seemed 
aware but appeared reluctant to learn more about the diagnosis. It is 
therefore conceivable that the experience of grief at the changes may also 
influence avoidance.  
A further influencing element may be that of the prior relationship. As 
highlighted above, some families sought to engage a collaborative approach 
to responding to the diagnosis, whereas for others, differences in awareness 
and understanding appeared to lead to distance and disconnectedness. 
Those families that engaged in a collaborative approach seemed to have a 
relationship in which cohesiveness and reciprocity featured strongly, such as 
the Morris Family (c.f. Chapter 6). They had worked together to overcome 
adversity in their lives thus their response in this latest challenge appeared to 
continue this pattern of relating. Similarly, where communication between 
generations was the norm for some families (see Perrin and Morris families, 
chapter 6), this seemed to influence awareness. For example, wider family 
members may be exposed to the concerns that closer family members have 
about changes, as described by Rachel Perrin: 
Rachel I think you were telling me more than you were telling her, so 
she was seeing more but not hearing, whereas I was hearing 
more but not seeing.  [] [T1]  
Even though Rachel was at University at the time, the patterns of relating 
within the Perrin family meant that she was in regular contact with Kate and 
therefore hearing about the difficulties that were being experienced.  
However, cohesiveness and reciprocity did not feature as strongly between 
generations in those families who were distant and disconnected. For 
example, Mollie and Anthony described their relationships with family as not 
being central to their lives (c.f. Chapter.6). Although they appeared to have 
strong connections to their grandchildren, they identified at the second time 
point that relationships with Mollies daughter had deteriorated (table 7.5). As 
indicated in that quote, they suggested that Diane had not accepted 
Anthonys diagnosis: 
Mollie She's seen all the pagesshe's been on the website, 
Alzheimers website, everything ((sighs)) I think its just a dig 
because we weren'tshe didnt get that attention at the time 
However it seemed that Anthony and Mollie believed that Diane held 
unrealistic expectations about the support that they could offer her. Similar 
difficulties concerning cohesiveness, reciprocity and expectations of support 
appeared evident between and within generations in the Lewin, Hugh, Horton 
and Stuart families.  
The availability of knowledgeable and supportive professionals influenced 
families awareness and understanding of bvFTD. In four of the families, the 
experience of help-seeking seemed to have been a frustrating and slow 
process in which a range of professionals were involved and where 
alternative explanations were offered before bvFTD was finally diagnosed. 
For example, in the Horton Family, Phil described a long journey in which 
they saw her general practitioner on numerous occasions before concerns 
were acknowledged. Referral to a number of different specialists  
subsequently occurred before a diagnosis was finally offered some three 
years after help was initially sought (Table 7.8): 
Table 7.8 A long route to diagnosis 
Phil So when things started to get slowly worse I went back again and 
it was exactly the same again. You need to go to Relate. [] She 
saw my wife on her own and then we went back together, for the 
consultation, [] And the actual GP said to me Well what do you 
think is wrong with her? And I said [] it would appear to me that 
she's got some form of Alzheimer's disease. So she [] did the 
mini mental test. When she was doing the test she said Oh dear, 
we have got a problem.  [] Then she sent us to see a specialist 
[]  who had  a brain scan done and said he could see nothing 
wrong with her brain scan and said There's nothing wrong with 
her. So that set it back another year. And then because things 
deteriorated, just little things, we went back and saw the GP. She 
said Well I'll send you to see somebody else. And then we saw 
Professor [] and he did some testing and they did a cognitive 
test [ and then referred] for a third opinion and they'd come to 
the conclusion that she'd got some frontotemporal problem. And in 
2008, after two years delay []  the Professor wrote a report 
where he said she'd got frontotemporal dementia [] So that was 
all done in about 2009, 10. [T1] 
Pamela and Jonathan Hugh also described a difficult experience with 
services, in which they felt that no-one was listening. Furthermore, they 
seemed to believe that the professionals they encountered didnt understand 
the nature of the difficulties that Elizabeth was experiencing: 
Pamela So we managed her over the Christmas period and I phoned 
her social worker and said what had happened and she 
basically said, Well we can't send any carers in if she 
doesnt agree because its against her human rights. [] 
And that social worker basically said, I dont believe that 
there's anything wrong with your mother. [T1] 
Therefore some families experienced the professionals as out of step with 
their needs, lacking understanding and therefore unable to help them. In 
contrast, other families felt that the availability of professional support 
following diagnosis had enabled them to understand and develop effective 
responses to the needs of the person living with bvFTD (Table 7.9): 
Table 7.9: Professional Support 
Melinda But I think it was the frustration of the build-up and then [the 
specialist nurse] was brilliant, because Bert will eat and eat and 
eat, because they forget he hasn't eaten.  And she was brilliant 
because she was giving me ideas how to cope, []  And I think all 
the support you get that way, helps us to help Bert and that is why 
I think hes steadier now than he was six months ago, because 
weve all learnt to adjust to the way Bert is functioning, rather than 
us trying to impose, You should get up at this time, you should go 
to bed that time, and weve kind of all learnt to adjust to the way 
you are. [T1] 
Therefore support from knowledgeable and responsive professionals may 
also be helpful in influencing the transition from awareness to understanding. 
7.4 Managing everyday life 
For all seven families, bvFTD had a wide ranging impact, affecting cognition, 
mood, social and relational functioning. Changes in functioning appeared to 
require adaptations so that wellbeing, relationships, activities of daily living 
and other aspects of family life could be sustained. Therefore the challenge 
of maintaining everyday living was present for all seven families who 
participated, particularly for the person with bvFTD and their closest family 
members. Narrative excerpts from all three time points contributed to this 
theme with three subthemes emerging from analysis: 
 The impact of bvFTD on relationships 
 The impact on independent activities of daily life 
 The impact on self-care, health and well-being 
Some of the main features of bvFTD are discussed in each of these 
subthemes. While other features of bvFTD and their effects are evident in the 
data, in light of the word limit, it is the main features that are considered here.  
The impact on relationships 
Changes impacting upon relationships with wider family members and other 
social situations are discussed here. Although there is inevitably some 
overlap with changes presented later in this chapter, under the theme Were 
not the same anymore. As in that section, I describe those changes that 
affected intimate and close relationships between couples or adult children 
who are co-resident or closely involved with the person with bvFTD. 
Intergenerational relationships are important in everyday life and appear to 
feature strongly in the lives of the participating families in this study. Similarly 
relationships with their wider social circle also appeared important to some. 
Furthermore, social contact in everyday settings is a regular feature of life, for 
example, in employment, shopping and similar activities.  
As described in Chapter 2, bvFTD impacts upon social cognition including; 
empathy, social behaviour, impulsivity, disinhibition and social interest. All of 
these are likely to have an impact on relationships within families and in other 
social spheres. Similarly, the impact of bvFTD on wider executive functioning 
involving the monitoring of own behaviour and flexibility of thinking may also 
affect relationships.  
Table 7.10 describes the apparent changes in social cognition experienced 
by Bert and the consequences of this change for his behaviour and its impact 
on others. 
Table 7.10 Impact on social cognition: Bert and Melinda 
Melinda: He gets very angry; if you say youre going to do 
something and they dont, he gets very angry and then when hes 
had the outburst and then you kind of ... 
Bert: But sometimes you have to be mindful about, its all right sort 
of going on one about something when it doesnt happen, but 
youve also got to try and think of the bigger picture with your 
relationship with that person, whether its your son or your 
daughter. 
Difficulty 
monitoring 
behaviour 
Cognitive  
empathy 
Difficulty with 
Melinda: We try and after each outburst, if theres an outburst with 
him, I will ring whoever it is and talk them through it, because its 
very hard when youve had this very loving dad, who has always 
been very calm and will talk things through, to one that will just go 
like that ((snaps fingers)) [] 
Bert: Yeah, but if I were to say something to them, it would be less 
of a problem than what it would be somebody outside.  I mean 
when youve ...  
Melinda: Hes lost his temper in shops. 
Bert: ... parked up ready to go in and then youve got some other 
clever bloke zips in behind you ... 
Melinda: He loses it. 
Bert: ... Ive got out and lost it a few times. 
Melinda: []  Because normally, before we go out to do anything, 
we go over what were going to do, what weve got to look for and 
Id forgotten to tell him about unreeling the cable and he lost it in 
Wilkinsons.  And this gentleman came to try and help him and he 
was really abusive to him and told him to f*** off and all sorts, [] 
Bert: The thing is, if you say something or react to something with 
your family, theyre less likely to become confrontational, because 
theyll be going along the line, Well, whats happened there?  
Whats caused that?  What have I done to cause it? 
Melinda: They just take themselves off now. 
Bert: Whereas, when youre in a situation outside your family, that 
in itself will cause that person to be confrontational with you and 
its very easy then to get that out of hand. 
Jenny: Are you aware, Bert, that thats happening?  Do you realise 
whats going on? 
Melinda: Not until after, the shock of somebodys face tells you, 
doesnt it? 
Bert: Mm. 
Melinda: He doesnt realise when hes doing it, because [the 
dementia is] a tyrant, this isnt the Bert we know.  Its the look of 
horror, I think, ((laughs)) on somebodys face. 
Bert: Yeah, because if Ive felt outside of my family how that other 
person reacted, because I thought they were in the wrong, but they 
thought, by their stance, that theyre in the right, then it could be ... 
I would probably take it to the next level. 
Melinda: Thats one concern he has, thats why he wouldnt dream 
of going off on his own shopping.  If we go out, [where], theres 
more shops, he would never go in a shop, he would stand on the 
outside, because he says, I havent got to face any confrontation.  
Because I think slowly youve realised ... 
Bert: Thats why I dont like answering the phone, because at the 
end of the day, you can say nine times out of ten, youre going to 
have to make a decision or say something that could cause a 
problem.  I just dont do it.  [T1] 
empathy (in 
the moment) 
Impulsivity  
Emotion 
regulation 
Impulsivity 
Affective 
empathy in 
the moment 
perspective 
taking, 
empathy 
impulsivity 
and irritability 
Cognitive 
empathy 
Impairment of 
empathy in 
the moment 
Unable to 
recognise 
distress in 
others,  
difficulty with 
perspective 
taking 
Difficulty 
monitoring 
behaviour. 
Not able to 
read the 
reactions of 
others in the 
moment 
Evidence of 
cognitive 
empathy 
In the above quote, at different points Bert seemed to be able to reflect on 
and recognise that his frustration and anger in specific situations had an 
impact on his adult children. He also seemed to recognise that this affected 
others who he came into contact with when out shopping or in other social 
situations. He appeared to recognise that he needed to modify his behaviour 
because of the impact it may have (lines 4-8 and 52-5).  
However, he also appeared in the moment to be impulsive in his responses 
and unable to take the perspective of others, read their nonverbal cues and 
modify his behaviour accordingly. Furthermore his responses seemed to 
suggest that during these incidents he experienced difficulty with affective 
empathy (lines 1-3, 21-6, 40-6). These actions seemed particularly likely at 
times of stress such as when routines were disrupted. Melinda described 
how difficult their adult children had found this when they had been used to 
someone, who she suggested, had previously been considerate and loving 
(line 9-13). The above quote alludes to strategies which have included 
attempting to understand Berts perspective and walking away. It is 
nevertheless evident that such behaviour can have significant consequences 
for relationships with wider family, particularly if that behaviour is not 
understood. Similarly, the potential impact of this behaviour in social 
situations is considerable. As Bert described, he felt he would be less likely to 
be able to control his behaviour when with someone he didnt know. The 
Morris family appeared to work with Bert to manage the triggers for such 
behaviour when outside, as evidenced in lines 47-55.  
Consequently, reductions in features of social cognition including empathy, 
interpersonal relating, perspective taking and executive functions including 
monitoring of own behaviour and impulsivity impacted upon relationships with 
wider family members in this research. Some people living with bvFTD 
retained cognitive empathy to the degree that they could reflect on their 
behaviour and its impact in relation to specific incidents or experiences. 
However, their capacity for affective empathy particularly when in the 
moment seemed to be significantly affected. Furthermore, such difficulties 
had the potential to impact upon everyday social interactions, thus providing 
many challenges for the person and their family in their everyday lives 
together.   
While difficulties in relationships were a consequence of the experience of 
bvFTD, it seemed that it was also possible to maintain relationships with 
some wider family members. Indeed for the five people with bvFTD who 
participated, relationships with their grandchildren continued to be positive 
and a source of joy for them: 
Ray The pleasurable things [] Grandchildren of course.  
Jenny Tell me a bit about Leo and Phillipa? 
Ray As you see them grow up it keeps you young I suppose. It 
keeps you on your toes and [] Leo likes to see me and he 
comes in and plays with my chair and he can be a bit of a 
handful but in a nice way. I mean he's always playing now 
with my controls on my chair and he gets it, like he knows 
where all the contraptions are. [] So yeah they keep me 
going [] So very good I think. Its good to have your 
grandchildren around you, [] [T1]. 
Ray seemed to value the contact with his grandchildren and felt that they had 
a meaningful impact on his life. It seemed nevertheless that there were 
limitations to the nature of their activities with them and in their relationships 
over time. For example, Kate appeared to suggest that Alistair was no longer 
able to be responsible for the grandchildren at time point two. Furthermore, 
some families seemed to notice differences in the ability to relate to older and 
younger grandchildren as the persons difficulties became more pronounced. 
For example, Mollie and Anthony suggested that Anthony enjoyed the 
activities their youngest grandchild Isla wished to engage in which seemed 
less demanding:  
Mollie He loves it. []And if you see them together it's like watching 
two children. Come on Granddad. Come on Granddad. Let's 
go. Let's go in the garden Granddad. And then the next thing 
you've got the pair of them are at the front door ringing the  
 doorbell to come in. And that's when they go off, toddle back 
round and they come... 
Anthony Isla's out the back door and she runs round and... 
Mollie Yeah and you lift her up to ring the bell. [T3] 
However they had gone on to explain that he had struggled with games of 
scrabble with their older grandchild Chloe. It is conceivable that the activities 
of older children may be more complex and therefore more demanding, 
making it difficult for the person with bvFTD to manage. Nevertheless, some 
of the families also suggested that their older grandchildren were responsive 
to the needs of the person with bvFTD and accepted the way things were 
with them: 
Kate Freya said to me, Nanny when Grampy gets difficult you 
know you can always come to me, she said and I said, 
Yeah I know thank you darling, ((laughs)). She's a good 
little soul. 
Alistair Yes she is. And Ill say to her, I'm sorry I dont recall that. 
That's all right Grampy itll come back. [T3] 
The above highlights some of the specific challenges for relationships and 
social interaction brought about by bvFTD. It is clear that bvFTD has a 
significant effect and has the potential to impact negatively on relationships, 
both with non-resident family members and within the wider social circle. For 
example, Melinda and Bert referred to the loss of friendships: 
Melinda  One friend that we had, that we thought was a friend, wed 
just found out hed got dementia, we told them and that was 
it, weve never seen them.[T1] 
Mollie and Anthony also highlighted the conflict with her daughter (Table 7.5). 
However this does not preclude the ongoing potential for positive 
relationships as described above.  
The impact on independent activities of daily life 
As described in Chapter 2, bvFTD has an impact on specific aspects of 
executive functioning, often referred to as adult higher brain functions   
including planning, initiating, monitoring and stopping behaviour. 
Furthermore, bvFTD also impacts upon processing and sense making, 
judgement and decision making. These changes seem likely to have a 
significant impact on the persons ability to be in control of their lives. 
Participants accounts highlighted the impact of these cognitive changes on 
the range of functions that are necessary for everyday life. 
Frequently, participants referred to changes in their ability to manage 
complex tasks occurring early in their experience of bvFTD. These included 
activities associated with employment, driving, household DIY or the ability to 
manage the activities of others. Furthermore, these difficulties also affected 
less complex activities such as using a shower or a microwave. Tables 7.11 
and 7.12 give two examples of the impact upon wider executive functions 
including sense making and processing, judgement and risk taking: 
Table 7.11: The impact on everyday life 
Sue: I'll tell you what he did, because I find it hard to do some 
aspects of my cleaning and I said This shower needs 
cleaning., because it's just, doing the tiles, I can't stretch up. 
So I said Would you do it for me? and I was doing some 
ironing and I left him. I said I'm not going to interfere, you don't 
like me interfering. And I had all of the things for what it's 
needed and other things. And he was squirting the bathroom 
cleaner on the tiles with this grouting brush, but no water. And 
he says to me This cleaner has fumes. And he said Now I've 
just squirted it and then wiped it with another cloth.  
Terry: I'm not a domestic. 
Sue: No, but since we've been here you have done it numerous 
times. But he just completely forgot how he'd got to do it. [] 
And so of course I had to do it myself. [] So he shouts at me. 
Oh, I'm useless. and all this. I said Why didn't you ask me if 
you weren't sure how to do it? I said I just didn't want to keep 
coming in, you tell me off.  'Can't I do anything on my own?' 
and all this. This is what it's doing to us. I'm trying to motivate 
him to do something, but he makes such a mess of doing 
something and I think I might as well do it myself. [T2] 
Sequencing 
Difficulties with 
planning 
implementing and 
monitoring, sense 
making and 
processing 
Motivation 
In the quote above, Sue described the difficulty that Terry had in undertaking 
an everyday task (lines 1-13). It seemed from her description of the situation 
that Terry experienced difficulties with executive function, including planning, 
sequencing and monitoring the actions he needed to take to achieve the task 
(lines 6-13). Furthermore Sue suggested that he also experienced difficulties 
with motivation. Similarly the excerpt from Kate in table 7.12 (lines 21-55) 
appears to highlight difficulties with concentration and attention, as well as  
judgement and decision making (lines 42-50). Kate described Alistairs 
difficulties with driving, a task he was previously highly competent at: 
Table 7.12: The impact on everyday life 
Kate: [] And he's certainly not managing as well driving. But 
fortunately, [] I got to [Outpatients appointment] before he did 
and I said to the receptionist I've got a problem, because I need 
to let them... so she went and spoke to the doctor and I could 
write down my concern on a piece of paper. And so she could 
bring it up as part of the, without knowing that I'd got, because he 
gets ever so cross when you mention driving. And she brought it 
up. But in the meantime I'd spoken to the guy, because I'd redone 
my minibus license and the guy that tests me also is the assessor 
for the driving. Because he said to me Where's Alistair? 
Because we always do our test together. [] And I explained. And 
I said There's no way he could drive a minibus now. and he said 
No, no, no, definitely not. I said I'm not even sure about his 
driving., [] Alistair [will] say I don't need [an assessment], so I 
said Okay then, that's fine. You don't need it. You know [the 
driving assessor] because he's tested you. You trust [his] word. 
Let's go by what [he] says. If [he] tests you this year and he says 
you're fine, I won't go on at you anymore. So he said Yeah. And 
I said But if [the driving assessor] says you're not fine, you have 
to abide by [his] decision. Is that a deal? So he said Yes. [] 
Jenny: What's concerned you about his driving? 
Kate: The fact he gets distracted. He doesn't seem to be able to 
see when something's dangerous. His spatial awareness isn't very 
good, so we often are very close to the car in front which frightens 
the life out of me. And the car in front is braking and he's still 
accelerating. And I'm trying to get out (laughter). He says he's not 
and it's my imagination and I'm being neurotic. However I wasn't 
neurotic when we nearly ended up in the ditch in France because 
he saw a cow in a field and he went Ooh, look at that So that 
was a bit hairy. I haven't let the children get in the car with him He 
hasn't worked out yet that I haven't let the children get in the car 
with him, but it does worry me that he says that it's not. And then 
it's, again, not helped by Mum and Dad because when they get in 
the car with him Mum says There's nothing wrong with his 
driving.(sighs). [T2] 
Attention and 
concentration 
Judgement 
and decision 
making 
Attention and 
concentration 
As well as the relational difficulties described earlier in this chapter, the 
potential consequence of these difficulties is a shift to a position in which the 
family increasingly had to take responsibility for the management and 
achievement of activities of daily living (lines 12-13). Furthermore, lines 21-39 
highlight that taking responsibility also involved those closest to the person   
having to make decisions independently of the person with bvFTD 
concerning these activities and safety. Sometimes those decisions created 
conflict as the person was unaware that their behaviour was inappropriate or 
unsafe (lines 32-38 and 44-47). Consequently family members may feel the 
need to resort to underhanded means to address issues of concern such as 
those expressed by Kate (lines 21-40).  
As the difficulties progressed, greater input appeared necessary. Pamela and 
Jonathan describe a typical week of involvement in Elizabeths life (table 
7.13): 
Table 7.13: Increasing needs 
Jenny: So thinking about a typical week what does that involve for you in terms of 
supporting your mum? 
Pamela: Well for instance this week what have we done this week? Jonathans 
taken a phone call from the [] electrical shop. I've seen [the nurse] today.  
Jonathan: There will be a call from the care provider about something, there's 
always a call about something. 
Pamela: Today I've spoken to Wiltshire Farms about her delivery of food. We have 
all the post redirected here so that we deal with that. I've had an email today from 
her accountant 
Jonathan: Whos also the power of attorney. 
Pamela: Who wants her P60 so that he can complete her tax return. On Friday I 
shall be at her house sorting out her key safe so that her key is available for [the 
food delivery] 
Jonathan: Well take wine won't we probably once every ten days and hide that in 
the garage for the carers to access. []  Usually something goes wrong in the 
house and needs to beor the garden and needs to be sorted out. 
Pamela: But today she's phoned up because the irons broken.  
Jonathan: The irons broken. 
Pamela: So she needs a new iron. But the thing is I never, ever take what she says 
as being true so Ill have to actually email the carers to see whether that is accurate 
information.[T1] 
Furthermore, some family members appeared to feel that they were unable 
to leave the person alone due to the level of difficulty they experienced with 
everyday tasks: 
Phil I couldn't cope with being away from the situation and leaving 
her on her own, because I knew she didn't know how to look 
after herself and I didn't know that she'd be safe in the house 
without some support or somebody with her. I'd go to   
 work and it would be at the back of my mind all the time, that 
there'd be a problem. And the care worker would come in 
and then I'd go to work and then the care worker would 
phone me and say This has happened. or That's 
happened. or The other's happened. So I just realised I  
 couldn't commit to a demanding job [] Because you can't 
do the two, there's no way. [T1]  
In the examples given above, bvFTD progressed to the point that it restricted 
many activities, impacting upon employment, personal finances and lifestyle 
for the person with bvFTD and their close family including partners.   
The impact on self-care, health and well-being 
Difficulties occurring as a consequence of bvFTD such as executive function 
and social cognition also impacted upon self-care. Some families described 
difficulties involving motivation to shower and change their clothes, For 
example, Mollie indicated that she had to prompt Anthony to take a shower: 
Mollie  [Anthony] wasnt sort of washing and showering. Hed argue 
with me, No, I had one yesterday and Id say to him, No, 
you havent had a shower love for about three days. [T1] 
Mollie and Anthony also described difficulty with dressing, particularly when 
buttoning up shirts or when putting on underwear. These difficulties 
increased over time, as suggested in Table 7.5, as by time point two, Mollie 
seemed to be involved in high levels of prompting and supervision. Mollie 
also suggested that Anthony had difficulties with motor co-ordination and 
described having to monitor him when they were on the boat together as he 
had become unsteady. Melinda and Bert also described similar difficulties 
resulting in falls,  
Melinda Yeah. You've had a couple more since then as well. When 
your leg gave way and you didn't know what that was. That 
was frightening because that was really early. 
Bert That was in the early hours of the morning and if you'd never 
got up. Had a drink and just for no reason just collapsed. My 
right leg just went. And I went down like a ton of bricks.  [T2]  
These difficulties appeared to result in close family members needing to take 
responsibility for prompting and supervision on a daily basis. 
Two of the families also noticed changes in eating habits, resulting in weight 
gain: 
Kate The food is certainly a filter that's gone. 
Alistair Yes [] if its in front of me Ill keep eating. [] Yeah that's a 
process I've got to do. 
Kate Not to the quantity though 
Alistair True But I can't its there. [] If they kept putting the food in 
front of me Id keep eating. [T3] 
As the above quote suggests, Alistair felt compelled to eat what was in front 
of him. He did not have the capacity to regulate his food intake, but was also 
resistant to attempts to change his diet. Rena and Kate suggested that he 
had become fixated on sweet foods and was also quite rigid in what he would 
eat. While they appeared to feel that this was an exaggeration of previous 
traits, it nevertheless seemed to be a source of concern due to Alistairs 
weight gain and his health. Similarly Pamela and Jonathan described 
difficulties in monitoring and restricting Elizabeths alcohol intake. Like 
Alistair, she appeared not to be able to instigate self-control consequently 
they described having to do this for her.  
Four of the families described disturbed sleep patterns. For example, Alex 
described that Ray woke frequently during the night: 
Alex He's getting me out of bed two or three times a night and 
when I get down here, hobble down the stairs and I say to 
him, you know, Its not easy for me to go up and down 
stairs, up and down stairs in the middle of the night. [T3] 
There were different reasons for disturbed sleep patterns among the people 
living with bvFTD including motivation, sleeping during the day and anxiety. 
However it seemed to have had a significant impact upon family members as 
Alex described in the quote above.  
A final feature of the impact of bvFTD seemed to be its effect on mood. Two 
of the families described changes such as low mood and increased anxiety  
Neither of the persons with bvFTD appeared to recognise this in themselves 
as described below by Anthony: 
Anthony I didn't feel that I was ever depressed. I feel lucky to be alive 
and notice each day as it comes. Every day is a bonus. So I 
couldn't understand how I could possibly be depressed. But I 
could get tearful ever so easily. And I would withdraw as well, 
into myself a lot more and have quite long quiet spells. [T3] 
Indeed it was ultimately Mollie who raised this with their GP following which 
Anthony was prescribed anti-depressants. It seems therefore that as with 
activities of daily living, difficulties with monitoring and managing self-care 
and health created increased responsibility for those closest to the person 
with bvFTD. The range of responsibilities appeared to rise as bvFTD 
progressed. 
7.5 Influencing Elements 
A range of influencing elements seems to be relevant to this theme; 
 Prior relationship 
 Awareness and understanding within the family 
 Awareness  Unawareness, person with bvFTD  
 Availability of knowledgeable and supportive professionals 
 Past experiences of similar difficulties 
 Peer support 
Some of these have already been addressed in this chapter, thus they will be 
summarised here with additional comments where necessary. Each of these 
is now addressed in turn.  
Family relationships prior to bvFTD have been considered in Chapter 6 and 
their influence on the challenge of awareness and understanding has also 
been discussed (p.152-3). The issues described there are equally relevant to 
this challenge, as past relationships appeared to influence the way in which 
behaviour was interpreted and understood; the extent to which families were 
able to collaborate to develop their understanding and the way in which they 
supported each other to cope. These are discussed more fully in the next 
chapter (Chapter 8) where coping processes are described.   
Similarly, awareness and understanding within the family is an important 
influencer and has already been considered in this chapter under the 
challenge of awareness and understanding of the changes (p.139-50). As 
described in this section having a shared understanding of the changes and 
therefore the reasons for a persons behaviour appeared to influence the 
development of coping processes. In the absence of such understanding, it 
appears that there is a risk that the person will be criticised for their 
behaviour, as seems to occur with Sue (Table 7.4). Furthermore it may cause 
conflict in relationships between generations as described by Mollie and 
Anthony (Table 7.5).  Similarly, the availability of knowledgeable and 
supportive professionals has already been addressed in this chapter (p.154-
5). As can be seen in that discussion, professional support to understand the 
impact of bvFTD and consider how best to cope seems to be an important 
element influencing families ability to move from awareness to understanding 
and to consider how best to manage the challenges to everyday living.   
Members of three of the families had past experiences of difficulties which 
appeared to enhance their understanding of the experience of bvFTD. For 
example, Kate described her own experience of dyslexia and her work 
supporting children with special educational needs and particularly with 
children who experienced autism. Alistair and Kates daughter, Rachel, also 
has Aspergers and dyslexia, consequently the family had previously worked 
together to develop strategies to support Rachel. As can be seen in the quote 
below, they combined these experiences with knowledge gained from others 
to develop coping mechanisms (Table 7.14): 
Table 7.14: Using past experiences to understand bvFTD 
Alistair You had a friend that had a brain injury and information that he 
was giving you from that sort of put two and two together and... 
And with you working with  Im trying to find the words now. 
Children that [] need that extra little bit of help at school and stuff 
like that so... putting that in. 
Kate Because of the SENCo work I do [] what I did was took 
everything I knew from there and converted it to making it work. 
What would I have done for a child that couldn't process? Well I 
would have put in a visual timetable, [] 
Melinda and Bert also referred to their sons experience of dyslexia and the 
insight this appeared to have given them. Furthermore Jane Burton also 
referred to her experience of working with children who have communication 
challenges and using this experience to support communication with her 
father.  
A final influencing element seemed to be that of peer support. A few of the 
families including the person with bvFTD described the value of peer support 
in helping them to understand their experience and develop strategies. For 
example, Anthony and Mollie found the Alzheimers cafs to be an important 
source of support for both of them (Table 7.15): 
Table 7.15: The value of peer support 
Mollie I think we get out a lot more than we did, don't we.  And we're out 
mixing with people. We both get out. You go out, you're talking 
with people who you know with dementia and other carers and 
stuff.  
Anthony We go to the Al's Cafs and meet other people in a similar position 
to yourself []. And then you pick up little ideas and tips off other 
people and find out how other people cope with it. And they come 
out with things that you never even thought of and you're thinking 
'Oh, well why didn't I think of that?' But you're so stressed out all 
the time so you can't think straight. So you support them and they 
support you. It's good.   [T3] 
As their narrative seemed to suggest, the opportunity to hear others 
experiences and learn from them was an important influence on finding ways 
of managing the challenges associated with everyday life.  
7.6 Being me in the context of bvFTD 
Being me in the context of bvFTD represents the challenge for the person 
with dementia to maintain their sense of self, identity, agency and safety in 
the face of the challenges brought about bvFTD. All five of the people living 
with bvFTD who participated in this research contributed to this theme.   
Narrative excerpts from all three time points contributed to this theme, with 
four subthemes emerging from analysis; 
1. Youre not the same anymore 
2. I know Im changing --- Ive not changed at all 
3. I dont feel in control  
4. I need to feel safe and secure 
Youre not the same anymore 
As demonstrated earlier in the section on managing everyday life, it seems 
that bvFTD has a wide-ranging and significant impact. Family members 
commented openly on the changes they had noticed. For example, Kate 
reflected on the change in Alistair since he began to experience bvFTD (table 
7.16): 
Table 7.16: Youre not the same anymore 
Kate He's forgetting things. Can't get his brain into gear, can't process 
stuff. He must have said ohhh nine or ten times in the last four 
days Brain into gear. Must get it into gear. He's trying to use his 
initiative. []  Because he thinks he's helping, he starts something 
and then gets distracted and doesn't finish. [] And so the inability 
to think of something and work through the consequences if he just 
does this little bit and doesn't do the rest has gone pretty much. 
That's a noticeable decline. Yeah, I think that's one of the things 
that's hardest. [] But he's also a very lovely man. And that's the 
thing that's hard, when he gets unpleasant, because that's out of 
character. It doesn't happen often, but he gets really quite shirty 
with the way he says something, as though you're a complete idiot 
and you've got no idea. And that's just not characteristic and it's 
not the Alistair that I know. Well, it is the Alistair I know now. But it 
wasn't the Alistair I married. [T2] 
Alistairs family appeared to have viewed him as a thoughtful, caring and 
competent man (c.f. chapter 6). Kates quote highlights the significant 
changes she has noticed in those valued characteristics since Alistair began 
to experience bvFTD. Similar narratives are evident in other families, most   
particularly from the person who lives with the person with bvFTD or is most 
closely involved with them.  
I know Im changing --- Ive not changed 
While family members acknowledged significant changes, the five 
participants living with bvFTD appeared to have varying degrees of 
awareness about the nature of the changes that they experienced as a 
consequence of dementia. Additionally they also had varying levels of 
awareness of the impact this had on them and their relationships with others.  
Alistair and Anthony and to a lesser extent Bert and Terry, recognised that 
they experienced changes in cognition and in the way that they responded 
and related to others. They also appeared to have some recognition of the 
influence of the changes on relationships with their family. Anthony described 
noticing cognitive changes particularly in relation to complex tasks even 
before he received his diagnosis (c.f. table 7.2). His awareness of these 
difficulties continued throughout his involvement in the research. Additionally, 
he recognised that his cognitive abilities were changing to the extent that less 
complex activities were challenging by the final time point: 
Mollie Yeah. You still go through your post, don't you, even if he 
doesn't remember what he's read, he still goes through his 
post and pops [it] down the desk round the corner and that's 
it. But he still looks at his post.   
Anthony It's when you put it down's the problem. It vanishes then.  
Mollie But you'd need about an hour to sit and digest whatever it is 
you're reading, don't you. At least. You keep going over it.  
Anthony Read it over several times before I can digest it. [T3] 
These changes seemed to have a profound impact on his life, including 
having to give up work earlier than intended and gradually having to 
relinquish many valued activities to his wife Mollie. Indeed he seemed to 
acknowledge that their roles had shifted and described Mollie as the captain 
now, with him being the crew. Similarly Alistair, Bert and Anthony also 
appeared to have awareness of the changes they experienced in the way 
they relate to others. For example, Bert appeared to recognise the impact of   
his behaviour towards his children and grandchildren at both the first and 
second time points in the research (Table 7.17): 
Table 7.17: Awareness of the impact of behaviour on family 
Melinda He gets very angry; if you say youre going to do something and 
they dont, he gets very angry and then when hes had the outburst 
and then you kind of ... 
Bert But sometimes you have to be mindful about, its all right sort of 
going on one about something when it doesnt happen, but youve 
also got to try and think of the bigger picture with your relationship 
with that person, whether its your son or your daughter. [T1] 
-------- 
Melinda What about when you shout at them?  
Bert Who? 
Melinda The kids. When you kind of, he can be quite abusive.  
Bert Yeah, I get quite... But I tried to, I suppose sometimes things that 
they do get on my nerves a bit, but then I always think about, I 
don't want them to think of me as a grumpy old granddad which 
you see on the telly. So, that in the back of my mind there makes 
me think. [T2] 
In the above quotes, Bert recognised that he struggled to control his 
frustration but he also seemed to recognise that its important to try and do so 
because of the impact that it will have on his family and the way that they 
view him.  
Some of the participants acknowledged that their level of awareness was 
shifting and that they didnt always recognise the changes that were 
occurring. Terry suggested that he wasnt aware of when the changes first 
started and indicated I should ask others: 
Jenny When did you start to notice things were not quite right for 
you? [] 
Terry Don't know. No I can't give you a truthful answer to that you 
know to be honest. Other people will have to do that. [T1] 
Anthony also described a change in his behaviour towards others that he 
wasnt initially aware of: 
Anthony I could be quite snappy and abrupt with people. And I didn't 
really notice it in myself, that I was doing so. It had just, I 
suppose, become the norm. But other people noticed it 
obviously and I didn't. [T3] 
Both appeared to accept that that their awareness was not necessarily in 
keeping with the level of changes that others noticed. Furthermore, it seemed 
that while it may be difficult to hear, four out the five participants with bvFTD 
accepted that others in their family might have a greater awareness of the 
ways in which they were changing than they had.  
However, even though some of the participants with bvFTD described 
changes, they did not always appear to be able to fully engage emotionally 
with the consequences of these changes. For example, both Alistair and 
Anthony were particularly articulate in describing the impact of bvFTD on 
their relationships. However, when describing these changes, neither Alistair 
nor Anthony seemed to express a significant emotional response. Indeed, 
despite the distress that Kate experienced when Alistair described the 
change in their relationship, he did not appear to be able to consider the 
emotional impact he experienced as a consequence of this change. Nor did 
he appear able to respond empathically to Kates distress, something I 
noticed and recorded following the interview. I recorded it because I became 
aware that this lack of empathy was only evident in his non-verbal behaviour 
towards Kate (Table 7.18): 
Table 7.18: Being able to engage emotionally with changes 
JLF [T1]  He looked at her a lot during our discussion and was attentive to 
her. He didn't however show any affection towards her when she 
was tearful, or indeed appear to recognise the impact it had on her 
and I am left wondering if this is normal for them? However they 
said that they cuddle and hold hands now. [] it was possible to 
discuss with them what bvFTD had meant for their relationship and 
Kate talked openly about the loss of intimacy and the change in 
their closeness. Alistair acknowledged it but didnt seem 
emotionally engaged with it. (field notes) 
While some acknowledged and indeed appeared to accept their diagnosis, 
Ray had much less awareness of his diagnosis and its impact. He often 
appeared to deny that he had dementia and even when acknowledging that 
he had received this diagnosis, was unaware of the impact it was having on 
Ray  So as long as you've got your brain to a certain degree into a 
gear which you know what youre doing youll exist but as 
soon as you start losing interest you start going downhill. And 
touch wood that isnt to a stage yet but all I will say is I've 
seen a lot worse people with in homes than me i.e. dementia 
 which I suppose I've got but its not showing up on me yet 
In contrast his family described considerable changes in him and in his 
behaviour: 
Sarah      You just think well youre, everything that he was, he now is 
the contrast of, in my opinion. [T1] 
However, Ray did not appear aware that these changes had taken place. It 
seemed as though he compared himself favourably with people that had 
dementia who lived in the care home he went to for respite and had 
concluded that he didnt have dementia in the way they did.  
As suggested above, the participants living with bvFTD appeared to have 
varying levels of awareness of the impact of dementia. Even where they had 
awareness, some appeared to recognise that they were not always aware of 
changes to the same extent as those around them. Furthermore, some of the 
participants did not appear able to engage fully with the emotional 
consequences of these changes for them or for their family. It is nevertheless 
clear that the changes brought about by bvFTD had the potential to have a 
significant impact on self-concept and identity, through the loss of valued 
roles, the change in relationships and the way that significant others 
perceived them. As well as the potential impact on self-concept, it appeared 
that bvFTD caused difficulties with feeling in control of ones life and being 
able to maintain ones own safety and security.   
I dont feel in control 
Four of the five participants living with bvFTD contributed to this subtheme 
(Ray, Alistair, Terry and Bert). Being unable to make sense of and control 
their world seemed to be a feature of their experience of living with bvFTD. 
Some of the participants were able to directly comment on this difficulty. For 
example, Terry described how challenging it was for him at times to process, 
make sense of and achieve tasks that previously would have been possible 
for him:  
Terry It's like a maze. Sometimes you can go round the maze, get 
through and come back out without any problem. But 
sometimes you can go in and you can't get out. And it's like 
that. [T2] 
He compared the difficulty he experienced with that of negotiating a maze, 
recognising that his ability to make sense of his world fluctuates. It appeared 
that when he couldnt manage this, it could result in him feeling out of control. 
Alistair also reflected on the difficulty he had in this regard and seemed 
particularly to feel out of control when in unfamiliar environments and/ or with 
strange people (Table 7.19): 
Table 7.19: Feeling out of control in unfamiliar environments 
Alistair The first time I go to a place I'm looking, my minds on overtime, 
wheres the toilets, wheres this, wheres the doors, if I go over 
there how do Iyou know. And if its a large room where there's 
lots of people in there, you know, will I recognise them things and 
pointed, things like that, back to where I'm sat or whatever, so that 
all that is going through my mind and then its what happens if I 
can't? You know it comes into my mind and then the panic comes 
in and I get stressy and not worked 
Kate Upset. 
Alistair Not upset straightaway, panicking that I won't be able to work it 
out. [T3] 
Alistair clearly described the difficulty he experienced in trying to make sense 
of this new environment and also how being out of control could lead to 
feelings of panic. Terrys and Alistairs narratives suggested that struggling to 
make sense of and control their world was an ongoing feature of their 
experience over time. Indeed Terry described the sense of helplessness he 
felt (Table 7.20): 
Table 7.20 being unable to control the changes 
Terry But theres all these factors thats come on, which makes me a 
zombie. 
Jenny Thats how it feels for you? 
Terry Yes and I dont want to be like that, but its out of my remit, isnt it? 
Jenny It feels out of your control? 
Terry It is, yeah. 
Jenny And what does that mean to you, what does being a zombie 
mean? 
Terry Its like something thats chipping away, which I cant get back.  I 
dont know whether its a design or what.  Because I aint like that, 
I mean basically.  But its sad in a way, isnt it, very sad, but as I 
say, I cant do nothing about it.  If I could read up about something 
and do something, Id do it, whenever.  But as I said, its gone, the 
brains all gone and what can you do? [T3] 
He likened his experience to being a zombie, emphasising the sadness he 
felt at being unable to control or influence the way in which bvFTD affected 
him. His quote highlighted that while he wished he could change the course 
he recognised that he could not. Similarly, Bert and Alistair appeared to 
share the concern that they were unable to influence the future and how their 
condition might change over time. 
I need to feel safe and secure 
In addition to the difficulties associated with feeling out of control, two of the 
participants, Alistair and Bert, expressed a sense of feeling unsafe and 
insecure which they both combat through holding to routines. Their sense of 
safety was upset when their routine was disrupted. A fundamental aspect of 
Berts lived experience appeared to be his need for routine and for things to   
happen in a predictable manner. For example, Bert and Melinda described 
how difficult Bert had found her emergency admission to hospital, which 
resulted in a disruption to his routine and therefore an escalation in his 
irritability: 
Melinda But [] I think it was a shock to them as well how their dad 
was. They couldnt quite understand how he was ticking, 
how... verbally abusive he'd become because he couldnt 
understand what was going on. [] but he was feeling in 
turmoil Id say wasn't you? 
Bert Yeah. 
Melinda You know you were just kind of 
Bert Well you feel insecure dont you? 
Jenny Right. 
Melinda Yeah and your head felt like it was going to explode you said 
at one point. [T2] 
Furthermore, the above quote highlights that for Bert, the absence of Melinda 
was also central to feelings of insecurity. Bert and Melinda subsequently 
described Berts fear that Melinda wouldnt stay with him: 
Jenny So that was a worry for you, that Melinda wouldn't stay with 
Bert Well, yeah, because that was one of the reasons why in my 
mind we went to the doctors in the first place with what was 
happening. Because I knew, I felt there was something 
wrong, didn't know what it was, but obviously I felt that I was 
putting a lot of pressure on her. Like everything else you can 
take so much pressure, then you just give up then, don't you. 
Or you become ill yourself or whatever. Or it affects you in 
different ways. [T2] 
Similarly, Kate commented on how important it was for Alistair to know where 
she was in order for him to feel safe and Alistair confirmed this:  
Jenny So it sounds as though Kate being around is really important. 
Alistair Yes it is important. [] Yes being there, just being in the 
vicinity yes. [] 
Kate Because I made him feel safe. 
Alistair Safe yes. 
Kate We were talking about it when we were [on holiday] and I 
said, Why do you need me so much? [] And so weve 
talked about it and he said, that you make me feel safe. [T3] 
It seemed that panic and distress were significant consequences of feeling 
out of control and insecure. This sense of panic was evident in all four of the 
participants narratives. For example, Kate and Alistair suggested that he 
would get panicky when he didnt feel safe: 
Kate Because what happens is then the panic kicks in and then he 
can't see anything except a sea of faces. So even if I'm 
standing right in front of him going, I'm here, I'm here, it 
Alistair Nothings recognisable its all just a blur. 
Kate The panic has taken away the last vestiges of [T3] 
Kate suggested that Alistair was unable to control this sense of panic once it 
had started and that the panic seemed to take away Alistairs ability to reason 
and respond to her. Sarah and Alex Lewin suggested that Ray experienced a 
sense of panic and it seemed that he also was unable to control this once it 
had started. Furthermore, Terry also appeared to experience a sense of 
frustration and anxiety when his ability to maintain a sense of safety and 
security was challenged, which may have contributed to his angry and 
defensive responses.  
7.7 Influencing Elements 
A range of elements would appear to influence this theme. These include: 
 In step or out of step in our awareness of changes 
 Family coping processes 
 I trust my familys ways of supporting me 
 Sense of self 
 The impact of bvFTD on social and cognitive functioning  
 An important person in our lives --- he was just there really 
 Understanding their emotional world 
Some of the people living with bvFTD and family members appeared to have 
more awareness of the changes that had occurred than others. Where 
awareness of the changes was present and there was some congruence 
between the person with bvFTD and their family, it appears that this may 
offer the potential for collaboration to occur in understanding the nature of the 
changes and what the person might need. Additionally it may also support 
opportunities to find ways of managing challenges, which support the 
maintenance of selfhood. For example, Anthony and Mollie explained how 
they had managed the difficulty Anthony had with operating kitchen 
appliances, thus maintaining his independence (Table 7.21): 
Table 7.21: In step and able to collaborate 
Anthony Once ((Mollie)) showed us what to do I thought: Oh yeah, of 
course, press that; silly bugger. And then the following morning I 
can remember ((Mollie)) telling us, no problem at all. But then 
((laughs)) later on again, another day, totally forgot what shed said 
and how it worked again. [] So we got another microwave, didnt 
we? Simpler.  
Mollie Yeah, I got rid of; it was an all-singing, all-dancing microwave. [] 
So, all Ive got is a 25 microwave now ((laughs)); one that you 
just turn. Its one that ((Anthony)) thinks he can use. We changed 
the cooker and did exactly the same thing now. [T1] 
Even where the person with bvFTD had less awareness, it still seemed that 
in the context of a previously positive relationship and an appreciation of the 
changes and the reasons for them, it was possible for family members to 
support opportunities to maintain selfhood. For example, as can be seen in 
Chapter 6, the Morris family hold a positive view of Bert and his value to 
them. They had also worked hard to understand the difficulties he 
experienced and explored ways of supporting him. Even though Bert 
appeared to have less awareness than some others participating in the 
study, he seemed to trust his family and accept the strategies they were 
putting in place to help and assist him (Table 7.22): 
Table 7.22: Strategies to support selfhood 
Melinda So we try, as a family, to keep that routine and if Idriss taking him 
out for the day, or any of them are taking him out for the day, we 
start at the beginning of the week and we say, On Saturday were 
going to do this, and we count it down on the whiteboard and this 
helps. 
Bert Because Idris takes me out fishing, so I enjoy that for the day. 
Melinda Hes really good with you.  Theyre going to rebuild a motorbike 
once we can get a garage nearer, because weve got this ones 
motorbike, so youre going to rebuild that, arent you?  But 
because hes got no perspective of danger any more, he needs 
someone with him to do woodworking, even though we were just in 
the process of saying that there are powerless drills and things that 
we can look into getting him.  So as a family, our next thing is to 
get him a workbench and start that way.  But he does need people 
with him when hes using sharp things because hes got no sense 
of danger, have you? 
Bert No. [T1] 
In building on activities that Bert had previously valued, but making 
allowances for the difficulties he experienced, his family were able to explore 
ways of supporting Berts selfhood.  
However, where awareness is out of step between the person with bvFTD 
and the family and they have less understanding of the nature of the 
difficulties being experienced; this may have the potential to negatively 
influence selfhood. For example, as described previously in Table 7.4, Sue 
described more frequent arguments since Terry began to experience bvFTD. 
In this example it is possible that their conflict may have arisen in part 
because of Sues lack of understanding of the effect of bvFTD and the 
possible strategies that they might use and therefore her positioning of him 
as at fault. Additionally, Carole, their daughter, who described a distant 
relationship with her father, also appeared to situate the responsibility for 
these problems with him, For example: 
Jenny So, when you go out with him and you're talking about his 
behaviour, how do you manage that? 
Carole Just sort of laugh it off really, at the moment. It's not been 
anything too serious really that he's said. They're supposed 
to be coming tonight to Ruth's school play, so that'll be an 
interesting one. [] We'll just see. But I almost feel like I 
need to put him in a corner somewhere. He'll probably start 
talking to people. But I'll just have to deal with it really when it 
happens. [T2] 
Thus Terrys opportunities for maintaining selfhood may be compromised by 
the lack of understanding of bvFTD within the family.  
A further element that may influence opportunities for maintaining selfhood 
was the self-concept of the person with bvFTD prior to the onset of dementia. 
For example, Bert experienced mental health problems earlier in his life: 
Melinda Youre afraid of how people are going to treat you if you tell 
them, thats half your problem, isnt it?  Because its like Bert 
had mental health issues, he had a breakdown when he was 
49, a really bad one and if you tell someone youve got 
mental health issues, the whole ... ((laughs)) the whole 
[conversation] finishes and people tend to shy away from 
you, so weve been dealing with that for a few years. [T1] 
 Similarly, Terry also experienced mental health difficulties and also seemed 
to have had a difficult relationship with his family of origin, which appeared to 
have had an impact on his wellbeing (c.f. Chapter 6). Their fears about the 
stigma associated with mental ill health including dementia were evident in 
their narratives. It seemed possible that their prior experiences would have 
influenced their experience of dementia and therefore their self-concept. 
It also seemed that for these participants, the impact of bvFTD on their ability 
to process external experiences and combine these with their internal world 
in order to maintain their well-being had a significant influence. This was 
clearly illustrated by Alistair and Terry (Tables 7.19 and 20). Aspects of daily 
living that were complex and multifaceted were difficult to achieve for all of   
the participants with bvFTD. For example, Anthony likened his difficulty with 
processing, retaining information and communicating to being like a slow 
computer.  
Anthony When you have a bad day its [...] like a very slow computer: 
it takes so long to digest information. Even to speak youve 
got to search for the words, to try and find them before you 
can speak. So, its very, very slow. [T1] 
Thus many aspects of everyday living could hold significant levels of anxiety 
for people living with bvFTD, when cognitive and emotional abilities are 
affected in this way. 
Furthermore, their experience also seemed to be compounded by their 
awareness of the changes they are experiencing. The people with bvFTD 
who contributed to this theme experienced varying degrees of awareness of 
the impact of dementia.  Where awareness was present it seems possible 
that this may have heightened their sense of insecurity. For example, Terry 
(Table 7.20) commented on the helplessness he experienced at his lack of 
ability to control the effect of bvFTD. 
A further influencing element appeared to be the extent to which family 
members were able to comprehend the emotional world of the person with 
bvFTD. Where family members were able to recognise and understand the 
experience of insecurity and develop strategies then this appeared to have 
an influence on the persons experience of the world. For example, Kate 
recognised that Alistair needed emotional reassurance from her as a 
consequence of his difficulties (c.f. p151). 
Alistair appeared to agree with her that her reassurance was important to him 
in combating feelings of insecurity brought about by his difficulties in 
functioning. Furthermore, Kate seemed to recognise that Alistairs capacity 
for processing emotions at a sophisticated level had changed. However, it did 
not appear that all of the families were able to consider the emotional world 
of the person with bvFTD. It seemed that being unable to consider how the 
person with bvFTD experiences the world may increase their sense of 
anxiety and frustration (table 7.23):  
Table 7.23: Recognising the emotional world of the person with bvFTD 
Sarah This is just on a normal day, he was on the toilet and the trouble I 
have ((laughs)) is when I hear bad news, or someone shouts at me 
or something, my reaction is to giggle  I cant help it, its just one 
of those things  []  So hes starting to get worked up and I just 
start laughing, ((laughs)) and its obviously the wrong thing to do  
So he gets worked up and we had it on the toilet the other day  
Bob was here, [] and he had to come and help me because I 
cant lift him and Dad then gets the shakes and he pretends to cry, 
but its not a pretend its like Sarah Get me up 
Alex And he wails and it gets louder and louder. 
Sarah Yeah and he just goes into a complete panic mode. 
Alex Its almost like meltdown. [T1] 
In this example, Sarah and Alex described Rays reaction to delays in 
supporting him. Ray seemed to become increasingly upset when his needs 
werent met. While it appeared that Ray experienced some difficulty in coping 
with a delay in requests for help; it seemed that his response may also have 
been prompted by his experience of Sarahs reaction to him. 
7.8 Were not the same anymore 
Family members who were closest to and largely co-resident with the person 
with bvFTD, appeared to experience unique challenges. This reflected 
increased awareness associated with closeness that comes from living 
together or in one family regular and frequent contact. Therefore, while the 
impact of bvFTD was similar to that described in managing everyday life, it 
appeared that the effect on these relationships differed as a result of the 
closeness and the nature of the pre-existing relationship. Furthermore, the 
subtlety of the changes and the difficulty that others appeared to have in 
seeing these changes also influenced their experience. These changes are 
now discussed, considering how these family members perceived the 
changes that had occurred in the person with dementia and the implications 
this had for their relationship. Were not the same anymore was present 
for all five partners, one co-resident adult daughter and her husband and 
another adult daughter and her husband who were heavily involved in   
caregiving. Narrative excerpts from all three time points contributed to this 
theme with three subthemes emerging from analysis; 
 Youre not the person you were to me  
 Youre the same but worse 
 Were not the same anymore 
A number of influencing elements were also evident including; 
 Awareness  Unawareness 
 Living together by choice/ increased contact 
 Prior relationship 
 The subtlety of the changes 
However their influence appeared to be intrinsic to the subthemes above. 
Consequently unlike the previous sections, these influencing elements shall 
be considered within the discussions about each theme.  
Youre not the person you were to me 
Six close family members contributed to this sub-theme (5 spouses and 1 
adult child). All six had described previously positive relationships with the 
person with bvFTD (c.f. Chapter 6). As indicated previously, those family 
members in closest contact with the person with bvFTD appeared to have a 
greater level of awareness of the changes occurring than the person with 
dementia or wider family members who had less frequent contact. Indeed 
they were the first to notice changes in the person with bvFTD. All six of 
these family members suggested that the person had fundamentally changed 
as a consequence of their experience of bvFTD (table 7.24): 
Table 7.24: Youre not the person you were to me 
Melinda   Yeah and it is very difficult losing the person that you loved and 
trying to learn to love the other person. Very, very difficult. [] I'm 
not going to get that Bert back. [T2] 
Sue         Theres no loving, were more like brother and sister. [] [he] 
would never come up to me and give me a kiss or put his arms 
round me.[T3] 
Phil          I'd get upset and she could see me upset but itd still have no 
reaction and I couldnt understand that because that was never 
how she was. [T2] 
Mollie Anthonys as good a gold but he's always looking now for, Shall I 
do this? Shall I do that? or its like, as I say its like a child looking 
for approval, its strange, whereas he used to be the one who 
would take control if you know what I mean [T2] 
Sarah      You just think well. Youre, everything that he was, he now is the 
contrast of, in my opinion. [T1] 
Kate         But he's also a very lovely man. And that's the thing that's hard, 
when he gets unpleasant, because that's out of character. [] And 
that's just not characteristic and it's not the Alistair that I know. 
Well, it is the Alistair I know now. But it wasn't the Alistair I married. 
As the above quotes appear to suggest, many of the characteristics of the 
person that these close family members had previously valued were felt to 
have changed. Characteristics included those previously described, such as 
empathy, care and sensitivity to others needs. As indicated by Melinda in the 
quote above and previously in this chapter, she felt that Bert had lost the 
ability to be caring towards her and their children. Similarly others described 
changes such as unpleasantness and increased argumentativeness.  
For example, Sarah appeared to feel that her father wanted to upset her, 
something she believed he would not have done previously. Although she 
acknowledged that they used to banter she suggested that he no longer 
knew when to stop and could be very hurtful:  
Jenny So it used to be a banter but that's shifted? 
Sarah We do still have a little bit of a banter but yeah he oversteps 
the mark a bit too much these days. What was the latest 
one? Oh yeah, his physio, whos a great friend of ours [] 
she's one of our best friends and we were on about doing 
something up the Wye Valley [] and she said, Oh come up  
 with me it will be great fun, and what did he say? She said, 
We could have a canoe each, and he said, Well that's all 
right for you, but Sarahs he didnt say fat and overweight 
but it was words along that line and that really cut and I was 
just like, no. And that did, but he was mean with it. So I just 
came away from there and I was in tears. [T3] 
Her husband Alex confirmed this and indicated that he had to call Sarah 
away at times to prevent these incidents occurring. As the above suggests,  
disinhibition and lack of a social filter were therefore also found to be difficult 
by some.  
Changes in levels of functioning also featured in these accounts. Kate, Mollie 
and Sue have referred to changes in abilities and skills earlier in this chapter. 
Such changes were evident in all seven family accounts. As the above quote 
from Mollie (Table 7.24) suggests, the nature of these changes is such that 
the person appeared to become increasingly dependent over time. Thus 
these close family members suggested that the person was less able to 
share in completing the everyday work associated with family life. The 
experience of loss at these changes was evident in the narratives of all six of 
these close family members, as demonstrated in table 7.24.  
Youre the same just worse 
However Pamela and Jonathan Hugh, who were heavily involved in 
supporting her mother but were not living with her, held a different view of 
Elizabeth. This appeared to be as a consequence of their difficult prior 
relationship (Hugh Family c.f. Chapter 6). The death of Elizabeths husband 
prompted an increased frequency of contact and engagement with 
Elizabeths needs which continued following diagnosis and throughout the 
duration of the research. Although initially concern was expressed for 
Elizabeth due to the manner of Alfies death, this increased contact appeared 
to become problematic due to the considerable difficulties Elizabeth was 
experiencing. These difficulties included spending significant amounts of 
money, drinking excessively and making decisions which had consequences 
for her own and others safety as described earlier (Table 7.3). 
While Pamela and Jonathan acknowledged some of the changes brought 
about by bvFTD they appeared largely to see them as exaggerations of 
Elizabeths previous personality and behaviour. For example, in the following 
quote, Pamela had described her experience of her mothers apparent 
perseverative behaviour regarding her jewellery. Even though both Pamela 
and Jonathan acknowledged that she had difficulty with planning, processing 
and memory and indeed with activities of everyday living, they didnt appear 
to have connected these difficulties with her mothers behaviour (Table 7.25):  
Table 7.25: Shes the same just worse 
Pamela And the problem is I dont like lying to her but you just dont know 
what to say because you just keep saying the same thing over and 
over again and you dont know whether she's taken it in or not and 
it just gets to the stage where youre thinking, I haven't got the 
energy to be challenged every time on certain things, because you 
can go and everythings hunky dory and then all of a sudden shell 
come out with questions and youre thinking, Oh I dont really want 
to answer this, because she's not going to be very happy with how 
I'm going to answer it, because there arent any right answers for 
them is there? Its all, well they just want to hear what they want to 
hear I suppose. They're just sort of like tuned into that arent they? 
Consequently, they appeared to situate the problem with Elizabeth rather 
than as an outcome of the difficulties she experiences. Furthermore, they 
appeared to experience frustration with her behaviour and seemed annoyed 
at what they perceived to be unreasonable requests from her. For example, 
she had asked the gardener to do more work, without recognising the 
consequences for her finances. Pamela and Jonathan seemed upset with 
her, without recognising that she might have difficulty comprehending the 
limitations and therefore positioned her as the problem:   
Pamela She just manipulates people into doing things and theyre 
just very clever at doing that arent they? 
Jonathan  I don't think that's any different I mean she's always done 
that. 
Pamela Yeah I know but its worse now. [T1] 
Her apparent lack of awareness of her condition also appeared to be a 
further source of difficulty for them: 
Jonathan  She will get upset because she won't accept that there's 
anything wrong and she won't accept there's a need for the 
care that's been put in place and that there's a need to say 
no. she just won't accept that and it upsets her doesnt it? 
Their positioning of her as the problem continued throughout the duration of 
the research.  
Were not the same anymore 
The impact of these changes on partners and adult daughters and their 
husbands seemed to be different, so are presented separately here. 
Partners 
The changes described above and in the previous section (p.156-66) had a 
profound effect on the relationships that partners experienced with the 
person with bvFTD. Nevertheless, in spite of the significant changes, a 
continuing bond was evident in the majority of narratives: 
Melinda And it isn't the Bert we know and love but it's me trying to 
learn and get to know this new person that the kids say It's a 
new dad. [T1]  
Furthermore, supporting the person with bvFTD seemed to be an accepted 
part of their commitment to each other: 
Mollie We always said that if one of us become unwell the other 
one will look after. [T2] 
Taking responsibility for the person appeared to have become a feature of 
everyday life for the majority of the spouses. This level of responsibility 
involved caring for the emotional and psychological well-being of the person 
as well as managing activities of daily life and self-care needs. For example, 
in the quote above (Table 7.24), Mollie likened Anthonys responses to that of 
a child. She goes on to explain this further in another interview: 
Jenny So are there other ways that its changed how you are 
together? 
Mollie I find that I'm more caring, carer, as long as he's all right. I'm 
likeI think of Anthony like I think of my grandchildren, you 
know, as long as theyre all right I've got to make sure 
theyve got to be okay, he's okay. [T2] 
This representation of the way of being of the person with dementia also 
seemed to feature in other partners accounts. As has been highlighted in this 
chapter, complex changes occur in emotional and cognitive sophistication 
arising from the effect of bvFTD on executive function and social cognition. It 
seems possible that the characterisation of the person as childlike represents 
the only reference point that partners have to explain such a complex 
process. As a consequence, the relationship between four of the married 
couples appeared to have shifted from one of partners to one in which the 
spouse felt they were taking total responsibility for the person and for their 
needs. Indeed Kate described having to think for Alistair before they received 
his diagnosis and increasingly took responsibility for him and their lives 
together throughout the duration of the research: 
Kate  I knew I wasdespite the fact that we hadnt got a label for 
what was going on I knew I was taking more of the thinking 
for both of us on []  [T1] 
Kate Everything is my responsibility [] [T3]  
There appeared to be consequences of this change for some partners in 
regard to the intimacy in their relationship. While for some, changes in 
intimacy arose directly from the effect of bvFTD: 
Jenny And did you notice a change in your relationship over the 
time? 
Phil I mean, if you're talking about real personal relationships, 
well it just fizzled out and died about seven years ago. No 
interest. She's got no interest. No interest basically. [T1] 
Other partners related this to the change in the nature of their relationship 
(Table 7.26): 
Table 7.26: Changes to intimacy as a consequence of caregiving 
Jenny I guess one of the things I'm conscious of is that sometimes 
people talk about the impact it has on their own relationship in that 
sometimes people feel that there's not a recognition of each 
other's experiences and feelings. And I wonder whether you feel 
that that's true for you, or whether you...? 
Anthony To a certain extent it is.  
Mollie Yeah. I feel I'm more carer. I feel that I've got to look after Anthony 
more than a wife in some respects. I think he knows what I'm 
talking about. So I think as far as man and wife... They keep 
saying Oh, will you continue marital relations? or whatever, but in 
your mind is, you think That person has got dementia. He's 
vulnerable. Is this right or is this wrong? He knows what I'm 
talking about I think. 
Jenny So it sounds as though it's changed the way you think about... 
Mollie Yeah. And I think that's been since Anthony was diagnosed with 
dementia. I think I've read too much on the internet to be honest. 
Because people can be vulnerable, they can be... Somebody with 
dementia is a vulnerable person. You still go to that person to 
make love, if you know what I mean, or do you, you're looking after 
that person. And that's what's in my mind. I don't think it's in his. 
Because I'm looking at myself more as a carer. And I'm always 
conscious, Is he alright?, Have you got your tracker?, Are you 
okay?, Have you eaten your breakfast?, Come on, you've got to 
eat your greens. I'm looking at that more than anything. And I 
know it's impacting on Anthony. I know he feels it, because he told 
me. But I can't get my head round it, the fact that I'm still looking 
after him. [T3] 
As Mollie described, she found it difficult to contemplate intimacy when her 
relationship with Anthony had changed so fundamentally from wife to carer. 
Nevertheless, the implications of withdrawing from this aspect of the 
relationship were significant in terms of the losses experienced as suggested 
by Kate:  
Kate Alistair is still functioning, [but] it didnt feel right, [] And we 
both want it to be but I just can't its just not right, I just can't 
do it. [T1] 
As well as the need to take responsibility for the person, changes to social 
cognition also impacted on the way that partners perceived the relationship 
with their spouse. The effects of changes to social cognition were described 
earlier in the subtheme managing everyday life and apply equally to the  
relationship between partners. As described previously, changes commonly 
affected difficulties with empathy in the moment. Kate had previously 
described how important Alistairs thoughtfulness and empathy was to her 
and to their relationship (c.f. Chapter 6) consequently the change appeared 
to be significant to her in viewing their relationship as fundamentally altered. 
Indeed she subsequently commented on feeling that she was mothering 
Alistair: 
Kate I think its more likeI tend to be more mothering, yeah more 
mothering. Its because we went through like the brother and 
sister bit, Alistair was still my friend, I could still confide and 
talk to but because there's no empathy there isnt that same 
sharing of jokes, of information and because so much more 
responsibility is mine now for simple decisions like the car, 
the fence, all of it tends to be mine, I feel more as if I'm 
mothering than I [] [T3] 
Changes in reciprocity were also described by a number of partners. For 
example, Sue suggested that she and Terry had always helped each other 
and gave an example of doing the shopping together because of the pain she 
experiences. However she seemed to feel that he was no longer as attentive 
as he had been in the past (Table 7.27): 
Table 7.27: Changes in reciprocity 
Sue We nearly always end up when we've been shopping having an 
argument... well I do because we don't do it together anymore. 
You see what we do we go to Aldi because I can cope with that it 
isn't such a big store. Sainsbury's is so big and my neck I'm in so 
much pain by the time I've gone all up and down these aisles, [] 
But Terry, "I'll go and get a paper from Morrisons" so I say, "Okay, 
right I'll see you in the store." So I start doing my shopping. And 
eventually he does come and he comes to the trolley and he puts 
something that he wants in the trolley and then he... 
Terry How dare you.  
Sue And then [hes] off again. And I end up at the checkout and I'm 
putting all the things on then I have to put them all back in the 
trolley don't you in Aldi. And eventually he... Yesterday he came 
and he put the last two items and I thought oh thanks Terry two 
loaves of bread. ((laughter)) [T1] 
In the above quote, Sue referred to the difficulties she experienced with 
managing shopping due to her pain. She needed support from Terry to 
complete this activity and described how much this had changed, indicating 
that effectively she now felt alone when undertaking shopping. As their 
relationship appeared to be founded on mutual support and assistance (c.f. 
chapter 6 Stuart Family) Sue appeared to feel this loss keenly.  
It therefore seems that due to the nature of the relationship between couples, 
expectations of relational exchanges such as empathy, intimacy and 
reciprocity, particularly where this was the norm in the relationship, appeared 
to result in the changes assuming greater significance for these partners. The 
challenge in this regard also seemed to be related to the proximity and 
possibly the intensity with which these changes were occurring. Furthermore, 
given the significance of communication in relationships, it also appears that 
changes in communication contributed to the belief that the relationship had 
altered. For example, Mollie and Phil described communication changes with 
their partners (table 7.28): 
Table 7.28: changes in communication 
Mollie Before he went on Sertraline he was beginning to shut down for 
long periods. What I call his 'sit in the chair and just go very quiet'. 
Unless you spoke to him he wouldn't speak. Just didn't want to 
communicate. And it was getting worse and worse. So it was 
beginning to affect me as well as him, [] 
Jenny Right. And you were just saying that it had started to affect you as 
well. In what way? 
Mollie Yeah. Because he's so quiet. Well, I turn the radio on in the 
kitchen, I turn the radio on in here. Just to have a noise. Because 
there was nobody to talk to, because he was just going so down. 
And you try and talk, Yes., No. And that's all you were getting.  
Phil At least five or six years. Well you couldn't sit down to her, you're 
watching the TV and discuss a TV programme. You couldn't 
discuss the political situation, where she's always been very pro 
that in the past. You couldn't discuss the effects of the recession 
on people's scenario at all because she just wouldn't be able to 
participate. She wouldn't understand where she was or what it was 
all about. [T1] 
Both quotes emphasise the relational consequences of these changes, 
including the loss of everyday conversation as well as stimulating discussion.  
Finally, it appeared that as the persons needs increased, opportunities to 
spend time apart as well as together became more of a challenge: 
Sue  because we're never really apart, you see. He even wants 
me to go to the shops with him.[T2] 
Other partners also shared this concern, particularly when the person with 
bvFTD appeared unaware of the risks associated with their actions. As 
described by Phil (p.163-4) this ultimately resulted in him not being able to 
leave Penny on her own at all, unless he had carers to support her.  
However, one of the partners rarely referred to taking responsibility for the 
person with bvFTD, possibly because she had always directed the 
relationship. Her daughter Carole suggested that her mother had always told 
her father what to do and therefore seemed to feel that this was just an 
increase in pre-existing aspects of their relationship: 
Jenny How do you think she is with him?  
Carole Frustrated, I think. I think that would be a good word to 
describe them at the moment. Because she's with him all the 
time, so it's constantly repeating the same stuff to him and 
having to organise him and tell him what to do. Which I 
suppose has always been their relationship, but it's just more 
at the moment. And I've said to her You'll have to tell him if 
you need him to do something he won't. Just think, to hold 
your arm, to steady you, you'll have to say to him Terry, wait 
for me. That's the only thing, really. [T2]  
Therefore, it is possible that Sue did not refer to this in her narrative because 
it is the norm for their relationship from her perspective. However, as the 
above quote suggests, it also appeared that Sue struggled to recognise the 
impact of bvFTD on Terrys ability to engage with what she needed him to do.  
Daughters and their husbands 
The two adult daughters and their husbands who were caring for their 
parents had similarities and difference in their experiences, thus attention is 
given to both in this discussion.   
As can be seen from chapter 6, Pamela and Jonathan Hugh described a 
sense of surviving together without Elizabeths support. Indeed they 
appeared to have found it necessary to maintain a distance in their 
relationship with her and closeness was equated with feeling sucked dry. 
Furthermore, as discussed above, they felt that bvFTD had exaggerated 
aspects of Elizabeths personality and behaviour rather than changing her, 
therefore they positioned her as the problem rather than the dementia. 
Pamela felt a sense of duty to care for her mother when she and Jonathan 
initially realised the extent of her difficulties. It appeared that this sense of 
duty continued throughout their involvement in the research: 
Pamela So then you wonder why are we doing all this support for my 
mother but I think it is possibly the upbringing really you just 
feel that you have a duty that you should do it really [] So 
therefore I suppose the responsibility I feel as though Ive 
been landed with that responsibility. [T1] 
However Pamela did not appear to welcome caring for her mother. She and 
her husband Jonathan seemed to feel compelled to take control as a 
consequence of her risky behaviour and provide significant levels of support 
(c.f. Table 7.13). Nevertheless, they felt that this was an undesired shift to a 
greater level of contact and responsibility for Elizabeth than they were 
prepared for. Furthermore they appeared to feel that her lack of insight and 
awareness of her condition or indeed appreciation for the level of support that 
they offered further damaged their relationship: 
Pamela And when I went there a few weeks ago, she sat there, 
having a cup of tea, her friend phoned her, she ignored me, 
she didn't even ask me if I wanted a drink. It was as though I 
was invisible. [T2] 
This resulted in the further deterioration of an already difficult relationship, as 
described by Pamela at time point three: 
Jenny Mm so how do you think your relationship with your Mum has 
been affected? 
Pamela I havent got one. It sounds awful but I dont want to see her, 
I dont want to do anything for her. [T3] 
However, it appeared that Pamela and Jonathan felt unable to change their 
level of involvement and free themselves of their contact with her because 
neither her family nor professionals were willing to take over: 
Pamela  And I said Look. If you want to change the care, you carry 
on. But you will take the responsibility. I said I'm not taking 
the responsibility.  I said We're sitting here, round this 
 meeting and I don't want to do any of this. I don't want to do 
the finances, I don't want to do the care, I don't want to be 
the one responsible. I'm the kicking-person. I don't want to do 
it [] It was just so awful that day. I said Oop, what a 
surprise, no one wants to take it off. ((laughs)) Because 
nobody will. [T2] 
Pamelas sense of indignation and frustration with the situation seemed 
evident in her tone of voice during this narrative.  She subsequently 
explained that she wished her mother would die: 
Jenny So what would you like to see happen now? 
Pamela A natural death ((laughs)) sooner rather than later. [T3] 
It seemed that ultimately this was the only way that they felt they would be 
free of the burden of caring for her. Therefore, it appeared that the 
boundaries they had valued in their relationship with Elizabeth had been   
undermined by her need for care which had caused their relationship to 
deteriorate further.  
Sarah and Alexs narrative about their relationship with Ray seemed to be 
different, in as much as Sarah described a positive relationship with her 
father before he began to experience bvFTD (c.f. Chapter 6). Consequently, 
Sarah experienced similar challenges to those of the partners of people with 
bvFTD in regard to the sense of loss and distress at the changes in him (c.f. 
Table 7.24 and p.184). Having moved back home prior to Rays diagnosis of 
MND, Sarah described a period in which their relationship strengthened and 
it appeared that her motivation to care was grounded in this pre-existing 
relationship: 
Jenny So its been a big change. 
Sarah Oh yes, yeah, but hes my Dad, so, at the end of the day, its 
payback time, isnt it ((laughingly)) [T1] 
However in common with the Hugh family, Sarah did not always link the 
changes in her father to the symptoms of bvFTD and found his behaviour 
frustrating. Consequently, Sarah and her husband Alex also positioned Ray 
as being responsible for his behaviour, rather than recognising that it might 
be influenced by dementia. Furthermore, they seemed to feel that he had 
control over his behaviour and could be different if he wanted to be: 
Sarah But then we know that he can put on and be really good and 
have a really decent conversation, so then I suppose that 
angers me in a way, because I just think, Why cant you do 
that with us?[T1] 
As a result, Sarah and Alex appeared to feel that the relationship they had 
with Ray had deteriorated over the duration of the research. At time point 
one, Sarah suggested that Ray had fundamentally changed and implied that 
he would never have been as argumentative and self-focused as he was 
Jenny So how has he changed, whats he like? 
Sarah Oh, hes very argumentative now and he never used to be, 
everythings all about him [] You just think well youre,   
 everything that he was, he now is the contrast of, in my 
opinion. [T1] 
Sarah appeared therefore to feel that their relationship had also changed 
fundamentally (Table 7.29): 
Table 7.29: Im more carer than father / daughter 
Jenny How has that changed because you said you've become more of a 
carer than a father/daughter, can you tell me in what way you think 
that's changed. 
Sarah Not that Id go to Dad for advice anyhow but I wouldnt go to him 
for advice now whereas sometimes you just think, Oh it would be 
nice to. Yeah were just getting through the day by doing the 
necessities with him, so eating, drinking, toiletries, rather than, 
yeah, taking, yeah him doing anything for me because 
((laughingly)) he doesnt ever, except wind me up and he likes 
doing that, mm. [T1] 
Subsequently she described having lost respect for her father because of his 
behaviour. Furthermore, it seemed from their perspective that Rays lack of 
awareness of the impact of his behaviour on them also seemed to be a 
source of difficulty. Over time, there appeared to be a lessening of the sense 
of frustration in their tone of voice when describing Rays behaviour and on 
occasions a recognition that his behaviour may be as a result of his 
diagnosis: 
Jenny Why do you think he's like that that he needs routine? 
Alex Everything is beyond routine isnt it? It has to be just so. 
Sarah I always thought it was the condition. 
Alex Yeah the dementia side of it. 
Sarah So never really, yeah because he never used to be. [T3] 
Nevertheless their relationship continued in the main to be poor. For 
example, Sarah appeared to feel at time point three that she needed to avoid 
Ray in order to survive the situation, even though she acknowledged that this 
was not always the right thing to do:  
Sarah I tend to avoid him. [] the carers come in from half six, 
quarter to seven and then until quarter to eight so I just 
leave, that's my time upstairs [] I come down about quarter   
 to eight, [] and I walk through past him and get to the kids 
and then think, Oh I havent even said hello to dad. And I 
think that's mean. I dont mean to and I'm like, Are you all 
right dad? How's it going? All sorted this morning? and 
sometimes he doesnt even acknowledge me, well I've 
obviously ignored him but [] [T3] 
While struggling with Ray, she and Alex appeared to try and balance their 
frustration with the recognition that Ray had lost a lot and that they should 
therefore be more understanding. Similarly, they appeared to value the 
relationship between him and their young children and seemed to want him 
to stay at home and to be well in order that the children would have a 
memory of him as their granddad: 
Alex This has been my biggest wish since we've had the two little 
ones is he stays around long enough that they can have a 
proper memory of Granddad. 
Sarah Yeah.  
Alex That's my biggest wish I just hope that he can cling on as far 
and as long as he can, another ten years, whatever, but just 
so the kids have got a proper memory of Granddad not just 
me and Sarah saying, He absolutely doted on the pair of 
you. [T2] 
Therefore, for Sarah in particular, their relationship was no longer the same 
because Ray had fundamentally changed from the father Sarah appeared to 
believe she previously had. Nevertheless, she did not appear to be as 
desperate for the relationship to end as seemed to be the case for the Hugh 
family.  
7.9 Chapter Summary 
Four challenges appeared to be present for these seven families;  
 Awareness and understanding of the changes   
 Managing everyday life.  
 Being me in the context of bvFTD 
 Were not the same anymore.   
Awareness and understanding of the changes 
Awareness and understanding of bvFTD appeared to be variable within all 
seven families and occurred at a different pace for those closest to the 
person with bvFTD than for those who had infrequent contact and/ or were 
not as emotionally close. Furthermore, it seemed that there were some who 
denied that changes were taking place or who had not able to make the 
transition from awareness to understanding. Some families appeared to have 
been able to work together to understand what is needed whereas it seemed 
that for others a lack of a shared understanding caused distance and 
disconnectedness between family members. 
Awareness and understanding of the family appeared to be influenced by the 
awareness of the person with bvFTD, with their awareness increasing 
opportunities for collaboration. Availability of supportive and knowledgeable 
professionals appeared to be important to support the transition from 
awareness to understanding.  
Managing everyday life 
All seven participating families appeared to suggest that bvFTD had a wide 
ranging impact on wellbeing, relationships, activities of daily living and other 
aspects of family life. Reductions in features of social cognition and executive 
functions appeared to impact upon relationships with wider family members. 
Some participants with bvFTD appeared able to reflect on their behaviour 
and its impact in relation to specific incidents or experiences. However, it 
appeared that their capacity to respond empathically in the moment was 
significantly affected. These difficulties appeared to have a substantial impact 
upon everyday social interactions, thus providing many challenges to 
everyday life. Furthermore, bvFTD appeared to impact on judgement, 
decision making, planning initiation and monitoring therefore affecting the 
ability to undertake activities of daily living and self-care. This appeared to 
result in family members taking increasing levels of responsibility for these 
activities and ultimately for the person themselves. Difficulties appeared to 
progress over time and as a consequence, supervision and care needs 
increased to ensure safety and wellbeing.   
This subtheme was influenced by awareness of family members and the 
availability of supportive professionals. Furthermore, knowledge of similar 
difficulties and contact with knowledgeable others such as peers also 
appeared to influence how families responded to the impact of bvFTD on 
everyday life.  
Being me in the context of bvFTD 
The challenge of being me in the context of bvFTD appeared to be 
experienced by all five people living with dementia who participated in this 
research. People living with bvFTD seemed to experience challenges to self, 
identity, agency and safety in the context of the social and cognitive changes 
brought about by dementia.  
All five participants living with dementia experienced varying degrees of 
awareness of the effects of bvFTD on their cognition and their behaviour. 
Some were also aware that this affected others including wider family. 
However, there appeared to be a lack of emotional engagement with the 
impact of the changes for them or for others. In those who were aware, it 
appeared that levels of awareness deteriorated over time. It seemed that 
some recognised and accepted that others including close family were more 
aware of the extent of the changes than they were. The changes brought 
about by bvFTD appeared to have the potential to impact self-concept and 
identity.  
Furthermore, bvFTD appeared to compromise their ability to process external 
experiences and combine these with their internal world in order to maintain 
their well-being. This appeared to influence their security, safety and sense of 
control over their everyday lives throughout the duration of the research. 
Holding to routines, familiar places and people were used to combat these 
feelings. However, it seemed that for some, panic and distress were 
significant consequences of feeling out of control, unsafe and insecure. It 
seemed that family members could influence these feelings if they had 
understanding of the persons emotional world. 
Were not the same anymore 
Five partners, 2 adult daughters and their husbands appeared to experience 
significant changes in their relationship with the person with bvFTD. Six of 
the seven family members appeared to suggest that the person with 
dementia had changed fundamentally, with bvFTD affecting many of the 
features that they valued about the person previously. These included 
aspects of social cognition such as empathy, care for others, willingness to 
recognise others needs and gentleness. They also described changes in 
their ability to function independently and therefore to share in the work of 
everyday family life. Loss and grief at these changes appeared to feature in 
these accounts. Conversely, one adult daughter seemed to feel that bvFTD 
had exaggerated previous personality characteristics, although this occurred 
in the context of a previously poor relationship and limited awareness and 
understanding of bvFTD.  
Therefore changes to relationship were evident in all 7 accounts, although 
there were differences for partners and for adult children. Many of the 
partners appeared to take on increased responsibility as a consequence of 
the changes in the emotional and cognitive sophistication of the person with 
bvFTD. Partners accounts appeared to suggest a loss of many of the valued 
aspects of their relationship, including empathy, intimacy, mutual support, 
reciprocity and communication. Awareness and understanding appeared to 
have an influence on how these changes were constructed. Both adult 
daughters appeared to experience changes in the relationship and also 
shared limited understanding of the impact of bvFTD. However, their 
relational history appeared to influence how they perceived this change and 
its meaning for them. A previously poor relationship seemed to give rise to 
conflict and a sense of entrapment for one adult daughter. In contrast, a 
previously positive relationship appeared to result in a significant sense of 
loss in the other adult daughter which in turn seemed to give rise to 
difficulties in adjusting to the changes in her father.  
Chapter Eight: coping processes used by families to address the 
challenges brought about by behavioural variant frontotemporal 
dementia (bvFTD)  
8.1 Introduction 
In the previous chapter, I have presented the results of a grounded theory 
analysis which identified psycho-social, cognitive, behavioural and relational 
challenges brought about by bvFTD for participating families and for 
individuals within the families, including the person with bvFTD. Two 
challenges related to the experience for the whole family, awareness and 
understanding of the changes and managing everyday life. A further 
challenge related directly to the experience of living with bvFTD for the 
person with dementia; being me in the context of bvFTD. A final challenge 
related specifically to partners or adult children who were living with or 
heavily involved in supporting the person with bvFTD; were not the same 
anymore. Furthermore, I explored a range of influencing elements as these 
impacted upon the experience of these challenges.  
In this chapter, I present the coping processes used by individuals and 
families, to address each of the challenges. Families and individuals 
appeared to develop coping processes which ranged on a continuum from 
assimilation and adjustment, through to resisting the diagnosis and the 
associated changes. Consequently I have identified a superordinate theme; 
Assimilating, adjusting, reconstructing --- Resisting, denying, being 
stuck. Themes connected with this continuum, which are specific to each 
challenge, emerged from analysis. These are presented in table 8.1:  
Table 8.1: Coping processes used by we/ I 
Superordinate Theme 2: 
Challenges to we/ I: 
Superordinate Theme 3: 
Assimilating, Adjusting 
Reconstructing 
-------- 
Resisting, denying being stuck 
Awareness and 
understanding of changes 
Accepting and Assimilating 
Its dementia, we have to find a 
way through this 
-------- 
Resisting and Blaming 
Resisting knowing 
They are the problem 
Youre the problem, you dont 
work with us or help us 
Distancing 
Were not the same 
anymore 
Accepting and 
Adapting                                                                        
Accepting the changes 
and finding new ways of 
being together  
Fighting  
Resisting the changes 
were going to fight this 
together 
Distancing and being 
stuck 
Achieving Distance 
Being stuck 
Accepting the need for a changing I 
 Grieving for a changing you and a changing we 
 Acknowledging the need for a changing I 
 Accepting the need for a changing I 
Managing everyday life 
Enabling and 
Facilitating 
Distancing, Managing 
and Controlling 
Avoiding and Reacting 
Underpinned by Collaboration, Adaptation, Communication, Addressing Conflict 
and Cohesion 
Being me in the context 
of bvFTD 
Maintaining Self:  
o Im still me, still active and engaged with life  
o Im still me theres nothing wrong  
o Im still me, resisting negative perceptions 
Maintaining Wellbeing: 
o Supporting safety and security (a collaborative process) 
o Holding them (family members) 
o Resisting and restricting (person with bvFTD) 
o Controlling, positioning and distancing (family members) 
As acknowledged in the previous chapter, the coping processes used by the 
families are similarly multifaceted and complex and appear to have a 
reciprocal influence on each other. Thus there are close connections 
between sections in this chapter and between this and other chapters. 
8.2 Awareness and Understanding of the Changes 
In chapter seven, the challenge of awareness and understanding of the 
changes associated with bvFTD was discussed. The coping processes used 
by families and individuals are now discussed. Each of the participating 
families coping processes can be positioned on a continuum from accepting 
and assimilating --- resisting and blaming. A number of subthemes 
appeared evident from analysis as follows; 
Accepting and assimilating 
 Its dementia we have to find a way through this 
Resisting and Blaming 
 Resisting knowing 
 Theyre the problem,  
 Youre the problem, you dont work with us or help us 
 Distancing 
Accepting and assimilating 
As described in Chapter 7, it appeared that moving from awareness to 
understanding was an important step in enabling families to develop coping 
processes that addressed the impact of bvFTD on their lives. The Morris and 
Perrin families appeared to have well established patterns of collaboration 
and communication within family relationships (c.f. chapter 6 and p.144-5). 
Both families described collaborating to address the challenges brought 
about by bvFTD. Collaboration involved developing a shared understanding 
of the challenges facing them, seeking to understand the emotional world of 
the person living with bvFTD and learning about bvFTD in order to develop 
appropriate responses. For example, members of the Perrin family described 
their approaches to addressing the challenges they faced (Table 8.2): 
Table 8.2: Collaborating, learning, putting yourself in their shoes 
Kate: And so we were chatting about what had gone wrong this week and 
why, so we were able to do that, which I think is what holds us together really. 
Jenny: Is that something that you do quite a lot? 
Kate: Weve always done. [] We all sit down and we all talk about it, 
whatever it is, weve always done that. And weve always made a point that 
everybody ate tea together so that everything was shared. 
Alistair: Yes. 
Kate: So that is new, the talking about stuff through isnt new. 
Alistair: Isnt new, no. 
Kate: Weve always done that. We think out loud, we plan out loud. [T1] 
Rachel: I think we all are good at asking him to try. So the one strategy my 
mum put in very early on was treating it like a brain damage, so making him 
think of the answer. So if he tries to answer like, I dont know, its like, Well 
try, because sometimes you know he knows and he's just saying, I can't do 
it, and hell say things like, I can't help it, so Yes you can try, and because 
my mum does that I started doing it and my sister does it and I've noticed that 
my grandmother does. I've not ever heard my grandfather say it but I know 
my grandmothers sort of started to make him think and I think that definitely 
helped when my mum was doing it so I think the fact that more people are 
actually making him. And I'm aware of the fact that he's trying more now. [T2] 
Rena: And then my cousin in Ireland has a husband who is quite a bit older 
than her and who has Alzheimers and Tessa has been through a lot with 
Arthur. Arthurs now 86 and is at home and sort of being cared for but doesnt 
really know which side is up. And she had read this book that she said Kate 
should read. Well by this time I was a bit scared to say to Kate, Tessa 
wants So all I did was email, I just forwarded it to Kate from things that 
Teresa had said. Anyway Kate did get the book, much to my surprise and we 
both read it. And that did change how we viewedhow to deal with Alistair. 
Rena: And he doesnt often show histhe sad side to us. We were in France 
one night, a year or so ago I suppose and Dave had gone to bed and the 
three of us had sat round having yet another glass of wine and Alistair sort of 
started to talk and opened up a bit. And I realised that it was much harder for 
him than we see. [T2] 
In lines 21 to 28, Rena describes their ability to learn as a family and take on 
new information to help them to cope with the changes Alistair was 
experiencing. This appeared to be achieved through collaboration across 
generations. For example, in lines 1-28, there are many references to 
working together as a family to address the challenges. Even though 
collaborating could be difficult (lines 25-27) it seemed that the Perrin family 
were able to find ways of communicating to develop a cohesive approach. 
They were also able to consider what it might be like for Alistair. Even though 
there was evidence in this family of different levels of awareness, (c.f. 
chapter 7, p.147) they nevertheless appeared to accept that it might be 
difficult for Alistair (lines 29-33). Alistair also seemed to collaborate in this, 
agreeing with Kate that they talked things through (lines 8-10). Furthermore, 
even into time point three, he appeared to recognise that the coping   
processes they had developed were supportive of him and he valued his 
familys support. For example, he described the support that Dave had 
offered him: 
Alistair Its a challenge to get myself motivated to go and do more on 
my own. If somebody comes round and says, Come on 
were doing this, then its not a problem. [T3] 
As described in chapter 7 (p.154-5, 167-8) the availability of knowledgeable 
others was an important element influencing their approach. Members of the 
Perrin family made reference to knowledge gained from others, in this case 
Renas cousin (lines 21-28). Furthermore, in Rachels discussion, she 
referred to the brain injury approach (lines 11-20) that Kate had described as 
a strategy she had developed in part through her contact with a friend whose 
son had traumatic brain injury.  
Similar approaches are evident in the Morris family, as can be seen in 
chapter 7. They described learning from knowledgeable professionals in 
order to understand and consider how to help Bert (table 7.9). Furthermore 
they valued the opportunity to learn from others in a similar position to 
themselves (Table 8.3): 
Table 8.3: learning from others 
Bert Talking about problems that they'd had, that... They'd gone 
through and sorted out and then little did we realise that we'd be 
going through the same, not exactly the same, different things and 
ending up with the same problems. [] 
Melinda I think it was like, you'll go through sessions where you never stop 
talking. And then you don't speak for a long time. And speaking to 
a couple of the gentlemen there, they were experiencing the same 
and it was like a cloud had lifted off you, wasn't it. Because it's 
knowing that that is part of it. [T2] 
The Morris and Perrin families moved from awareness to understanding once 
diagnosis had occurred. Even though there were differences in levels of 
awareness within the family, these appeared to be accepted and did not 
prevent them from collaborating to address the challenges brought by 
bvFTD.   
This approach continued throughout the duration of the research as new 
challenges and changes emerged. For example, Kate explained that their 
dance teacher had died; consequently they wanted to find a way of keeping 
on dancing. Attending another dance class would have been difficult for 
Alistair as he didnt like strangers or new places therefore Kate identified 
another way of addressing this: 
Kate  But I think I've found a solution, [] so I've hired the village 
hall every Tuesday night, [] and then well just walk our 
way through the steps and I've worked out and I'm going to 
make some posters so that there's a visual clue for Alistair as 
he's dancing round and well just use the village hall as a 
practice [] [T3] 
As the above quote highlights, Kate sought to recreate the lessons they had 
received in a safe environment. Furthermore, her parents and other friends 
who had attended the lessons joined in with this. 
In the Burton, Lewin and Hugh families, collaboration occurred within 
subsystems in each family, between the person with bvFTD and their partner 
or between couples involved in caring for the person with bvFTD. For 
example, as described previously in chapters 6 and 7, Mollie and Anthony 
Burton had a close relationship and did not appear to see wider family as 
central to their lives together. As a couple, they appeared to work together 
closely to understand and cope with the impact of bvFTD and used similar 
coping processes to those described above. In attempting to understand the 
changes taking place and consider how to manage them they described 
reflecting at the end of each day: 
Jenny One of the things I wondered about was what helps you to 
cope now? What are the things that help you to cope and to 
manage the challenges that this brings? 
Anthony My coping strategies are ever so good []To a certain extent 
we do tend to analyse the day at the end of the day as to, 
you know, how the day's been, you know and 
Jenny Is that both of you or  
Mollie Mm we usually sit and have a chat about it dont we? 
Anthony Yeah. 
Mollie Whats gone on throughout the day. [T1] 
However collaboration and communication did not extend to wider family 
members. For example, while Jane visited regularly, it appeared that this 
contact did not include working together with Mollie to support Anthony. 
Rather it seemed to be about her visiting to maintain contact with her father, 
during which she was sometimes informed of changes: 
Jenny So how have things been since then with your dad?  
Jane Okay. I think he's gone downhill maybe slightly from what 
Mollies been saying to me. But he still seems quite happy in 
himself and he still remembers who I am which is nice. [T2] 
Thus collaboration and cohesiveness only occurred between the couple in 
this family. In both families where adult daughters were caring for their 
parent, there appeared to be some collaboration between the adult daughter 
and their partner. For example, Sarah described at time point two and three, 
that she and Alex had needed to come together to cope with the challenges: 
Jenny I was aware from the discussions that we were having that 
there was quite a lot of frustration on your part around how 
he was behaving and how you were trying to deal with it and 
I just wondered whether you felt things had changed a bit in 
that way?  
Sarah I think we've addressed it and I think Alex and I just work 
better now as a team. We try not to let anything stress us 
out.[T2] 
However it also appeared that this had its limits and Sarah acknowledged 
that in spite of their need to work as a team, she found it difficult to hear Alex 
criticise her father and would defend him when Alex raised issues with his 
behaviour. Neither of these couples had experienced collaboration with 
professionals concerning their parents experience of bvFTD. Indeed the 
Hugh family in particular seemed to experience an adversarial relationship 
with professionals who they suggested lacked knowledge and understanding  
(c.f. p.154-5). Similarly both struggled to make the transition from awareness 
to understanding.  It is with this in mind that I now consider the opposite end 
of the continuum, that of resisting and blaming.   
Resisting and Blaming 
In four of the families (Burton, Hugh, Lewin and Stuart families), some family 
members seemed to have struggled with understanding the difficulties 
experienced. Consequently the coping processes of those who resisted or 
denied the difficulties involved positioning the problems with the person 
(Table 8.4): 
Table 8.4: Positioning of the problem with the person with bvFTD  
Alex: But he doesnt see that, he thinks we're his carers full time whatever 
[] I think now. I think its got to that stage where its, Just do it. [] Not a 
case of, Could you, would you mind? its a case of, Get and do it. 
Sarah: And he goes on about, Oh when I was younger I used to do this and I 
used to do that, and whatever and, Life has changed and these youngsters 
dont do it, and whatever, well I think he's only on about us but then if we go 
and say, Oh we're going out, or we've got this on or we've got that on. []  
Why? and he doesnt like it. 
Alex: So if wed got somewhere to go he wouldnt be happy. 
Sarah: If we've got a party to go to then no he doesnt Where are you 
going? How long are you going to be? 
Alex: That's right and if that's the case just when we're about to go hell want 
the loo. 
Sarah: Oh yes. 
Alex: Spot on. 
Jenny: Right. 
Alex: That's clued up that is, that's notits almost like, But I know how I can 
keep you here a bit longer. [T2] 
Pamela: We can't do anything, you know, it was so bad and she was so 
resentful towards us that we couldnt do anything. 
Jonathan: And we have tried to look at it from her point of view. Its very 
difficult to understand obviously because we dont know how wed feel but the 
sympathy can only go so far because when someone just will not accept what 
youre trying to tell them in their best interests however understanding you try 
to be its very frustrating. [T1]  
In the above examples, Sarah and Alex (lines 8-18) and Pamela and 
Jonathan (lines 23-25) appeared to see the persons behaviour as deliberate 
and intentional. Both also appeared to experience frustration and anger with 
the person with bvFTD (lines 1-18, 21-25). This was also evident in   
their tone of voice when describing the actions of their parent (c.f. chapter 6, 
research context). For both of these families, it seemed that a consequence 
of this was that relationships with the person with bvFTD deteriorated. By 
time point three both Sarah and Pamela described avoiding contact: 
Sarah I tend to avoid him. [] [T3] 
Pamela  But I've not been round as regularly as I could have done 
((laughs)) because I just can't stand it really, [] [T3] 
While by time point three, Sarah and Alex seemed to appreciate to some 
degree that Rays behaviour may be as a consequence of bvFTD, it did not 
appear that Pamela and Jonathan were able to shift to this position. Indeed 
as described in chapter 7 (p.194) Pamela saw her mothers death as the only 
resolution to their caregiving responsibilities.  
Sue and Carole Stuart also appeared to position Terry as being at fault (c.f. 
table 7.4 and p.179-80). A consequence of this for Sue and Terry seemed to 
be an increase in conflict within their relationship even into time point three: 
Terry If I was aggressive, I would say yes, Id have something done 
about it, but Im never aggressive, am I? 
Sue Yes, but you are occasionally to me. 
Terry Well, thats probably the diabetes. 
Sue No, I think its the other.  You shout at me. [T3] 
However, at later time points it seemed that Carole, their daughter, had 
begun to recognise that her father might be struggling (Table 8.5): 
Table 8.5: Moving towards understanding 
Carole And I have had a conversation with him and I said, Its not about 
that youre an idiot, its the fact that part of your brain is not 
working. That's the way I understand it, part of your brain is not 
working the same as it used to. That's not your fault and it doesnt 
meanits not anything to do with your intelligence. But he's quite 
sensitive. 
Jenny He's very sensitive to that? 
Carole Yeah. 
Jenny So how does that influence your behaviour with him? 
Carole Well I wouldnt make a joke about his dementia and even if he 
made a joke about it Id probably try and read into that does he 
want some reassurance that he's not an idiot or something. So 
thats the way I tend to go about it now. Yeah you have to think 
about it really, not just react. [T3] 
Carole recognised that he found his difficulties challenging and sought to 
consider how he might feel before responding. Consequently, she also tried 
to support her mother Sue to recognise that Terry couldnt help his difficulties 
and that she needed to prompt him (Table 8.6): 
Table 8.6: Supporting Mum to understand 
Carole She makes him make a cup of tea in the mornings for both of 
them. Because I did say to her, You can't expect him to just do 
things voluntarily, if you want him to start doing things youre going 
to have to say to him every day probably, Right its your turn to go 
and make the tea, [] if you tell him I'm sure hell start doing it. 
And he has started doing the tea and stuff and unloading the 
dishwasher and things for her. [] Yes but she still finds it very 
hard. She expects him to volunteer to do it but I said, He can't 
youre just going to have to say, Get up off your bottom and do it 
you know because she's always done everything for him and she's 
getting older now as well. [T3] 
However it appeared from Caroles perspective that Sue was less able to 
shift to understanding the impact of bvFTD, how this might influence Terrys 
behaviour and respond accordingly. Consequently, conflict continued to be a 
feature of Terry and Sues relationship throughout the research.   
In the Hugh, Burton and Lewin Families, wider family members who were out 
of step in their awareness, were also positioned as the problem. For 
example, both the Hugh and the Burton families highlighted frustrations with 
some relatives (Table 8.7): 
Table 8.7: Positioning of family members 
Pamela: I didnt tell my brother I was going away I thought well tough if he 
gets a load of phone calls that's good luck to him but he hasnt been in touch 
anyway. 
Jonathan: I mean he doesnt contact us, he's either in the betting shop or the 
club and I don't know where hell be on the evenings now because he's not 
round at your mothers but I mean he is just completely in denial, he has 
never been a support has he?  
Pamela: No. [T1] 
Mollie: She's seen all the pagesshe's been on the website, Alzheimers 
website, everything ((sighs)) I think its just a dig because we weren'tshe 
didnt get that attention at the time [T2]  
Jenny: I am aware that you were saying that [] your daughter [] wasn't 
particularly understanding.    
Mollie: I don't think she is, still, is she, Diane.  
Anthony: Diane's very much a 'me' person. It's all 'me, me, me' and anything 
else is totally oblivious to regardless.  
Mollie: You're useful to her and if you're not useful... [T3] 
In the above quotes Jonathan felt that Stan had never been supportive (lines 
6-8). Jonathans perspective appeared to be strongly held despite evidence 
that Stan had supported Elizabeth for around 6 years and may have 
experienced similar frustrations to theirs: 
Pamela He was going round, I mean, he wasn't nice with her. He was 
going round every single day and doing a meal for her at 
night. But he'd shout at her, he'd be really short with her  [] 
Furthermore they appeared to have made a decision to take responsibility for 
caregiving away from him without discussing this with him. While this 
decision seemed to have been motivated by a desire to ensure the best 
support for him and Elizabeth, it nevertheless seems to suggest that they 
were unable to work together to consider how best to support her. Nor were 
they able to consider how he might have experienced their actions. Similarly 
Mollie and Anthony described Dianes behaviour towards Anthony as 
deliberate, self-centred and lacking in understanding (lines 9-11, 15-17). 
Unmet expectations seemed to have been a feature of their relationship. It 
also appeared that they had not considered that it may be difficult for her to 
comprehend the changes: 
Mollie Well with the family, my family, immediate family, we've 
managed quite well because what I did was [], go onto the 
Alzheimers site and on there it gives about Anthonys 
dementia and I printed some off and I handed them out to 
them ((laughs)) and I found thatthere you are read that and 
that'll tell you and it saved you explaining things. And that's 
what I did didnt I? [T1] 
As the above quote suggests, their communication surrounding Anthonys 
diagnosis was based on giving information sheets rather than discussion and   
collaboration. It is therefore possible that Diane did not understand the 
complexity of the difficulties Anthony experienced with such limited 
information and was unable to modify her expectations accordingly.  
As with the impact of positioning the person with bvFTD, a consequence of 
the positioning of family members as to blame seemed to result in conflict 
and/ or distancing in relationships. For example, Mollie described her 
relationship with Diane as having become problematic as a consequence of 
the difficulties described above. Similarly, Pamela and Jonathan indicated 
that communication had broken down with Stan: 
Pamela My brother turned up, my brother who hasnt spoken to me 
Jonathan  He just blanked me. I said, Hello Stan how are you? and 
he ((laughingly)) just ignored me, completely ignored me. 
In concluding this section it is important to recognise that Phil Hortons 
experience rarely featured in the coping processes described above. It is 
possible that his narrative does not feature strongly in this theme because 
their experience of bvFTD had been over a much longer period of time and 
Penny had already moved to a care home at the time of the research. 
Furthermore as their daughter did not participate in the research, we do not 
have her additional perspective to draw upon. Therefore his narrative largely 
reflected the coping processes he as an individual had needed to engage.  
8.3 Were not the same anymore 
In chapter seven, the challenge of were not the same anymore was 
discussed. Changes to relationships were evident in all seven accounts, 
although there were differences for partners and for adult children. Many of 
the partners took on increased responsibility and felt the loss of many of the 
valued aspects of their relationship, including empathy, intimacy, mutual 
support, reciprocity and communication. Awareness and understanding 
influenced how these changes were constructed. Both adult daughters 
experienced changes in the relationship and also had limited understanding 
of the impact of bvFTD. However, their relational history influenced how they  
perceived this change and its meaning for them. A previously poor 
relationship gave rise to conflict and a sense of entrapment for one adult 
daughter. In contrast, a previously positive relationship resulted in a 
significant sense of loss in the other adult daughter, which in turn gave rise to 
difficulties in adjusting to the changes in her father.  
The experiences and coping processes of these close family members 
seemed to be significant in impacting upon the way in which bvFTD was 
managed within the family as a whole. Consequently, in this chapter, this 
challenge is addressed before that of managing everyday life. The coping 
processes used by the five partners and two adult children to manage the 
changes to their relationship are now discussed. 
Two parallel processes occurred, involving addressing the impact of the 
increased level of care required by the person with bvFTD alongside coping 
with the impact of the changes for themselves as individuals, as a couple and 
as a family. In their ways of coping, these close family members adopted 
three positions on the superordinate continuum, giving rise to the themes of; 
accepting and adapting, fighting and distancing and being stuck. 
Furthermore, they were challenged to engage in a process involving 
Accepting the need for a changing I.  A number of subthemes appeared 
evident from analysis as follows: 
Accepting and adapting  
 Accepting the changes and finding new ways of being together 
Fighting  
 Resisting the changes, were going to fight this together  
Distancing and being stuck 
 Achieving Distance 
 Being stuck 
Accepting the need for a changing I 
 Grieving for a changing you and a changing we  
 Acknowledging the need for a changing I  
 Accepting the need for a changing I  
Accepting and adapting 
As described previously in chapter 7, the consequences of bvFTD involved 
an increasing level of dependence on those in closest contact with the 
person with dementia as the social and cognitive skills associated with living 
an independent life and engaging fully in relationships became challenged. 
Close family members were therefore required to consider ways of coping 
with these difficulties (Table 8.8): 
Table 8.8: Acceptance and adaptation 
Jenny      So, how do you feel having this diagnosis has affected your 
relationship together and your lives together?  
Anthony  In some ways its made the relationship stronger insofar as Im 
now much more dependent on ((Mollie)) than I was before. So, we 
gel together nicely as a team. []  
Mollie  No but thats how it is now, isnt it?  
Anthony  Thats how it is. Were both reasonably good at coping, so youve 
got to adapt.  
Mollie  Weve adapted  thats a good word, yeah.  
Anthony   Give and take a little on both sides  some more than others. [T1] 
Bert  It's like having a new head on, isn't it. 
Melinda  Yeah. That's what I said to you, I've had two of you. 
Bert You could have a new heart, a new liver and this that and the other 
but its like having your head took off and another head put on it. 
You know the changes that happen.   
Melinda  Because we can have some quite childish behaviour at times. 
Bert You can't do anything about it at the end of the day. It just 
becomes part of you, doesn't it?  
Melinda  I think once you accept that this is part of you and once everybody 
else accepts, well, this is a learning experience, it's a new way. 
And you come to terms with that and everybody'll do it at different 
stages. I think that's when it becomes a lot easier. You know, I 
think it's just saying, well, you can't change it, it's learning to cope 
with it and keep a sense of humour about it all really, because 
we've had some laughs really, haven't we. And it's learning and to 
support each other not to be afraid to say to each other. And that's 
very important.   [T2] 
As can be seen in the above quotes, Mollie and Melinda accepted the 
changes brought about by bvFTD and adapted in order to manage them. 
Furthermore, both appeared to collaborate with the person with bvFTD and   
additionally in Melindas case wider family to achieve this, as described in the 
previous section (p.203-7). Both partners were accepting and adapting to the 
changes to their relationship with the person with bvFTD. Mollie and Anthony 
recognised that Anthony had become more reliant on her. Similarly Melinda 
also reflected on how important it had become to support and work with Bert: 
Melinda I think that's where we've come as a family in the last six 
months. It means supporting you. We've accepted more. We 
work with Bert. Instead of trying to change it, this is what it is 
and we try and work more with it, don't we. [] [T2] 
Thus Melinda had also shifted to taking greater responsibility for meeting 
Berts needs, in collaboration with her family. Mollie and Melinda appeared to 
hold the person with bvFTD through strategies designed to support their 
continued participation in family life and everyday activities. For example, as 
described previously, Mollie had found ways to enable Anthony to continue to 
be independent in preparing his breakfast through the purchase of a new 
microwave. Similarly, Melinda described how she supported Bert to continue 
to do the things he had previously engaged in: 
Melinda ((laughs)) So we are learning different ways, aren't we. And 
it's accepting with memory. Like, I try and involve Bert in 
doing what he's always done so it's like setting the table and 
you'll say Set the table. Have you set the table? Well, now, 
it's Will you set the table? and then if it doesn't happen I'd 
give him the placemats and the knives and forks. And that 
way, it's trying to find ways to stop the confrontation. And to 
encourage them still to do things. [T1] 
As can be seen from the above quote, for Melinda this also involved finding a 
balance by trying to prevent confrontation, while supporting Bert to remain 
engaged and active. This process of acceptance and adaptation continued 
throughout the research, as both partners recognised the need to adjust the 
strategies they used as changes occurred. In particular they both highlighted 
the importance of managing their expectations of what their partner could   
achieve. For example, at time point one, Mollie reflected on Anthonys 
continued involvement to some degree in activities like sorting and 
responding to their mail. However by time point three, Mollie had taken over 
these activities because she recognised that Anthony could no longer 
manage: 
Mollie [...] I've gone from Anthony doing it all, sorting this and taking 
the lead and I've had to do it now. And then you have to 
think, 'Well, is this right? Shall I do it? Or..?' Because I can 
ask Anthony and he'll say 'Oh yes. We'll go and do it.' or 
whatever. Even if it's wrong. He'll tend to just agree.  [T3] 
While both Mollie and Melinda described active processes to collaborate and 
engage with the person with bvFTD, it is nevertheless apparent from these 
quotes that they were taking responsibility for their partner. Such 
responsibility involved a significant shift from their previous relationship, 
where the work of relational and family life appeared to be shared between 
them. Therefore as described previously, Mollie likened this to the care she 
would offer a child: 
Mollie Anthonys as good a gold but he's always looking now for, 
Shall I do this? Shall I do that? or its like, as I say its like a 
child looking for approval, its strange, whereas he used to be 
the one who would take control if you know what I mean but 
he can no longer do that. [T2] 
Phil Hortons narrative also highlighted that he had needed to take 
responsibility for his wife Pennys wellbeing and that this had begun before 
diagnosis and continued throughout her experience of dementia. For 
example, he described cuddling her to make her feel secure: 
Phil But it would be a case of me holding her rather than her 
responding to me if you know what I'm saying. Trying to 
make her feel wanted, trying to make her feel secure, 
basically. [T1] 
He also appeared to focus on acceptance and adaptation although his 
experience appeared to be significantly different from Mollie and Melinda for  
reasons described previously. Consequently he felt that he had needed to 
manage on his own and seemed to describe a process of adapting and 
compensating as changes occurred: 
Phil I just used to compensate for the situation, [] so never 
really harmed our relationship. I mean, there have been 
occasions when things have happened and you think Well, 
what was that for? and Why did that happen? but then you 
readapt. For me marriage was for life and not just for an 
occasional few years. So that was my way of life and it was 
just a case of adapting to the changing circumstances really. 
While placing her in a care home had been a necessary but difficult decision 
for Phil, he continued to adjust and adapt in order to support Penny.  At time 
point two and three, he had sought to adjust to this new situation by 
collaborating and communicating with the staff in the care home. This 
involved working together with the staff to make her life better (Table 8.9): 
Table 8.9: Collaborating with staff 
Jenny  You mentioned last time she'd lost a lot of weight.  
Phil  Yeah but she's down to five and a half stone and what theyve 
decided to do [] which I totally agree with, well it was my 
suggestion, somebody that weighs five and a half stone surely 
doesnt need the same level of medication that somebody that was 
12 stone needs, so theyve reviewed the medication and theyve 
taken her off, she's not been on an antipsychotic for about six 
months which is good. [] So theyve gradually weaned her off 
that and she's not on Sertraline anymore. And I think going forward 
Ill gradually look at all the [medication] because she was on an 
absolute massive amount of medication at one stage. [T3] 
Thus Phil continued to take responsibility for Penny and for her needs and 
had adapted to the changing circumstances by working with staff as well as 
visiting and supervising regularly.  
Fighting 
Consistent with her view of herself as a capable and strong person who could 
overcome challenges (c.f. chapter 6); Kate Perrin chose a different route to   
managing the experience of bvFTD. Although she understood that it was 
progressive, she decided to fight the changes associated with bvFTD for as 
long as possible. Fighting involved using the sort of processes she would 
implement with children that had difficulties with processing and sense 
making as described below (Table 8.10): 
Table 8.10: resisting the change, were going to fight this together 
Jenny How did you arrive at the decision to take that route [] 
Alistair I dont know. 
Kate You didnt. 
Alistair I didnt, no, I didnt. yes, you had a friend that had a brain injury 
and information that he was giving you from that sort of put two 
and two together and... [] 
Kate Because of the SENCo work I do and the working with little people, 
what I did was took everything I knew from there and converted it 
to making it work. What would I have done for a child that couldn't 
process? Well I would have put in a visual timetable, I would have 
done this... So thats all weve done at home, is make everything 
visual. So all the skills and the things that I would have done in a 
classroom for a child that was struggling is what weve tried to put 
into the house. It isnt rocket science to do it, it just needed thinking 
through in the first place. And I think I didnt give you a choice, I 
think the route we took was... I was so adamant... 
 Alistair That it wasnt going to get the better of us. 
Kate Yes. And if we stayed together and we stayed strong together we 
could beat anything. 
Alistair Yes. 
Kate And we ca... we are beating it, we are winning, because 
[psychiatrist] said that... 
Alistair Yes. 
Kate Im going to phrase this badly but Ill do it anyway, the decline in 
your capabilities hasnt been as great as she would have 
anticipated. So we are holding it off, it is hard work but we are 
doing it. 
Alistair And its easy to slip and let it go. [T1] 
Jenny How do you manage the change in your relationship? 
Kate How do I manage it? 
Jenny How do you cope with it? 
Kate Just accept it. There's nothing else you can do. There's no point in 
being angry, I've been angry, I've done that. There's no point in 
being upset. There's no point in changing it, it is what it is. [tone 
tremulous] [T3] 
As can be seen in the quote above, while Alistair appeared to agree with the 
strategy, both acknowledged that it was Kate who was the driving force 
behind the decision to fight. Indeed Alistair seemed to acquiesce to her 
decision to respond in this way. Kate also sought to achieve this in 
collaboration with her family as can be seen from their narratives (Table 8.2). 
In the first quote at time point one; it appeared that their interactions with the 
psychiatrist confirmed for Kate that they were doing the right thing. Kates 
tone of voice during the times when she was discussing this approach 
appeared strong and clear.  
Her commitment to this strategy continued into the third time point and as 
described previously, she adapted and adjusted her strategies as Alistairs 
needs changed. However when talking about how she felt about the 
changes, there was a marked difference, with her tone reflecting anger, 
sadness and loss. Therefore while by time point three, Kate referred to 
acceptance as the only way she could cope with the changes, it appeared 
that this came with a considerable cost as she had to accept that the 
changes were occurring no matter how hard she fought them. 
Distancing and being stuck; achieving distance 
Consistent with the discussion of resisting and blaming explored in 
awareness of the changes (p.208-12), one partner and two adult daughters 
and their partners struggled to move to a position of understanding the 
impact of bvFTD. Consequently, the person with bvFTD appeared to be 
positioned as the problem and on occasions, their behaviour seemed to be 
interpreted as deliberate. In this context, as described previously, the two 
adult daughters achieved some distance from the person with bvFTD as a 
coping process. A core part of distancing involved becoming care managers 
and limiting the amount of direct care they provided. While this strategy had   
benefits, it also appeared to be at times an added cause of stress. For 
example, Sarah Lewin described a battle to get the help they needed at the 
first time point, although once this was in place she valued the support she 
received, including regular carers and respite breaks (Table 8.11): 
Table 8.11: Feeling supported 
Sarah Yeah and whats the point in getting stressed. The respite has 
helped so much. It just gives us so much of a break. We didnt 
realise its not just Dad its everything, you know, the carers 
coming in, you know, theyre helping now but theyre invading our 
privacy. Now I dont mind, you know, theyve just come in now 
theyre going to be helping me out but in the morning theyre here 
at half six, they wake the dogs up, they wake the kids up, we dont 
get a lie in. Theyre then in at quarter past, half past nine, well I 
dont like them being out in the dark so I say if you've finished 
come here I dont want you sitting in the lay-by its dangerous. So 
they walk in. Now that's fine they can chat to Dad but again its 
they come in and its invasion of privacy, theyre in my home, I 
can't come down in my dressing gown and get a drink and 
whatever. So its just like argh  
Alex I find that the hardest I think. 
Sarah Yeah but we have now 
Alex The invasion of privacy really. [T2] 
However, she and Alex point to the difficulties associated with the invasion of 
their privacy that came with having carers in their home. Similarly Pamela 
described the many phone calls and resulting stress she experienced 
because the care agency did not appear to recognise the limits within which 
they had to work. At times she suggested that they made the situation worse 
(Table 8.12): 
Table 8.12: Its a double edged sword 
Pamela We did have an issue with them because theyre supposed to 
actually buy her day to day stuff like for her lunches. I do all the 
ordering for frozen meals and all they have to do is to buy 
something like salad and bread and milk and toilet rolls and 
cleaning stuff and there was an issue about how much money we 
were giving to them and I had a meeting with them and I said, Is 
that amount okay? and they said yes, the next week they email 
me and she says, We're out of money. So I emailed them back 
and just said, Well how come last week you said that you had 
sufficient money and now youre telling me you've run out? I've 
had no receipts, I don't know what the moneys been spent on so 
what have you used it for? So the comment back was, Its been 
mostly on cleaning material and it would be in Elizabeths best 
interest if you purchased it. So I started 
Jonathan  Over and above the budget that's given to them. 
Pamela So as far as I was concerned theyve got a budget and they should 
stick to it. If you give them say 120 and its four weeks then 
theyve got 30 a week to spend and we have to manage our 
budgets dont we with food and what have you so why can't they 
manage a budget as such. [T1] 
Therefore achieving a distance through care managing was an important 
coping process to manage the difficulties they experienced. However it 
seemed to be only partially successful in achieving the balance these adult 
daughters needed in their level of engagement with the person with bvFTD.  
Distancing and being stuck; Being stuck 
As described previously, Sue Stuart appeared to struggle to understand the 
difficulties associated with bvFTD. Furthermore, throughout the research she 
reflected on the loss of the qualities she had valued in her marital relationship 
such as being cared for and supporting each other: 
Sue Theres no loving, were more like brother and sister.[T3] 
It seemed that Sue also struggled to find a way to address the challenges 
brought by bvFTD for their relationship and their lives together. She initially 
appeared to minimise Terrys feelings about the difficulties he was 
experiencing: 
Terry But there's a stigma about it isn't there without doubt, you 
know and people say, "You've got dementia, oh" you know, 
they won't say it to your face, it's there. It is there.   
Sue I think you're imagining it. [T1] 
However, later in the research Sue described accepting their situation and 
appeared to be trying to find ways of managing the challenges including 
seeking ways to enable Terry to remain active.  She also described walking 
away when conflict between them arose and engaging in activities they both 
enjoyed such as going on holiday. However she often felt that these attempts 
were unsuccessful. For example, she described the problems she   
experienced with asking Terry to do household activities (table 7.4) and those 
associated with going away on holiday with Terry (Table 8.13): 
Table 8.13 Being Stuck 
Sue Well, it's just accepting the situation and making the best of the 
situation. That's what it's about. I just get upset inside the fact that I 
have to do everything, because I sometimes think Oh, it'd be nice 
to be waited on. 
Terry This is why we have our holiday, so you can be waited on.  
Sue Yes, but I'm not waited on when we go all-inclusive. You go off and 
get your meals and leave me to struggle getting mine.  
Terry Oh, I'm the villain again. 
Sue Yeah, I'm not really happy with having to keep going and getting 
my own food in front of... 
Terry But they don't do that anymore. You don't get a service  
Sue I know, but he's insistent that we do all-inclusive so I have to go 
along with what he says. What he doesn't understand is I'm 
unsteady and I have to keep trying to get these tongs and all sorts 
of other things. Ooh, I just think that I could pick it up with my 
fingers, it'd be so much easier. 
Terry I do bring you coffee. And your drinks. 
Sue Yeah, he goes and gets the drinks. Because I couldn't do that.  
Terry I can't choose your meal for you.  
Sue No. I know that, Terry.  
Terry You've got your own choice. 
Sue But that's what it's about. You're saying I'm being waited on, but 
I'm not really, am I? [T2] 
It appeared that Sue experienced resentment and sadness that Terry could 
not do these activities for her and was no longer able to support her in the 
way that she felt she needed. Thus it is possible that Sue experienced 
feelings of being stuck in this situation. It certainly seemed that Sue had 
become resigned to life continuing in the same vein and having little control 
over it: 
Sue I just think it could be a lot worse. And I've just got to make 
the best of the situation. I don't dwell on it. I mean, you've got 
to cope, you've got to live together, haven't you. [T2] 
It seemed that Sue may not have had the emotional and cognitive 
understanding needed to identify and implement alternative coping 
processes. Although she had experienced support initially from her local 
services, it did not appear to have continued beyond initial post diagnostic 
interventions. Thus a possible source of support and assistance to develop 
these strategies was not accessed and/or was not available.  
Accepting the need for a changing I 
Alongside managing the increased responsibility for the person with bvFTD, it 
seemed that these close family members engaged in a parallel process of 
managing the impact of this change on themselves as individuals. Changes 
in emotional and cognitive sophistication resulted in an early shift in the 
relationship and therefore also in everyday relational work. Although Pamela 
Hugh did not express a sense of loss with the changes in her mother, she 
nevertheless acknowledged changes in relationships as a consequence of 
her mothers illness. The realisation of these changes resulted in the 
expression of grief and loss for these close family members (Table 8.14): 
Table 8.14: Grieving for a changing you and a changing we 
Phil          You just do the best you can. If you really care for somebody you 
will do the best you can for as long as you can. I mean the last 
thing I wanted is for her to be seriously ill and the very last thing I 
wanted is for her to be out of my life. I just want to try and do the 
best I can for her [T1] 
Jenny       I guess that one of the things that I was aware of was when we 
very first met you talked a lot about that your plans had been, once 
you retired,  to go off all over the place.   
Mollie       Do you know what, I think that hit me more than anything. 
Everything just stopped. [] [T3] 
Melinda   Yeah and it is very difficult losing the person that you loved and 
trying to learn to love the other person. Very, very difficult. And one 
thing you can't do is compare. I'm not going to get that Bert back. 
So it's learning to love this one. And acknowledging to yourself that 
that is not going to be easy. But you get there. [T2] 
Kate         And I suppose if the one thing that I've learnt in all of this is what 
will be will be and I mean years ago for example I would have 
yelled and ranted and raved, I dont even do that now do I, I just 
[] Because there's nothing you can do. I mean I dont like it. I 
dont like the fact that the one person that was always by my side 
and always so strong where I was wussying and airy fairying 
around isnt there in the same way. I mean hes physically still 
there but its not the same is it? [] and I suppose that's the 
mummy tiger because I'm not going to allow it to happen but how I 
manage it that's all you can do, I can't manage it, what am I going 
to do? [T3] 
Jenny The last time when we were talking you were saying you were 
going to have a christening. 
Sarah Yes weve had that. He stayed here didnt he? 
Alex Yeah he didnt come in the end. 
Sarah No we asked him, asked him and asked him. We said that we 
would pay for a taxi down for it to wait, because it was the same 
church that we got married in so that wouldnt have been, you 
know, it was somewhere that he wouldit was the family church, 
he knows it and no. Too much, couldntyeah.[T3] 
Sue          But that's one of the hardest things I think, that side. You know he 
doesnt, he'll never hold my hand, I have to hold his arm because 
I'm not very steady now when we are walking in [village]. But I feel 
as if he keeps on doing this it's as if he doesn't want to do that you 
know what I mean? I said to [nurse], ten years ago, or 15, when 
we'd be on holiday and everything we'd be holding hands walking 
along but now its absolutely nothing. [T1] 
Pamela    And I'm just amazed at how it's affected our family. You can't 
believe that you know [] we're not even talking to each other.  
Jenny And is that different from before?  
Pamela    Yeah. Initially, when she was first ill we used to talk frequently, 
because I'd be phoning up and saying Ooh, she's done this, that 
and the other, or whatever. Or he'd be saying, well, he was the 
one who first tipped us off that there was something wrong. [] So 
initially, we were talking. But to now be at the stage where we 
won't even speak to each other unless there's something specific 
to say. [T2] 
Close family members experienced grief relating to the loss of; 
companionship and hope for the future, expectations of a future together, a 
life partner, intimacy and togetherness, closeness and family cohesion. 
Furthermore, some close family members identified personal costs 
associated with the changes in the person with bvFTD and their caregiving 
role, particularly when trying to manage this alongside the other pressures 
experienced in their lives (Table 8.15):  
Table 8.15: Personal Costs 
Phil          So everything revolves around that and that colours the way I feel day to 
day. I find that I can't concentrate like I find it difficult to sit down and as I 
say I'm very interested still in the music but I'm not able to sit down and 
concentrate and practice and do things that I ought to be doing. [T2] 
Kate         That's why I got so frightened in January when I really thought Id got 
dementia, I really believed Id got it, I sat at a meeting at work and there 
were all these people round and I knew I knew all of them, I knew I knew 
who they all worked for but do you know I couldnt have told you and I got 
frightened and I thought well I've got alcohol induced dementia obviously 
because if I'm going to go anywhere its going to be through alcohol [T3] 
Pamela Its just so awful though because I mean like I wasn't very well a few 
weeks ago was I and my blood pressure was absolutely through the roof 
and when you keep having the phone calls all of the time you just think, I 
just can't do this any longer. [T3] 
Jenny     One of the things I was aware of, Mollie,  [] you yourself had started to 
feel quite pressured and stressed. And I wonder if you could tell me a bit 
about what was that like for you? 
Mollie  Oh yes. I think it's just the build-up, from January onwards, because 
obviously family were at the hospital. [my son was ill]. They didn't know if 
he was going to pull out of it, because they kept saying to me Do you 
realise how seriously ill your son is? And I thought Well, I've taken him to 
the doctors' every time. So and I thought Well, I can't do any more. So 
we had all that time with Pete and then got him settled. And then we went 
away on holiday and it was a disaster. Because I was trying to look after 
two other people who just said they've got this wrong and that wrong and I 
thought Oh, I don't need this. And I was trying to please them because I 
wanted them to enjoy themselves. There was absolutely nothing I could 
do to please them and in the end I said to them both I'm here to look after 
Anthony, not you two. I can't look after three of you. So we came back 
and it didn't feel like a holiday. []  So I think with the build-up of 
everything I felt I couldn't cope. I wasn't coping. [T3] 
Melinda [sighs] It is frustrating for you and I don't think its helped because 
normally Im very proactive and I will push it and see things through but 
emotionally I was drained. [T2] 
Costs included physical ill-health, stress, impairments in cognitive function 
and becoming emotionally exhausted. Furthermore, some close family 
members worried about how possible changes in their own health might 
impact upon their ability to care for the person with dementia. Realisation of 
these changes and their impact resulted in a challenge for these close family 
members to acknowledge the need to grieve and find ways of coping.   
Close family members were variable in the extent to which they were able to 
address this. For example, Phil suggested that he had become a more 
emotional person as a consequence of his experience (Table 8.16): 
Table 8.16: Becoming more emotional 
Jenny How's that been for you?  
Phil I've always been the backstop within the family. If there's been a 
family crisis like when my father died, that was 1972, or when my 
mother died, or when my brother and sister died I've always been 
there for the others. And always remained strong throughout. But 
recently, as Penny has deteriorated significantly, I've had trouble 
holding it together. And I've got emotionally upset. On a few 
occasions (quiet, pause). I make no bones about it, I am a pretty 
emotional person, sentimental old fool you could say and I have 
been affected by it, yeah. Absolutely. I've got the specialist nurse, 
[] who comes and sees me, probably every six weeks. But ... 
apart from that you're on your own really and I haven't got loads of 
family as you can see from that. I've got some very good friends 
and I just tend to be able to rationalise things out. [friend] is still a 
very good sounding board. But yeah, I have become significantly 
affected over the last few months. From time to time.  I was very 
upset on Tuesday when I realised that, she didn't ... ... recognise, 
when I went anywhere near her she was screaming just as much 
as she was with anybody else. That was pretty significant really 
[] [T1] 
In doing so, he recognised that he needed others help and identified 
accessing psychological support from a specialist nurse and from a few close 
friends. Similarly Mollie, Pamela and Melinda described that they had valued 
the psychological support they had received, also from specialist nursing: 
Melinda and then [specialist nurse] was absolutely a godsend bless 
her because I was able to go and unload, which I'd never 
done with anybody. And that, I think, kept me sane and 
helped me cope. [T2] 
In Melindas case this support assisted her to address the changes in her 
relationship with Bert as well as understanding how to support him. However,  
three of these four family members described circumstances in which they 
were no longer able to access the psychological support that they had 
received and all were concerned about how this would impact upon them 
going forward. For example, Mollie indicated that the specialist nurse she had 
received support from would be leaving and not replaced and appeared to be 
worried about how she would cope without this, something she mentioned 
after the recording had finished (T3 reflective notes).  
JLF Although she was concerned about the future as the 
specialist nurse was leaving and what this might mean for 
her. [field notes T3] 
All four described friendships, peer support and family as being additional 
and important sources of help to them as individuals. For example, in table 
8.16, Phil identified friendships that he relied on to express how he felt. 
Similarly Mollie described the value of friendships they had made with others 
who were in a similar position at the Alz Caf: 
Mollie And if you're having a bad day, or something's not right, get 
on the phone and somebody'll listen to you at the other end. 
And that's how we do it, go on, isn't it.  But I think it's 
because we've got a good circle of friends who are in a very 
similar position.[T3] 
Having the support from others who listened and understood seemed to be a 
particularly important way of coping with their feelings of loss.  
The three other close family members who participated did not appear to 
address their needs in this way. Sarah appeared often to talk about her loss 
in terms of how her father had changed or what he did rather than expressing 
how she had experienced this change (c.f. table 8.14). Furthermore she did 
not appear to have accessed support to consider how she experienced the 
changes. 
Sue and Kate seemed to be more expressive of the challenges they faced. 
Indeed both described how their partner had changed (c.f. table 8.14). 
Nevertheless, Sue seemed not to see professional support as an answer to 
this and had not utilised the professional support that was available to her.  
For example, Carole mentioned that Sue had seen a specialist nurse on a 
few occasions: 
Jenny Is that [specialist nurse]?  
Carole Yeah I think it is yeah.  
Jenny Okay. 
Carole Mum seems to find her visits very helpful, just getting out. 
However Sue did not mention this support in her interviews and by time point 
two, the specialist nurse was no longer involved. Sue may have struggled to 
address feelings of grief, as she also appeared to have unresolved grief from 
the death of her father ten years previously. Furthermore Sue appeared to 
feel quite isolated, suggesting that they had struggled to make friends since 
their move:  
Sue [The neighbours] are always going on holidays or they're 
going to somewhere with the children somewhere, they go 
off for weeks on end. We call them the invisible neighbours 
sometimes. [] So it is very quiet. But what we try to do is go 
to [village], we'll have a walk round and by the river. [T1] 
This isolation may have further added to her difficulty with finding sources of 
support. However by time point three, they had established new friendships, 
although it is not clear whether these friendships were such that she would 
have been able to confide in them, if indeed this is something she would 
have sought.  
Kate also did not appear initially to have sought forms of support to address 
her grief. She described feeling that she couldnt share with her family or with 
professionals. For example, she suggested that it would be inappropriate to 
share her feelings with a professional because she was a similar age to her 
daughters: 
Kate But it'd be like trying to talk to one of my daughters. There's 
things I can't talk about to them. And I think that's hard. [] 
She's lovely and so it's not a criticism of her. Who else in 
their right mind would want her job, to be honest? ((laughs))  
  Must be really tricky. Because you're constantly dealing with 
the negatives of things. That must be tricky.  [T2] 
However, she might also have been struggling to acknowledge and express 
her own feelings at a time when she was heavily invested in trying to prevent 
further deterioration through the strategy of fighting it referred to earlier. 
Later in the research, it appeared that Kate was becoming more open to 
addressing her grief. She described relying more and more on her family for 
support, in particular talking with her mother: 
Kate I can always pick up the phone and talk to my mum, she's 
always up for a chat, in fact that's why it took me so long to 
do the ironing last night because I ended up being on the 
phone nearly 45 minutes with my mother when you went out 
[]. [T3] 
Rena I'm her safety valve, I think.[T3] 
As the above suggests, Rena perceived that she had become Kates 
confidante. Kate also appeared to have benefited from peer support and in 
particular described her contact with two local groups: 
Kate But it is hard and it is isolating. The [young onset carers 
group] are brilliant. That's lovely.  But because I work, I can't 
always get there and they're talking about bringing [the 
young onset] Al's Cafe earlier so that more people can 
attend. Well that will just take me out completely because I 
struggle getting there some nights for the time it is now. [T2] 
However, as indicated above, this was not without difficulties as Kate was in 
full time employment at the time of the research so consequently it was not 
always possible for her to attend these meetings.  
In addition to accessing professional and peer support and the support of 
friends, close family members described additional ways of coping with the 
feelings of loss. These included making broader choices about what they 
could commit to in their lives: 
Mollie And I went and I thought Okay. and I had to walk away. I 
said Pete, I've got to go. And I haven't been there since   
 with him, have I. I walked away. I couldn't cope anymore. But 
I'm finding it a lot better now. I just had to walk away. It was 
either that or I wouldn't be able to look after Anthony. You 
can only cope with so much. And I was thinking... I was 
snapping with my friends and I didn't want to go to these 
meetings. You isolate yourself. You don't want to... But now 
we're getting out again, aren't we. [T3] 
Mollie suggested that she had taken on too much in trying to care for her son 
as well as Anthony. She recognised that she couldnt do it all and had to 
make some decisions about her priorities. Both Pamela and Sarah had made 
a similar decision by engaging care agencies to support their parents. Kate 
also referred to having to give up some of the activities she had previously 
enjoyed because of Alistairs increasing needs. Phil also had to make a 
significant decision in placing his wife in long-term care due to the level of 
support she required: 
Phil  I'd still prefer her to be here but I just dont think I'd be able to 
cope even with 24 hour assistance, you know, its justI 
never know from one minute to the next how she's going to 
be and that's really where we are. [T2] 
However, as referred to in Phils quote, it seemed that these decisions were 
often not straightforward. It appeared that the decision Phil had made created 
dissonance because he would prefer Penny to be at home.  
Caring for oneself also appeared to be an important strategy. Mollie and 
Sarah referred to attending carers courses as a way of learning how to 
manage and therefore alleviate their stress: 
Sarah It does, it depends what sort of mood were in.  I think weve 
learnt. I was always getting really agitated and argued back 
with him and since Ive been on the carers courses, Ive  
 learnt that theres no point in arguing back because you 
wont win. [T1] 
Similarly, having time for themselves was mentioned as an important aspect 
of self-care:  
Sue But it gives me a little bit of a break as well. I mean, the first 
week was lovely, because I went out with my daughters to 
the centre and I really enjoyed that and we had something to 
eat. And it was a nice little day because we're never really 
apart, you see. [T2] 
Time out was achieved in a range of ways, including walking away when 
situations became stressful, taking time out at the gym, sleeping in a 
separate room and communicating with friends, including the use of social 
media.  
8.4 Managing everyday life 
In chapter 7, the challenge of managing everyday life was considered. All 
seven participating families suggested that bvFTD had a wide ranging impact 
on wellbeing, relationships, activities of daily living and other aspects of 
family life.    
This challenge was influenced by awareness of family members and the 
availability of supportive professionals. Furthermore, knowledge of similar 
difficulties and contact with knowledgeable others such as peers also 
appeared to influence how families responded to the impact of bvFTD on 
everyday life.  
The coping processes that these seven families used to manage this 
challenge are now discussed. It appeared that these coping processes were 
underpinned by core components of family functioning including 
collaboration, communication, the ability to address conflict and 
cohesiveness. These have already been discussed in the first two sections in 
this chapter. Furthermore, as described in the previous section (p.212-31), 
the coping processes of the family member most closely involved with the 
person with bvFTD appeared to have a significant influence on wider family 
coping responses. In their ways of coping, close family members adopted 
three positions on the superordinate continuum, giving rise to the themes of: 
 Enabling and facilitating,  
 Distancing, managing and controlling,  
 Avoiding and reacting.   
Each of these themes is now addressed in relation to coping with the impact 
on relationships and coping with the impact on everyday activities of living 
and self-care.  
Managing the impact on relationships 
Enabling and Facilitating: 
In some families, this impact of bvFTD on relationships was addressed 
through the cohesive, collaborative and reflective nature of the families, 
which included the person with bvFTD and wider family members. As 
described in the previous two sections (were not the same anymore and 
awareness and understanding of the changes) the Perrin and Morris 
families worked together to understand the changes, develop and implement 
coping processes. The partners of the person with bvFTD appeared to be 
central to facilitating this process. Melinda Morris suggested that it was 
important for her to be proactive and support her family emotionally (Table 
8.17): 
Table 8.17: Engaging with and supporting each other as a family 
Melinda   But I would say as the mother, or whoever it's going to be in that family, 
they need to be proactive. In that you've got to get an inner strength and 
come over so that they're not afraid to say how they're really feeling. And 
like with Adam, I was quite able to say to him I'm really angry and 
annoyed that this has happened. And that encouraged them to come 
back then and say Angry? I want to thump the door And it's 
encouraging that, because you can't just think, because it's not like 
cancer, it changes your personality. And reminding each other when 
things go wrong and you do forget things. Because you can have a really 
good period where things are really good and then even during a 
conversation you can be really good at the table and then completely 
forget. And it's encouraging each other, Well this is part of it. Just move 
on. Don't dwell on it. And that helps everybody then. [T2] 
Bert           Idris pops in through the week ...  
Melinda   And its just support, he takes you fishing. We see these every day.  
Bert       Sam does.  
Melinda    Because Amys Polish and her thing about the family is different and 
shes a little star, an absolute star.  
Bert       I mean Adam lives in [village], but he comes more often now than when 
we were in [previous area].  
Melinda   Yeah, but we try not to ... if I need some support, or if I feel you need the 
support of someone different to me, I tend not to go, he would be my last 
choice. I tend to go to Idris and Sam and then Kelly and Margaret and we 
do it that way, dont we?  
Bert       Mm.  
Melinda    And each one of them offers Bert something different in their approach.  
Bert       I mean Adam takes me out for a half day, a day.  
Melinda  Hes good that way, you go and do nice things together, dont you?  
Bert      Mm. [T2] 
Melinda  Because even though you're sharing this journey, Jenny, you don't want 
them, at this stage anyway, to experience every part of this behaviour, 
because it's hard for them. I'm their mum and they've not been used to the 
way Bert can be towards me sometimes. So it's recognising that and as 
long as I feel able that day to do that, is to accept that. [T2] 
In being proactive, Melinda appeared to address the emotional wellbeing of 
her children in order to support their adaptation to the changes Bert was 
experiencing. Furthermore, this coping process appeared to enable the 
whole family to move to a position of supporting Bert to manage everyday 
life, which in turn also supported Melinda. In achieving this collaboration, 
Melinda described needing to be mindful of the differences in adaptation of 
each of her children as this influenced how much she would ask of them. 
Furthermore, it appeared that she also sought to protect them from knowing 
everything about Berts behaviour as she felt this would be too much for 
them. 
While such protection wasnt always possible, open communication of 
emotions enabled them to address the impact of his behaviour as described 
in chapter 7 (Table 7.10) and here (Table 8.18): 
Table 8.18: Open communication of emotions 
Melinda: We try and after each outburst, if theres an outburst with him, I will 
ring whoever it is and talk them through it, because its very hard 
when youve had this very loving dad, who has always been very 
calm and will talk things through, to one that will just go like that 
((snaps fingers)) [] [T1] 
Melinda described needing to find an inner strength in order to achieve this 
and in this respect appeared to feel responsible for the wellbeing of the whole 
family. 
In the Perrin family, as can be seen in the previous section, (p.217-9) Kate 
was instrumental in developing the coping process that they used to support 
Alistair and engaged their family in enabling this approach to be 
implemented. Thus the family seemed to be united in supporting Alistair. This 
collaboration appeared to continue into time point three (Table 8.19): 
Table 8.19: Perrin, engaging with wider family 
Rena      And if he wants to come out with us he does and if they back out at the 
last minute, okay, that's fine, or whatever. We dont put the same rules 
that you would put on I suppose if it was anybody else. Because we want 
him to be as comfortable as he can. And Dave goes there most 
weekends, Dave is there. And what Dave says is 'Do you need me this 
weekend?' and if they say no, they dont, that's fine and if they say 'Yes 
please.', then he goes. [T3] 
While this level of collaboration with wider family did not appear in the 
remaining five families, there was evidence of communication and co-
operation in some. For example, Sarah Lewin described some of their family 
as helping by visiting regularly and Carole Stuart described her involvement 
in supporting her mother. This appeared to be limited to visits or telephone 
calls but it seemed to be supportive of the closest family member and/ or to 
the person with bvFTD (Table 8.20): 
Table 8.20: Engaging with wider family, communication and co-operation 
Sarah  We have such support from Alexs parents and his brother and 
well yeah we haven't seen [sister in law] for a long time, [], but 
his brother will come and sit with my Dad for an hour  
Alex  Yeah just chatting.  
Sarah  Just chatting. And theyll chat about anything. Well they haven't 
really got anything in common but [Alexs brother] will come and  
Alex  He makes the effort.  
Sarah  He does make the effort and its great and Aileen and Tony, 
[Alexs] mother and father, come and every time they come and sit 
with him, they dont come and sit with us, they come and sit with 
Dad and go through and theyll really put the world to rights and 
have sensible conversations.  
Jenny  So in many respects its really quite different in terms of the people 
who do come in comparison to your  
Sarah  Yeah. And even, well my Nan comes over to see the kids which is 
my mothers mother. Now and my Mum comes down and she has, 
you know, spends time with him. So the ones that you wouldnt 
have thought would [T2] 
Consequently while some family were not supportive, Sarah and Alex 
appeared to feel that others were and that they all benefitted from this. 
Similarly Mollie Burton and Phil Horton reflected on the supportive nature of 
their contact with their siblings: 
Jenny  Yeah. So in terms of who you have, the relationships that are 
important to you now is that family or are there others who 
are important to you?  
Phil  I've got some very good friends who I see more so than I see 
the family. I see Pennys brother probably once or twice a 
week. I see my brother every other week probably and we 
speak on the phone daily. They'll phone me. My own brother 
will phone daily to find out how things are with Penny. And 
her brother I'll phone him when I've been to see her and tell 
him how she is. So we keep in touch by phone quite 
significantly but I have got some very good friends who are 
supportive [T2] 
As can be seen above, Phil reflected on supportive friendships too, as did 
Mollie (c.f. p.227). However, it did not appear that the emotional experience 
and needs of the wider family in regard to the impact of bvFTD were explicitly 
addressed.  
Distancing, Managing and Controlling:  
In five of the families, as has been discussed previously in awareness and 
understanding of the changes (p.208-12), working together to address the 
impact of bvFTD and moderate its impact on relationships appeared to be 
less in evidence. In some of these families, members who were out of step 
with close family members were positioned as the problem. This positioning 
appeared to result in these family members being blamed for their lack of 
understanding. Additionally it seemed that close family members sought to 
achieve a distance from them and/ or experienced conflict in their 
relationships with them.  
Furthermore, as discussed previously, it appeared that even where 
relationships continued, they lacked cohesion and collaboration. For 
example, Jane Burtons involvement in her family appeared to be about 
keeping in touch with her father (p.207). Janes narrative appeared to 
suggest that she recognised there was a risk of an increasing distance in her 
relationship with Anthony. She described that she had made considerable 
efforts to keep in contact with her father and Mollie since his diagnosis. For 
example, she referred to having to visit more frequently because Anthony 
was no longer able to communicate via telephone, something they had done 
previously: 
Jane I think there are certain aspects of it that may have changed 
because of the diagnosis. For example, the phone. He won't 
speak over the phone at all now whereas before I could keep 
in touch with him by calling him on the phone and talking to 
him. And now he won't do that at all so it's a case of I have to 
go over and see him. And obviously now that he doesn't 
drive because of the dementia as well he can't come over to 
see me either. [T1] 
Consequently, even though Anthony and Mollie appeared to feel that she 
was the one person who could be relied upon to visit: 
Anthony  Because Jane popped in last night didnt she?  
Mollie  She pops in on her way from work doesnt she in the 
hospital. She works at the hospital and she's good. She's 
quite thoughtful Jane.  
Anthony  Yeah she's the thoughtful one of the two. [T2] 
Jane seemed to be concerned about the risk of increasing distance from her 
father.  
In other families it appeared that a lack of shared understanding and 
collaboration resulted in a decision to allow relationships that were no longer 
meaningful to drift apart: 
Sarah  Its up to them its their loss, you know, I know what he's got, 
[] he's been properly assessed, if they dont want to believe 
it and if they dont want to help out or come and visit then 
that's their loss ofthey could still get a lot of pleasure from 
their brother at this stage of his dementia rather than, you 
know  
Alex  There's no point coming round when he's drifted any further, 
if he drifts out further. [] But their situations I find extremely 
odd really with the sisters because I think they should be 
around a lot more than they ever turn up. [T2] 
Consequently while Sarah and Alex felt that Rays sisters should be more 
involved, they appeared to accept that this wouldnt happen.  
Avoiding and Reacting 
Similarly, distancing also appeared to occur in the Stuart and Horton family 
although it appeared to have been a way of coping previously (c.f. chapter 6).  
In spite of the pre-existing relationship difficulties, Carole Stuart described 
establishing and maintaining a greater level of contact with her mother since 
her fathers diagnosis. Her mother Sue confirmed that she had regular 
contact with Carole and involved her in their lives (c.f. chapter 6). 
Nevertheless when discussing the impact of bvFTD at time point one, neither 
Sue nor Terry appeared to feel that it had impacted upon their children: 
Jenny  How do you think having this diagnosis has affected your 
relationship with your children?  
Terry  We don't hardly see them anyway but it aint  
Sue  I don't think at this stage, Jenny, that it's made...  
Terry  Any impact.  
Sue  I mean both of them do not seem to be surprised of the 
diagnosis. To me it's like they've always thought something 
((laughingly)) not right with your dad. Its awful to say but 
that's what I think. [T1] 
As described by Carole in chapter 6, it appeared that there was a lack of 
communication within this family about their experiences and needs.  
Consequently, it seemed that this greater level of contact appeared to create 
further challenges in their relationships. At the third time point, Carole 
indicated that she had limited her contact with her parents because her 
mother had not been honest with her and had let her down at Christmas 
when she had made an effort to look after them: 
Carole  She was supposed to be staying and then they made lies up 
to go. And I didnt appreciate that because I had to clean the 
housebecause mums spotless, Id cleaned the house and 
working full time and trying to do everything it was a lot, I was 
absolutely exhausted and I was cooking dinner for them on 
Christmas day []. So we could have had such a more laid 
back Christmas if it had just been, you know, if I knew they 
weren't staying over whereas I had to change all the beds 
and get it all clean all the skirting boards because I knew 
she'd be looking at it, so that really annoyed me at 
Christmas, really annoyed me that Id put so much effort into 
it and she knows how busy I am and she couldnt tell me the 
truth. And we did have words about it but not quite out in the 
open because she just gets too upset about things. So yeah. 
So its knocked things about because we werebecause I 
was taking her to the hospital and stuff before Christmas, we 
were getting quite a lot closer really but I've sort of stepped 
back again. [T3] 
Carole suggested that the reasons for less contact were related to the lack of 
honesty within the relationship. She further suggested that it was difficult to 
be honest with her mother about the reasons for her distance, because of her 
emotional fragility. This seemed to result in a repeating pattern within this 
family, in which relationship challenges were denied or avoided, 
consequently distancing occurred. 
Finally, Phil Horton appeared to describe a historical degree of distance with 
their daughter after she had left home (c.f. Chapter 6). He also seemed to 
feel that his daughter found it difficult to cope with her mother:  
Phil  On one occasion my daughter came to visit and my wife 
actually hit my daughter. Big time. Three or four times during 
a two or three hour period. []  
Jenny  How has your daughter been affected by...?  
Phil  Well, because she's got the two children and she lives so far 
away she's not been able to visit very often, but shes found it 
difficult to cope with. [] I just think because it's her mother 
she can't cope with the situation. I have been of the opinion 
that she's been in denial really. But I don't necessarily think 
that's the right word to use. She hasn't really visited her 
mother as often as she probably needed to, to keep the 
contact going. That is difficult sometimes for me to cope with. 
While it appeared that some contact was maintained through occasional 
visits, their daughter might also have maintained a distance as a 
consequence of her mothers behaviour. Although it appeared that Phil 
struggled with this at time point one, by time point two he appeared to have 
accepted the situation as it was: 
Phil  We still get on. We're okay. I mean initially when her mother 
was really ill and particularly when she went into the hospital 
I guess I probably expected my daughter to come and see 
her a bit more often than she did but over time you just learn 
to live with the circumstances really and it doesnt in any way 
bother me any more now. [T2] 
It did not appear however, that Phil had considered how his daughter might 
have felt about the changes in her mother although it is not clear from the 
interviews why this might be the case.  
Managing the impact on everyday activities of living and self-care 
Enabling and Facilitating: Scaffolding 
This section addresses the coping processes used to manage everyday 
activities of living and self-care. Two families and one couple (Morris, Perrin 
and Burton) utilised coping processes that supported the person with bvFTD  
through planning and preparation, anticipating difficulties, providing routine, 
structure, support and prompting and providing safety when this was 
required. As can be seen in the section in this chapter awareness and 
understanding of the changes, understanding the impact of bvFTD 
seemed critical to developing appropriate strategies to support the person 
living with dementia. Furthermore, it appeared that the role of the closest 
family member was crucial to developing and implementing these processes. 
In spite of their different perspectives on adapting to bvFTD, Mollie, Melinda 
and Kate utilised similar approaches to supporting their husbands. This 
appeared to begin with establishing routine and structure to the day. For 
example, Mollie described the use of a diary to support and structure her 
husbands day from time point 1: 
Mollie  Another thing was asking questions. He was: what time are 
we going to be there? What time have we got Or where 
are we going today? And suggestions like [OT] and 
[specialist nurse] the diary  the diary is like a lifeline to you 
now  that took away a lot of stress because he doesnt ask 
me; hell look at his diary. So, if weve got an appointment 
and I say, Can you pop that in your diary love for such and 
such? its in there. [T1] 
The diary had become a fundamental part of Anthonys support system, such 
that by time point three, with Mollies prompting, Anthony was recording his 
activities to act as a reminder of what he had achieved each day. Similarly 
Kate described the importance of ensuring that the environment was as 
supportive as possible, because she recognised that Alistair couldnt process 
effectively and therefore lost track of where things were. Consequently she 
had organised their holiday home in order that Alistair was able to find 
everything (Table 8.21): 
Table 8.21 Structuring the environment 
Kate  So he couldnt find it. That's the nice thingthat's the most 
relaxing thing about being [away] because everything has a home 
and I've labelled all the shelves in the garage and now I've stopped 
my mother filling things in the holes when Alistairs taken 
something so it effectively shuffles the shelves, I've stopped her 
doing that now and she now understands its got to go back in the 
same place  
Alistair  Yes.  
Kate  Because she understands that its much better. [] but in [holiday 
home] its so easy because everything lives in its home and 
everything you can get. So you go ontoand I've coded 
everything ((laughingly)) I went into primary teacher mode and 
everythings got a label. So there's a gardening cupboard. So the 
hand held gardening tools are in one place. The gardening tools 
are on the wall in one place. The household tools are on the wall in 
anotherand everything isso if he's looking for a drill itll be on 
the tool shelf and so that's made it easier and that's what will 
happen here  
Alistair  Yes.  
Kate  because that's what I'm aiming for Alistair. [T1] 
Furthermore, as can be seen above, Kate had plans to ensure that their 
home was similarly structured once the renovations were completed, to 
enhance Alistairs ability to find things independently. Melinda also referred to 
structuring and sequencing activity in order that Bert was able to engage with 
enjoyable activities (Table 8.22): 
Table 8.22: Structuring Activity 
Melinda  You accept that when you can't do something. And, instead of me 
having to map out how we're going to do it, you're quite happy now 
to do that, like with the motorbike they take photographs of how 
they take it apart and they'll colour-code it so they know what part 
goes onto another. And you've been very much part of that with 
them which he wasn't six months ago. You tried to hide it from 
them. [T2] 
Bert  And in my, yeah in my mind I was thinking, Right if I dont want to 
lose something you can sit there and become a zombie and lose it 
naturally if you like, if you dont use your mind, if youre not active 
and try and do things as best you can  
Melinda  Weve done loads havent we?  
Bert  Its got to help.  
Melinda  Were building a motorbike, youre building a motorbike with Idris 
arent you?  
Bert  Yeah that belonged to one of me sons that died.  
Melinda  Yeah theyre building that back up.  
Bert  So weve stripped it down now and  
Melinda    Taken photos so he knows where  
Bert  Had it shot blasted and undercoated and then it wasin the end, 
then next spring were going to get it sprayed then silver, the 
proper colour and then all my lads know motorbikes so were going 
to build it back up and its 25 years old now the bike so, you know, 
but its something like that that, you know and youve got the lads 
round doing things and they have a good laugh and a joke and all 
this, its good for me. [T2] 
As can be seen from the above quote, breaking activities down into their 
component parts was fundamental to facilitating successful activity. 
Preparation and prompting was critical to this, as can be seen in the quote 
below where Rachel Perrin described how she had supported Alistair to 
engage in some work on the outside of their home (Table 8.23): 
Table 8.23: Preparation and prompting 
Rachel  Well he's done a lot more of the building work and stuff. [] He 
dug a hole outside and he'd also hurt his back at the same time 
and he'd got in the hole and then I said to him, Right have you got 
everything? and he went, Yes, yes, yes. []. So I said, Go 
through what you need and just to double check while I'm here, 
and he went, Okay, and he said, I've got my pencil, brilliant, got 
the pipe, and I said, What about what youre cutting it with? 
because I could see his saw was on the other side of the garden 
((laughingly)) and he went, I'm using my electric saw, and I went, 
Right, wheres the electricity coming from? So he'd got the 
electric saw and no power ((laughingly)) supply. So he's like, Oh, 
yeah I need a power supply, so I was like, Oh right, and he told 
me where it was. So I went and plugged it in and brought it to him. 
So that was fine. And then he needed something else and he was 
like, Oh ((sighs[]. And I was like, Right now what do you 
need? and he was telling me and I was like, And so do you need 
that? that was something else that was in the garden and he was 
like, Yeah, and I went and got that ((laughs)) [] And I was like, 
Right Lets help a bit here, because he hadnthe'd thought of 
what he needed but he hadnt thought of the actual ability to get 
them [T2] 
Rachel seemed to recognise that her Dad was unable to process sufficiently 
to be able to plan and prepare for the task, consequently she was able to   
help him to the extent that he was then able to undertake the task, through 
prompting and guidance. 
As can be seen in tables 8.21 - 8.23, it appeared that Melinda and Kate had 
sought to collaborate with other family members to facilitate this structure. 
Furthermore, Melinda and Berts quotes (Table 8.22) also attest to the 
process that they have had to go through to enable these strategies to be put 
in place. It appeared that Bert was not initially happy to accept this help; 
consequently she recognised that it would take time to put these processes 
in place. Melinda described the importance of learning how to approach Bert: 
Melinda  If we keep with a routine. At first, I used to get frustrated with 
him because of the changes and I know hes a capable man, 
so suddenly a complete change in personality with Bert and it 
was very difficult for me and that caused friction between us, 
didnt it? Now Im able to understand what the problem is 
through the diagnosis, then I dont expect the same from Bert 
that I did before and I know I have to explain things more. I 
know that when hes going to do a task, we sit together and 
we work that task out from start to finish and we kind of do it 
on a board. I understand hes embarrassed about his 
condition, so if people come, we take away things that are 
reminders for Bert. [T1] 
Therefore by time point 2, Bert appeared to value the support and assistance 
he received from his wife and his children. Indeed he had extended his 
willingness to accept help to receiving assistance from a neighbour who was 
helping him to grow vegetables. Sensitivity to the persons experience was 
also evident in the Burton and Perrin family narratives.  
Similarly, empowering the person to engage in activities appeared to be an 
important feature of scaffolding. Empowerment involved all of the scaffolding 
processes described above. Furthermore, it required that family members 
were able to undertake assessment of risk and manage activities 
accordingly, on an ongoing basis (Table 8.24): 
Table 8.24: Assessment of risk 
Mollie  And I'd been going out, I was out last week, I went and met 
[friend], didn't I, for a coffee. Left you to it. Because [] He's got a 
tracker. He's not going to go far because he's happy here in his 
own little space. And if he does wander off I can find him. [].  
Anthony    And talking on that side, it makes a huge difference. The fact that 
I've got the tracker means that if, say, Mollie's gone out and I'm on 
my own and then you suddenly feel like you'd like to pop round to 
have a walk down by the river or something, that without it I would 
have to stay at home because if I wasn't here when she got back, 
then, it's upsetting. But because I've got that, then I've got the 
freedom to go out any time I like. [T3] 
It seemed that tolerating risk involved emotional and practical considerations. 
Mollie had described concerns about leaving Anthony alone, but on the 
advice of their GP and specialist nurse, she had felt able to do this. Achieving 
this was clearly beneficial to both of them in providing much needed time 
apart. However this was possible because of the availability of assistive 
technology that allowed them both to feel secure that Anthony could be found 
should anything go wrong.  
A number of other coping processes appeared to be utilised in scaffolding. 
Simplification of household items appeared to be important, as described 
previously in chapter 7 (Table 7.21). Anticipating and managing potentially 
difficult situations were particularly important given the difficulties people with 
bvFTD experienced with control, safety and security. For example, in chapter 
7, (Table 7.10) Bert and Melinda described how Bert could lose his temper 
when out shopping or in similar situations. In this context they had identified 
the triggers and worked together to agree a way of coping that involved 
avoiding similar situations: 
Melinda: Thats one concern he has, thats why he wouldnt dream of 
going off on his own shopping.  If we go out, [where], theres 
more shops, he would never go in a shop, he would stand on 
the outside, because he says, I havent got to face any 
confrontation.  Because I think slowly youve realised ...  
Bert:  Thats why I dont like answering the phone, because at the 
end of the day, you can say nine times out of ten, youre 
going to have to make a decision or say something that could 
cause a problem.  I just dont do it.  [T1] 
Rena and Dave also described the importance of ensuring that familiarity 
was established should Alistair need to go to strange places. With Rachels 
upcoming wedding, they sought to ensure that Alistair was familiar with the 
place where the reception was happening (Table 8.25): 
Table 8.25: Facilitating familiarity 
Jenny  So how did that come about, in the sense that, was that a process 
that Kate put in place?  
Rena  Yes. We went up there the one night, Rachel and Mike, Dave and I 
and Kate and Alistair and had a meal up there and spoke to the 
proprietor before it was all booked. And Kate explained the 
situation and we'd taken over the hotel. []So and then Kate said 
Would it be possible for me to bring my camping car? And the 
guy said yes.  
Dave  So they parked it in there  
Rena       So they parked it in and that was deliberately done in case Alistair 
found it was all too much. And, he didn't have to cope with a 
strange bedroom and a strange place that he wasn't familiar with. 
Because all the things they do at the moment, I mean, when they 
go [to their holiday home] they go on the same ship. They know 
the cabins, they know the layout, it's all familiar and they get 
[there] to their own house and they know where they're going. So 
he copes with all that. A lot of the time when they go away they go 
visiting with friends, they take the camping car and again, they stay 
there, so he isn't forced to then cope in somebody else's house. 
Through careful preparation, including engaging with the owner of the hotel, it 
appeared that they were able to help Alistair to feel secure and safe. 
Furthermore the above quote appeared to allude to another coping process, 
that of having a safe space to escape to. It seemed that having the 
opportunity for time out was an important feature of enabling the person with   
bvFTD to feel safe and secure and therefore avoid stressful situations. Mollie 
referred to this in her description of Anthonys need to withdraw on a bad 
Jenny  So what do you notice about a bad day?  
Mollie  Oh yeah, he shuts down and he's in the chair and he can 
spend hours sitting in the chair. I just leave him to get on with 
it basically. [T3] 
Similarly Kate referred to the importance of their holiday home and 
motorhome as safe spaces for Alistair. Finally, Melinda highlighted how 
important it had been for them to have a home with two bedrooms, so that 
she could give Bert some space when he needed this. Furthermore, she 
highlighted that it had been important to help their children to understand that 
he needed this space to withdraw in order to manage when the environment 
became too much for him: 
Melinda  Things like family parties, family get-togethers, if more than 
one comes, hell take himself off.  And its these now 
understanding thats not dad not wanting to be part of it, but 
dad needing his space.  And by doing that, these now are 
picking up on their children and what behaviours can trigger 
Bert to lose it, so to safeguard these, because all these know 
is that granddad is poorly and thats the way that its been put 
over to the younger ones.  The older ones know and ... [T1] 
It seemed that Kate, Melinda and Mollie were able to reframe behaviour as 
reflecting their husbands need for a safe space. However it appeared that for 
Mollie, this reframing was challenged by an increase in Anthonys withdrawal 
at time point three. Similarly Kate reflected on how lonely her life had become 
in the evenings as withdrawal into Alistairland became a feature of their lives 
together: 
Alistair I should be... hang on, what am I doing? Yes, I've gone off 
into what we call Alistairland, you know, drift off and...  
Kate  I think the absolute hardest thing for me is the silence. 
Because I'm so communicative I find it really hard. Alistair 
can sit all night and not speak to me. Not because he doesn't 
want to talk to me, but just because he's just tired and so 
he's shut down. That's happened more and more and I find it 
quite lonely. [T2] 
Thus even though they understood the need to withdraw, it further 
accentuated the losses they were experiencing as a consequence of bvFTD. 
Enabling and facilitating: An enjoyable life 
It appeared that for three of the families (Burton, Morris and Perrin) seeking 
opportunities to continue to enjoy life was an important aspect of living well 
with bvFTD. Initially the onset of bvFTD appeared to impact upon what might 
be possible and some had made decisions to restrict or disengage in 
previously valued activities: 
Jenny  How has that changed now?  
Anthony What we was really, really looking forward to was retiring and 
actually doing some long-term cruising on the boat. That 
unfortunately never came to fruition and never happened, 
which was disappointing. Not having a boat we miss terribly. 
Its a little bolthole, a little escape, a second home. We had 
one for such a long period of time that we definitely miss it. 
It nevertheless seemed that over time families sought to find ways to achieve 
opportunities to enjoy life, either by adapting activities or engaging in new 
ones. For example, Mollie and Anthony described finding a way to continue 
cruising (Table 8.26): 
Table 8.26: An enjoyable life 
Mollie  We'll see how things pan out when we go on the boat, because I 
think it's going to take us back how we were when we were on the 
smaller boat, []. It's what you wanted. But to see him on the back 
of a boat, as I say, it's stepping back before he was ill. That's how 
he is on the back of a boat. So because he's remembering 
everything, what we used to do []. Which I was quite surprised 
about actually, when we went out in May. So it's not Don't give 
up. Like, we sold the big boat because I couldn't cope with that 
big boat with him. I just couldn't handle it. Then I thought we 
wouldn't buy another one because I don't know how he's going to 
be. Well, we don't. And I'd have to cope with it all. So this year 
we've tried hiring. And I thought Well, hire one a couple of times a 
year. It's still the cost of moorings and whatever. And we haven't 
got the thought of, stress, the worry, the upkeep of it.  
Anthony   It's not the same as having your own boat. Advantages both ways.  
Mollie       No. But you love it on the back of that boat. [] But I was quite 
surprised when he got on the back of that boat how he 
remembered what he used to [] So I went through with him. He 
was fine, weren't you love.  
Anthony We find the boat very therapeutic.  
Mollie      Yeah. You sit for hours on the front deck watching the fish.  
Anthony   It gets rid of all your problems, just veg out. It's so calming, it slows 
you down to such a pace.  
Mollie And I haven't got to watch him on the boat. I can sit there and read the 
paper and he's just tootling around and he sat on the front deck for 
about two hours with a bit of bread watching the fish come up. [] 
Similarly, Kate Perrin described engaging in activities that they enjoyed 
together (c.f.p.206). Engaging in such activities required that families 
anticipated and prepared, managed risk and used the scaffolding processes 
described previously. For example, in the quote above, Mollie referred to 
hiring a boat rather than owning one, thus having less responsibility for 
upkeep, which appeared to be an important adaptation for them. 
Enabling and facilitating: Humour 
Additionally, humour also seemed to be a method of coping for some of the 
families. Laughing about the difficulties rather than at the person seemed to 
be critical to this as in the example below: 
Anthony Yeah. I can behave meself if I have to.  
Mollie  People think 'She's telling him off.' But he takes notice. Or he 
laughs at me.  
Jenny  Like you're doing now ((laughs)). What does misbehaving 
mean then?  
Anthony  It's like being a naughty child. You go into your second 
childhood, don't you, when you get older.  
Mollie  This is why I have to keep...  
Anthony  You're allowed to misbehave now and again, I've got a good 
excuse.  
Mollie  He doesn't see danger, do you love.  
Anthony  No.  
Mollie  Everything's funny. We've got a saying, haven't we. 'Behave 
yourself now.' 'I'll come up there, I'll slap your legs.' and you'll 
suddenly come back and say 'Oh yes please' ((laughs)). 
Everything's funny to us. [T3] 
Thus it appeared that laughter enabled them to defuse a situation that might 
otherwise have been stressful. Humour also featured in the narratives of the 
Perrin and Morris families.  
Enabling and facilitating: Supporting, informing and involving 
others 
Over the duration of their involvement in the research, it appeared that some 
families sought to involve others in their lives as a means of coping with the 
impact of bvFTD. The Perrin and Burton families seemed to involve others in 
providing meaningful activity and occupation for the person living with bvFTD 
(Table 8.27):  
Table 8.27: engaging with support from others 
Kate The other day when I went off with mum I spent the whole day, 
because it was Alistairs first time with [support worker] and I was 
anxious but I thought I've got to let him do it [] So mum and I 
went out for the day and I was climbing the walls by the time I got 
to [city] and she kept saying to me, Do you want to phone? No 
I'm not going to phone, I'm not going to phone he knows where I 
am he can phone me if he needs me. I've got to trust that this is 
going to work, and when I got back youd had a lovely time you 
and [support worker] hadnt you?  
Alistair  Yes.  
Kate  And he hadnt needed me at all. [] 
Alistair  The first time we just went out where I go wind surfing and we had 
a walk round the lake and that and just a natter and then stopped 
and had a drink in a pub, a nice little pub and a bite to eat, a 
sandwich. And so just getting to know each other. This time were 
going off to have a game of squash.  
Jenny  Great.  
Alistair  Yes I havent played squash for I don't know. ((laughs)) []  
Jenny  Okay. So whats the reason behind [support worker] coming? Why 
is that happening?  
Alistair  Its so I get to know [support worker] before I got totally forgetting 
people so he's familiar with me now. []  
Kate  The idea is that until Alistair stops working that he sees [support 
worker] roughly once a month to start building a good relationship 
because I want it to be somebody, not only Alistair trusts but that I 
trust with Alistair because that's hard [] I dont want five or six 
people. Alistairs frightened of new people. He doesnt like it. So to 
have a different carer coming in that's not going to work [] its not 
just about the person being cared for its about the trust that the 
carer has to have. If I dont trust the person there's no way I'm 
going to leave Alistair with them, no way, any more than I would 
have left a child with a carer that you didnt trust. [] Another 
problem is that everybody sees dementia as Alzheimers, people 
dont recognise the different forms and therefore the different 
strands within it. He's got AlzI mean the number of times people 
say to me, He's got Alzheimers, no he hasnt got Alzheimers 
and there is a huge difference. [] But what 
               Alistair needs is the continuity. He doesnt like new spaces, he 
doesnt like new people, he doesnt like lots of people. There are 
all sorts of little things you no longer will  
Alistair  Tolerate. [T3] 
As can be seen from the quote above, it appeared that in order for these 
opportunities to be successful, they needed to focus on activities that the 
person with bvFTD would enjoy and was willing to engage in. It seemed from 
Kates narrative that this was also designed to support Alistair to become 
familiar with others being involved in his care, as dealing with strange people 
and places was a particular difficulty for him. 
Furthermore, it was additionally important that the family were able to trust 
that the care provided would be beneficial and that they could trust the 
person involved. This commonly involved ensuring that the support worker  
understood the persons specific needs and as indicated above, recognised 
the way in which bvFTD might impact upon those needs. Kate also referred 
to the importance of developing a relationship with the person to support 
greater involvement as Alistairs needs increased.  
A particular benefit to involving others in the persons care appeared to be 
the opportunity for time apart as a number of the families mentioned that one 
impact of bvFTD involved spending increased amounts of time together. 
Therefore, although initially Kate found it difficult, she subsequently identified 
that having time apart was an important benefit of such support.  
Distancing, managing and controlling: getting through the 
necessities 
However, as described in the sections awareness and understanding of 
the changes and were not the same anymore, the Hugh and Lewin 
families appeared to position the problems brought about by bvFTD with the 
person and seemed to distance themselves through processes such as care 
management. This strategy was only partially successful; consequently these 
families also seemed to limit their involvement to getting through the 
necessities of life with the person with bvFTD (Table 8.28): 
Table 8.28: getting through the necessities 
Pamela  And I was getting more and more worked up because of the 
amount of stuff that I've gotta do that I was thinking 'I just can't do 
this anymore. So it's a bit like I've had to look at it and say 'Well, 
as long as she's got her basic needs... The carers are going in, I'll 
go in when I want to, or when I have to go in. But you see, when I 
back off, she ends up phoning me. So it's like ((laughs)) Oh, Pam 
hasn't been round for a week or two. Ooh, let's try ringing her. 
And it'll be ridiculous things that she's phoning for. Well, nothing in 
particular.[T2] 
Sarah  Yeah were just getting through the day by doing the necessities 
with him, so eating, drinking, toiletries, [T1] 
It seemed that this strategy wasnt entirely effective for Pamela as she felt 
her mother would re-establish contact if she hadnt been there for a while. 
Similarly, it had limited success for Sarah and Alex as they lived with Ray 
and were therefore exposed to his needs for much of the time.   
Distancing, managing and controlling: controlling them and 
others involved in their care 
Additionally, it appeared that both couples engaged a controlling approach to 
manage the behaviour of the person with bvFTD.  
Sarah and Alex initially utilised a strategy of keeping Ray in check. This 
involved being firm with him about his behaviour: 
Sarah  You have to be quite strict with him.  
Alex  You have to do it my way, rather than his way, because 
sometimes he just will not listen. And Ive only raised my 
voice to him once, but it seemed to work for about six months 
and I didnt get any backchat. [T1] 
However, over time they seemed to become less controlling in their 
responses to him (Table 8.29): 
Table 8.29 being less controlling 
Sarah  So I'm like, Why do you want to swap all these about? Oh well I 
own that land and I want to make sure that that's right, Right 
okay dad. So I've done it because if you dont do something  
Alex  Hell mither on and on.  
Sarah  hell mither yeah all the time and hell make. Hell make your life 
a living hell so you justits easier to give into him sometimes 
((laughs)).  
Jenny  Are there things that you both give in on?  
Sarah  I try but what dont we give in on?  
Alex  He wins on everything come on.  
Sarah  Food to a certain point but even then I give into that. He knows 
he's meant to be taking it easy with what hes eating but then I 
think, well  
Alex  What pleasures in life  
Sarah  What pleasures in life does he have? So people are saying dont 
have pudding or dont  
Alex  He doesnt drink, he doesnt smoke, you know, if a guilty pleasure 
is overindulgence then as far as I'm concerned just let him. He 
hasnt got the options we have and its sad but its true so as far as 
I'm concerned if he wants to eat it he can.[T3] 
It is possible that lessening their use of control with him arose because of the 
level of support they were receiving, which was not present at time point one.  
Nevertheless they continued to experience the situation as stressful and 
difficult because of the demands of caring for him. It seemed that at times 
Ray was aware of this difficulty: 
Jenny  So whats things like as a family together at the moment for 
you and for Sarah and for Alex and the grandchildren?  
Ray  Well they might find it more difficult because of the kids [] 
to look after me because theyve got the kids to look after. So 
in a way I might comewell I'm part of the family but I 
wouldnt get full attention because of, you know, what Sarah 
has said, I mean, Youre not the only one here mind. Which 
is understandable. The way to have full treatment is just what 
I'm saying if you want to go away into a home and be looked 
after or you can come and lookyou know, I mean to say 
what I'm trying to say is stop in your home as long as you 
can, dont complain too much what they do for you, well what 
they do for you is a bonus.  
Jenny  Yeah.  
Ray  But dont, you know, if you start playing up too much you'll be 
away like, you know. That's what I'm saying you've got to be 
careful. [T2] 
It appeared that Ray recognised the need to control the demands he made 
on them in order to avoid placement in a care home. However while he may 
have shown some level of cognitive awareness in interview; Sarah and Alex 
continued to experience his behaviour as difficult, suggesting that from their 
perspective, he didnt control his behaviour in the moment. By time point 
three they had made the decision that there were limits to what they could do 
to support him: 
Jenny  Okay. So you were just saying that its quite difficult for you 
to manage the challenge of looking after him and the children 
when youre on your own?  
Alex  Yeah, which is becoming obviously its more often but its a 
case you have to but weve had another incident with a near 
fall so since then its a case of I'm just not going to take that   
 risk any more. So whether it be he unfortunately has an 
accident in his trousers then so be it and hell have to have a 
pad and that will be that because I'm not having another 
incident like we did with the paramedic here the last time.  
Sarah  Yeah we had the paramedics here again since you've been.  
Alex  And its yeah its a no-no. [T3] 
While it seemed that this was due in part to other life circumstances, 
including their childrens needs and their own health challenges (c.f. chapter 
6) it nevertheless resulted in coping processes that continued to position Ray 
as at fault. However, although their situation was very difficult, Sarah and 
Alex seemed unwilling to contemplate alternatives: 
Sarah  Yeah if we have too many things going on that theyre going 
to turn round to us and say you can't cope he's got to go into 
a home.  
Jenny  Is that something that you've talked about?  
Sarah  Other people have but we havent because that was never 
the, you know and the going gets tough sometimes but he's 
not ready for a home yet, I feel yeah that he'd be ready for a 
home when he has to have feeding [] or whatever [] but 
whilst he's like he is I think that we can cope with it. We get 
support, carers, so yeah. [T3] 
Pamela and Jonathan also appeared to use a controlling approach in their 
response to Elizabeth. Taking control seemed to begin during the pre-
diagnostic phase as a consequence of the level of risk that became apparent. 
Furthermore it continued throughout Pamela and Jonathans involvement in 
the research. As a consequence of the difficulties experienced prior to 
diagnosis, taking control involved managing care to ensure that Elizabeths 
needs were met. They appeared to feel the need to do this as a result of the 
challenging consequences of Elizabeths behaviour for her well-being, their 
own and others. However, managing her care commonly involved damage 
limitation as they frequently found it difficult to control Elizabeths behaviour 
or indeed to mitigate the consequences.   
They had discussed Elizabeths alcohol intake at length on more than one 
occasion. In the following quote, they described the challenges of managing 
this difficulty and addressing her best interests as well as managing the 
dilemma it created for them; 
Pamela So she was drinking really heavily. I don't know quite at what 
point we stopped her from going to the shop. 
Jonathan  Well I don't know but we looked at it from our point of view 
and said is it morally right to be supplying this to her because 
if she dies of alcohol poisoning or as a result of drinking 
that's been supplied to her by us, on the advice ((laughingly)) 
of the psychiatrist but nonetheless weve been kind of aiding 
and abetting so we were quite ready to pull back on that 
weren't we? [T1] 
They appeared therefore to be trying to protect Elizabeth, which frequently 
involved making impossible choices, as a consequence of dilemmas for 
which they had no satisfactory answers or solutions. 
Damage limitation also therefore seemed to involve attempting to control and 
anticipate what Elizabeth might do or what she might need. Additionally it 
involved managing the risks associated with her behaviour, even though they 
acknowledged that this was also difficult to achieve. They described the need 
to manage her life in the first interview and continued in this vein, suggesting 
that they needed to control everything. This included the care package, the 
frequency of her trips to the shops with the carers, the amount of alcohol she 
consumed and her meals, as described in chapter 7 (Table 7.13). Pamela 
and Jonathan therefore described many different activities involved in 
controlling her life, much of which required a supervisory role, overseeing 
and monitoring on an ongoing basis.  
For both families, controlling also involved managing the work of others 
involved in providing care. Sarah and Alex described the necessity of 
ensuring that the carers understood what they needed to do for Ray: 
Sarah  [] Ive got a situation at the moment that could be really 
dangerous and why they dont do it I dont know. He has a 
stand and turn you've seen them the plates and I saw it with 
my own eyes and I, excuse me, [told him off] him after it 
happened. Two skinny girls, bless them, came and put him to 
bed the other night and he got on this stand and turn and 
messed around and he started rocking it. Well, they nearly 
lost control over him and he so very nearly ended up on the 
floor. [] I said, Youve got to tell him, because youre going 
to get injured, or he is, [] you have to go in really firm with 
him.[T1] 
Similarly, Jonathan and Pamela frequently described the need to direct the 
carers in their interventions with Elizabeth. 
Avoiding and reacting: blaming and undermining 
As with the Hugh and Lewin Families, it appeared that the Stuart Family also 
positioned Terry as the problem and seemed to see him as responsible for 
his behaviour. While Carole seemed to move to a position of being more 
understanding of his behaviour by time point three (c.f. table 8.6) it did not 
appear that Sue was able to make a similar shift in her understanding and 
therefore her responses to Terry. Consequently, Sues responses to Terrys 
difficulties appeared largely reactive and critical as described in chapter 7 
(Table 7.4). As a result, it seemed that Terry became frustrated and upset 
with Sue and may have felt undermined by her as suggested by Carole: 
 Jenny  Right and thats been quite a change really?  
Carole  He does shout at her quite a lot I think. Stop telling me what 
to do, I think she does treat him like a child and sometimes I 
do cringe. But its like, oh. But I justI suppose she's just so 
used to having to tell him what to do. Its something very 
difficult a balancing act I would imagine ((laughs)) [T3] 
Furthermore, as described earlier (p.228), while it appeared that Sue had 
received support in the form of a specialist nurse, this did not appear to have 
influenced her approach towards Terry, indeed she did not mention this   
support when discussing what had helped her to cope. Therefore Sue 
mentioned few coping processes throughout the research, with those used 
being largely confined to having to bite her tongue and let it go or walking 
away when they got into conflict (Table 8.30): 
Table 8.30: having to bite my tongue and let it go 
Sue  Ill tell you what else he does. We can probably be going in the car 
and we might start talking about something and then all of a 
sudden Terry comes out with something which is not anything to 
do with what weve just been talking about.  
Terry  Thats the editing listening.  
Sue  And I go, What are you on about? You know I cant. And I just 
dont know what youre on about you see ((laughingly)) But he 
expects me to think what it is. That has caused a few words in the 
car. Nearly every time we go out in the car we have a few words 
((laughs))  
Jenny  So its what you were saying about the editing machine?  
Terry  Its the editing machine. My brain is engaging to that editing 
machine and it goes on something that Im thinking about and it 
edits that. And the brain goes ten to the dozen, thinking of 
something else and Im trying to get that across and its quite 
frustrating, isnt it?  
Jenny  It sounds like its frustrating.  
Sue  But no, youre expecting me to know exactly what youre thinking 
of at the moment and I think, Well, I cant see any relevance to 
how hes come out with that when weve been talking about 
something entirely different ((laughs)) So now Ive got to try to 
bite my tongue every time he does it and not say anything, but its 
very difficult, isnt it?  
Jenny  It sounds like its frustrating for both of you.  
Sue  Yeah, yeah.  
Terry  Yes it is, Jenny and Im not stupid, I know what Im trying to get 
across and if you cant get it across its frustrating. [T3] 
It therefore seemed that Sue was somewhat passive in her responses, 
reacting only when situations became difficult.  
Avoiding and reacting: finding ways to enjoy life while we can 
and involving others in care 
Sue and Terrys primary coping approaches as a couple appeared to be 
limited to finding ways of enjoying life while they still can and continuing with 
the support of a carer for Terry. They described engaging in activities that 
they enjoyed together (c.f. table 8.13) which appeared to be particularly 
important to them as a way of coping with the impact of bvFTD on their lives: 
Sue  I keeping trying well just make our life as best as we can and 
that sort of thing and thats the only thing you can do isn't it 
really. I mean we still have a laugh and a joke don't we?  
Terry  Yeah.  
Sue  and do that you know.  
Terry  I laugh at her and she laughs at me. ((laughs))  
Jenny  So how do you make life as best as you can, what do you 
Sue  Well by going on holiday, trying to keep in touch with our 
family and things like that. [T1] 
Furthermore, as with the families that engaged in enabling and facilitating, it 
seemed that they felt that humour was also an important coping process. 
However as described previously (Table 8.13), it did not appear that the 
holidays that Sue and Terry took were always successful as Sue felt that 
Terry was not as supportive of her as she needed him to be.  
Sue and Terry also described having a support worker for Terry, which 
enabled him to be motivated and to engage in meaningful activities: 
Jenny  So this was the person who was coming to take you out?  
Terry  And dont forget that fellow.  
Sue  We were supposed to be getting funding and the only help 
hes had is this [carer] that comes and its [a care agency] 
and hes a really nice chap and hes even helped Terry 
decorate the kitchen and the dining room, they did it between 
them, because I was worried and I cant cope now with 
scraping paint and whatever, so they did it between them   
 and it looks lovely. I mean they did that dining room in half a 
day and we hadnt moved anything, so that was nice and 
they enjoyed it. I put music on for them and they were 
singing and laughing and he enjoyed that. And then like last 
week, he went to play snooker with him and I went into town.  
Terry  Hes 50 a time, mind you.  
Sue  He enjoys that, Jenny and thats what he needs. [T3] 
Again, as well as providing meaningful activity for Terry, an additional value 
of this appeared to be in providing Sue with time apart from Terry (c.f. p.231). 
8.5 Being me in the context of bvFTD 
The challenge of being me in the context of bvFTD was experienced by all 
five people living with dementia who participated in this research. People 
living with bvFTD experienced challenges to self, identity, agency and safety 
in the context of the social and cognitive changes brought about by dementia.  
The coping processes utilised to address this challenge involved strategies 
that the person with bvFTD invoked as well as those that family members 
developed. In some families, there was collaboration within the family 
including the person with bvFTD which seemed to support selfhood, agency 
and to maintain wellbeing. This appeared to include holding the person to 
manage feelings of distress. However, in other families, individual family 
members seemed not to recognise the difficulties the person was 
experiencing, thus the person with bvFTD appeared to act independently to 
attempt to maintain selfhood, agency and wellbeing. Evidence of coping 
processes associated with this challenge occurred across all three time 
points. A number of subthemes emerged from analysis: 
 Maintaining self 
o Im still me, still active and engaged with life;  
o Im still me, theres nothing wrong  
o Im still me, resisting negative perceptions  
 Maintaining wellbeing 
o Supporting safety and security (a collaborative process) 
o Holding them (family members)  
o Resisting and restricting (person with bvFTD) 
o Positioning, controlling and distancing (family members) 
Maintaining Self: 
Im still me, still active and engaged with life 
Alistair Perrin and Anthony Burton appeared to acknowledge that they were 
changing and recognised that their family members may have different 
perspectives on how much bvFTD had affected them. It nevertheless 
seemed that they engaged in activities or roles which maintained their self-
concept and therefore selfhood. Alistair and Anthony referred to valued 
aspects of their lives that they continued to engage in which appeared to 
reinforce their sense of self. For example, Alistair had initially reflected on the 
importance of children in his life, which was reinforced by his family, (c.f. 
chapter 6). He continued to reflect on the positive nature of his relationship 
with his grandchildren: 
Alistair Yeah. The kids get my attention straightaway. 
Kate They always have done. 
Alistair Yes. 
Kate The little ones always do. 
Alistair When they come in and theyre in your face really they dont 
have certain 
Kate And theyre loud and theyre not subtle you see, Grampa 
youre not listening 
Jenny ((laughs)) 
Alistair Yeah wallop, Grampa okay right. ((laughs)) 
Kate Grampa she's pulling on his legs, Grampa [T1] 
This relationship continued to be important throughout his involvement in the 
research. Similarly, Anthony was described by Mollie as someone who would 
always try to help others (c.f. chapter 6). He continued to value opportunities 
to contribute for example, undertaking activities such as work with the 
University and as in the example below, for the church rooms (Table 8.31):  
Table 8.31: Continuing to contribute 
Anthony [] So I've been well pleased with that, how I've been coping 
and standing up. And a few improvements as in doing a bit of 
voluntary work over the church rooms, has given us a good 
sense of purpose.   
Jenny How did that come about? 
Anthony The treasurer of the church rooms, ... he was cutting the 
hedge back running along the pathway, the alley there and 
the hedge had got so tall and overgrown he couldn't reach 
the top of the hedge, []  And he was doing it all on his own. 
[] Talking to him over the garden fence, we give him a 
hand on occasions and used our brush saw to cut down a 
few of the big trunks of the holly trees in the middle. And 
that's how we got involved. [] So that's made a difference 
to us, doing something that... We walk past every morning, 
going down for the paper, so you see the gates that you've 
done, you can relate nicely to it. So you're doing it for your 
own benefit really, not for anybody else. [T3] 
Thus they appeared to be able to maintain their sense of self and remain 
actively engaged with life in spite of the changes they experienced.  It 
appeared that for both Alistair and Anthony, the responses of family and 
others around them supported the maintenance of self-concept. For example, 
both the Perrin and Burton families reinforced Alistair and Anthonys identity 
as a grandparent throughout the research (Table 8.32): 
Table 8.32: Supporting selfhood 
Kate        Yeah. Oh yeah, yes. Child safety has always been... But he was 
like a magnet at the wedding. All of these kids, [] everybody's 
small person and there were a number. There were only fifty at the 
actual wedding and twelve of those were little people. So he's 
playing with them all at the bottom of the garden. Weren't you? 
Alistair     Tag. Tickle. Wizards.  
Kate        Because they just played with all these kids. Had a lovely time. 
Every time we looked up he was playing with the kids. [T2]  
Mollie  She is, honest to God. And they're both the same with him. And he 
loves it, you love it, don't you. And another thing he does with Isla, 
I leave the front door open now she's here. The horror Wild child 
He goes out and he does the same with her, she'll go out and 
she'll 'Come on Granddad, we're going out for a walk in the 
garden.' And then you'll hear the doorbell going. And she's got him 
to lift her up so she can press and you open the door and she's 
smiling. And they keep going round and round.  
Anthony  That's true, straight out the back door and then straight round she 
comes to the front door.  
Mollie  Granddads got to lift her up, so yeah, she's been up when you 
had potatoes, growing potatoes at the back. She gets her hands 
dirty, she enjoys that, Isla. Chloe doesn't. Chloe does not like 
getting dirty at all. But Isla loves it. So he really has some fun with 
the girls, don't you. They're very caring. [T3] 
Relationships with their grandchildren appeared to be viewed positively and 
supported by both families. Both Kate and Mollie appeared to recognise that 
the ability to engage in more complex activities with the grandchildren was 
changing over time and as described previously, (p.159-60) Alistair and 
Anthony appeared to find it easier to interact with younger grandchildren. 
Nevertheless, it seemed that these relationships were maintained throughout 
their involvement in the research and held benefits for both the person with 
bvFTD as well as their grandchildren.  
Similarly, both Anthony and Alistair were supported to engage in and be 
successful at activities through enabling and facilitative strategies described 
earlier in this chapter, such as scaffolding. For example, Anthony was no 
longer able to drive. Consequently, Mollie supported Anthony to attend 
meetings at the University and facilitated his engagement with activities 
associated with this. Similarly, throughout the duration of the research, 
Alistair continued to work as a result of a partnership between his employer, 
Kate and himself. This involved Kate supporting his manager and work  
colleagues to understand the nature of the difficulties he experienced and the 
adaptations he needed (Table 8.33): 
Table 8.33: Supporting and informing others 
Kate  So thats when they panicked and we went to Occupational Health, 
which was fine. It was quite interesting that the doctor that was the 
occupational health guy was asking me about what he could do 
and I was explaining all the things that he couldnt do and what the 
condition does and how its going to degenerate. And I looked at 
him at one point and said, Youre the doctor, why am I telling 
you? And he said to me, Youve got a greater understanding and 
knowledge of this than I do, because I only know what Ive read on 
the internet, when I knew I was seeing Alistair. And I said, And 
you will have read Alzheimers and he doesnt have Alzheimers 
and there is a huge difference. And he went, Right, which is what 
youre explaining to me now. So he wrote his report, [] What 
weve got to now, is if theyre going to change something 
drastically, the arrangement is they will contact me first. And then 
he came home yesterday and said theyre changing his boss 
again, but they havent contacted me, which is a bit of a worry, 
because that is what wed set in place to work, so that I could 
prepare him for it, because it is best. If we know something has got 
to change, it is best it comes from me, isnt it? [T1] 
Furthermore, when Alistairs driving licence was withdrawn, Kate explored 
ways of enabling Alistair to continue to go to work through employment 
support allowance.   
Im still me, theres nothing wrong 
This subtheme primarily appeared in Ray Lewins narrative, although the 
Hugh family seemed to feel that Elizabeth held a similar perspective. 
However as Elizabeth did not take part in the research, it is not possible to 
present her perspective here.  
Ray seemed to hold onto a resistant self-concept in which he largely refuted 
that he had bvFTD.  
Ray I've seen a lot worse people with in homes than me i.e. 
dementia which I suppose I've got but its not showing up on 
me yet [T1] 
This appeared to be due to lack of awareness as well as a lack of emotional 
engagement as a consequence of the impact of bvFTD. Rays self-concept 
seemed to reflect who he perceived himself to have been throughout his life, 
as demonstrated in the quote below: 
Jenny So how has life changed for you? 
Ray Well I've made life go on. They always say to me now and 
I've had MND for, well been diagnosed nearly 15, 16 years. 
Now when I was really active, which I've told you I was an 
active man, picked a tennis racket up during the Wimbledon, 
played cricket, mowed pitches, played crib, played darts, 
played well everything and so it came very hard for me when 
I was called MND like a sledgehammer. They said, What is 
MND, and I said, Well just think of a sledgehammer on top 
of your body, you want to get up but you can't. And people 
said to me it must have been very, very difficult for you Ray. 
But I comes out with it. And I've kept smiling and I've kept 
eating. [T1] 
Furthermore, where he acknowledged changes, he focused solely on the 
physical and emotional impact of MND, but stressed the importance of 
maintaining a positive view despite those changes. This unchanging self-
concept is held despite the significant changes that Sarah seemed to feel 
had occurred, indeed at the first time point she indicated that he had 
fundamentally changed from the person she knew:  
Jenny So how has he changed, whats he like? 
Sarah Oh, hes very argumentative now and he never used to be, 
everythings all about him.  Its mine.  It was going on with 
the budget today, there was a penny off the price of beer, oh 
my God, if that had happened years ago, he would have 
been over the moon and now hes going, No, tax them and 
re-re-re.  You just think well youre, everything that he was, 
he now is the contrast of, in my opinion. [T1] 
Therefore despite the changes associated with bvFTD and the way his family 
appeared to view and respond to him, it appeared that Ray believed that he 
was the same person he had always been.  
Im still me, resisting negative perceptions 
Terry and Bert appeared to have a tenuous self-concept which was 
influenced by their concerns about stigma and the negative perceptions of 
others. They seemed to need to defend themselves from the perceptions of 
others.  
For example, Bert and Melinda described the difficulties Bert appeared to 
have with others knowing his diagnosis (Table 8.34): 
Table 8.34: Stigma and others attitudes towards dementia 
Bert But also its an eye opener, that the four years we were on the 
other scheme [], the people that hadnt got issues, like a lot of 
them that we knew, when we first moved on there, had got 
dementia. 
Melinda But afraid to say.  [] 
Bert And its the same on here... 
Melinda Its different here. 
Bert Yeah, attitudes are different, but what Im saying is ... 
Melinda Youre afraid of how people are going to treat you if you tell them, 
thats half your problem, isnt it?  Because its like Bert had mental 
health issues, he had a breakdown when he was 49, a really bad 
one and if you tell someone youve got mental health issues, the 
whole ... ((laughs)) the whole [conversation] finishes and people 
tend to shy away from you, so weve been dealing with that for a 
few years.  And dementia is very much the same in that people 
dont understand.  Im still me, Im still Bert, and you find it hard to 
deal with how people then react to you.  One friend that we had, 
that we thought was a friend, wed just found out hed got 
dementia, we told them and that was it, weve never seen them.  
And Bert is very afraid of isolation, if you like, of people and the 
way they treat him.  Where you go to lunch here, once every other 
week, you go for the lunch and people accept people for what they 
are, but you really are afraid of saying, Ive got a form of 
dementia, arent you?   
Bert Oh yeah, yeah. [] Its like cancer was 15 or 20 years ago. 
Melinda You didnt talk about it.  [T1] 
He and Melinda described the stigma Bert had experienced as a result of his 
prior mental health problems. Indeed given the way that their friends had 
responded, his fears about others perceptions of him since his diagnosis 
appeared to have been realised. Terry also appeared to have similar 
concerns about the people he lived near knowing what was wrong with him 
and seemed angry with his wife Sue for telling a neighbour at the first time 
point. Later in the research, both Terry and Bert appeared to have moved to 
a position of recognising that others might help and support them, 
consequently they had become willing to tell selected others. However, their 
narratives appeared to suggest that they continued to be concerned about 
the way others viewed them and treated them.  
For example, even though he acknowledged some of the changes, Terry 
frequently appeared to engage in self-protective responses when talking with 
his wife Sue about their experience of bvFTD. During one of the interviews, 
Sue described Terrys behaviour towards others in the supermarket, 
suggesting that he was at times inappropriate in his responses, following 
which he seemed to respond defensively (Table 8.35): 
Table 8.35: Resisting negative perceptions 
Terry If I was aggressive, I would say yes, Id have something done 
about it, but Im never aggressive, am I? 
Sue Yes, but you are occasionally to me. 
Terry Well, thats probably the diabetes. 
Sue No, I think its the other.  You shout at me.  And he cant deny it, 
because the chap down there, hes walked past with the dog and 
he says to Terry, I heard you shouting at Sue the other day. 
Terry Thats indicative of the diabetes, a lot of people have that. [] 
Sue Terry, with you its probably a combination, isnt it? [] 
Terry [] Yeah, but [friends] the same, [his wife] tells me. 
Sue Yes, but Terry you havent always been like that towards me. 
Terry Oh no. 
Sue That is what Jennys trying to determine, how youve changed in 
our relationship. 
Terry Yeah, I tend to be a bit stressy. [T3] 
Both the positions of Im still me, still active and engaged with life and Im still 
me resisting negative perceptions featured in Terrys and Berts account, 
although it seemed that the latter was predominant. While both of their 
narratives seemed to have emphasised the need to resist negative 
perceptions, this did not preclude engagement in activities that reinforced 
selfhood.  For example, Bert described rebuilding a motorbike (Table 8.22) 
and Terry described helping a neighbour out: 
Jenny So even though its difficult you do still do things? 
Sue Yes. 
Terry I can do most things.  I can do a ladys, [] sewing machine, 
I took it to pieces and put it back again.  So Im not 
completely non compos mentis, am I? [T3] 
Similarly, there were occasions when resisting negative perceptions 
appeared in Alistairs account at T2 and T3, where he seemed to be sensitive 
to Kates apparent criticism of his driving safety: 
Alistair I process sometimes at the roundabouts, which roundabout 
do I want to go so I've gone round roundabouts no end of 
times. 
Kate Two or three times weve gone round roundabouts. 
Alistair I want that junction. Its just I'm working out where I go. 
Kate ((laughs)) My mother thinks its hilarious, another round the 
roundabout 
Alistair I dont have a ((laughingly)) problem its just another way of 
processing and dealing with the situation. 
Kate However not terribly safe in a car. 
Alistair I think its safe, youre still moving and going round, youre 
not blocking anybody in, not stopped in the road and saying 
where am I going?  [T3] 
Consequently, while all 5 participants appeared to hold to one dominant 
position, to a lesser extent, other positions were also evident in their 
accounts.  
Maintaining Wellbeing 
Supporting safety and security 
In chapter 7, (p.174-7) examples of the experiences leading to feeling out of 
control, unsafe and insecure were described for four of the people living with 
bvFTD who participated. Two of these participants, Bert Morris and Alistair 
Perrin appeared to be supported by their families to utilise coping processes 
that supported feelings of safety and security. These appeared to include 
holding to routines, to familiar environments and familiar people. Holding to 
routines appeared to be a particularly important strategy for Bert: 
Jenny And what helps you to cope, Bert? 
Bert I suppose getting into a routine of doing things. 
Melinda You get very disorientated if we break that routine. 
Bert Well, yeah. 
Melinda We have to motivate him first thing in the morning, but once 
youve done that were well away. 
Bert But also if thats sort of broke, I do get upset then.   
Melinda Because he feels like and I think weve all recognised this 
now, that Berts very good in a routine, that you could think: 
oh, a bit of memory problem, its a bit of change of 
personality, but when you break that routine it becomes very 
evident about his problems that he has got, because youre 
very frustrated, you get very disorientated, dont you? 
Bert Mm. [T1] 
As the above quote appears to suggest, Bert seemed aware that routines 
were necessary and furthermore, when they were broken, this caused him to 
feel distressed. Having order and routine included that others should keep to 
appointment times as highlighted in table 7.22 and also seemed to involve 
life remaining ordered and familiar within their home. For example, when 
Melinda was admitted to hospital, Bert acknowledged that he found it very 
difficult to cope with the change: 
Jenny What was that like for you when it happened? 
Bert Well I just couldnt get my head around all the changes that 
were going on.[] Well over a period of time I'm better with a 
routine. 
Jenny Yeah. 
Bert But everything just went up in the air, so then I mean with 
obviously going to the hospital to see her and then your 
meals are changed everything changes, your your times 
andso I didnt like that at all. It was upsetting.  [T2] 
Alistair also discussed how important it was for him to feel safe in unfamiliar 
environments. He appeared to recognise that when he and Kate were out, he 
needed to be able to locate her in order to avoid feeling insecure and unsafe: 
Kate I mean going to Tesco at one point was absolute nightmare 
[] I wanted to buy a new coat and I found this really smart 
black one. [] Why dont you have this one, its a nice red 
why dont you have this one? And he went on and on and on 
wouldnt let me have the black one and I didnt understand 
why and then it came out a few nights later, Because I can't   
 find you in the supermarket unless youre wearing something 
bright, and it was about locating me. 
Alistair Something in a different colour. 
Kate So I mean I have a very bright red hat, my rain hat is a bright 
red one and I have a bright turquoise 
Alistair Yes the red hats helped as well.  [T1] 
In the above quote, it seemed that Alistair had been able to identify an 
effective visual strategy for ensuring that he could find Kate when they were 
out, through the use of bright colours. Even though he struggled to 
communicate this strategy, once they had worked it out together, it appeared 
to support his ability to find her and therefore to feel secure.   
For both Bert and Alistair, it would appear that their partners and family 
supported the development and implementation of these strategies. As 
indicated in chapter seven and earlier in this chapter, it seems likely that the 
extent to which family members were able to comprehend the emotional 
experience of the person with bvFTD was important. Examples of this were 
highlighted earlier (p.204-6) and in the quotes above, where both Kate and 
Melinda appeared to recognise the difficulties their partners experienced. 
Consequently, they seemed able to collaborate with the person with bvFTD 
to explore ways of managing.  
Holding Them 
The Perrin and Morris families seemed to recognise that the person with 
dementia experienced significant anxiety and panic as a result of the 
difficulties brought about by bvFTD. Phil Horton also appeared to recognise 
Pennys need to feel safe. In addition it appeared that Mollie Burton 
recognised that the experience of bvFTD was variable resulting in good and 
bad days that could also lead to increased difficulty for Anthony. 
Consequently these families (Horton, Burton, Perrin and Morris) appeared to 
develop coping processes that sought to hold the person with bvFTD 
emotionally in order to support their wellbeing. Coping processes involved 
practical, emotional and physical strategies. For example, Phil Horton 
appeared to try and understand Pennys emotional world and discussed why  
she might behave in particular ways. He felt that Penny struggled with 
personal care because she might have thought she was being attacked. Phil 
therefore described ways of supporting Penny including cuddling her in order 
to enable her to feel secure. He also discussed working together with the 
care home staff, to help them to understand her needs and support her as 
described earlier (table 8.9). 
Similarly Kate described the strategy they had developed since Alistair had 
developed difficulties with sleep as a consequence of high levels of anxiety 
(Table 8.36): 
Table 8.36: Holding them 
Alistair Take teddy to bed.  
Jenny Yeah because you were talking about, in July last year and we met 
I remember you saying you used to get and I can't remember the 
word you used.  
Kate         Night nadgers.  
Jenny Night nadgers thats it. You used to get night nadgers and you said 
that youd done something to make a difference something to do 
with a teddy.  
Kate        Yes. Teddy.  
Alistair    Yes take teddy to bed.  
Kate       Yes well now he's got lots of them. We have teddy that sleeps here, 
we have one in France that's the same size and then sitting on the 
sofa behind you is our suitcase travel teddy.  
Alistair  Travel teddy.  
Kate     Because he's smaller than the rest and hell stuff it in the suitcase. 
He's not quite as good as teddy and the big one that he's got is 
great because its 80cm so its big and he just, him and the teddy, 
it stops the crying. Its stopped him crying, it hasnt stopped him 
snoring.  
Alistair  My safety net.  
Kate  But its stopped him crying at night.  
Alistair  Yes secure, its like a comfort blanket. [] But I can't cuddle Kate 
all night long, which Id like to but  
Kate  He's tried to and it just doesnt work, go away  [T3] 
Rena  And you know about the teddy bear, do you? That's really worked 
very, very well. And much to my surprise when it was first 
suggested and they got it, he came out and showed us.  
Dave  Yes he didn't try and hide it  [T3] 
As was described in chapter 7, Alistair experienced panic and anxiety as a 
consequence of the changes in his emotional and cognitive sophistication. As 
his symptoms progressed, his anxiety increased and his sleep became 
disturbed. In conversation with peers, it was suggested that Kate try offering 
Alistair a teddy. Alistair was accepting of this as can be seen from the quote 
above and it appeared that this had a significant and lasting effect on 
Alistairs wellbeing at night. Furthermore it seemed to be accepted as an 
effective strategy by the whole family, as evidenced in the quote from Rena 
and Dave.  
Although Anthony Burtons narrative did not suggest that he felt unsafe and 
insecure, it nevertheless appeared that Mollie sought to hold Anthony. She 
described the need to take the lead from how Anthony was on any particular 
Mollie  Mm. But if you're not having a good day and I say Well, do 
you want to go so-and-so? You say No. Fine. No. [] 
 he shuts down and he's in the chair and he can spend hours 
sitting in the chair. I just leave him to get on with it basically. 
Because he'll go in the garden, wander round, spend about a 
quarter of an hour in the garden and he'll wander back in, sit 
down and you know, you just leave him to it. Because he's 
quite happy in his own surroundings.  
Anthony You can have a busy few days and you're getting about and 
you're doing things. And then all of a sudden it all catches up 
with you and then you're totally and utterly drained.  
Mollie  And somebody'll say Well, why can't you come? I said He's 
not having a good day today. Well why? And I say Well, he 
just wants to be left alone today. And that's it. I just carry on 
and leave him to get on with it. He's happy. [T3]  
Throughout their involvement in the research, Mollie described the 
importance of being flexible with Anthony, recognising that he had good days 
and bad days and that it was important to respond to this appropriately. As 
described above, this meant that any activities that had been booked had to 
be flexible and Mollie was prepared to cancel engagements with others if she 
and Anthony felt that it would not be beneficial for him to go. Thus she 
seemed able to consider Anthonys perspective and support him.  
Further coping processes used by these families to support the wellbeing of 
the person with bvFTD appeared to include; 
 Learning and understanding about bvFTD 
 Developing routines and structure 
 Anticipating and addressing challenges  
 Involving others in their care 
 Having a safe space to escape to 
These strategies were described earlier, in the sections considering coping 
processes for managing everyday life, awareness and understanding of the 
changes and were not the same anymore. Consequently, to avoid repetition 
they are not described here.  
Resisting and restricting,  
In contrast, two of the participants, Terry Stuart and Ray Lewin appeared to 
use the strategy of retaining control through resisting or restricting activities 
that caused distress. For example, Terry appeared to experience being out of 
control and unsafe when driving and as a consequence he and Sue 
suggested that he had restricted where he would drive to: 
Terry Yeah I've lost a bit of my independence really, I mean, with 
not being able to drive anywhere.  
Sue I think that's because that was one thing when we retired he 
said, "We'll go off to different places that we've never seen" 
and we haven't. All we go is to places that he already knows 
like going to our daughters, going to his brothers, you know. 
I mean we've only been Mark once by car and it took us five   
 hours because he was driving so slow on the motorway, he 
has a real fear now of the motorway.  
Terry You've got all these [people] and what have you and they 
don't know what side they're driving. 
Sue No it's your fear in your mind, Terry. 
Terry It's safety.  
Jenny Yeah.  
Terry It's safety I'm thinking about, you know, if anything 
happened. If anything hit you... 
Sue I know. 
Terry You know and you went like that you'd be dead. [T1] 
Similarly, Sarah and Alex appeared to suggest that Ray had significantly 
restricted what he would do since he was diagnosed with bvFTD. 
Alex I do feel for him for that because he was such an active man, 
I mean playing all his sport [] and socialising. 
Sarah and we can do things whereas he can't and he won't. He 
doesnt help himself. 
Alex No and he's got to the point that just he won't, he won't. [] 
He won't go out of the house. We, hopefully, are going to get 
the kids christened on the same day and we've offered to get 
a special taxi here to take him to the church because he's got 
his electric chair and bring him home and he won't go. 
Sarah No, well we dont know. I've said, you know, Are you coming 
Dad? 
Alex Well we have said think about it because he 
Sarah So he says, Oh well I'll think about it. Well I wouldnt have 
thought there's anything to think about, theyre your 
grandkids and its only, you know, a journey in a taxi which 
you've been in before... [] You can guarantee he won't but 
he won'twe've done everything possible over the lastwell 
since he's become ill to get him out and about and he just 
won't go. [T2] 
In his interview, Ray appeared to suggest that these restrictions were as a 
consequence of MND. However, it seems possible that his reluctance to go 
out may also be as a result of a need to feel in control, as adaptations that 
would have supported him to travel had not made a difference to his 
willingness to go out. Additionally, although Ray accepted that he would go 
into respite care, he nevertheless became anxious when this was due to 
happen and had even demanded the same room each time he went, which 
may also have been as a consequence of his need to feel in control.  
Positioning, distancing, controlling 
In resisting and restricting activities, it appeared that Terry and Ray acted 
independently of their family members. Even though Sue commented on 
Terrys actions in regard to driving, it did not appear that this was a decision 
that was reached jointly. Furthermore, as highlighted in chapter 7 (Table 7.4) 
it seemed that while Sue recognised Terry struggled, she did not appear to 
understand why this might occur and therefore the support he might need. 
Similarly, as described in the quote above, Sarah and Alex also appeared to 
have difficulty understanding why Ray might resist engaging in activities. 
Consequently, it appeared that these family members positioned the person 
with bvFTD as the problem, as suggested in Sarah and Alexs narrative 
above. In these circumstances, families appeared to use coping processes 
such as controlling and distancing, as described in previous sections (p251-
9) in this chapter. Nevertheless, positioning the person as the problem, 
controlling and distancing appeared to add to difficulties within relationships 
as the persons attempts to support their own wellbeing appeared to be 
misconstrued as obstructive and hurtful as in the quote from Sarah and Alex 
above.  
8.6 Chapter Summary 
Awareness and understanding of the changes 
All seven families contributed to the coping processes described in this 
theme. In two families, receiving a diagnosis of bvFTD enabled them to work 
together, develop their understanding and respond to the changes taking 
place. Accepting the diagnosis, learning about bvFTD and placing 
themselves in the shoes of the person with dementia underpinned the 
development of coping processes. These families engaged in learning from 
knowledgeable others to support them, including professionals, peers and 
others in order to developing their strategies. Collaboration included the 
person with bvFTD and also involved accepting that family members may 
have different levels of awareness and understanding. One couple described 
a similar approach to these two families although this collaboration did not 
extend to wider family.  
Three of the families appeared to struggle to move from awareness to 
understanding and seemed to position the person with bvFTD as the 
problem. Similarly family members who were out of step with close family 
members in regard to their awareness were also positioned in this way. 
Although some shifts in positioning were seen over the duration of the 
research, it nevertheless appeared that avoidance and achieving a distance 
were used as a means of coping with the person with bvFTD and family 
members who were out of step in their awareness. Additionally, it appeared 
that conflictual communication arose. A feature of these family relationships 
appeared to be a lack of collaboration and poor affective and information 
based communication. Relationships with professionals and others also 
appeared to be poor.  
Were not the same anymore / Im not the same anymore 
The consequences of bvFTD involved an increasing level of dependence on 
those in closest contact with the person with dementia as the social and 
cognitive skills associated with living an independent life and engaging fully in 
relationships became challenged. In keeping with the coping processes 
described in the previous section, three of the partners appeared  
to use acceptance and adaptation to respond to the changes. The coping 
processes appeared to involved holding the person with bvFTD and 
continuing to support them to engage in everyday life while adapting and 
compensating for the difficulties they experienced over the duration of the 
research. These families appeared to strive to ensure that the person with 
bvFTD was not diminished by these coping processes.  
One partner chose to resist and fight the changes brought about by bvFTD. 
She accepted the diagnosis and used similar strategies to those involved in 
acceptance and adaptation, however these were designed to support and 
maintain the person with bvFTD as they were for as long as possible. In 
order to achieve this she worked in collaboration with her family and 
knowledgeable others. Adaptation of coping processes occurred with new 
changes. However, by the third time point, it appeared that there were 
considerable emotional costs to engaging in this strategy.  
Two families who positioned the person with bvFTD as the problem sought to 
achieve distance from them by engaging in care management and involving 
others in the persons care. However, this wasnt entirely successful in 
relieving direct caregiving responsibilities and other stressors were apparent, 
including managing the work of the carers and being unable to escape the 
persons care needs. Finally one partner appeared to feel stuck with the 
difficulties they experienced as a consequence of their partners diagnosis. 
They found it difficult to develop successful coping processes and seemed to 
find the changes difficult to bear throughout the duration of the research.  
In this context partners and adult daughters were challenged to manage the 
personal costs associated with taking responsibility for the person with 
bvFTD, involving grief and loss at the changes and/ or the impact on their 
health and wellbeing. Some were able to acknowledge their grief and seek 
psychological support to address it. Furthermore, they also appeared to seek 
support through their relationships with others including friends, family and 
peers. Additional coping processes developed included taking time out, 
making realistic choices about what is possible and achievable and self-care. 
Some however appeared to take considerably longer to acknowledge their 
own needs including their grief. Consequently, accessing psychological   
support and other self-care strategies appeared to occur at a much later point 
in the research, or not at all.  
Managing everyday life 
The coping processes used by families to manage everyday life appeared to 
be underpinned by the extent to which families were able to collaborate, 
communicate, address conflict, adapt and be cohesive. Families coping 
responses to managing the impact of bvFTD on relationships and on 
everyday activities of living involved either enabling and facilitating; 
distancing, controlling and managing or avoiding and reacting.  
The coping process of enabling and facilitating involved the primary family 
caregiver taking a lead role in engaging with and supporting the whole family 
to understand and work together in order to address the consequences of 
bvFTD for relationships and for everyday life. Two families appeared to work 
together to achieve this. The coping processes they utilised included 
scaffolding which involved planning and preparation, anticipating difficulties, 
embedding routine and structure and addressing safety. Other processes 
involved finding ways of maintaining an enjoyable life. One family also 
supported conversations about the emotional impact of bvFTD. While one of 
the other families did not experience collaboration with wider family, as a 
couple, they worked together to implement the coping processes described 
above.  
The coping process of distancing, managing and controlling appeared to be 
connected with positioning the person with bvFTD as the problem. As 
described previously, two of the families sought to maintain a distance from 
the person with bvFTD. Where contact was required, both families utilised 
coping processes involving holding to the bare minimum of care needed and 
engaging in controlling responses designed to keep person in check. They 
also sought to control the actions of care staff involved in supporting the 
person with bvFTD. In one family, it appeared that control was used less over 
the duration of the research, however they continued to seek to achieve a 
distance from the person with bvFTD. 
Finally, one family appeared to use avoidance and reacting as coping 
processes. The partner of the person with bvFTD appeared to find it difficult 
to adjust to the changes and the consequences of these changes for their 
relationship. While awareness increased, coping processes largely involved 
finding ways to enjoy life and reacting to or avoiding difficult situations. These 
coping processes had limited success as the partner struggled to adjust to 
the challenges associated with bvFTD.  
Being me in the context of bvFTD 
Five people living with bvFTD who participated in the research informed this 
theme. Coping processes associated with this challenge occurred across all 
three time points and involved strategies to maintain self employed by the 
person with bvFTD as well as strategies to maintain wellbeing. In order to 
maintain self, two persons with bvFTD acknowledged changes but continued 
to engage in activities and roles which supported self-concept. These 
included grand parenting and occupational activities. These activities were 
supported by their family members. One person sought to deny the changes 
that were taking place and emphasised that they were still the same person 
they had always been. While family members held an entirely different 
perspective, the person with bvFTD appeared steadfast in their belief that 
they had not changed. Two persons with bvFTD appeared to hold a tenuous 
self-concept which was influenced by concerns about stigma and the 
negative perceptions of others. Both were concerned about the way that they 
were perceived by others, although over time they were able to disclose their 
diagnosis to others in their life. It appeared that the position of Im still me, 
still active and engaged with life also featured in their accounts over time. 
Both participants engaged in activities that reinforced self-hood, suggesting 
that they found ways to continue to enjoy life as they adjusted to the changes 
associated with bvFTD. Similarly there were occasions when other positions 
were evident in the accounts of two of the persons with bvFTD. Therefore 
while all five participants held to one dominant position, to a lesser extent 
other positions were also evident in their narratives. Maintaining wellbeing 
appeared to occur on a continuum from supporting safety and security and 
holding them through to resisting and restricting and positioning, controlling   
and distancing. Two families worked together with the person with bvFTD to 
support safety and security through holding to routines, to familiar 
environments and familiar people. Family members engaged in scaffolding 
activities to support the wellbeing of the person with bvFTD in this context. 
Furthermore, they sought to understand the emotional world of the person 
with bvFTD and develop coping processes that enabled the person to feel 
safe and secure such as physical holding and nurturing.  
In contrast two of the persons with bvFTD sought to retain control through 
restricting activities that caused them to feel distressed and in doing so, 
frequently acted independently of their family. Close family members 
appeared unable to understand the reasons for their actions and positioned 
the person with bvFTD as the problem. Thus relationships became further 
strained and conflicted.  
Therefore, it appeared that the families coping processes to address the 
challenges wrought by bvFTD occurred on a continuum of Assimilating, 
adjusting, reconstructing --- Resisting, denying, being stuck. Some 
families and individuals within families appeared to shift their position on the 
continuum as awareness and understanding increased and coping processes 
enabled them to find ways to maintain and/ or reconstruct family life and 
support wellbeing.  Others appeared to find this more difficult, reflecting 
limited movement on the continuum in the context of a difficult relational 
history and/ or trouble in finding ways to adjust to the impact of bvFTD. It is 
with this in mind that the final results chapter considers the outcomes for 
family relationships of living with bvFTD.    
Chapter Nine: relational outcomes associated with living with 
behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia: a changing we/ I --- an 
entrenched we / I 
9.1 Introduction 
In Chapter six, I presented a narrative analysis of the family relationships of 
each of the seven families that participated in this research. As indicated 
previously, while these family storylines reflect the uniqueness of each family, 
it is nevertheless possible to see that their relationships ranged on a 
continuum of cohesive and connected to disconnected and distant. In 
Chapter seven I discussed a grounded theory analysis of the four challenges 
that these families and individuals within these families faced in living with 
behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD).  
I then described a grounded theory analysis of the coping processes utilised 
by families to address these challenges in Chapter eight. Families and 
individual family members appeared to develop coping processes which 
ranged on a continuum of assimilation, adaptation and adjustment, through to 
resisting the diagnosis and the changes associated with this. 
In this final results chapter, I consider my interpretation of the data in regard 
to the relational outcomes for these families and individuals within these 
seven families using narrative analysis. My use of the term outcomes is not 
to imply that an end point is being described. Indeed due to the dynamic 
nature of relationships and the progressive nature of bvFTD, it is inevitable 
that changes over time will continue to occur. Therefore in this chapter, I 
seek to represent the changes in relationships from the perspective of the 
families and individuals family members that had occurred during the 
research. Thus this chapter reflects that narrative moment in time. 
Additionally, as a consequence of the dynamic nature of relationships, the 
distinction between outcomes and coping processes is inevitably blurred. 
Consequently, the outcomes described here can also be viewed as coping 
processes.  
As described in the previous chapters, I felt that families and individuals 
within families varied on a continuum of being able to adapt and adjust to the 
changes through to those who struggled to or resisted the need to change. 
Consequently I identified a superordinate theme, A changing we /I ---- an 
entrenched we / I. A number of subthemes emerged and I have presented 
these in table 9.1: 
Table 9.1: A changing we / I ----- An entrenched we / I 
Relational outcomes for close 
family members including the 
person with bvFTD 
 A changing we, stronger in a different 
 Losing we, but still connected  
 Losing you so losing we, together but 
separate 
 There is no we, just getting through it 
Relational outcomes for 
partners, adult daughters and 
their partners: the need for a 
changing I 
 Becoming a new I,  
 An entrenched I 
Relational outcomes for wider 
family members 
 Closer together 
 Conflicted 
 Losing we 
Drawing upon the results presented in the previous 2 chapters, I begin by 
summarising the impact of bvFTD on the capacity of the person living with 
dementia for relational functioning given the changes to executive functioning 
and social cognition.  
I then discuss my interpretation of the consequences of bvFTD for close 
family relationships (between partners and between adult daughters and their 
parents), considering how the relationship between the person with bvFTD 
and their partner or daughter and her partner was affected. Following this, I 
consider the relational outcomes for partners and adult daughters and their 
partners as individuals.  Finally, I explore the consequences for wider family 
relationships, considering how relationships between the person with bvFTD,  
their close family members and wider family have been affected for the whole 
family and for individuals within the family.  
9.2 The impact of bvFTD  
As has previously been described, bvFTD impacted upon a range of 
functions of those affected, including features of social cognition such as 
empathy, interpersonal relating and perspective taking. Furthermore, 
executive functions, including planning, initiating, monitoring and stopping 
behaviour and impulse control were also affected. Finally, bvFTD also 
impacted on processing and sense making, judgement and decision making. 
Consequently, these complex changes created considerable challenges for 
the person with bvFTD in managing everyday life, resulting in increasing 
levels of dependence on others for wellbeing to be maintained. Reliance on 
others began before diagnosis, with some close family members describing 
the need to take responsibility and think for the person before changes were 
understood. Furthermore, it appeared that this reliance additionally involved 
emotional dependence as bvFTD compromised the persons ability to feel 
safe, secure and in control.  
Awareness of these changes and their impact was variable in the people 
living with bvFTD. While some had awareness that changes were occurring, 
it was nevertheless evident that this awareness was not congruent with their 
family members. Although some of the people with bvFTD appeared to 
accept that their families may have a different perspective on the impact of 
the changes, others seemed much less aware of this. Furthermore, the 
participants with bvFTD did not appear able to engage fully with the 
emotional consequences of these changes for them or for their family. 
Consequently, close family members seemed to suggest that the person was 
increasingly less able to share in completing the everyday work associated 
with family life. Furthermore characteristics of the person that were previously 
valued, such as empathy, reciprocity, care and sensitivity to others were also 
perceived to have changed. It therefore seemed that bvFTD had a profound 
impact on the lives of the person with dementia and their family.  
9.3 Relational Outcomes for Close Family Relationships 
A range of outcomes were evident for couples and for adult children and their 
parents. These were: 
 A changing we, stronger in a different way  
 Losing we, but still connected  
 Losing you so losing we, together but separate  
 There is no we, just getting through it 
These are now discussed. 
A changing we: stronger in a different way 
As I described in chapter eight, two couples appeared to accept and adapt to 
the changes in the person with bvFTD. Both couples appeared to collaborate 
to address the changes that had occurred, involving the need to change their 
relationship from one in which reciprocity and shared decision making 
featured, to one in which partners increasingly took responsibility to support 
the wellbeing of the person with bvFTD as well as managing everyday life 
(c.f. chapter 8 p.214-6). These changes began before diagnosis (c.f. chapter 
7, page 139-41). Therefore even at time point one, Mollie and Anthony 
described needing to adapt: 
Anthony Thats how it is. Were both reasonably good at coping, so 
youve got to adapt.  
Mollie Weve adapted  thats a good word, yeah. [T1] 
Similarly, Melinda and Bert also described a process of acceptance of the 
changes, although Bert contributed less to these discussions than Anthony. 
For both couples, this acceptance continued throughout their involvement in 
the research: 
Bert You can't do anything about it at the end of the day. It just 
becomes part of you, doesn't it.  
Melinda I think once you accept that this is part of you and once 
everybody else accepts, well, this is a learning experience, 
it's a new way. []  I think that's when it becomes a lot  
 easier. You know, I think it's just saying, well, you can't 
change it, it's learning to cope with it [] [T2]    
Consequently, both couples recognised the impact of these changes on their 
relationship over time, although Mollie and Anthony were more explicit in 
acknowledging Anthonys increasing dependence on Mollie (table 9.2): 
Table 9.2: the outcomes of bvFTD for close relationships 
Anthony Im dependent on you now and thats hard to accept. 
Mollie This is what he keeps saying to me. From the time we got the 
diagnosis ((Anthony)) says I think he became frightened 
because I dont know what Id do without you this is what he 
says, I couldnt manage without you Im his 
Anthony Memory bank. 
Mollie He calls me his memory bank. Anything that were doing or 
anywhere were going he relies on me. [T1] 
Anthony   And that was the biggest thing really, was confidence and 
aggression as well. That was the other thing that we tended to get 
very aggressive with other boaters, the ones who like watching 
paint dry coming through []  
Jenny So was it like that this time then? 
Anthony No. Taking the anti-depressants has calmed our aggression down 
a lot.  
Jenny Okay. And has that impacted on other parts of your life too?  
Anthony Yes. 
Jenny Yeah. In what way?  
Anthony Nothing specific. Just generally 
Jenny Okay. Is that something you've noticed? 
Mollie Yeah. I find that when we were away in May, on the boat, that 
Anthony was looking more to me for sort of, instruction.  
Anthony Instead of taking the lead I was just... 
Mollie You were looking for instruction weren't you.  
Anthony I was the crew and you were the captain. 
Mollie Yeah ((laughs)). I was the captain [].  
Anthony A role reversal. 
Mollie We didn't mind, did we, love. As long as we get there. [T3] 
As can be seen in these quotes, Mollie and Anthony appeared to have 
adjusted their ways of relating and roles within the relationship to adapt to the 
changes in Anthony and found ways to continue to enjoy life together. 
Adjustment was a process that occurred over time. Initially they had sold their 
boat because Anthony had become less confident and more dependent and 
Mollie had concerns about his safety. However by time point three they had 
adapted their ways of being to incorporate these changes in their relationship 
and had found a way to continue with their pastime. Subsequently both 
Anthony and Mollie commented that they had become stronger together as a 
consequence of these changes, even though this was different to the way 
they had envisaged being before his diagnosis: 
Anthony The important thing [is] that we work together as a team. 
We're not two separate people.  
Mollie Yeah. He still keeps me in my place. He keeps me, not down 
sort of thing, but... How can I put it? You're a good influence, 
aren't you. [T3] 
Similarly, Melinda and Berts narrative indicated that they sought to find a 
way to maintain the strong bonds that had underpinned their relationship. For 
example, they reaffirmed their commitment to each other by renewing their 
marital vows. Although they had intended to do this on their 50
 wedding 
anniversary it was brought forward because Melinda had recognised Berts 
concern that she wouldnt stay with him (table 9.3): 
Table 9.3: finding ways of continuing to be strong together 
Jenny No. So tell me about this wedding, your renewal of your vows.  
Melinda It was a good wasn't it. It really was good.  
Bert  Yeah, 
Melinda It was a really brilliant memory, wasn't it.  
Bert I've never met people like that before. I only ever met the vicar. But 
we went there and they showed us while he was talking about the 
history of the church and all that lot.  
Melinda And the family were just so... It went from this quiet little thing into 
a bigger event. But it was really nice, [] And you're a lot better in 
yourself now. Because you said now you know that I'm not going 
to disappear.    
Jenny So how do you feel your relationship is now?  
Melinda It's a lot better, isn't it.  
Bert Yeah, yeah [T2] 
Melinda also described working together with their children to find ways of 
supporting Bert and enabling him to be a part of their lives together. In this 
context, both Bert and Anthony appeared to accept that they had changed 
and largely trusted that their partners were acting in their best interests.  
It therefore appeared that these couples were able to adapt to the changes 
and find ways continue to have meaningful lives together albeit in a different 
form to their prior relationship. Nonetheless, as described in chapters seven 
and eight, the impact of bvFTD resulted in a shift in relational roles which had 
consequences for the partners of the person with bvFTD. Both couples were 
interviewed together and largely maintained their narrative of acceptance and 
adaptation throughout the research. However there were times when Mollie 
and Melinda struggled with or chose not answer questions that were directed 
at how they had experienced the changes. Often this was in their non-verbal 
reactions, or outside of the interview. As referred to in the interview context, 
Melinda often alluded to her difficulties in this way. Consequently while it was 
important to them to present this united front, they nevertheless struggled 
with the changes to their relationship and its meaning for their lives. This is 
addressed under the subtheme of a changing I later in this chapter.  
Losing we but still connected 
One partner and one couple contributed to this subtheme, but their narratives 
are significantly different so are presented separately. Phil Hortons narrative 
also contributed to the theme of acceptance and adaptation described 
previously in chapter 8 (p.216-7). However his experience of the marital 
relationship was also fundamentally influenced by the significant changes 
that had occurred in his wife Pennys wellbeing immediately prior to his 
involvement in the research. Phil explained that he had needed to place 
Penny into a care setting due to her significant needs.  Consequently,  
although Phil had accepted and adapted to the changes in Penny (c.f. p.217 
chapter 8), her increasing difficulties and the recent transition into care had 
brought further challenges for him.  
For example, Phil suggested that he was losing their togetherness now as 
Penny no longer recognised who he was at times: 
Phil Up until two weeks ago I think she still recognised me, but on 
Tuesday this week I went to the hospital and she screamed 
the place down and she didn't want anybody in the room.  
And although she keeps asking for Phil and Leanne, which is 
my daughter, when I say Look. It is Phil. No it's not. Then 
she'll scream. But horrendous screams and her face all 
shaking (tone quiet, emotional). [T1] 
He seemed to find this change very difficult to bear and subsequently 
described his struggle to come to terms with the decision that he had made 
to place her in care. This struggle became more problematic for him because 
the care placement failed and she was admitted to a mental health unit 
where he perceived a lack of support and understanding for Penny or for 
their relationship as husband and wife: 
Phil I mean, even now, my wife's in the hospital. She's supposed 
to be in a leading psychiatric hospital and you find that some 
people are sympathetic to the situation, I'm talking about 
hospital people and some people just couldn't give a [****] 
really. [] they have no understanding of how it affects, for 
example, my wife being seriously ill and how it affects me. 
They have no clue. They're very standoffish when it comes to 
talking about it. [T1] 
Therefore, the transition into care and Pennys deteriorating wellbeing 
caused Phil to feel he was losing her and their relationship. While she 
subsequently moved to a new care home where he felt the care was better, 
Phil nevertheless continued to struggle with his decision to place her in a 
care home. At the second time point, he seemed to experience regret and 
guilt about the decision and wished that he could bring her home (table 9.4):  
Table 9.4: Maybe I should have tried harder 
Phil Oh yeah that's changed. I mean shes definitely deteriorated both 
mentally and physically. [pause] 
Jenny How has that affected you? 
Phil Well badly really. I mean ((sighs)) the problem I have is seeing her 
deteriorate, you know, I come home and think, Well maybe she 
shouldnt have gone into the hospital.  Maybe I shouldnt have let 
her go into the care home. Maybe I should have tried harder to 
keep her at home, its a struggle to come to terms with that 
situation and sometimes I'll be lying awake thinking, Well what 
shall I do? [] but my concern is that I dont want her toshe's ill, 
she's going to be suffering anyway but I dont want her to be 
suffering because she's outside of her comfort zone, if you know 
what I'm saying, her home environment.  
 Therell come a time, I haven't done it yet, there'll come a time 
when I'll go and put some pictures on the wall and make the room 
a bit more amenable to her. I keep promising to do it. And I guess 
eventually I'm going to have to do it. But there's been a couple of 
times when I've thought that Penny was fading away and she 
might not be around if you know what I'm saying. [T2] 
It also appeared that he felt he might actually lose her as her health had 
deteriorated so significantly. Consequently, he sought to remain strongly 
connected to Penny and felt the need to visit every day, even though he 
acknowledged that this was very difficult for him. Furthermore he suggested 
that he resisted making her room homely and familiar. It is conceivable that 
his resistance to this was a feature of his difficulty in accepting the 
permanence of her placement as well as being related to her declining 
health. By the third time point, it appeared that Pennys wellbeing had 
stabilised to some degree. Phil seemed more accepting of the situation and 
remained connected to her through less frequent but regular visits which 
involved caring for her as well as monitoring and advocating for the care she 
needed. Nevertheless the changes in Penny, including her lack of recognition 
of him had caused Phil to feel that their relationship had fundamentally 
altered. At time point one he had recognised how lonely he felt and described 
needing someone to share his life with, although he didnt feel it was possible 
for him. By time point three he had embarked on a new relationship, although 
he still expressed his attachment to Penny (table 9.5): 
Table 9.5: a new relationship 
Phil If I've got to make a new life for myself that gives me the 
opportunity whereas where I was before doesnt, you know. 
Jenny What does making a new life mean for you? 
Phil [] So for me its another relationship basically.  
Jenny Yeah. 
Phil That's what it will be and where it will go. Ill probably never end up 
sort of feeling the same way about anybody else as I've felt about 
Penny and as I still feel about Penny but nevertheless for me it has 
to be that kind of thing. I'm notI can live on my own if I want to 
but it wouldnt be what Id choose to do. No matter how loyal I want 
to be to Penny I'm in limbo really but by the same token I've just 
got to get on with it and make the best of what I've got, what I've 
got because I'm getting older by the day, you know and so that's it 
really. If that makes any sense to you. 
Jenny Yes it does. So you've got a lady friend? 
Phil Yeah who has been very supportive, very helpful, understands the 
circumstances and the situation, isnt jealous and spiteful of the 
situation, understands where I am, understands where I'm coming 
from and understands the situation with Penny and that Penny will 
always be the priority. [T3] 
Kate and Alistair Perrin also contributed to this theme. As has been 
described previously, Kate and Alistair were a strongly connected couple who 
valued their time together and each others company as well as having 
identified family as central to their lives (c.f. chapter 6). Consistent with her 
previous role in the relationship, Kate was the driving force behind the 
decision to resist the changes brought about by bvFTD, using resources that 
Kate and to some degree their family were familiar with because of their 
previous experience (chapter 8 p.217-9). However as indicated in chapter 8, 
it appeared that while Kate remained strong in implementing and enabling 
this approach, it nevertheless had emotional consequences for them both. 
Kates tone of voice appeared tremulous and quieter when discussing the 
changes that were occurring and the impact these had on their relationship. 
For example, Kate acknowledged at time point one that she didnt want to 
face the changes (table 9.6): 
Table 9.6: We dont want to face the changes 
Kate We said last night, because we had a long talk about it last night, 
in between dances, that it was the whole... the realisation when I 
do bring him up on that, youve got to do this, youve got to start, 
put the effort in, Im nagging him. To him the scary thing was 
realising how the disease, how the illness is... 
Alistair Hitting. 
Kate Yes. How it is actually progressing, because we keep thinking, no, 
no, no, were not declining, its not going any further. But the reality 
is we are and thats what were not facing and we dont want to 
face it. So what were doing is trying... and thats... that's 
happening. 
Alistair Im trying to sort of say well thats how I was, this is how I am now, 
how much has changed. Trying to collate the two and that is the 
frightening scary part. You think, well I used to be able to do that, 
why can't I do that now. I dont feel any different in myself,[] [T1] 
Similarly Alistair suggested that he found the changes scary, particularly 
when Kate pointed out differences in functioning that he had not been aware 
of himself. There was a significant difference in their discussion of this issue. 
It seemed that the focus of Alistairs narrative appeared to be on how he had 
changed. Conversely, Kates use of we may in part be indicative of her 
desire not to face the changes in their relationship wrought by the changes in 
Alistair. At time point one; Alistair described the changes to their relationship 
as more like brother and sister: 
Alistair Yes. Yes, no, were... relationship with each other is about... 
its more... its not so much husband and wife these days, is 
Kate No. 
Alistair No. Brother/sister/friend. [T1] 
However, there seemed to be a lack of emotionality in his discussion of this, 
he didnt appear to recognise the emotional consequences of this change for 
Kate or for himself and seemed not to have noticed her distress when he said 
this (c.f. Table 7.18). By time point three, Kate explained that she felt she 
was mothering Alistair (table 9.7): 
Table 9.7: Changing from brother/ sister to parent/ child 
Kate I think its more likeI tend to be more mothering, yeah more 
mothering. Its because we went through like the brother and sister 
bit, Alistair was still my friend, I could still confide and talk to but 
because there's no empathy there isnt that same sharing of jokes, 
of information and because so much more responsibility is mine 
now for simple decisions like the car, the fence, all of it tends to be 
mine, I feel more as if I'm mothering than I am 
Alistair Yeah the car, the fence. 
Kate When anything happens its down to me to sort or me to organise 
Alistair Its Kate do you want thisthis is my idea what I thought does it 
match with you? No I thought it this way. So I havent got the 
confidence to go ahead and do something straightaway I need that 
reassurance that I'm doing it properly. 
Kate But its about everything though, its about choosing clothes its 
aboutand everything stops with me [T3] 
And as this quote suggests, these changes resulted in the loss of many of 
the valued aspects of their relationship. Consequently Kate felt that she was 
losing we while remaining connected to Alistair. His apparent lack of 
emotional engagement with the changes in their relationship further 
accentuated her sense of loss. 
Alistair acknowledged that he was becoming increasingly reliant on Kate. He 
recognised that he was not functioning as he had previously; indeed he had 
suggested to Kate that he was not the husband he used to be: 
Kate And you say things likehe says things that will upset me 
like, I'm not a proper husband anymore because I just can't 
look after you. And he says things like, It shouldnt be this 
way round, I should be there. It shouldnt be this way. And 
gets upset and then when he's saying that that's when I get 
upset. [T3] 
According to Kate, Alistair was previously particularly empathic in their 
relationship (c.f Chapter 6). While Alistairs reaction may have represented 
an emotional engagement with the changes, an alternative explanation is that 
Alistair was reacting to the level of emotion Kate expressed at these  
changes. For example, Kate had previously suggested that her distress 
impacted negatively upon Alistair: 
Kate So it isn't often I get really, really cross or really, really angry 
and since I upset Alistair so much a few months ago by being 
very angry he just said to me Please stop being angry. I 
said I can't help it. He said But I don't like it when you're 
angry. And I realised that I hadn't vented my anger 
anywhere and I was actually taking it out on him. [T2] 
Therefore in the context of the emotional dependence he had on Kate (c.f. 
chapter 7 p.176-7), the distress he expressed at the changes may reflect his 
need to feel safe and secure which was strongly located in Kate. Thus these 
changes had considerable consequences for their emotional wellbeing and 
their relationship.    
Losing you, so losing we; together but separate 
The Lewin family (Ray, Sarah and Alex) and the Stuart couple (Terry and 
Sue) contributed to this subtheme. Both Sarah and Sue described previously 
positive relationships with the person with bvFTD. However, neither Ray nor 
Terry contributed significantly to discussions about the quality of their 
relationships prior to the onset of bvFTD (c.f. chapter 6), although Terry 
appeared to agree with Sues narrative. Sarah described her relationship with 
Ray as having been very important to her, as a child and again after she 
returned home in 2000 (chapter 6). Similarly Sue reflected upon the 
importance of her life with Terry for her, reinforcing the reciprocity and care 
for each other that she perceived had been fundamental to her relationship 
with him (chapter 8 p.221-3).  
As has been discussed in chapters 7 and 8, Sarah and Sue found it difficult 
to shift from awareness to understanding. Furthermore, when talking about 
the difficulties they experienced, their tone of voice often reflected frustration 
and anger with the person with bvFTD. Consequently it seemed that both 
Terry and Ray were positioned as the problem and their behaviour 
interpreted as deliberate. Indeed Sarah suggested that everything Ray had 
previously been to her had now changed. She and Alex also suggested that  
he could control what he was doing if he chose to (c.f. chapter 8, p208-9). 
Rays lack of awareness of his difficulties further compounded their 
frustration with him. Sue also appeared to blame Terry for his difficulties, 
which were the cause of frequent conflict in their relationship (c.f. chapter 8, 
p209-10). By time point three, Sue and Sarah had some appreciation of the 
difficulties inherent in bvFTD and why they might be occurring and their tone 
of voice appeared to have softened when discussing the persons behaviour. 
However, this did not impact significantly on their coping processes.  
Furthermore, it seemed that their relationships with the person with bvFTD 
had fundamentally altered. Although neither Sue nor Sarah openly discussed 
feelings about the changing relationship in depth, it nevertheless appeared 
that they experienced grief and anger. For example Sue reflected on the 
change in affection within her relationship with Terry (table 9.8): 
Table 9.8: Losing you so losing we 
Sue Ill tell you what I do feel, Jenny, I just feel that it would be nice to 
have a bit of affection, so hed do something for me and think, Oh 
thats nice, Terry, thats a nice thought, or hed say, Well do this.  
Its always Ive got to say it.  Like the other day, I said, Well have 
a bit of lunch on my birthday, and he said, Oh thats a good idea, 
but he wouldnt think of that. 
Jenny And that sort of links to what you were saying about not having 
that compassion anymore? 
Terry Yeah, that piece is missing out of the jigsaw puzzle. I cant help 
that. 
Sue Oh its Sues birthday, Ive got to organise something for her 
birthday, I dont get anything like that, nothing, not even a cup of 
tea in bed.  The only time he makes me a drink, I made him start 
doing it and thats in the afternoon, half past three. 
Terry Heres a cup of tea. 
Sue He makes me a drink, but it took him ages, he couldnt remember 
whether I had tea or coffee and Ive had tea in the afternoon for 40 
years ((laughingly))  You see what I mean? 
Terry But that is part of the symptom, isnt it? 
Sue Yes.  [T3] 
Sue seemed not to have understood the difficulties that would lead to the 
changes and she seemed to feel frustrated and angry with him and their 
situation as well as a sense of loss. Similarly she also commented on the   
absence of the compassion and support that Terry had previously given her, 
something she relied on due to her disabilities. Even though Terry 
acknowledged the change, they were not able to collaborate to address 
these issues; indeed the couple were defensive with each other. Again this 
became apparent in the tone of their conversations when discussing issues 
of contention such as that described in chapter 8 (p.209-10). Furthermore 
Sue did not appear to address her grief and anger in other ways either as 
described previously in chapter eight (p.227-8). Consequently, it seemed that 
Sue and Terry experienced a sense of helplessness to influence changes 
they were experiencing in their relationship. For example Terry described 
having to accept the changes in a manner that suggested resignation to the 
impact of bvFTD (c.f. Table 7.20). Similarly, Sue had also become resigned 
to the way their relationship had changed and chose to not dwell on what 
might happen in the future by living life together in the present: 
Sue I find that by not dwelling on the situation of what it is and 
what it might be, I just think well if its going to happen, if 
youre going to end up just sitting there like a zombie or 
something, thats what its going to be, but until I get to that 
stage well just keep on trying to be positive, trying to go out 
or to do something. [T3] 
Although as identified previously, despite attempts to be positive, Sue 
continued to find it difficult to tolerate Terrys behaviour at times, particularly 
when he was unable to help her (c.f. table 8.30) and this resulted in an 
ongoing presence of conflict in their relationship.  
Sarah also struggled significantly with the changes in her father, although I 
felt that her grief and anger was more commonly reflected in her narrative 
about his behaviour change, such as his refusal to attend the christening of 
his grandchildren (c.f. Table 8.14). As with Sue and Terry, Sarah experienced 
conflict with her father as a consequence of these changes and ultimately 
described the need to use avoidance as a coping strategy (c.f. chapter 8 
p.196-7). Therefore even though she and Alex were able to reflect  
upon the losses Ray had experienced by time point three and valued his 
relationship with their children, they described that their relationship with him 
had become tense and stressful: 
Jenny Yeah. So how do you see your relationship with him, 
because clearly when I first met you, you were talking about 
how he was a very positive person in your life [] and that 
you were very close. 
Sarah Very, very. 
Jenny How would you see it now? 
Sarah ((laughs)) Um 
Alex I think its just more fraught [with] him. 
Sarah Strained. [T3] 
Alex also described a greater level of conflict between them, particularly as 
he felt Ray demanded more of them now than they were able to offer. While 
Ray largely appeared unaware of the changes in their relationship, at time 
point three he did acknowledge that they did not always get on together and 
that their priorities might not be the same as his: 
Ray So its very different ways, oh it is I think its very difficult but 
Sarah and I clash a bit. Very difficult I suppose because the 
kids to a certain extent have to come first. So the children 
tend to comeI dont say in front of me but they tend to be, if 
theyre outside and there was somebody crying I think youd 
have to wait. And that bit of waiting might not be too good to 
me but there you are. But otherwise I can't grumble. [T3] 
As with Terry and Sue, Sarah and Alex also experienced a sense of being 
powerless to influence their relationship with Ray.  Consequently, they 
commonly coped by avoidance and distancing. Nevertheless, Sarah and Alex 
felt that this situation had caused them to try and work together as a team of 
two and by time point three they were actively seeking ways to care for 
themselves as a couple (Table 9.9): 
Table 9.9: caring for ourselves 
Jenny You said you went out on a date night last night  
Sarah We did [] weve started, we went to the [restaurant] last week. 
And we went out last night. So were just going to start taking 
ourselves out of the equation, I'm not saying its going to 
happenI think its like once a month type of thing but weve got a 
wedding coming up to go to, evening reception and yeah its 
something that we havent done before and now that the kids are a 
little bit bigger and weve got a reliable babysitter which weve 
come across so hopefully were just going to takeand build 
Alex A bit of time out for ourselves. 
Sarah yeah and build on that and also, you know, look to the future and 
think right I can't do it this time round but I think were wanting to 
go on holiday and, you know, plan things more when dad goes into 
respite [] [T3] 
Furthermore, while they perceived that their relationship had fundamentally 
altered, they valued the relationship Ray had with their children. Indeed it 
seemed to be a means of maintaining a degree of connectedness with him 
and a reason for him to remain at home even though this was very difficult for 
them: 
Alex This has been my biggest wish since we've had the two little 
ones is he stays around long enough that they can have a 
proper memory of Granddad. 
Sarah Yeah. 
Alex That's my biggest wish. I just hope that he can cling on as far 
and as long as he can, another ten years, whatever, but just 
so the kids have got a proper memory of Granddad not just 
me and Sarah saying, He absolutely doted on the pair of 
you.[T2] 
Both of these close families struggled to assimilate the diagnosis and the 
resulting changes. The nature of the changes and the meaning of them 
resulted in a sense of losing the person as they had always been and 
therefore the valued characteristics of their relationship together. Both 
families felt powerless to moderate the impact on their relationship with the 
person with bvFTD and seemed resigned to the changes. Furthermore as 
adjustment to the emotional consequences of bvFTD for their relationship   
was difficult for these close family members, conflict and/ or avoidance 
commonly arose in their interactions with the person with bvFTD.  
Nevertheless, Sarah and Alex were able to seek ways to care for themselves 
and to find some meaning in their relationship with Ray through his 
relationship with their children. Similarly, Sue and Terry sought ways to enjoy 
life together for as long as they can.  
In this context Ray and Terry appeared to act independently of their close 
family members in seeking to maintain their self-concept and wellbeing. For 
example as described previously, Terry sought to defend himself against 
Sues apparent criticism of him by challenging her perspective. Similarly 
Sarah and Alex suggested that Ray engaged in active resistance and in 
attempts to control them: 
Sarah And he goes on about, Oh when I was younger I used to do 
this and I used to do that, and whatever and, Life has 
changed and these youngsters dont do it, and whatever, 
well I think he's only on about us but then if we go and say, 
Oh we're going out, or we've got this on or we've got that 
on. [] Why? and he doesnt like it. 
Alex So if wed got somewhere to go he wouldnt be happy. 
Sarah If we've got a party to go to then no he doesnt Where are 
you going? How long are you going to be? 
Alex That's right and if that's the case just when we're about to go 
hell want the loo. 
Sarah Oh yes. [] 
Alex That's clued up that is, that's notits almost like, But I know 
how I can keep you here a bit longer. [T2] 
It is possible that Ray would hold a different perspective about his intentions. 
Nevertheless, he did appear to resist their attempts to engage him in family 
activities such as the christening of his grandchildren. Throughout the 
research he emphasised his desire to remain at home, asserting that the 
world had changed for the worst so he wasnt missing anything: 
Ray So I said no I'm quite happy to sit in my chair and watch a bit 
of racing. [] But things go by now and things go by as far 
as I'm concerned. But all I do know Jenny is that people who 
come to see me [] They say, I'll tell you something my boy 
you're not missing anything outside that but what you've got. 
Because there is bugger all going on apparently. People 
have changed, its all changed. Life has changed. And they 
said, You are not missing this and that. And I said, Well 
that's all right. [T2] 
Thus while these families remained connected, bvFTD had brought about 
fundamental changes to relationships which cause those closest to the 
person with bvFTD to feel that they were losing we. This also resulted in 
family members acting independently of each other, including the person with 
bvFTD.  
There is no we, just getting through it 
In contrast to the six other families, the prior relationship between Pamela 
and Jonathan Hugh and her mother Elizabeth had been described as difficult 
and characterised by distance, disconnectedness and a lack of affection (c.f. 
chapter 6). While initially care had willingly been provided as a consequence 
of the death of Elizabeths husband, the nature of the difficulties experienced 
as a consequence of bvFTD had cause them to come close, disrupting the 
boundaries that they appeared to have created to maintain a tolerable 
distance, resulting in conflict.  
Significant risk taking and an apparent lack of awareness resulted in Pamela 
and Jonathan taking control which continued throughout the duration of the 
research in order to minimise risk and ensure her needs were met. For 
example they described having to try and stop local businesses from giving 
Elizabeth items as she wouldnt be able to pay for them (table 9.10):  
Table 9.10, taking control to minimise risks  
Pamela [] And that was the difficulty that we had because my mother 
was going in all of the local shops and asking to take things home 
and she'd pay them later and this sort of thing and I literally had to 
go in every shop and say, My mums ill please do not let her have 
anything because you won't be paid because she hasnt got the 
money to pay you, and some people were really horrible to me. 
And they just didnt comprehend. I mean there's one shop in the 
village that I will never, ever step foot in again because of the way 
they treated me and all I was trying to do was protect them from 
losing money basically. [T1] 
However, it appeared that they felt she resented this control, did not accept 
that there was a need for their actions and blamed them for restricting her: 
Pamela Well what she sees is that I say no. 
Jonathan  That's right yeah. [] That's why she doesnt really want 
Pamela to know anything that she's doing. Shell say to the 
carers, Dont tell my daughter. And theyll tell us 
((laughingly)) she said, Dont tell. Of course but. 
Pamela ((laughs)) 
Jonathan  But we know she does that because she knows there's a 
risk that Pamela will say no. [T3] 
As has been described in chapter seven and eight, this increased contact 
caused further damage to an already difficult relationship. As with Sarah and 
Sue, their tone of voice suggested that they were angry and frustrated when 
discussing Elizabeth. It seemed therefore that Pamela and Jonathan 
positioned Elizabeth as the problem and largely perceived the impact of 
bvFTD to have exaggerated existing personality characteristics which were 
not valued by them, including being self-serving. By time point three, Pamela 
and Jonathan expressed the view that they no longer wanted a relationship 
with Elizabeth. Indeed Pamela stated that she felt she hadnt got a 
relationship with her mother: 
Jenny Mm so how do you think your relationship with your Mum has 
been affected? 
Pamela I havent got one. It sounds awful but I dont want to see her, 
I dont want to do anything for her, [][T3]  
Furthermore she suggested that she wished her mother would die. It seemed 
as though this was the only way that they felt they would be free of their 
involvement with her. Consequently, as described in chapters seven and 
eight, they sought to minimise their contact with her as much as possible.  
The difficulties they experienced in their caregiving role for Elizabeth had 
significant consequences for their relationship as a couple (Table 9.11): 
Table 9.11: The consequences for their relationship as a couple 
Jonathan  Yeah and more than that you can't talk about it calmly. We 
couldnt talk about calmly could we? 
Pamela No. 
Jonathan  Were always like rising and you might not think were very calm 
but were quite calm tonight ((laughs)) 
Pamela ((laughs)) 
Jonathan  Yeah if youd come to see us two years ago youd have probably 
been in the corner by now. You can feel it and I keep saying now, 
Just calm down, calm down, because its not worth it and we do 
we get very heated, or we did get veryeven when Id call a friend 
of mine, particularly who was involved in social work, a guy I've 
known since I was six years old and I found myself actually almost 
shouting down the phone at him ((laughingly)) as if it was his fault 
for the social service system and of course its not obviously 
nothing to do with him but that's how it got us and we had to 
offload it somehow. [T1] 
As described in chapter 6 (research context) and above, at time point one 
Pamela and Jonathan experienced high levels of stress as a consequence of 
their caregiving. This impacted upon their relationship as a couple and as 
indicated above, the relationships they had with friends. Indeed they 
commented that it had taken over their lives and was the only thing they 
talked about. However by time point two, a health crisis had caused Jonathan 
and Pamela to re-evaluate their wellbeing individually and as a couple. 
Consequently, Pamela described the need to care for themselves and each 
other: 
Pamela And you just have to reassess what you do, don't you, on a 
day-to-day basis. And I think that Jonathan and I are being a 
bit more organised with everything in the house, because the 
house was getting in a right state. [] So it's been a bit like   
 saying 'Oh well. If I'm not chasing round I've got more time 
here and I can organise things. And that will make me feel a 
little bit better. [] So we have been trying to do a bit of nice 
things in between. [] So we are trying to have some time 
together rather than just to be bogged down with it.  [T2] 
It appeared that this also reinforced the use of distancing as a coping 
process in responding to Elizabeth as described in chapter 8. Indeed Pamela 
described avoiding contact as much as possible and focusing only on getting 
the basics of care done. However, it appeared that Pamela and Jonathan 
remained connected to Elizabeth through their caregiving role and felt that it 
was impossible to relinquish this contact completely: 
Jonathan  The power of attorney said, very gallantly, Pamela needs 
support she can't do all this on her own, but there's no 
solution, there's nobodys come forward and said, Okay well 
take this on and well you know, there is no solution,[] 
Consequently they seemed ultimately to become resigned to their caregiving 
role and believed that they would only be free of this after her death. 
9.4 Relational outcomes for partners, adult daughters and their partners: 
the need for a changing I 
As described earlier and in chapter 8, close family members experienced a 
significant shift in their relationship with the person with bvFTD. Many of the 
partners appeared to take on increased responsibility for the person with 
bvFTD, while experiencing a loss of many of the valued aspects of their 
relationship. Adult daughters also experienced changes in the relationship. A 
previously poor relationship seemed to give rise to conflict and a sense of 
entrapment for one adult daughter and her partner. In contrast, a previously 
positive relationship appeared to result in a significant sense of loss in the 
other adult daughter which in turn seemed to give rise to difficulties in 
adjusting to the changes in her father.  
However, even where it was possible to negotiate a changing we partners; 
adult daughters and their partners experienced challenges to their own sense 
of self resulting from the consequences of bvFTD for their relationships with 
the person with dementia. Coping processes involved accepting the need for 
a changing self, grieving the losses experienced and finding ways to care for 
themselves. Relational outcomes for these family members appeared to 
involve having a foot in both camps that is finding a balance in supporting 
the person with bvFTD while addressing their own relational and individual 
needs. This is addressed under a continuum of: Becoming a new I --- An 
entrenched I. This continuum is now discussed. 
Becoming a new I 
Over the duration of the research, four partners (Phil, Kate, Melinda and 
Mollie) appeared to move towards developing a new self. This seemed to be 
a gradual process which involved, as described in Chapter eight, an 
acknowledgement that changes to relationships were taking place and that 
they needed to address their own wellbeing. Developing relationships with 
others, within and external to their families occurred as a consequence. The 
pace at which this transpired varied with these four partners and seemed to 
be influenced by the nature of the changes the person with bvFTD was 
experiencing, their readiness to address their grief and the availability of 
support from others.  
For example as described earlier, Phil experienced a significant transition 
prior to becoming involved in the research as his wife Pennys increasing 
needs had necessitated a placement in long term care. As described above 
(p.289) Phil had initially described how lonely he felt. I also experienced a 
sense of loneliness and grief when visiting his house, an almost tangible 
sense of coldness in the room (c.f. chapter 6, research context). Over the 
duration of his involvement in the research, it appeared that Phil engaged in 
a grieving process in which the changes in Penny were acknowledged 
following which he recognised his need to change.  
Therefore at time point two, he had put his house up for sale: 
Phil I've come to the conclusion that probably I'm going to have to 
move house because every time I come in here it just feels 
like empty [T2] 
Furthermore by time point three, Phil described the motivation for moving 
home:  
Jenny You said that it was difficult to go into the old house when 
you got home? 
Phil [] Yeah absolutely.  It just didnt feel right at all ever, from 
the day she moved out. Instead of getting better it got worse. 
Jenny Mm. 
Phil So from that point of view I'm better being here than I was 
there, you know... [] 
Jenny Yeah so is that about making this your house? 
Phil Well its still our house whether I like it or not but the fact that 
she's never been in it and is never likely to be in it makes it 
easier for me to bring people back here. 
Jenny Okay.  
Phil If I've got to make a new life for myself that gives me the 
opportunity whereas where I was before doesnt, you know. 
Thus Phil was able to move towards developing a new life for himself, which 
included as indicated previously, developing a new relationship.  
However the other three partners were at a different point in their lives with 
the person with bvFTD. All three people with bvFTD were living at home; 
additionally at the beginning of the research two had only recently been 
diagnosed. Consequently, a shift to developing a new self occurred in more 
subtle ways, reflecting the continued presence of the person with bvFTD in 
their lives and their considerable involvement in supporting that person. 
Furthermore it appeared to reflect a gradual process of assimilation of the 
diagnosis and its consequences for them. For example at time point three,  
Mollie seemed to recognise that it had taken a long time to adjust and adapt 
to the changes in their lives and their relationship together: 
Mollie But I don't think its Anthony. I think it's more me. It's taken a 
long time to adjust, it really has. [T3] 
Similarly, Kate and Melinda appeared to experience a gradual and for Kate a 
lengthy period of assimilation, acceptance and adaptation as described 
previously (table 8.8 and 8.10). All three acknowledged the limits to their 
capacity to care and remain patient in the face of the changes in their 
relationship and the challenges associated with the level of care and support 
their partner needed. For example, Melinda referred to her frustration with 
Berts behaviour at times: 
Melinda I suppose I'm not a saint and sometimes I get very, very 
frustrated with it all [T2] 
Each of them suggested that they had therefore come to realise the need to 
care for themselves (table 9.12): 
Table 9.12: I have to care for myself 
Melinda Because you do lose yourself in it all. It's recognising, yeah, you've 
got needs and to bring that forward.[T2] 
Mollie [] I think it can if youre not careful pull you down, pull me down. 
Kate [] So I thought, well Ill try anything because if I go to the doctor 
hell say, You're overworked, you're stressed, therefore the 
answer to stress is a pill, and I dont want to take anything. I dont 
want anything that is going to make me less clear than I am now. 
So there's no way I'm taking anything and I thought, if I'm not 
going to go to the doctor I've got to sort it myself. [T3] 
Furthermore, it also appeared that they recognised that they could become 
engulfed in caring for the person with dementia to the exclusion of their own 
needs. Indeed prior to time point three, Kate had been self-critical when 
describing that she couldnt influence the progression of bvFTD in Alistair: 
Kate so I just spend this time feeling that I'm a horrible wife and a 
crap person ((laughingly)) pretty much. So that is hard. [T1] 
Consequently, in table 9.12, her quote reflected a realisation that her 
emotional wellbeing was suffering and that she needed to address this. 
Melinda also described how easy it was to become exhausted; particularly 
given the changes they had experienced over the duration of the research 
including moving house and her need for an emergency hospital admission. 
Therefore she highlighted that time for herself was a necessity: 
Melinda Its a coping strategy.  And Berts also aware now that 
sometimes I have to, when life gets to me, I have to have 
time for myself, where before he hated that. [T1] 
Thus acknowledging and recognising their own needs appeared to involve 
meeting their needs for reciprocity and care through strengthening their 
relationships with others as well as those coping processes described in 
chapter eight. For two of the three partners this involved shifting allegiances 
within their existing relationships with family. As described previously for Kate 
and Melinda this resulted in stronger bonds with children and for Kate also 
with her parents (Table 9.13): 
Table 9.13: shifting allegiances 
Kate And Liz is very good. She's very, very good about just letting me 
talk without making me feel guilty, or making me feel as though I'm 
burdening her. [T2] 
Rena [] Phone rang and it was Katherine and she said Mum, we're 
locked in the conservatory. The conservatory door won't unlock.  
And I said to her Do you want us to come? and she said Oh, can 
you? and then I said Yeah, we're ready, we'll be there. [T3]  
Melinda Right. We'll talk, we'll phone and if something happens one of us 
will make sure that one of us gets in contact with that person. []. 
And they've encouraged me by saying It's alright to say that you 
get frustrated and you get angry. That is fine. When it gets too 
much, ring. And that's what I can do. I can ring and they'll come 
for a couple of hours and I'll get a couple of hours off.[T2] 
Therefore both Kate and Melinda strengthened existing relationships with 
family members and confided in them in order to address their needs for 
emotional and practical support as individuals, as well as managing their 
caregiving role. However, this did not appear to be without difficulty, as both 
Kate and Melinda had referred to the need to protect their children from the 
full consequences of the changes.  
It seemed that investing in closer bonds with family was not possible for 
Mollie, given the difficult relationships she experienced with her children (c.f. 
chapter 8, p.211-2). Consequently her narrative seemed to suggest that she 
had re-engaged with and strengthened relationships with friends: 
Mollie Well, I've started going out a little bit more with friends and 
meeting for coffee and things like that now. I've took on 
board what the doctor said and what specialist nurse said. 
You've got to look after yourself. Because not only with 
Anthony, but I was also looking after Pete and his problems.  
And I've actually walked away from that. I've had to walk 
away from that for my own wellbeing. So, getting there, 
slowly. But Anthony's got to be my priority. But no, for 
instance, go over to the library once a month. We do a family 
history thing over there. And when you go over there you're 
sat talking to people and you're thinking on the normal day-
to-day. Not having to remind that person they've got to do 
something, or they've got to... you know what I mean. Or go 
in for a coffee with friends in [city] and having a good old 
chinwag, a good old gossip ((laughs)). [] [T3] 
Furthermore, she also seemed to rely upon regular contact with the specialist 
nurse as her confidant, as well as making decisions about priorities and the 
limits to what she could do. Additionally all three partners had also described 
developing relationships with peers as a source of support (c.f. chapter 8 
p.227).  
An Entrenched I 
One of the adult daughters, her partner and one of the partners (Pamela, 
Jonathan and Sue) appeared to be closer to an entrenched position on the 
continuum. These close family members shared a difficulty in moving from 
awareness to understanding, positioned the person with bvFTD as the 
problem and utilised coping processes including distancing, avoiding, 
rejecting and controlling. Furthermore they also shared a sense of 
helplessness in the face of the changes that had occurred in the person with 
bvFTD. Consequently they may not have recognised the need to change 
themselves and/or were unable to sustain changes that might be needed.  
Pamela seemed to feel alone with the responsibility of caring for her mother. 
While Jonathan shared in some of the activity, Pamela suggested that she 
was largely responsible for her mothers care: 
Pamela And my comment was, Well there is nobody else to do it, 
and I think I feel now there isnt anybody, well Stan could do 
it but he's not capable. So therefore I suppose [] I feel as 
though Ive been landed with that responsibility. [T1] 
Furthermore Pamela and Jonathan identified that caring for her mother had 
strained their relationship which may have further heightened this sense of 
aloneness: 
Jonathan  Well it became virtually the only topic of conversation, 
virtually the only thing that we talked about and it certainly 
hasnt helped the relationship between us. [T1] 
Jonathan also acknowledged that Pamela was the primary supporter as he 
was away for significant periods of time with his work. However, at time point 
two, it seemed that Jonathan and Pamela sought to strengthen their 
relationship and become closer. Pamela suggested that they were trying to 
take time for themselves as a couple: 
Pamela  So we are trying to have some time together rather than just 
to be bogged down with it. [T2] 
Nevertheless, at time point three the weight of responsibility for Elizabeths 
care continued to be held by Pamela, as did her sense of helplessness. 
Indeed Jonathan reinforced that it was Pamelas responsibility to care for 
Elizabeth as her next of kin and further acknowledged that he was less 
involved: 
Jonathan  [] you know, there is no solution, unfortunately and I was 
saying this the other day there's no way out of it, Pamelas 
stuck with it because she's next of kin, her brothers no help. 
[] I'm the call answerer when I'm here really basically. I 
make a few calls but, you know, really there's no way of 
offloading what Pamela does [T3] 
It is possible that this was being enacted in the interviews as despite 
agreeing to participate in the research, Jonathan chose not to be present at 
time point two and left halfway through the time point three interview. Pamela 
additionally emphasised that support from her brother was not forthcoming: 
Pamela No well he doesnt talk to me so we had a meeting, []  we 
were all saying that we all ought to be singing from the same 
hymn sheet in regard to payment of her care and how much 
care went in and he was asked specifically what do you 
think? And he said something like, I can't think about 
anything but myself because I'm not well, so youre thinking 
well you're at a meeting, this is what were discussing and 
you're saying that you can't even contribute to what were 
actually talking about. [] [T3] 
It appeared that Pamela and Jonathan did share their experience to some 
degree and sought to find ways of strengthening their relationship. 
Nonetheless Pamela seemed to feel alone in her responsibility to care for her 
mother which was further heightened by the lack of support from her brother. 
Furthermore Jonathan also felt helpless to influence the situation: 
Jenny No. How do you manage  
Jonathan Me? 
Jenny  the impact, yeah?   
Jonathan Oh well I just, I'm rolling with it now really ((laughs)) its not, 
you know, there's no light at the end of the tunnel as far as 
I'm concerned, shell probably outlive me its just there's 
nothing we can do. I feel absolutely powerless really to do 
anything we just make the best of a bad job. [T1] 
Consequently, he limited his direct involvement with Elizabeth, thus acting 
independently of Pamela.  
Sue Stuart also appeared to experience a sense of being alone with the 
challenges she faced. She rarely acknowledged the need to confide in her 
daughter or others. As described previously, her daughter Carole suggested 
that her mother was talking with her about the difficulties she experienced 
with Terry and that this involved exploring solutions to challenges she faced. 
However, by time point three any closeness that may have existed seemed 
to have ruptured (c.f. chapter 8, p.237-8). Consequently, while Sue 
acknowledged the difficulties she experienced at the changes in Terry, she 
did not appear able to find ways to support herself and address her own 
needs. Indeed it seemed that she did not recognise the need to change 
herself, rather she appeared to focus largely on positioning the problems in 
their lives with the changes in Terrys behaviour.  
A risk associated with occupying an entrenched position appeared to be that 
of a decline in personal wellbeing. Many of the participants described 
personal costs to their caregiving, as described in chapter 8 (table 8.15), 
however it appeared that for some the realisation of these costs was a pivotal 
moment which stimulated action such as that described by Kate above (table 
9.12 and p.305-7). However while Pamela experienced consequences to her 
health and wellbeing (c.f. table 8.15), she did not seem able to engage 
ongoing self-care strategies. Indeed, it appeared that Pamela was 
experiencing a loss of the person she felt herself to have been.  
Pamela And the worse thing is I'm just a crabby old woman, that's 
how I feel, I'm just resentful and angry and I know that I am 
and I know whatever comes out of my mouth I'm thinking, oh 
you just sound awful But its like I can't even stop myself   
 because I feel as though I've been ground down to such an 
extent now that I don't know when my life is going to be 
normal again and the thought of another ten years with my 
mother as it is with no escape is just horrendous.[T3] 
At the start of the research Pamela had already been supporting her mother 
for over 6 years; consequently this length of time may have contributed to her 
declining wellbeing. Nevertheless, while she acknowledged that the costs 
were too high, she did not appear to feel able to consider how to manage her 
situation before it further damaged her wellbeing. Nor did it seem that she 
had the support she needed to make such changes.  
Sarah and Alex Lewin appeared to occupy the middle ground on this 
continuum. As described previously, they shared much in common with 
Pamela and Sue in regard to their difficulty in moving from awareness to 
understanding, in their positioning of her father as the problem and coping by 
distancing and controlling.  
However, in contrast to Pamela and Sue, it appeared that they had support 
available to them and seemed able to make some changes to their situation. 
Thus while they were critical of Rays sisters for their lack of support at time 
point one, by time point three, it appeared that they felt that as a family they 
had support from other family members and friends (Table 8.20). 
Additionally, while in some respects it appeared that Sarah and Alex were 
stuck in their attitudes towards Ray, they nevertheless appeared to move 
towards recognising the need to care for themselves. By time point two it 
appeared that the help they received from professionals enabled them to 
accept respite care and to have conversations about their own needs: 
Sarah [The specialist nurse] came the other day, well two days ago, 
[] He demonstrated his 
Alex Displeasure. 
Sarah displeasure that we were talking about something else 
other than him and we quickly turned it around that but its 
only [the nurses] way, she's got to work with us as a family   
 and so she's getting to know Alex, myself and Dad and yes 
the majority of her appointment is with Dad but she also does 
need to know what our needs are and what our interests are 
because we've got to have a balance as well in life.[T2] 
By time point three it seemed that Sarah and Alex were able to engage more 
collaboratively as a couple to meet their own needs (c.f. p.296-7), which also 
included supporting each other to manage the difficulties they experienced 
with Ray: 
Alex But Sarahs started to listen to me a little bit more and 
coming away and walking away. 
Sarah ((laughs)) I do now, I've got to for my own sanity now.[T3] 
Thus, as in this example, they were able to recognise that they were able to 
care for themselves by working together.  
9.5 Relational outcomes for wider family relationships 
As has been described in chapters 7 and 8, wider family members also 
experienced significant challenges to relationships as a consequence of 
bvFTD. In the context of the superordinate theme a changing we --- an 
entrenched we, a number of subthemes for relational outcomes for wider 
family members emerged: 
A changing we: 
 Closer together 
An entrenched we: 
 Conflicted 
 Disconnected  
 Drifting apart 
A changing we: closer together 
As has previously been described, it appeared that the Perrin and Morris 
families sought to work together to address the challenges brought by  
bvFTD, in the context of a prior family relationship that included cohesion, 
open communication, collaboration and conflict management.  
Working together involved wider family members who were not living with the 
person with bvFTD and their partner. Thus in the Perrin family, their adult 
daughters and Kates parents were significantly involved in Alistair and Kates 
lives and in providing much needed support. Similarly, in the Morris family, 
Melinda described a longstanding connectedness with their 7 children and 
grandchildren. She subsequently discussed how they had come together to 
support Bert and to provide mutual assistance to manage the impact of 
bvFTD on their lives (c.f.chapter 8 p.232-3).  
Melinda and Berts children did not participate in the research consequently it 
is not possible to present their perspectives here. However from Melinda and 
Berts perspective, they had moved closer together as a consequence of 
Berts diagnosis. Being closer together involved reciprocal exchanges of 
support and assistance to address emotional needs (c.f. table 9.13), problem 
solve and meet practical needs: 
Melinda We have had to put a clock in the garden though, because 
now he's got this fixation that he'll start and he'll just keep 
going 'til he drops. So we've put a clock in the garden now so 
we can say Right, when it gets round there you come in, sit 
down, have a breather and a snooze. And then go back out. 
[] So they're very much onto it and they came up with the 
idea of the clock. [] And I think they've got a better 
understanding of it now and they're always looking for new 
ways of helping you, aren't they. Like photographs with 
names and things like that. [T2] 
Thus their children were actively engaged in managing the impact of bvFTD. 
Furthermore, as described in chapter eight (Table 8.18) and raised above 
(table 9.13) the emotional needs of wider family members were 
acknowledged and addressed as a part of this reciprocity.  
Kate and Alistairs daughter Rachel and her parents Rena and Dave also 
participated in the research. As has been described previously, all three were   
closely involved in their lives and as with the Morris family, this closeness 
reflected longstanding patterns of connectedness.  
Coming closer together to support Alistair appeared to be positive in 
maintaining and strengthening relationships within the family. Indeed Alistair 
seemed to feel a sense of security and safety when with his family. For 
example he and Kate described that he was more comfortable when going 
out with Rena and Dave as it seemed that they also reinforced his sense of 
safety and security. Furthermore he also highlighted how Daves support had 
become important in helping him to manage and be motivated: 
Kate So my dads back round again driving things forward and 
Alistair Keeping me motivated.[T3] 
Similarly, when Kate was at work, Rachel often used to call in to see her 
father, because she knew he struggled with being alone at home: 
Rachel She doesnt like to leave him on his own for any length of 
time at all. So if she's going out for the evening Ill pop round 
and have a chat and stuff. I don't think he likes to be on his 
own either.[T3] 
And Alistair confirmed that knowing she was close by was helpful to him: 
Alistair If youre not there and she's there I know I can go round no 
matter what. [T3] 
However this closeness also brought challenges for them. For example, 
Rena and Dave described an increasing awareness of the impact of bvFTD 
on both Alistair and Kate (table 9.14): 
Table 9.14: the impact of bvFTD on Alistair and Kate 
Rena [] they have to take the motorhome down [to south of UK] []So 
we're due to take it down on Saturday. So all four of us are going, 
so that we can come back all together. It's somewhere past Bristol 
we've got to go down, that way. So it was decided, because 
Alistair's not allowed to drive it any longer. So Katherine would 
drive it, but I would go with her because I would chat to her. And 
Dave and Alistair will go in our car. And then we'll all come back 
together and presumably we'll do the same when we go to collect 
it. But Katherine wanted me there because she wanted someone 
to talk to because she said Alistair wouldn't. He wouldn't chat. 
Dave Well, it's no surprise. I dont chat. 
Rena No, you dont. But Alistair always did, you see. And that 
motorhome's big for her to drive on her own. [] And a complete 
role reversal. Whereas Alistair always drove and the caravan was 
Alistair's thing and she just did catering and that sort of thing. Now 
of course, she's in charge of the driving and that sort of thing. So 
they've completely changed roles there. Which is, I think, in a way 
hard for him too. [T3] 
In this quote it appears that they are exposed to and recognising the change 
and the impact of the changes on both Kate and Alistair, in particular the role 
reversal and increasing reliance on them. While it is evident that they willingly 
gave of their support, they also appeared to experience distress and sadness 
when talking about these changes. It therefore seemed that this increased 
exposure was also challenging for them. Dave had acknowledged previously 
how difficult it was for him to face Alistairs diagnosis because of his fears 
that he might also develop dementia: 
Jenny And have you looked for anything to tell you more about it? 
Dave To be quite honest no. but whether that is because I'm fearful 
of what will happen I don't know []  and quite often I'm 
wondering whether this is happening to me and I don't want 
to know to be quite honest its as easy as that so that could 
be clouding the judgement as well.[T1] 
Rena also expressed concerns and in response to my question about the 
future, highlighted that she had fears for what will happen when Alistair was 
no longer able to work. She acknowledged that there were limits to the 
support that they could provide because of their age and were worried about 
the level of support that Alistair would need: 
Jenny [] How do you think Alistair and Katherine see the future? 
Rena I think Alistair sees it blackly and I think Katherine tries not to 
look. I think we're all holding our breath that he keeps his job, 
because that is going to be, if a time comes when he's at 
home, then we all have real problems. Dave and I are too old 
to take him on. And Katherine doesn't expect us to. But she   
 is only fifty-three. She's got a few years that she's got to 
work. And financially she'll need to work. So what happens to 
Alistair? He doesn't like her not being there. He can cope if  
 Dave's there, but he doesn't like her not being there. So how 
is that going to work? I think that's what scares us all. And 
there isn't an answer.[T3] 
Furthermore, they were also worried about Kate and her wellbeing, 
recognising that she was increasingly relying on them and experiencing high 
levels of stress. Kate also appeared to be aware of her increased reliance on 
them and the challenges this created for their relationship (table 9.15): 
Table 9.15: challenges for wider family relationships 
Jenny You talked about your parents and that they only see certain 
things, how does that affect your relationship with them?  
Kate Most of the time I'm just very grateful for the fact of the support 
they give me, so it doesn't really, just occasionally I'll think Oh, for 
God's sake. But then I realise that, the practical person in me 
realises that they can't help that, that it's not deliberate and it's not 
done to wind me up. It's just a lack of understanding. [] It means 
I'm not going to yell at my mother and say How dare you do that? 
and oh God, I don't want to fall, out with her and that's what would 
happen, because she would get upset and I can't let that happen. I 
can't let it happen for a whole host of reasons. But for Alistair as 
well. and, so no, it's its, you just deal with it you know. [] [T2] 
Thus as Kate appeared to suggest, having a greater reliance on them 
required that she was sensitive to their experience and needs. Additionally it 
also seemed to require her to actively manage possible sources of conflict 
because she and Alistair needed them.  
The increased closeness also caused challenges for Rachel in her 
relationship with her Mum and Dad. Rachel was experiencing a transition in 
her own life during the research, as she got married and had plans to start a 
family. However, she had also acknowledged an increased reliance on them 
because of her experience of Aspergers at time point 1: 
Rachel because Im a lot like him and Im sure mum has told you, 
Ive got Aspergers, so moving away and the thought of   
 staying away for a long time, I didnt like.  I realised that 
when you get to an adult you have to move away and you 
have to stand on your own two feet and all the rest of it.  And  
 I had Mike, so that was fine, but I didnt particularly like it. [] 
So, the fact that now it makes it easier for me to be [here], it 
then can rationalise it to everyone else, [] The main reason 
is that Im more comfortable [] being here, the flat Im in 
now is the home Ive grown up in [T1] 
At time point two she had also described being involved in caring for her Dad, 
as a consequence of conversations with her parents. Indeed she suggested 
that she would be supporting him once he finished work while she was at 
home with her baby. It is conceivable that these competing demands caused 
Rachel some dissonance, as she subsequently seemed upset that her sister 
was getting involved in caring for her father and had suggested that she 
would be less involved: 
Rachel My sisters made a couple of comments on the fact that she's 
going to be looking after him, or helping to look after him. 
She's said how she couldnt have another child because 
she'd need to help look after my dad and bits and pieces like 
that which I thought was funny because apart from very, very 
recently as in the last two or three months of me planning the 
wedding where I've been stressed the rest of the time, she 
doesnt really have that much to do with the family, if you see 
what I mean. She comes over for Sunday dinner and then 
goes and then that's it whereas I'm the one that pops in, in 
the evening, thatI'm not saying I'm lookingI'm helping at 
all really, although if my mum was to go out for the evening it 
would be me she would text to say, you know, Just go and 
call and check on your dad tonight, or, I've told your dad 
youre upstairs if he needs you, and things like that. 
Whereas she's said that she thinks its going to be on her 
because Mike and I are now married that were going to be 
off and not really helping with the whole family life like as a  
  big unit instead of just a nuclear one. So that was quite hard 
for me to take because I thought, like my mum and I had 
been talking about the fact that Id be the one to look after  
 him [] So it was quiteand I just, you know, if it didnt 
happen then it wasn't the end of the world, its not like Im 
relying on the fact that I'm going to be helping looking after 
my dad but or will have my dad to help me but it just kind of 
made sense. So the fact that my sister thinks she's putting 
her life on hold a bit [T2] 
However it seemed that by time point three, Rachel had shifted from this 
perspective and suggested that she and her parents were close but not over-
involved: 
Rachel No I just think its the fact that I've got my own life and 
theyve got theirs I know if my mum did need something she 
could ask and she doesnt want to be imposing on us and I 
dont want to be interfering on them so sort of leave it if either 
one wants to then we can but its not forced. [T3] 
This coincided with a significant life change for her in that she was nearing 
the end of her pregnancy at the third time point. Thus it appeared that she 
was trying to negotiate a transition in her own life, involving the need to 
individuate while recognising that her parents needed support and that she 
needed them. Consequently, while being closer together had clear benefits 
for this family, it also presented new challenges for their relationships 
because it disrupted normative patterns of relating and transitions such as 
that of non-interference described by Rena (c.f. chapter 6) and Rachels 
struggle to individuate and develop a new family, while recognising her 
parents increasing needs.  
In both the Perrin and Morris family as described previously (Chapter 7, 
p.159-60), closeness between grandparents with bvFTD and their 
grandchildren also continued. Similarly, although relationships between 
generations were not always positive, this also occurred in the Burton and 
Lewin families. Family members sought to support interaction and reinforce  
the value of relationships between grandparents and grandchildren, thus 
maintaining close bonds (c.f. chapter 8, p.261-2).  
An entrenched we 
Five families experienced ruptures in their relationships with wider family 
members, leading to an entrenchment of positions which in some cases, 
resulted in losing we (Burton, Hugh, Stuart, Lewin and Horton). In all five of 
these families, these ruptures were influenced by previous difficulties in 
relationships, a lack of understanding of each others experiences and a lack 
of congruence in awareness and understanding.  
Difficult prior relationships between family members were experienced by all 
five families to some degree (c.f. chapter 6). Relationships that were 
characterised by degrees of disconnectedness, lack of closeness, poor 
communication and difficulty in addressing conflict or challenges such as 
those described by Pamela and Jonathan Hugh and Carole Stuart appeared 
to be ill-equipped to manage the challenges brought about by bvFTD.  The 
need to have increasing contact and offer increased levels of support for 
parents appeared to intensify existing relational difficulties. For example as 
indicated previously, Carole Stuart described a history of relationship 
difficulties with both of her parents, which she had tried to address following 
the birth of her daughter. Furthermore, despite her anxieties about caring for 
her parents, Carole had increased her contact in order to support them 
following her fathers diagnosis. However as can be seen below (table 9.16) 
further conflict seemed to result in the need to revert to keeping an emotional 
distance as was evident earlier in her adult life: 
Table 9.16: Difficult prior relationships  
Carole [] I moved out when I was 19, so I left home when I was 19 and 
came to live round this area. So that's quite a few years ago now. 
[] So my visits, because were so busy and stuff were quite like 
once a month, once every two months. [] I would say ... that a lot 
of the time I have to be the adult in the relationship that's the way I 
Jenny You were saying that you've felt you've had to be the adult. 
Carole Yeah always in that way. I think my brothers always been very 
selfish. 
Jenny Right. 
Carole And so because they didnt have much money my brother 
screamed and shouted for what he wanted and made mum feel 
very guilty and he always got what he wanted so I always was the 
one that said, No Ill have the board game or something, whereas 
he wanted a mountain bike or a brand new computer. So in that 
way I felt a lot of resentment to my parents up until I had 
counselling for it. So my relationship was quite strained with them 
but we seem to be okay now but I do have this real panic inside of 
me that I'm going to be the one looking after them. [T1] 
Carole Weve had a bit ofwell we were quite close up until Christmas 
time but my brothers split up with his fiance and moved out and 
he's had quite a lot of drama and stuff which I think he's taking 
advantage of them quite a lot financially.  
Jenny Okay. 
Carole And one of the reasons why they wanted to go on Christmas day 
really was because they'd had an upset with my brothers ex but 
she hadnt told me that on Christmas day which would have been 
like more understandable. She was supposed to be staying and 
then they made lies up to go. And I didnt appreciate that because I 
had to clean the housebecause mums spotless, Id cleaned the 
house and working full time and trying to do everything it was a lot, 
I was absolutely exhausted [] that really annoyed me at 
Christmas, really annoyed me that Id put so much effort into it and 
she knows how busy I am and she couldnt tell me the truth. And 
we did have words about it but not quite out in the open because 
she just gets too upset about things. So yeah. So its knocked 
things about because we werebecause I was taking her to the 
hospital and stuff before Christmas, we were getting quite a lot 
closer really but I've sort of stepped back again. 
Jenny Yeah. 
Carole I keep me guard and the barriers have come up [] [T3] 
Consequently, entrenched patterns of relating within this family were further 
accentuated by the challenges brought by bvFTD. In the absence of coping 
processes such as open communication, this resulted in a negative impact 
upon relationships between generations involving actual and emotional 
distance and disconnection.  
In the context of difficulties in being able to appreciate or understand each 
others perspectives, disconnectedness and conflict occurred in relationships. 
For example as described previously (chapter 8, p.210-2) Mollie and Anthony 
Burton experienced difficulties in their relationship with Mollies daughter   
Diane. It seems possible that they did not appreciate that it might be difficult 
for her to understand the changes Anthony was experiencing and what this 
might mean for him and for Mollie. Similarly, although they described being 
closer to Jane Burton, it seemed that they struggled to appreciate that she 
might be finding the changes in her father difficult: 
Mollie Jane's quite good, but I don't know if we've upset Jane, 
because she usually comes round, but Anthony comes out 
with things now, you see, that and Jane's one to get easily 
up... You said something to her one day and she was nearly 
in tears and I don't know what it was. I can't remember what 
you said to her. She's got to learn to take things, because 
something you said to her, was it... What was it, about Joe? 
'He should get out and get a job.', or I don't know what it was 
you said. Whatever it is, I see the tears and I thought 'Well 
I'm not saying anything. She's got to learn that they just 
come out.'     
Anthony But she molly coddles him too much. I mean, he's eighteen 
now [].  
Mollie I don't know if she... She's used to sitting there and Dad 'Yes, 
nice, nicey-nicey.', but now he doesn't. [T3] 
In the quote above Mollie seemed to assume that her lack of contact was 
because of Anthonys behaviour and her lack of understanding. Jane 
indicated in her first interview that she was aware that he would say 
inappropriate things: 
Jenny And are there other things that youve noticed when youre 
out together that he does that perhaps he wouldnt have 
done before? 
Jane I think he speaks his mind a lot more now, whereas before 
he was a fairly placid quiet man and he would keep his 
thoughts to himself, whereas now if he sees somebody or 
something that he doesnt agree with hell just turn round and 
say so and he doesnt really care who overhears him or 
anything, whereas before he would be very conscious about   
 people overhearing him say something like that. So he 
wouldnt speak his mind so much before. Well never actually 
Thus they appeared to struggle to consider her perspective such as how the 
changes in her father might impact upon her emotionally. Therefore they did 
not seem to recognise or address her emotional needs. In the context of 
these difficulties, it seemed that Diane and Mollie experienced conflict and a 
degree of emotional distance in their relationship. Similarly Jane also seemed 
to experience an increasing emotional distance from them. As discussed 
previously in chapter 8 (p.238-9), it also seemed that Phil Horton may have 
had difficulty in appreciating the impact of his wifes behaviour on his 
daughter. His daughter had made a decision not to allow her children to be 
exposed to her mother, even though he appeared to want that contact for his 
wife:  
Jenny Do the grandchildren come? 
Phil No. 
Jenny No. Okay. 
Phil I think my daughters frightened for them to see their Nan in 
the current state. She wants them to remember her when 
she was who she was. 
Jenny Yeah. 
Phil I've suggested a few times that it might be a good thing for 
her mum to see the grandchildren but my daughters 
frightened that if she comes and they dontand she turns 
aggressive it might have a negative impact on the 
children.[T2] 
Thus it appeared that for some families, this difficulty in appreciating each 
others perspectives could lead to further disconnectedness between 
generations.  
Finally lowered levels of awareness and understanding could also lead to 
difficulties within relationships. As has previously been described (chapter 7, 
p.147-9) lowered levels of awareness within families, where this occurred   
in the context of limited connectedness and proximity caused some family 
members to be positioned as the problem (chapter 8, p.210-2). This occurred 
in the Lewin, Burton and Hugh families. All three families described the 
breakdown in some relationships as a consequence of a lack of congruence 
in their understanding. For example the Lewin family suggested that 
relationships with some of Rays sisters had broken down. Similarly, Pamela 
described the loss of her relationship with Stan, her brother. Indeed Pamela 
described her sadness at the loss of this relationship: 
Pamela And I'm just amazed at how it's affected out family. You can't 
believe that you know [] we're not even talking to each 
other.  
Jenny And is that different from before?  
Pamela   Yeah. Initially, when she was first ill we used to talk 
frequently, [] he was the one who said There's definitely 
something wrong. So initially, we were talking. But to now be 
at the stage where we won't even speak to each other unless 
there's something specific to say. For instance, before 
Jonathan went in hospital, the carers had said Has your 
mother got another light switch in her kitchen? Because it's 
really dark?. [] so I actually texted Stan and said Can you 
sort the lights out?  Jonathan's going in hospital tomorrow. 
We can't do it. So at that point he said Ooh, what's the 
matter with him?. So I told him. So Stan didn't even text me 
or anything to say 'Well, how is he?'. [] He hasn't phoned to 
see how Jonathan is. And it's Sebastian's birthday today, he 
hasn't sent him a card. [] So that is how it is now. And that 
is really dreadful. [T2] 
It therefore appeared that these families may also have experienced a sense 
in which they were losing we. As in the context of a lack of cohesion, open 
communication and conflict management within these families, difficulties 
such as those described above did not appear to be addressed. Indeed 
coming closer together caused further challenges and damage to 
relationships.   
9.6 Chapter Summary 
In this chapter I have considered the outcomes for family relationships when 
a member of the family has bvFTD. Relational outcomes were evident for 
families, close family relationships and individuals. These ranged on a 
continuum from a changing we/ I to an entrenched we/ I.  
A changing we --- an entrenched we: relational outcomes for close 
family members 
Close family members experienced considerable changes to their 
relationships as a consequence of the interplay between the effects of bvFTD 
and their prior relationship. Consequently, a range of outcomes were evident, 
reflecting the diverse nature of relationships within these seven families. 
While acknowledging the changes and their impact, two couples were able to 
accept and adapt to the changes. Collaboration between the person with 
bvFTD and their partner characterised their coping, with one of these couples 
involving wider family in collective strategies designed to support the 
continued involvement of the person with bvFTD in everyday family life. In 
this context couples sought ways to maintain their strong bonds.  
A further two close family members (one partner and one couple) described 
the changes and acknowledged the loss of the relationship as it was. For one 
partner this occurred because the person with bvFTD no longer recognised 
them and had been placed in long term care. The fundamental nature of the 
changes resulted in a shift for Phil Horton towards seeking a new relationship 
while remaining connected to Penny. Over the duration of their involvement 
in the research, Alistair and Kate Perrin gradually recognised that their 
coping process of fighting it was not successful in keeping changes at bay 
which caused distress at the loss of core aspects of their togetherness. While 
losing we, the couple remained connected, although the nature of this 
connectedness had fundamentally altered. Kate openly acknowledged the 
shift in their relationship from husband wife, to parent child.  
Two further close family members described a loss of the person with bvFTD 
as they were and therefore experienced a loss of togetherness (one adult 
daughter and her husband and father and one couple). In the absence of a   
shared understanding of the changes, poor communication and difficulties in 
addressing the emotional impact of such changes these family members 
experienced grief, frustration and anger at the changes. Furthermore, they 
seemed unable to tolerate the changes in the person with bvFTD and 
positioned them as the problem. Coping in this way appeared to cause family 
members including the person with bvFTD to work separately from each 
other in order to address their individual needs. However the adult daughter 
and her partner seemed able to seek ways of strengthening their relationship 
as a consequence of the challenges they experienced.  
Pamela Hugh and her partner experienced a relationship characterised by 
distance and disconnectedness with her mother Elizabeth, in which distance 
from each other was valued. BvFTD disrupted these carefully maintained 
boundaries as this family needed to come closer together to cope with the 
changes. In the context of these relationship difficulties and a lack of 
understanding of bvFTD Elizabeth was positioned as the problem. 
Consequently, the nature of the contact required to manage the changes in 
Elizabeth caused further damage to their relationship. Pamela and Jonathan 
experienced significant challenges in addressing their own relational needs 
and in finding a balance in their caregiving. Ultimately they appeared to have 
become resigned to their role and expressed the view that they would only be 
free of this when Elizabeth died.   
A changing I --- an entrenched I: relational outcomes for partners, 
adult daughters and their partners 
Changes to we incurred challenges to self for these close family members. 
BvFTD seemed to require family members to have a foot in both camps. 
That is to find a balance in supporting the person with dementia while 
addressing their own relational and individual needs. Adaptation to meeting 
their own needs was a gradual process, brought about by pivotal changes 
such as the need for care, the loss of valued relational characteristics and 
deteriorating personal wellbeing. Consequently, while remaining attached, 
some of the partners and adult daughters and their husbands gradually 
sought to invest in other relationships in order to meet their needs. This was   
not without challenges, as for example, confiding in adult children may be at 
odds with their wish to protect them from the consequences of bvFTD. 
Similarly it may be that relationships with wider family are such that coming 
closer together was not possible or support was not available.  
Other partners and adult daughters seemed to be stuck and unable to move 
to a new self. Difficulties with prior relationships, ruptures in relationships with 
the person with bvFTD and a lack of shared understanding appeared to 
cause these close family members to feel helpless to influence change and 
to feel alone. Consequently it appeared that even when recognising changes 
to their own wellbeing, they were unable to implement or sustain measures 
designed to care for themselves.   
A changing we --- an entrenched we: relational outcomes for wider 
family members 
In the context of a prior relationship involving connectedness, open 
communication, successful resolution of conflict and cohesion, two families 
sought to work together with wider family members to address the changes 
and facilitate the continued involvement of the person with bvFTD in their 
lives. Family members moved closer together and engaged in mutual 
exchange of support to address emotional and practical day to day needs. 
Furthermore it was possible for relationships to continue to thrive albeit in a 
different form, such as with grandchildren. However, while closeness 
appeared beneficial to these families, it was not without consequences, 
including exposure to loss and sadness associated with the changes; fears 
for the future; fears for the wellbeing of the person with bvFTD and their 
partner and disruption to normative developmental transitions.  
For five of the families, the onset of bvFTD resulted in increased closeness. 
However in the context of difficult prior relationships involving poor 
communication, a lack of ability to take each others perspective and a lack of 
cohesion, these families experienced ruptures to their relationships with 
wider family members.  This appeared to lead to an entrenchment of pre-
existing relational positions involving emotional and practical distance.  
Furthermore, in some families a loss of relationships and/ or increased 
conflict appeared to occur.
Superordinate Themes and Subthemes Overview 
Superordinate 
theme 1: 
We/ I before 
bvFTD 
Cohesive and 
connected 
-------- 
Disconnected 
and distant 
Superordinate 
theme 2: 
Superordinate theme 3: 
Challenges 
experienced 
by we/ I 
Influencing 
Elements 
Assimilating, 
adjusting, 
reconstructing 
-------- 
Resisting, 
denying, being 
stuck 
Awareness and 
understanding 
of the changes 
Emotional and 
physical proximity, 
Its really subtle and 
difficult for others to 
Readiness to see and 
hear the changes, 
Prior relationship, 
Availability of 
knowledgeable and 
supportive 
professionals, 
Understanding of 
bvFTD. 
Accepting and 
Assimilating 
Its dementia, we 
have to find a 
way through this 
-------- 
Resisting and 
Blaming 
Resisting 
knowing, 
They are the 
problem, 
Youre the 
problem, you 
dont work with us 
or help us, 
Distancing. 
Managing 
everyday life 
Availability of 
knowledgeable and 
supportive 
professionals, 
Accepting  
resistingrejecting, 
Awareness  
Unawareness, 
Its really subtle and 
difficult for others to 
Past experiences of 
similar difficulties, 
Peer support, 
Prior relationship. 
Enabling and 
Facilitating 
Distancing, 
Managing and 
Controlling 
Avoiding and 
Reacting 
Underpinned by Collaboration, Adaptation, 
Communication, Addressing Conflict and Cohesion 
Were not the 
same anymore/ 
Im not the 
same anymore 
Awareness  
Unawareness, 
Its really subtle and 
difficult for others to 
Living together by 
choice, 
Prior relationship. 
Accepting and 
Adapting                                                                        
Accepting the 
changes and 
finding new ways 
of being together  
Fighting  
Resisting the 
changes, were 
going to fight 
this together 
Distancing and 
being stuck 
Achieving 
Distance, 
Being stuck. 
Accepting the need for a changing I 
 Grieving for a changing you and a changing we 
 Acknowledging the need for a changing I 
 Accepting the need for a changing I 
Being me in the 
context of 
bvFTD 
In step or out of step 
in our awareness of 
changes, 
Family coping 
processes, 
I trust my familys 
ways of supporting 
Sense of self, 
The impact of bvFTD 
on social and 
cognitive functioning, 
An important person 
in our lives --- he was 
just there really, 
Understanding their 
emotional world. 
Maintaining Self:  
o Im still me, still active and engaged with life  
o Im still me theres nothing wrong  
o Im still me, resisting negative perceptions 
Maintaining Wellbeing: 
o Supporting safety and security (a collaborative 
process) 
o Holding them (family members) 
o Resisting and restricting (person with bvFTD) 
o Controlling, positioning and distancing (family 
members) 
Superordinate 
theme 4: 
Relational 
Outcomes 
entrenched 
we / I 
-------- 
A changing 
we / I 
Relational outcomes for close 
family members including the 
person with bvFTD (along the 
continuum) 
 A changing we, stronger in a different 
 Losing we, but still connected  
 Losing you so losing we, together but 
separate 
 There is no we, just getting through it 
Relational outcomes for 
partners, adult daughters and 
their partners: the need for a 
changing I  
Becoming a new I ----- An entrenched I 
Relational outcomes for wider 
family members (along the 
continuum) 
 Closer together 
 Conflicted 
 Losing we 
Chapter 10 Discussion 
10.1 Introduction 
In this final chapter of the thesis, I consider the findings of the research study 
in the context of existing literature. Initially, I compare the results of this study 
with those of the systematic synthesis described in the literature review. 
Following this, those results that are consistent with existing research are 
explored. I then discuss the findings that appear to be unique to this study. 
After these two sections, I consider the potential implications of the findings 
for interventions and practice. I then summarise my own influence on the 
research, following which, I discuss the limitations of the study and the 
implications of the findings for future research. Finally, I conclude by 
considering the extent to which the research questions posed at the outset of 
the study have been addressed. 
10.2 Links between the current study and the results of the systematic 
synthesis exploring family relationships and dementia.  
In undertaking the current study, I sought to address some of the main 
limitations of research highlighted in the systematic synthesis described 
earlier. This included seeking the involvement of the person with bvFTD in 
the study; recruiting families with a range of relationships; focusing on a less 
common form of dementia and taking a longitudinal approach. In addition, 
where possible I sought to recruit wider family members to the research, in 
order to gain a family perspective on living with bvFTD. Further studies are 
required to consider the potential impact of bvFTD on diverse family 
constellations including those influenced by varied ethnicities or sexual 
orientation.  
The results of the systematic synthesis identified four superordinate themes: 
a shared history, negotiating the impact of dementia upon the 
relationship, openness and awareness and finally, shifting sands.  
A shared history contained two subthemes which appeared to represent 
opposite poles on a continuum; A good life together through to disconnected. 
This superordinate theme has strong parallels with the superordinate theme  
Cohesive and connected ---- Disconnected and distant in the current 
study. While the synthesis largely reflected the relational characteristics 
associated with couples or adult daughters and their mothers, family 
relationships in the current study seem to reveal similar features. That is, the 
strength of the emotional bond, commitment, communication, the ability to 
resolve conflict and to share roles provide the bedrock upon which dementia 
is addressed within a family as well as a dyadic context.  
Furthermore, as in the systematic synthesis, families made links between the 
qualities of their prior relationship and their experience of their current 
relationship and their motivations for supporting the person with bvFTD.  
The three superordinate themes of  Negotiating the impact of dementia upon 
the relationship, Openness and Awareness and Shifting Sands similarly have 
strong parallels with two of the superordinate themes Challenges 
experienced by we/ I and Assimilating, adjusting and reconstructing --- 
Resisting, denying, being stuck described in the current study. The seven 
families experienced challenges associated with becoming aware and 
understanding bvFTD, managing everyday life, managing the impact of 
dementia upon close relationships and retaining a sense of self in the face of 
dementia. As with the synthesis, families responses and coping processes 
associated with these challenges appeared to range on a continuum from 
seeing the dementia as a challenge to be met collaboratively through to 
experiencing ruptures in relationships as family members struggled to 
maintain or support connectedness in the face of dementia.  
Consistent with the synthesis, some families described sharing their 
understanding, supporting each other emotionally and adjusting and 
adapting. This occurred in spite of the altered levels of awareness of the 
person with bvFTD, as family members sought ways to involve and include 
the person in everyday family life. Families at the opposite end of the 
continuum appeared to experience challenges with awareness and 
understanding. As a consequence they also positioned the person with 
bvFTD as the problem and indeed other family members who were out of   
step in their awareness. Strategies described in the synthesis involving 
minimising and working apart also featured in the current study, with family 
members appearing to distance themselves from each other and/ or 
experience increased conflict in relationships.  
The current study however extends and provides more depth concerning the 
specific experience of the impact of bvFTD. As described in the synthesis, it 
is the psychosocial impact brought about by bvFTD that appears to be 
significant. There is considerable evidence of individual variability in the 
experience of dementia generally (Eschweiller et al. 2010) and there is 
recognition that symptoms commonly associated with bvFTD such as 
impairments in social cognition and executive function also occur in other 
forms of dementia. Nevertheless, it appears that for the participating families, 
changes to social cognition and executive function had a profound and early 
impact upon the persons ability to engage in everyday family life, even 
before diagnosis, thus necessitating fundamentally altered ways of relating. 
This appears to be different from those living with Alzheimers disease and 
other more common forms of dementia included in the synthesis, where 
evidence of continued mutuality in relationships early in the experience was 
possible.  
The final superordinate theme in the current study, A changing we / I --- An 
entrenched we / I, considered the relational outcomes associated with the 
experience of bvFTD for these seven families. BvFTD impacted upon the 
relationships of whole families, individual family members as well as on close 
family relationships, reflecting the diverse nature of relationships within the 
participating families. As indicated previously, the use of the term outcomes 
was not to imply an end point had been reached, rather it represented the 
perspectives of families about their relationships at that point in time. 
Families and individuals within families experienced varying degrees of 
changes to relationships on a continuum reflecting the extent to which they 
were able to adapt and adjust to the changes brought about by bvFTD.  
I did not explore relational outcomes in the synthesis. Having completed this 
study, it is evident that considering relational outcomes in the original 
synthesis would have been a valuable addition to the process. However, the 
majority of the studies included in the synthesis used a cross-sectional 
design which would have rendered it difficult to identify outcomes, which 
meant it did not emerge as a theme. Nevertheless, a small number of the 
articles did use a longitudinal design and reflected on changes to 
relationships. For example Hellstrm et al (2007) identified that couples 
engaged in a process which ultimately involved either becoming a new we, 
becoming an I or engaging in a new beginning. These outcomes have 
parallels with the findings of the current study in reflecting changes within 
relationships as well as for individuals. Furthermore, consistent with the 
findings of the current study, Roach et al. (2014a) also identified relational 
outcomes in some of the family storylines, involving for example ruptures or 
distancing in relationships with wider family.  
10.3 How the findings relate to existing literature  
The findings of this current study are related to existing research in regard to: 
 The interplay between past and current relationship quality and its 
impact on the experience for family members 
 The ability of people with bvFTD to contribute to research 
 The awareness of the person living with bvFTD 
 Assimilation and understanding of changes for the whole family 
 Coping styles 
 Identity, selfhood and wellbeing for people living with bvFTD  
 The specific experience of partners and adult children concerning the 
impact of bvFTD on their relationship with the person with dementia 
and its effect on their own identity 
 Scaffolding strategies used by families to support wellbeing and 
functioning in people living with bvFTD. 
The interplay between past and current relationship quality and its 
impact on the experience for family members 
In my research, the experiences of these seven families provided a powerful 
representation of the interplay between past and current relationship quality 
and the influence of this on the wellbeing of participants. In some families, a 
previously positive relationship appeared to enable the family to engage its 
resources to find ways of maintaining the quality of the current relationship 
albeit in a changed form. Conversely, in the context of a previously distant 
and disconnected relationship, bvFTD brought strain and conflict to current 
relationships. These findings correspond with existing research that 
emphasises the link between past and current relationship quality and the 
implications of this, both for the wellbeing of the person primarily involved in 
caregiving and the person with dementia (Quinn et al. 2009; Fauth et al. 
2012; Morris et al. 1988). These findings are also supported by the results of 
the systematic synthesis reported earlier (La Fontaine and Oyebode 2014).  
However, as also found in these studies, it cannot be assumed that a 
previously positive prior relationship will always lead to current relationship 
quality or wellbeing of family members. The findings of the current study 
demonstrate that bvFTD brings particular and early challenges for family 
relationships because of its effect on features of social cognition and 
executive functioning. While a positive prior relationship may support family 
adaptation to bvFTD, this does not necessarily mediate the experience of 
grief and loss at the considerable changes in the relationship. In some family 
members, the nature of the changes caused them to evaluate the 
relationship as having fundamentally altered in a negative way which had 
implications for the emotional and physical wellbeing of partners and adult 
children. These findings indicate that bvFTD has a particular influence on 
relationship quality and wellbeing.   
The ability of people with bvFTD to contribute to research 
Five people living with bvFTD participated in this research. In Chapter 2, I 
reviewed the limited research which exists concerning the experience of 
people living with bvFTD. Griffin et al. (2015) and Avineri (2013) have both   
challenged the dominant narrative that people living with bvFTD cannot 
contribute to research due to lack of awareness and insight. This current 
study confirms these authors assertion that people living with bvFTD can 
indeed articulate their experience. All five people were able to give insightful 
accounts of their day-to-day life with bvFTD. While awareness was variable, 
this did not conform to the literature which appears to suggest that 
awareness and insight is absent. Rather, as Avineri (2013) suggests, this 
would be more appropriately viewed as being on a continuum of 
unawareness to awareness.  
Avineri (2013) and Griffin (2015) also commented upon the context in which 
research should take place and the nature of the modification to research 
design that needs to occur to ensure participation. The family context of the 
research appeared to be significant. Four of the five people living with bvFTD 
chose to be interviewed together with their close family member. Where 
close family members were cognisant of and responsive to their needs during 
the interview process, this appeared to support their contribution.  
 The awareness of the person living with bvFTD 
Parallels between research considering awareness in people with 
Alzheimers disease and the current study were apparent. Clare (2002; et al. 
2005) considered the awareness of people living with Alzheimers disease, 
describing participants as being on a continuum of self-maintaining to self-
adjusting in their coping styles, reflecting varying degrees of awareness of 
the changes they were experiencing and their coping responses in light of 
this awareness.  
In the current study, the participants with bvFTD also demonstrated variable 
levels of awareness and associated coping styles. Two appeared to be closer 
to a self-adjusting coping style, although it appeared over time that self-
maintaining strategies were also used. Conversely, one appeared to hold to a 
self-maintaining coping style throughout the research, whereas two others 
appeared to fluctuate over the duration of the research in regards to their 
position on this continuum. One person in particular appeared to adopt a 
largely self-maintaining style, due to his concerns about stigma and the   
perspectives of others. However over time, he seemed to become more at 
ease with his diagnosis and was able to begin to tell others and accept 
support from others, suggesting features of self-adjustment.  
Therefore consistent with the findings of Clare et al. (2005), it appears that 
people with bvFTD in this study sought ways to cope with the impact of 
bvFTD, with some having greater levels of awareness than others. Clare et al 
(2005) also focus on the experience over time which is consistent with these 
findings, in that the people with bvFTD in this study seemed to experience 
some shifts in coping styles which may be influenced by a number of factors 
including adaptation and assimilation of the diagnosis.  
However, while degrees of awareness were apparent, participants had lesser 
awareness of the nature and extent of the changes and the impact of them, 
than their family members. Furthermore, in contrast to the findings of Ablitt et 
al. (2010), people with bvFTD in this study also appeared to have less 
emotional awareness of the impact of the changes on their family members. 
While some appeared to recognise the changes at a cognitive level, in the 
moment emotional recognition seemed to be significantly affected. In this 
context, some participants appeared to have meta-awareness in that they 
recognised that they had less awareness than their family members. 
Consequently they appeared to attempt to integrate others understandings 
of the changes into their narrative and were open to strategies which, when 
supported by family members, sought to address difficulties that their 
behaviour might cause. However others did not appear to have this 
understanding which resulted in relational difficulties. This finding is 
consistent with Avineris (2013) view that the relational context may be an 
important factor influencing awareness in people with bvFTD. Furthermore, it 
attests to the relational context of adjustment and assimilation of dementia 
(Snow et al. 2015). With this in mind, I now turn to the awareness and 
understanding of changes for the whole family.  
Awareness and understanding of changes for the whole family 
Family members in this study appeared to have varying degrees of 
awareness and understanding, influenced by a range of factors including   
emotional and physical proximity to the person with bvFTD and willingness to 
hear and see the changes. Close family members were often the first to 
notice changes, while those who were in contact less frequently appeared to 
remain unaware for significantly longer. Consistent with recent research on 
developing awareness and help seeking, it seems that in these families, help 
seeking occurred as a consequence of active reflection and/or in response to 
pivotal moments (Perry-Young et al. 2016) and was primarily initiated by 
close family members. Nevertheless, in three of the families, the person with 
bvFTD seemed to acknowledge that seeking help was necessary, thus it 
appeared to be a negotiated process (Chrisp et al. 2013).  
However, the development of dementia at a younger age is associated with 
longer time to diagnosis and difficulties in detection and misdiagnoses before 
a diagnosis is reached, particularly in the context of less common forms of 
dementia such as bvFTD (van Vliet et al. 2011). Consistent with this, three of 
the families described experiencing long periods of time and difficulties with 
professionals before receiving a diagnosis. Of the three families that had 
shorter time periods from initial contact to diagnosis, their experience was 
enhanced by contact with knowledgeable GPs and subsequently with a 
newly formed and skilled team. Experience of knowledgeable and informed 
professionals appeared to enhance opportunities to develop awareness and 
understanding (Kelly and Innes 2016). In some families that did not have 
access to such support, this appeared to be a contributory factor hampering 
awareness and understanding.  
Developing awareness and understanding following diagnosis was an 
important factor influencing family adjustment and the development of 
strategies to address the impact of bvFTD on their lives. Cheston (2013) 
describes the assimilation of problematic voices model, initially developed 
by Stiles (2001) as a meaningful way of understanding the process through 
which a person can be supported to assimilate the diagnosis of dementia and 
live well. Cheston (2013) proposes that seven levels are associated with the 
process, moving from warding off through understanding and gaining 
perspective and ultimately, resourcefulness, problem solution and mastery. 
Recently, this process has been applied to the experience of couples (Snow   
et al. 2016), demonstrating that strategies used by couples could support or 
alternatively prevent assimilation occurring. These findings are consistent 
with the current study, as it appeared that families varied considerably in their 
ability to communicate, empathise and openly acknowledge the changes thus 
moving towards assimilation. Furthermore, these authors described 
assimilation as an oscillating, dynamic and fluid process (Snow et al. 2016), 
that also has parallels with the experiences of the families in this study. In 
particular this was evident in changes in awareness and understanding over 
time within families. For example, some wider family members took 
considerably longer to move towards assimilation than close family members, 
or were stuck at a particular stage, such as warding off. This resulted in 
conflict or distancing between family members in the context of previously 
poor relationships.  
Coping styles 
Existing research has considered the coping styles of family caregivers. 
These have commonly been categorised as emotion-focused or problem-
focused (Snyder et al. 2015). Within the emotion-focused category, it is 
suggested that there are dysfunctional strategies (such as blaming self) or 
functional strategies (such as forgiveness and spirituality). Recent literature 
has also considered the coping styles of spouse and adult child caregivers in 
the context of bvFTD, as described in the literature review (Roche et al. 
2015; Wong and Wallhagen 2014). The current study also evidenced these 
different forms of coping in close family members. Although existing research 
tends to suggest family caregivers use one main coping style (Snyder et al. 
2015) in the current study, there was evidence that family members engaged 
a combination of these coping styles, across a range of different situations 
although one form of coping may be more dominant. Similarly, there was also 
evidence of flexibility over time in coping styles.  
Nevertheless, existing research that considers coping has limitations. For 
example, Snyder et al. (2015) acknowledge that they did not control for or 
consider the breadth of factors that may influence coping, such as appraisal 
which is thought to influence coping styles (Lo Sterzo and Ortega 2015).  
 While the current study is a small qualitative study and cannot be 
generalised, it appears that what is important is what works for the person 
and their family at that time and in that situation, rather than a focus on one 
form of coping as being more effective than another. Furthermore, as 
identified by Lazarus and Folkman (1984) a range of factors may influence 
coping processes. In this study these included the past relationship and 
family functioning.  
Identity, selfhood and wellbeing for people living with bvFTD  
A significant body of literature has considered identity, selfhood and 
wellbeing in the context of dementia (c.f. Kitwood 1997; Sabat 2001). 
However the perspectives of people living with bvFTD have largely been 
absent from this literature. Instead, the dominant discourse around bvFTD 
has focused upon underlying pathology, symptoms and associations 
between behaviour and caregiver outcomes. A risk of this focus is that the 
identity and personhood of the person with bvFTD is marginalised and as 
Kitwood (1997) and Sabat (2014) have identified in relation to the experience 
of dementia more broadly, their experience is reduced to a set of symptoms 
to be charted and monitored. In applying Sterns Critical Personalism theory, 
Sabat (2014) challenges us to recognise that people with dementia have a 
host of intact psychological, emotional and cognitive abilities that would be 
unnoticed if we were to restrict our understanding of such people to their 
performance on standard neuropsychological tests (35).   
The current study adds depth to this small body of evidence concerning the 
personal experience of bvFTD and the challenges faced by people with 
bvFTD in living well. Active efforts to maintain selfhood were apparent in all 
five participants and this study details the range of ways in which the five 
participants sought to maintain their selfhood and identity. These are 
consistent with Sabats discussion of Critical Personalism (2014) and 
included continuing to perceive themselves as embodying the multiple roles 
they have held through their lives. Furthermore, there was evidence of self-
maintenance, involving resisting the way in which they were perceived by 
others (autotelic goals: Sabat 2014) and although less commonly and in   
restricted ways, through reciprocity (heterotelic goals: Sabat 2014). Further 
research is needed, but the current study adds further support to the 
challenge made originally by Kitwood (1997) for us to see people with 
dementia as whole persons.  
The current study also highlights the importance of the relational context in 
which personhood was supported or denied. Consistent with the work of 
Sabat (2001) and Kitwood (1997) and more recent literature (Le Gals et al. 
2016; Sabat 2010; Hydn 2014) selfhood and identity was supported within a 
relational context. Family members supported the person in regard to their 
emotional wellbeing such that in one case, the person with dementia felt able 
to tell others about his diagnosis (Weaks et al. 2015). Similarly some family 
members sought to minimise the threats to wellbeing that caused the person 
with bvFTD to feel of insecure and panicky. Furthermore, people with bvFTD 
acted in collaboration with their family in order to achieve activities 
associated with everyday life.  
The specific experience of partners and adult children concerning the 
impact of bvFTD on their relationship with the person with dementia 
and its effect on their own identity 
As described in the literature review, existing research highlights the 
experience of partners in particular, having an increasing need to take 
responsibility, including taking on roles that would previously have been 
carried out by the person with dementia (Pozzebon et al. 2016; Wadham et 
al. 2016; Lin et al. 2012). Similarly, these authors emphasise the nature of 
the changes in the relationship and therefore the losses that partners have to 
contend with. The results of the current study share much in common with 
these findings, demonstrating that the partners experienced significant 
challenges associated with the nature of the changes to their relationships. 
Similarly, the findings of the current study concerning the relationship two 
adult daughters had with their parent with bvFTD are consistent with existing 
research (Ward-Griffin et al. 2007; Kjllman-Alm et al. 2013).   
However, a limitation of much of the literature in this area is that it combines 
the experiences of bvFTD with other forms of dementia. As indicated earlier,   
the current study appears to suggest that a specific focus on bvFTD is 
warranted. Close family members in this study reflected on significant and 
early changes to core aspects of mutuality involving everyday relational work, 
such as communication and reciprocity. Additionally, changes in the ability of 
the person with bvFTD to contribute to the practical activities of everyday life 
were such that taking responsibility for these activities and for their needs 
was an early and profound shift in the nature of their interactions. This can be 
likened to the concept of second order change described in systemic theory 
(Davey et al. 2012), where transformation of the system itself occurs as a 
consequence of bvFTD.  
In particular some partners characterised the changes as becoming like 
brother-sister and ultimately like parent child. It is important not to see this 
as infantilising (although that may occur) but rather it may reflect the difficulty 
in conceptualising the complex nature of the changes to the level of cognitive 
and relational sophistication.  
Outcomes for relationships involved partners needing to stay attached while 
simultaneously finding new ways of meeting their own needs (Hellstrom et al. 
2007; Keady and Nolan 2003; Pozzebon et al. 2016; Wadham et al. 2016). 
This included strengthening existing family relationships or finding new 
relationships; peer support and psychological support. Similarly adult 
daughters grappled with staying involved while achieving a distance from the 
person with bvFTD and also finding ways of meeting their own needs.  
Finally, the current study appears to support existing research concerning the 
value of peer support (Keyes et al. 2016) as a source of reciprocity, learning 
and shared experience. 
Scaffolding strategies used by families to support wellbeing and 
functioning in people living with bvFTD. 
Research exists concerning the use of neuro-rehabilitation, cognitive 
rehabilitation and behavioural interventions in other fields (e.g. traumatic 
brain injury) and has been applied in the context of Alzheimers disease 
(Bahar-Fuchs et al. 2013; Padilla 2011; Buchanan et al. 2011; Letts et al. 
2011). Similarly, research into interventions in the field of dementia care has   
involved working with family members to enhance their ability to support the 
person with dementia (c.f. Gitlin et al. 2008; 2010a; 2010b). Developing 
scaffolding techniques, such as breaking activities down into component 
parts and supporting success in one part before moving to another, is a 
common feature of interventions of this type. It has recently been 
recommended that there would be value in transferring these strategies to 
bvFTD (e.g. Nunnemann et al. 2012; Korte and Rogalski 2013; OConnor et 
al. 2013). A small number of studies have explored supporting problem 
solving skills development with family caregivers of people with bvFTD (e.g. 
Mioshi et al. 2013b) and most recently, one study has illustrated the value of 
the tailored activities programme in this context (OConnor et al. 2016). The 
current study lends support to the recommendations of these reviews and the 
study conducted by OConnor et al (2016), that enabling families to work with 
the person with bvFTD to engage in activity focused interventions which 
utilise scaffolding techniques can be effective. Furthermore, it appears to 
provide important means to support functioning, address quality of life and 
feelings of mastery.  
10.4  The unique contribution of these findings: The reciprocal influence 
between family relationships and bvFTD 
As described in the literature review, few studies have considered the whole 
family experience of living with dementia and none have applied this to the 
experience of bvFTD. The current study appears to be unique in achieving 
this. A number of key findings are evident. Consistent with findings from 
family systemic approaches to illness and disability (Rolland, 1994; Kissane 
and Bloch 2002; Walsh 2006), this research shows that there is a reciprocal 
influence between family relationships and the experience of bvFTD. That is, 
that the family relationship influenced the way in which bvFTD is understood 
and managed within the family and in turn the changes associated with 
bvFTD influenced the relational outcomes on a continuum from a changing 
we/ I to an entrenched we/ I.   
Additionally, the findings illustrate that all family members within the system 
were affected by and influenced the way in which bvFTD was interpreted, 
understood and managed. While there appeared to be varying degrees of  
 impact based on emotional and physical proximity, the responses of wider 
family members had an impact on close family members and vice versa. 
These relational exchanges influenced family functioning and relational 
outcomes for each of the families involved. Wider family were for some close 
family members an alternative source of strength and closeness. However in 
other families who were less connected, wider family members were sources 
of further distress and conflict for close family members. These findings echo 
those of a number of previous studies exploring the value of family support to 
primary caregivers of people with dementia (Diest et al. 2014; Trujillo et al 
2016; Chesla et al. 1994; Sutter et al. 2014; Tremont et al. 2006; Sherman et 
al. 2013).  
The characteristics of family functioning were fundamental to the way in 
which bvFTD was addressed within the system and affected the outcomes 
for all family members both individually and together. These characteristics 
included the extent to which families were cohesive, able to collaborate, 
openly communicate, manage conflict, adapt and address changes in 
boundaries and roles within the system (Rolland et al 1994; Kissane and 
Bloch 2002; Walsh 2006).  
Furthermore, the longitudinal nature of this research illustrated the way in 
which families and individuals within families adjusted over time. Differences 
in adaptation were unique to each family, reflecting health beliefs, the stage 
of the family in the developmental life cycle, prior experiences and responses 
to adversity (Rolland 1994). When combined with the specific difficulties 
created by the experience of bvFTD, each family and indeed individual family 
members underwent changes and were required to confront challenges that 
were unique to them and their specific way of being as a family.  
These findings therefore also align with research concerning the influence of 
family functioning on the stress process when caregiving for a person with 
dementia (Mitriani et al. 2006; Tremont et al. 2006). These authors suggest 
that particular styles of family functioning such as conflict and poor cohesion 
can contribute to the experience of burden in family caregiving.  
A particular strength of the current research is that it has included families 
with less positive relationships, thus presenting a nuanced portrayal of the 
family experience of bvFTD. These findings are therefore consistent with 
existing theoretical understandings of the interplay between illness, disability 
and family functioning (Rolland 1994; Kissane and Bloch 2002). Rolland 
(1994) suggests that we need to view the family as the unit of care in which 
a broad range of family forms and biopsychosocial interactions are 
normative (12). This requires that their patterns of relating should not be 
viewed as functional or dysfunctional. Rather, it is imperative that we 
recognise that bvFTD brings particular challenges which will impact to a 
greater or lesser extent depending upon family functioning.  
10.5  Implications of the findings for interventions and practice 
There are a range of implications for interventions and practice with families 
living with bvFTD and for individuals within these families. These include:  
 Family systems approaches to working with families living with bvFTD 
 Specific interventions for those family members in close and/ or 
intimate relationships with the person with bvFTD 
 Interventions to support the person with bvFTD to maintain selfhood, 
identity and wellbeing 
 Developing therapeutic practice in professionals and carers in order 
that they are able to work with families living with bvFTD 
 Information provision for families and individuals within families 
regarding bvFTD 
Family systems approaches to working with families living with bvFTD 
Benbow and Sharman (2014) suggest that while literature concerning the 
application of family therapy to dementia has increased in the past 25 years, 
there are a number of areas requiring further research in order to support the 
integration of family therapy as a therapeutic approach in dementia care. 
These include the need to identify appropriate techniques to evaluate its 
effectiveness, how to ensure treatment integrity, making techniques from   
family therapy widely available and how to train health and social care staff to 
work with families (2047). They further suggest that there is a need for 
further research which looks more broadly at changes in the family system, at 
the relationship between the family and health/ social care and in individual 
members of the family system (p.2047).  The current study, although small 
scale, provides such evidence concerning the interplay between family 
relationships and bvFTD.  
A number of practice implications can be identified. Firstly, incorporating 
family systems approaches to working with families affected by bvFTD may 
be a valuable direction for interventions. The current study points to the need 
to understand bvFTD within a family centred framework. Within this context, 
the needs of families and individuals within families should be assessed as a 
prelude to intervention (Rolland 1994). The current findings point to the 
uniqueness of each family ranging on a continuum from cohesive and 
connected to distant and disconnected. Therefore assessment needs to 
consider the range of factors that will influence the familys response to 
bvFTD. 
Following this, interventions are required that are responsive to the specific 
needs of families and take account of family patterns of relating and existing 
beliefs concerning health and illness. Research evidence and theoretical 
frameworks already exist which support the value of such flexible 
interventions in the fields of cancer (Kissane and Bloch 2002), illness and 
disability (Rolland 1994; Walsh 2006). Furthermore, the New York University 
(NYU) intervention for family caregivers of people with dementia has proven 
success in delivering family focused interventions in the context of dementia, 
albeit with a focus on the primary family caregiver (Gaugler et al. 2013; 
Mittelman et al. 2008; Mittelman et al. 2006).  
In particular, the findings of the current study highlight that interventions are 
needed that reflect the best fit for each family. It is widely acknowledged that 
interventions which are flexible and responsive to individual differences such 
as those described by Rolland (1994) and Mittelman (2003) may be more 
effective than prescriptive interventions (Elvish et al. 2012).   
As described above, family focused interventions can also be delivered to 
individuals within a system. The NYU caregiver programme is typical of such 
interventions (Benbow and Sharman 2014). The findings of the current study 
support the need for specific psycho-social interventions which recognise the 
unique experience of bvFTD for spouse relationships and adult children who 
are caregiving for the person with bvFTD. These interventions would need to 
incorporate opportunities as required for them to consider the range of 
feelings that may be experienced, including the grief and loss associated with 
the change in the relationship (Large and Slinger 2013). Furthermore, this 
would usefully support close family members to consider their own needs 
and self-care strategies, involving for example accessing peer support 
(Keyes et al. 2016) and strengthening existing relationships (Rolland 1994; 
Mittelman et al. 2003).  
Furthermore, given the nature of the changes over time that this study has 
identified, support to individuals and families would be most beneficial if it 
were ongoing and accessible to them as they require it, such as that 
described by Mittelman et al (2003). 
Interventions to support the person with bvFTD to maintain selfhood, 
identity and wellbeing 
A small body of existing research has begun to explore ways in which 
families can be supported to provide opportunities for the person with bvFTD 
to maintain selfhood and wellbeing (OConnor et al. 2016; Mioshi et al. 
2013b). The findings of this current study confirm the value of such 
approaches in enabling the person with bvFTD to engage in activities that 
were personally meaningful to them and enabled them to continue to be 
active and engaged in family life. Furthermore, consistent with the findings of 
Le Gals and Bungener (2016) the person with bvFTD was able to 
collaborate with family members where this was appropriately supported 
through scaffolding. A person-centred approach (Kitwood 1997) is of critical 
importance to such interventions, achieving an individualised assessment 
and identification of activities that are relevant and meaningful and 
appropriate to the strengths and challenges the person experiences.   
Furthermore these interventions should provide the conceptual framework 
necessary for the family to adopt an enabling and facilitative approach (Le 
Gals and Bungener 2016; OConnor et al. 2016).  
Developing therapeutic practice in professionals and carers in order 
that they are able to work with families living with bvFTD 
Benbow and Sharman (2014) identify the need to improve knowledge and 
understanding of therapeutic practice with families living with dementia. The 
current study highlights the need for professionals to understand the specific 
experience of bvFTD and how to support families in this context (Nunemann 
et al. 2012). In particular, the findings underscore the challenges faced by 
families and the complexities of their experience. While some found 
professionals and carers to be knowledgeable and supportive, others 
appeared to have found professionals and carers to lack understanding.  
These findings are consistent with existing literature considering the 
experience of people living with young onset dementia (Nunnemann et al. 
2012; Sansoni et al. 2016). Education and training needs to be available to 
support knowledge, skills and therapeutic practice, in order that professionals 
and carers can personalise support for families. This is particularly important 
as unmet needs appear to have a significant relationship with lower health 
related quality of life (Bakker et al. 2013).  
Information provision for families and individuals within families 
regarding bvFTD 
The findings of this study support the need to provide specialised information 
concerning bvFTD for families. Information already exists concerning the 
nature of bvFTD, but this is largely focused on symptom description. In light 
of the current findings, it would appear that this needs to be extended in the 
same way that information exchange concerning more common forms of 
dementia has developed. For example, Barnes et al. (2016) suggest that the 
provision of information that gives meaning to everyday experiences can 
enable carers to feel better able to give care, enhancing their capacity as well 
as their sense of achievement and security (520). Similarly Pozzebon et al 
(2016) suggest that spouses frame their experience of dementia within a   
relational context, thus information would be most effective if it supported 
knowledge development within that context. It is within this framework that 
information needs to address the nature of the changes in order to provide 
families with a conceptual understanding of bvFTD and how this relates to 
the persons behaviour on a day-to-day basis.  
The current findings also point to the need to consider the way in which 
information is delivered. The family systems illness model incorporates three 
time phases of disability; the crisis phase occurring pre-diagnosis through to 
the period following diagnosis, the chronic phase and the terminal phase 
(Rolland 1994). Rolland suggests that the way in which professionals deliver 
information during each of these phases can have a significant impact on 
family functioning, particularly if this is delivered without understanding the 
family context or the way in which the family interpret information. This is 
consistent with the findings of Barnes et al. (2016) who emphasise that 
people may have very different needs and expectations and without 
understanding of these, information may be of no value or indeed harmful.  
10.6 Reflexivity and reflection on the research and my contribution to the 
findings 
I was well used to working with people living with dementia and their families 
and had undertaken research with families living with dementia previously 
when I began this research. I was nevertheless challenged personally, 
professionally and as a researcher. I had undertaken to engage in personal 
supervision as a part of this research process. This supervision, alongside 
the support provided by my supervisors was essential in order for me to 
consider the challenges I experienced in managing these multiple roles while 
being party to sometimes unanticipated but nevertheless distressing and 
difficult experiences. These raised emotionally and sometimes ethically 
challenging moments for me, involving personal and professional discomfort.  
I found it difficult at times to manage the boundaries between practitioner and 
researcher, recognising that as a practitioner I would have sought to actively 
address the difficulties experienced by families.  I felt constrained by my 
research role which resulted in my bearing witness to their experiences   
without being able to actively work with them. Consequently there were times 
when I felt helpless to respond appropriately. Sometimes, my response to 
this internal conflict was the desire to create some emotional distance from 
the families, which ultimately meant that I could not be present in the 
moment with them. I felt this sometimes affected the quality of the interviews 
and my interactions with them.  
This experience highlighted the need for ethical practice which cannot 
necessarily be anticipated and planned for during the research design phase. 
Such experiences call for person centred approaches which are in the 
moment and embody ongoing reflexivity, such as that of ethical mindfulness 
(Warin, 2011). Having recognised the ethical importance of these 
experiences, the use of supervision enabled me to work with these feelings 
and manage them so as to limit their impact upon my research practice. In 
particular, this required that I consider the ramifications for me of emotional 
engagement with participating families in the context of the research. Hoskins 
and White (2013) highlight that this is a common challenge for student 
researchers, particularly in the context of sensitive research topics.  
Supervision enabled me to identify strategies to support family participation in 
the research and address my emotional experience. This involved ensuring 
that I remained conscious of the familys experiences and as appropriate, 
offered opportunities to change the way in which we worked together where 
this was needed (Hellstrom et al. 2007a; Dewing 2007; Sakellariou et al. 
2013; Forbat and Henderson, 2005). Furthermore, I explored within 
supervision, where the boundaries of practitioner and researcher blurred and 
revisited strategies for supporting participants at the end of the research 
interview (Sakellariou et al. 2013; Pesonen et al. 2012).   
This illustrates how important it was for me to own my feelings and 
perspectives while conducting this research and consider how these might 
impact upon the research process, including analysis. Consequently I 
engaged in personal supervision until the analysis of each of the families had 
been completed. 
I do not claim to know what it is like to live with bvFTD, indeed I have no 
personal experience of dementia in my family. While I have strived to 
represent the experiences of the participating families, this needs to be 
viewed within Riessmans (1993) layers of representation. That is that this 
thesis represents my interpretation of their experiences as they described 
them over the duration of the research. My own and their perceptions of their 
experiences are subject to change over time and are influenced by the wider 
context in which we each live our lives. Thus these findings cannot be 
considered to be a single truth but may provide a window of insight into the 
world of the families who participated.   
10.7 The limitations of the findings 
There are a number of limitations to this research: 
A snapshot of the family experience 
This was a longitudinal study considering the perspectives of these families 
over 3 time points (ranging from 12 to 24 months). While this supports the 
value of a focus on the interplay between relationships and dementia over 
time, it is nevertheless still a snapshot of the experience of these families. 
Further research is needed that explores the reciprocal influence of bvFTD 
and family relationships over a longer period of time to fully capture the 
experiences and the possible intervention needs associated with them. 
Particularly as the experience of bvFTD represents a lengthy and changing 
course over several years which each family is likely to experience 
differently.  
Achieving theoretical saturation in grounded theory 
Only two of the participating families involved an adult daughter as the 
primary caregiver. Thus the categories developed related to their experience 
can only be considered provisional as it was not possible to achieve 
theoretical saturation without returning to the field to recruit new families, 
which was not possible within the confines of the current study. Similarly, 
although the categories developed within the experience of families where 
partners are the main caregivers are stronger, I also believe that returning to  
the field would be of value to strengthen these categories and the 
relationships between them. Thus the grounded theory aspect of this study 
has not built theory, but nevertheless has highlighted some strong concepts 
which can be viewed in relation to the experiences of other similar families. 
Initial sampling constraints 
Given the relative rarity of bvFTD and the anticipated challenges of recruiting 
family groups to research such as this, I chose not to limit recruitment to a 
specific time point in the course of the illness. Consequently, there is 
considerable heterogeneity in some of the characteristics of the seven 
families that participated. Furthermore, six of the seven families in this study 
are living with dementia at a younger age. While this reflects prevalence data 
(Rascovsky et al. 2011), the results are therefore largely specific to the 
experiences of young onset dementia. While a focus on young onset 
dementia is a strength of the research given that it is an under-researched 
area, the experience of bvFTD in older families may be significantly different 
and requires further study (Baborie et al. 2012).  
Similarly, the gender of the five participants with bvFTD and their female 
partners is likely to have influenced the findings. Thus future studies will need 
to consider the perspectives of women living with bvFTD and their male 
partners and/ or adult sons. Similarly, it was not possible to select a sample 
that included diverse relational experiences, for example same sex couples 
or families from migrant communities. However, given the sample size it 
would have been difficult to ascertain the differences that might have been 
driven by cultural differences or those specific to same sex family 
relationships.  
Rurality 
Participants were recruited within a largely rural county with some of the 
widely acknowledged challenges associated with service provision that 
rurality brings (Morgan et al. 2011). It is also acknowledged that service 
receipt for people with young onset dementia and their families is patchy and 
fraught with difficulties in many areas (Roach and Keady 2008). Thus the 
service experience of the participating families may be significantly different   
from an urban area which has for example, a specialist service for younger 
people with dementia. Consequently, these findings need to be considered 
with this in mind. 
Research Method 
Finally, a limitation of the research may be in my choice of method. Although 
I sought to capture evidence of life as it is lived through interviews with 
family members together, this may have been more accessible if I had used 
participant observation. While I sought to engage aspects of observation 
during interviews and this proved particularly important in highlighting the 
nature of the changes experienced it is nevertheless limited. An ethnographic 
approach based on participant observation and interviews may have been 
more effective in illuminating the family experience, but this has to be 
weighed against the invasiveness of such research on the lives of the 
families, the extent to which observation could be tolerated by the person 
with bvFTD and the impact of the researcher on the naturalistic 
environment.  
10.8  Implications for future research 
In light of the findings, a number of possible areas for further research are 
identified. Firstly, further study considering the perspectives of adult children 
as primary supporters of a person with bvFTD is needed. Similarly the 
perspectives of migrant and minority communities require consideration. 
While recent studies have explored family functioning and dementia in some 
countries, (c.f. Diest et al. 2014; Trujillo et al 2016) they cannot necessarily 
be applied to other communities given differences in cultural context. 
Furthermore, a specific focus on bvFTD in this context is warranted.  
Similarly, the experience of families with different relationship types would be 
beneficial, considering for example the needs and experiences of families 
where the person with bvFTD is in a lesbian or gay relationship. Furthermore, 
it would be beneficial to conduct similar research which reflects different 
gender relationships, involving female participants living with bvFTD and their 
male partners and/ or adult sons. Additionally, children and young people 
within these seven families did not take part. Given the very significant   
impact of living with a parent with dementia that has been identified in 
existing qualitative studies, this would seem to be an area for further 
research.  
Secondly, the findings lend support to the development, piloting and 
evaluation of a family based assessment and intervention for families living 
with bvFTD. As Benbow and Sharman (2014) suggest, careful consideration 
would need to be given to methods of evaluation as well as ways to ensure 
treatment integrity. A critical factor influencing the practice based relevance 
of such a study would be to consider how staff working within services can be 
supported to deliver family focused interventions given the current focus on 
caregiving. Involving professionals who are already knowledgeable about 
family focused support, such as Clinical Psychologists and Admiral Nurses 
(Quinn et al. 2013) may be an important first step to developing such 
interventions.  
Thirdly, an area for future research could be the development and evaluation 
of meaningful and contextual information for families living with bvFTD. The 
involvement of families to develop, design and evaluate this information 
would be a meaningful way forward in ensuring that it is relevant and 
beneficial. Additionally, given that there is some evidence that the presence 
of expert carers in psychoeducational courses is meaningful to family 
members (Barnes et al. 2016), it seems relevant to consider how family 
members who have experience in this area might be co-educators in 
delivering such information.  
Fourthly, as described earlier in this chapter, research has begun to consider 
how families can be supported to facilitate meaningful activities with the 
person with bvFTD that support identity, selfhood and wellbeing. However 
this is early in its development and existing research has considered people 
with advanced experience of bvFTD (OConnor et al. 2016) or is limited to 
family caregiver interventions (Mioshi et al. 2013b). A further area for study 
could therefore be to support such activity in families who have recently 
received a diagnosis.   
10.9  Conclusions  
In the current study, I sought to understand the inter-generational family 
experience of bvFTD over time. In particular, I aimed to explore the emotional 
experience and impact on relationships and the strategies that families used 
to make sense of and cope with bvFTD. Furthermore, I hoped to identify the 
practice implications of this research in order to provide the basis on which 
interventions could be developed. To achieve these objectives, I identified six 
research questions as follows (Table 10.1): 
Table 10.1 Research questions 
1. How were family relationships experienced prior to FTD occurring  
2. How have families made sense of and understood the changes 
associated with FTD beginning with the early signs before diagnosis and 
continuing throughout their involvement in the research  
3. What are the implications of this process of sense making for coping with 
the experience of FTD within a relational context over time? (Considering 
the verbal, embodied and emotional aspects of coping)  
4. How has FTD affected and impacted upon family relationships over time? 
(considering processes of reciprocity, cohesion, collaboration, 
communication, conflict, allegiances, roles and responsibilities)   
5. What is the reciprocal influence of family relationships and coping 
processes in the context of FTD? 
6. What does this tell us about the factors that facilitate or mediate against 
living well with FTD and what interventions might be needed in order to 
support families to live well with FTD? 
Using a longitudinal, pluralistic qualitative research design, I employed 
narrative thematic analysis to explore questions one and four. I employed 
grounded theory to explore questions two and three. The data arising from 
these different but complementary approaches were brought together to 
address question five and to identify implications for practice in line with 
question six. The study was framed within a constructivist approach, 
acknowledging that I do not have direct access to the familys experiences 
and that multiple realities exist.  
Within the context of a constructivist approach, I generated thick and rich 
description rather than theory due to the need for further theoretical 
sampling. I nevertheless believe that I have achieved an in-depth 
interpretation of the experiences of the seven families who participated, over 
the duration of the research. The research findings are consistent with 
theoretical conceptualisations of family functioning (Rolland 1994; Kissane 
and Bloch 2002). In foregrounding the family as the unit of study, I have 
illustrated that in these seven families, family relationships form the bedrock 
upon which the impact of bvFTD is interpreted. Factors such as the extent to 
which families are cohesive, collaborative and are able to adapt are critical to 
how they address the unique challenges associated with bvFTD for 
relationships. In turn, the experience of bvFTD and the way in which it is 
understood and managed influences the relational outcomes for families and 
for individuals within families. This is a cyclical process, as the experience of 
bvFTD is by its very nature progressive and dynamic in its effect. Thus 
caregiving forms a part of the family experience, but is part of what families 
do or dont do, rather than defining them.  
Furthermore, in involving people with bvFTD in this research, I have 
contributed to a small body of evidence which can challenge the dominant 
approach within research in this area that has risked contributing to a 
depersonalisation of the person living with the diagnosis. People living with 
bvFTD are able to contribute their perspectives and experiences. In this 
context, I have shown that the people within this study were active in 
interpreting the experience of bvFTD and in seeking to manage its impact on 
their lives. It is significant but unsurprising, that the achievement of wellbeing 
and maintenance of identity was dependent upon the extent to which family 
were able to support, enable and facilitate such activity.   
Finally, the findings of this study support a rationale for having a specific 
focus on bvFTD. The challenges brought by bvFTD for families including the 
person with dementia appear to be qualitatively different from those 
experienced with more common conditions such as Alzheimers disease. 
Changes associated with social cognition such as the capacity for empathy 
and mutuality occurs at an early stage and are complex to understand. When   
combined with difficulties with executive function, these impacted upon 
everyday family life and involved significant losses, changes in relationships, 
identity and self-concept. Information and interventions are needed which 
reflect the specific features of bvFTD and assist families to understand these 
changes within a relational and everyday context. Furthermore, the ongoing 
and dynamic nature of these changes require that services are flexible in 
their approach to supporting families; incorporate assessment and 
understanding of the family relationships and offer interventions that are 
tailored to their needs. This is likely to mean that services need to be able to 
offer continuity of support provided within the context of skilled, 
knowledgeable and therapeutic practice.  
References 
Ablitt, A.J., Jones, G. and Muers, J. (2009) Living with dementia: A 
systematic review of the influence of relationship factors. Aging and 
Mental Health. 13(4), 497-511.  
Ablitt, A.J., Jones, G. and Muers, J. (2010) Awareness of carer distress in 
people with dementia, International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 25, 
1246-52 
Allen, J., Oyebode, J. and Allen, J. (2009) Having a father with young onset 
dementia, Dementia. 8(4), 455-80. 
Allmark, P. (2002) The Ethics of Research with Children. Nurse Researcher. 
10(2), 7-19. 
Alvira, M.C., Risco, E., Cabrera, E., Farr, M., Hallberg, I.R., Bleijlevens, M. 
H. C., Meyer, G., Koskenniemi, J., Soto, M.E. and Sabalegui, A. on 
behalf of the righttimeplacecare consortium (2015) The association 
between positive-negative reactions of informal caregivers of people 
with dementia and health outcomes in eight European countries: a 
cross-sectional study. Journal of Advanced Nursing. 71(6), 1417-34. 
Alzheimers Australia (2007) Exploring the needs of younger people with 
dementia in Australia: report to the Australian government. Canberra. 
Department of Health and Ageing.  
Alzheimers Research UK (2016) You Gov Polling for Alzheimers Research 
UK, http://www.alzheimersresearchuk.org/about-dementia/facts-
stats/10-things-you-need-to-know-about-public-perception/ accessed 18 
July 2016 
Alzheimers Society, (2011) Support, stay save, care and support of people 
with dementia in their own homes. London. 
http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/download_info.php?fileID=103
0 accessed 15 March 2013. 
Andrn, S. and Elmsthl, S. (2005) Family caregivers' subjective experiences 
of satisfaction in dementia care: aspects of burden, subjective health 
and sense of coherence. Scandinavian Journal of Caring Science. 
19(2), 157-68. 
Ascher, E.A., Sturm, V.E., Seider, B.H., Holley, S.R., Miller, B.L. and 
Levenson, R.W. (2010) Relationship satisfaction and emotional 
language in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer disease patients 
and spousal caregivers, Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders.  
24(1), 49-55. 
Avineri, N. (2013) The interactive organization of insight: clinical interviews 
with frontotemporal dementia patients. In Mates, A.W., Mikesell, L. and 
Smith, M.S. (editors) Language, Interaction and Frontotemporal 
dementia, reverse engineering the social mind. Equinox 
publishers.com. 115-38.  
Baborie, M.D., Griffiths, T.D. Jaros, E., Momeni, P., McKeith, I.G., Burn, D.J., 
Keir, G., Larner, A.J., Mann, D.M. and Perry, R. (2012) Frontotemporal 
dementia in elderly individuals, Archives of Neurology. 69(8), 1052-60. 
Bahar-Fuchs, A., Clare, L. and Woods, B. (2013) Cognitive training and 
cognitive rehabilitation for mild to moderate Alzheimers disease and 
vascular dementia (Review) Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 
6 (2013): Art. No.: CD003260. DOI: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/14651858.CD003260.pub2. accessed 31 
August 2016.  
Balen, R., Blythe, E., Calabretto, H., Fraser, C., Horrocks, C. and Manby, M. 
(2006) Involving Children in Health and Social Research, human 
becomings or active beings? Childhood. 13(1), 29-48. 
Barnes, M., Henwood, F. and Smith, N. (2016) Information and care: A 
relational approach. Dementia. 15(4), 510-25. 
Benbow, S. and Sharman, V. (2014) Review of family therapy and dementia: 
twenty five years on. International Psychogeriatrics. 26(12), 2037-50.  
Bingley, A.F. Thomas, C. Brown, J. Reeve, J. and Payne, S. (2008) 
Developing narrative research in supportive and palliative care: the 
focus on illness narratives, Palliative Medicine. 22, 653-658 
Birks, M. and Mills, J. (2011) Grounded theory, a practical guide, London: 
Sage Publications 
Bjrnholt, M. and Farstad, G. (2014). Am I rambling? On the advantages of 
interviewing couples together. Qualitative Research. 14(1),13-19. 
Bott, N.T., Radke, A., Stephens, M.L. and Kramer, J.H. (2014) 
Frontotemporal dementia: diagnosis, deficits and management. 
Neurodegenerative disease management. 4(6), 439-54. 
Bowtell, E.C. Swayer, S.M. Aroni, R.A. Green, J.B. and Duncan, R.E. (2013) 
Should I send a condolence card? promoting emotional safety in 
qualitative health research through reflexivity and ethical mindfulness, 
Qualitative Inquiry. 19(9), 652-63 
Braun, V. and Clarke, V. 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. 
Qualitative Research in Psychology. 3(2), 77-101. 
Braun, M., Scholz, U., Bailey, B., Perren, S., Hornung, R. and Martin, M. 
(2009) Dementia caregiving in spousal relationships: a dyadic 
perspective. Aging and Mental Health. 13(3), 426-36. 
Braun, M., Mura, K., Peter-Wight, M., Hornung, R. and Scholz, U. (2010) 
Toward a better understanding of psychological well-being in dementia 
caregivers: the link between marital communication and depression. 
Family Process.  49(2), 185-202. 
Brioschi Guevara, A., Knutson, K.M., Wassermann. E.M., Pulaski, S., 
Grafman, J., Kruger, F. (2015) Theory of mind impairments in patients 
with behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia (bv-FTD) increases 
caregiver burden. Age and Ageing. 44, 891-95. 
Brooker, D. (2007) Person-Centred Dementia Care, Making Services Better. 
First edition. London. Jessica Kingsley Publishers.  
Brown-Wilson, C. (2011) The value of reflexivity in resolving ethical dilemmas 
research in care homes, Journal of Advanced Nursing. 67(9), 2068-77 
Bucci, S. Berry, K. Barrowclough, C. and Haddock, G. (2016) Family 
interventions in psychosis: a review of the evidence and barriers to 
implementation. Australian Psychologist. 51(1), 62-8 
Buchanan, J.A., Christenson, A., Houlihan, D. and Ostrom, C. (2011). The 
role of behavior analysis in the rehabilitation of persons with dementia. 
Behavior Therapy. 42, 9  21. 
Burgener, S. and Twigg, P. (2002) Relationships among caregiver factors 
and quality of life in care recipients with irreversible dementia, 
Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders. 16(2), 88-102. 
Burck, C. (2005). Comparing qualitative research methodologies for systemic 
research: the use of grounded theory, discourse analysis and narrative 
analysis. Journal of Family Therapy. 27, 237-262. 
Calasanti, T. and King, N (2007) Taking womens work like a man: husbands 
experiences of care work. The Gerontologist. 47, 516-27. 
Camden, A., Livingston, G. and Cooper, C. (2011) Reasons why family 
members become carers and the outcome for the person with 
dementia: Results from the CARD Study. International Psychogeriatrics. 
23(9), 1442-50. 
Charmaz, K. (2006) Constructing Grounded Theory, a practical guide through 
qualitative analysis. California: Sage Publications. 
Charmaz, K. (2014) Constructing Grounded Theory, second edition. London: 
Sage Publications.  
Chesla, C., Martinson, I. and Muwaswes, M. (1994) Continuities and 
discontinuities in family members relationships with Alzheimers 
patients. Family Relations. 43(1), 3-9.  
Cheston, R. (2013) Assimilation of problematic voices within 
psychotherapeutic work with people with dementia. Neuro-disability and 
Psychotherapy. 1(26), 70-95. 
Chrisp, T.A.C., Tabberer, S. & Thomas, B.D. (2013) Bounded autonomy in 
deciding to seek medical help: Carer role, the sick role and the case of 
dementia, Journal of Health Psychology, 18, 2, 272-81 
Chow, T.W., Pio, F.J. and Rockwood, K. (2011) An international needs 
assessment of caregivers for frontotemporal dementia. The Canadian 
Journal of Neurological Sciences. 38, 753-57. 
Clare, L. (2002) Well fight it as long as we can: coping with the onset of 
Alzheimers disease. Aging and Mental Health. 6(2), 139-48. 
Clare, L. and Shakespeare, P. (2004) Negotiating the impact of forgetting: 
dimensions of resistance in task-oriented conversations between 
people with early-stage dementia and their partners. Dementia. 3(2), 
211-32. 
Clare, L., Roth, I. and Pratt, R. (2005) Perceptions of change over time in 
early-stage Alzheimers disease Implications for understanding 
awareness and coping style. Dementia. 4(4), 487-520. 
Clare, L., Nelis, S.M., Whitaker, C.J., Martyr, A., Markova, I.S., Roth, I., 
Woods, R.T. and Morris, R.G. (2012) Marital relationship quality in 
early-stage dementia. Perspectives from people with dementia and their 
spouses. Alzheimer disease and associated disorders. 26(2), 146-58. 
Corbin, J.M. and Strauss, A.C. (2008) Basics of qualitative research: 
techniques and procedures for developing grounded theory. California: 
Sage Publications. 
Coughlan, M., Cronin, P. and Ryan, F. (2007) Step-by-step guide to critiquing 
research. Part 1: quantitative research. British Journal of Nursing. 
16(11), 658-63. 
Cowdell F. (2006) Preserving personhood in dementia research; a literature 
review, International Journal of Older People Nursing. 1, 85-94. 
Cox, F.D. (2009) Human intimacy, marriage the family and its meaning. 
Belmont: Wadworth. 
 Cuff, B., Brown, S.J., Taylor, L. and Howat, D. (2016) Empathy: a review of 
the concept. Emotion Review. 8(2), 144-53. 
Daniels, K. J., Lamson, A. L. and Hodgson, J. (2007) An exploration of the 
marital relationship and Alzheimer's disease: One couple's story. 
Families, Systems and Health. 25(2), 162-77. 
Davey, M.P., Davey, A., Tubbs, M.P., Savla, J. and Anderson, S. (2012) 
Second order change and evidence-based practice. Journal of family 
therapy. 34, 72-90. 
Davies, J. C. (2011) Preserving the ''us identity'' through marriage 
commitment while living with early-stage dementia. Dementia. 10(2), 
217-34.  
Deegan, M.J. (2001) The Chicago school of ethnography. In Atkinson, P., 
Coffey, A., Delamont, S., Lofland, J. and Lofland, L. (editors) Handbook 
of Ethnograpy. London: Sage Publications. 11-25. 
Deist, M. and Greeff, A.P. (2015) Living with a parent with dementia: a family 
resilience study. epub ahead of print Dementia. doi: 
10.1177/1471301215621853, accessed February 18 2016.  
Denny, S.S., Morhardt, D., Elise Gaul, J., Lester, P.,  Andersen, G., Higgins, 
P.J. and Nee, L. (2012) Caring for children of parents with 
frontotemporal degeneration: A report of the AFTD taskforce on families 
with children, American Journal of Alzheimers disease and other 
dementias.  27(8), 568-78.  
Denzin, N.K. and Lincoln, Y.S. (2003) Introduction the discipline and practice 
of qualitative research in Denzin, N.K. and Lincoln, Y.S. (Editors)  
Collecting and interpreting qualitative materials second edition. California: 
Sage Publications. 1-45. 
Department of Health (2005) Research governance framework for health and 
social care. Second edition. available online at 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/...data/.../dh_4
122427.pdf accessed March 2006. 
Department of Health (2014) Prime Ministers challenge on dementia 2020 
available online at https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/prime-
ministers-challenge-on-dementia-2020 accessed 16 December 2015. 
de Labra, C.,  Milln-Calenti, J-C., Bujn, A., Nez-Naveira, L., Jensen, 
A.M., Peersen, M.C., Mojs, E.,  Samborski, W. and  Maseda, A. (2015) 
Predictors of caregiving satisfaction in informal caregivers of people 
with dementia. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics. 60(3), 380-88.  
Dewing, J. (2007) Participatory Research: A method for process consent with 
persons who have dementia. Dementia. 6(1), 11-26. 
Diehl-Schmid, J., Schmidt, E-M., Nunnemann, S., Riedl, L., Kurz, A., Forstl, 
J., Wagenpfeil, S. and Cramer, B. (2013) Caregiver burden and needs 
in frontotemporal dementia. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and 
Neurology. 26(4), 221-9. 
Dowrick, A. and Southern, A. (2014) Dementia 2014, opportunity for change. 
Alzheimers Society. Available online at 
https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/download_info.php?fileID=23
17 accessed 1October 2014 
Dykstra, P.A. and Fokkema, T. (2011) Ties between parents and their adult 
children: a western European typology of late-life families, multilinks 
deliverable 5.3: Report on the comparative study on intergenerational 
transfers and social integration. Available online at; 
http://www.multilinks-  
project.eu/uploads/papers/0000/0044/MULTILINKS_deliverable_5.3.pdf 
accessed 20th May 2013.  
Eastern Cognitive Disorders Clinic (ECDC) (2011) The FTD Toolkit Module 4: 
Assessing the impact of frontotemporal dementia. http://ecdc.org.au/ftd-
toolkit.htm accessed 4 Sept 2013. 
Elliott, R., Fischer, C.T. and Rennie, D.L. (1999) Evolving guidelines for 
publication of qualitative research studies in psychology and related 
fields. British Journal of Clinical Psychology. 38, 215-29. 
Elvish, R. Lever, S.J. Johnstone, J., Cawley, R. and Keady, J. (2012) 
Psychological interventions for carers of people with dementia: a 
systematic review of quantitative and qualitative evidence, British 
Association for Counselling and Psychotherapy. 
http://www.bacp.co.uk/research/Systematic_Reviews_and_Publications
/dementia_carers.php accessed 12 June 2012. 
Eschweiler, G.W., Leyhe, T., Klppel, S. and Hll, M. (2010) New 
developments in the diagnosis of dementia. Deutsches rzteblatt 
International. 107(39),  677-83. 
Esin, C. (2011) Narrative analysis approaches. In Frost, N. (editor) 
Qualitative research methods in psychology, combining core 
approaches. Maidenhead: Open University Press. 92-117. 
Etters, L., Goodall, D. and Harrison, B.E. (2008) Caregiver burden among 
dementia patient caregivers: a review of the literature. Journal of the 
American Academy of Nurse Practitioner. 20(8), 423-28. 
Evans, D. and Lee, E. (2014) Impact of dementia on marriage: A qualitative 
systematic review, Dementia, 13(3), 340-9. 
Fadden, G. and Smith, J. (2009) Family work in early psychosis, in Lobban, 
F. and Barrowclough, C. (editors). A Casebook of Family Interventions 
for Psychosis. Oxford. John Wiley and Sons. 23-46. 
Fauth, E., Hess, K., Percy, K., Norton, M., Corcoran, C., Rabins, P., 
Lyketsos, C. and Tschanz, J-A. (2012) Caregivers relationship 
closeness with the person with dementia predicts both positive and   
negative outcomes for caregivers physical health and psychological 
wellbeing. Aging and Mental Health. 16(6), 699-711. 
Fernandez-Duque, D., Hodges, S.D., Baird, J.A. and Black, S.E. (2010) 
Empathy in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimers disease. Journal 
of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology. 32(3), 289-298. 
Forbat, L. (2003) Relationship difficulties in dementia care: A discursive 
analysis of two women's accounts. Dementia, 2(1), 67-84.  
Forbat, L. and Henderson, J. (2005) Theoretical and practical reflections on 
sharing transcripts with participants. Qualitative Health Research. 15(8), 
1114-28. 
Frank, A. (1995) The wounded storyteller: body illness and ethics. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Frost, N., Nolas, S.M., Brooks-Gordon, B., Esin, C., Holt, A., Mehdizadeh, H. 
and Shinebourne, P. (2010) Pluralism in qualitative research: the impact 
of different researchers and qualitative approaches on the analysis of 
qualitative data. Qualitative Research. 10(4),  441-60. 
Frost, N. (2011) Qualitative research in psychology. Frost, N. (editor) 
Qualitative Research methods in psychology, combining core 
approaches, Maidenhead: Open University Press. 3-13. 
Frost, N. (2011) Looking forward in Frost, N. (editor) Qualitative Research 
methods in psychology, combining core approaches, Maidenhead: 
Open University Press. 185-192 
Gallagher-Thompson, D., Tzuang, Y.M., Au, A., Brodaty, H., Charlesworth, 
G., Gupta, R., Lee, S.E., Losada, A. and Shyu, Y.I. (2012) International 
Perspectives on Nonpharmacological Best Practices for Dementia 
Family Caregivers: A Review. Clinical Gerontologist. 35(4), 316-55. 
Garwick, A.W., Detzner, D. and Boss, P. (1994) Family perceptions of living 
with Alzheimers disease. Family Process. 33, 327-40.  
Gaugler, J.E., Reese, M. and Mittelman, M.S. (2013) Effects of the NYU 
caregiver intervention-adult child on residential care placement. The 
Gerontologist. 53(6), 985-97. 
Gelman, C.R. and Greer, C. (2011) Young children in early onset Alzheimers 
disease families: research gaps and emerging service needs. American 
Journal of Alzheimers disease and other dementias.  26(1), 29-35. 
Gitlin, L. N., Winter, L., Burke, J., Chemett, N., Dennis, M. P. and Hauck, W. 
W. (2008). Tailored activities to manage neuropsychiatric behaviors in 
persons with dementia and reduce caregiver burden: a randomized pilot 
study. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 16, 229239. 
Gitlin, L. N., Winter, L., Dennis, M. P., Hodgson, N. and Hauck, W. W. 
(2010a). Targeting and managing behavioral symptoms in individuals 
with dementia: a randomized trial of a non-pharmacological 
intervention. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society. 58, 1465
1474. 
Gitlin, L. N., Winter, L., Dennis, M. P., Hodgson, N. and Hauck, W. W. 
(2010b). A biobehavioral home-based intervention and the well-being of 
patients with dementia and their caregivers: the COPE randomized trial. 
Journal of the American Medical Association. 304, 983991. 
Glaser, B. and Strauss, A. (1967) The discovery of grounded theory: 
strategies for qualitative research. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.  
Goffman, E. (1961) Asylums: essays on the social situation of mental 
patients and other inmates. Garden City: Anchor Books. 
Gorno-Tempini, M.L., Hillis, A.E., Weintraub, S., Kertesz, A., Mendez, M., 
Cappa, S.F., Ogar, J.M., Rohrer, J.D., Black, S., Boeve, B.F., Manes, 
F., Dronkers, N.F., Vandenberghe, R.,  Rascovsky, K., Patterson, K., 
Miller, B.L., Knopman, D.S., Hodges, J.R.,  Mesulam, M.M. and 
Grossman, M. (2011) Classification of primary progressive aphasia and 
its variants, Neurology. 76(11), 1006-14.  
Griffin, J., Oyebode, J.R. and Allen, J. (2015) Living with a diagnosis of 
behavioural-variant frontotemporal dementia: the persons experience. 
Dementia. epub ahead of print doi: 10.1177/1471301214568164 
accessed 07.09.2015. 
Guba, E.G. and Lincoln, Y.S. (1994) Competing paradigms in qualitative 
research. In Denzin, N.K. and Lincoln, Y.S. (editors) Handbook of 
qualitative research. California: Sage Publications. 105-17. 
Gubrium, J. and Holstein, J.A. (2009) Analysing narrative reality. California: 
Sage Publications Ltd.  
Harper, S. and La Fontaine, J. (2009) Ethnography. In Neale. J. (editor) 
Research methods for health and social care. Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 238-64. 
Harvey, R.J., Skelton-Robinson, M. and Rossor, M.N. (2003) The prevalence 
and causes of dementia in people under the age of 65 years. Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry. 74, 1206-9. 
Hedman, R., Hansebo, G., Ternestedt, B-M., Hellstrm, I. and Norberg, A. 
(2013) How people with Alzheimers disease express their sense of self: 
analysis using Rom Harrs theory of selfhood. Dementia. 12(6), 713-33. 
Hellstrm, I. Nolan, M. and Lundh, U. (2005) 'We do things together': A case 
study of 'couplehood' in dementia. Dementia, 4(1), 7-22.  
Hellstrm, I., Nolan, M. and Lundh, U. (2007a) Sustaining `couplehood': 
Spouses' strategies for living positively with dementia. Dementia. 6(3), 
383-409.  
Hellstrm, I. Nolan, M. Nordenfelt, L. et al. (2007b) Ethical and 
methodological issues in interviewing persons with dementia, Nursing 
Ethics. 14(5), 608-19.  
Holland, J., Thomson, R. and Henderson, S. (2006) Qualitative Longitudinal 
Research: A Discussion Paper, Families and Social Capital ESRC 
Research Group, London Southbank University.   
http://www.lsbu.ac.uk/families/workingpapers/familieswp21.pdf  
accessed 2 May 2011. 
Hollway, W. and Jefferson, T., (2013) Doing qualitative research differently: A 
psychosocial approach. London. Sage Publications. 
Holstein, J. and Gubrium, J. (1995) The active interview. California: Sage 
Publications. 
Hoskins, M.L. and White, J. (2013) Relational inquiries and the research 
interview: Mentoring future researchers, Qualitative Inquiry, 19(3), 179-
Hsieh, S., Irish, M., Daveson, N., Hodges, J.R. and Piguet, O. (2013) When 
one loses empathy: its effects on carers of patients with dementia. 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neurology. 26(3) 174-84. 
Hubbard G, Downs M and Tester S (2002) Including the perspectives of older 
people in institutional care during the consent process in H Wilkinson 
(editor) The perspectives of people with dementia - research methods 
and motivations. London: Jessica Kingsley.63-82. 
Hunter, A., Murphy, K., Grealish, A., Casey, D. and Keady, J. (2011) 
Navigating the grounded theory terrain. Part 1. Nurse Researcher, 
18(4), 6-10. 
Hutchings, R., Hodges, J.R., Piguet, O. and Kumfor, F. (2015) Why should I 
care? Dimensions of socio-emotional cognition in younger-onset 
dementia. Journal of Alzheimers disease. 48(1), 135-47. 
Hutchinson, K., Roberts, C., Kurrle, S. and Daly, M. (2016) The emotional 
well-being of young people having a parent with younger onset 
dementia. Dementia. 15(4), 609-28. 
Hydn, L-C (2014) Cutting brussels sprouts: collaboration involving persons 
with dementia. Journal of Aging Studies. 29, 115-23. 
Hydn, L-C. and Nilsson, E. (2015) Couples with dementia: positioning the 
we. Dementia. 14(6), 716-33.  
Jessop, D.A. (1981) Family relationships as viewed by parents and 
adolescents, a specification. Journal of Marriage and the Family. 43, 
95-107.  
Joshi, A., Barsuglia, J.P., Mather, M.J., Jimenez, E.E., Shapira, J. and 
Mendez, M.F. (2014) Evaluation of emotional blunting in behavioural 
variant frontotemporal dementia compared to Alzheimers disease. 
Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders. 38, 79-88. 
Keady, J. and Nolan, M. (2003) The dynamics of dementia: working together, 
working separately or working alone? Nolan, M., Lundh, U., Grant, G. 
and Keady, J. (editors) Partnerships in Family Care: Understanding the 
caregiving career. Buckingham: Open University Press. 15-32. 
Kelly, F. and Innes, A. (2016) Facilitating independence: The benefits of a 
post-diagnostic support project for people with dementia. Dementia. 
15(2), 162-80. 
Kendall, M., Murray, S.A., Carduff, E., Worth, A., Harris, F., Lloyd, A., 
Cavers, D., Grant, L., Boyd, K. and Sheikh, A. (2010) Use of 
multiperspective qualitative interviews to understand patients and 
carers beliefs, experiences and needs, BMJ. 340, 196-99. 
Keyes, S., Wilkinson, H. Alexjuk, E.J., Wilcockson, J., Robinson, L., 
Reynolds, J., McClelland, S., Corner, L. and Cattan, M. (2016) Were 
all thrown in the same boat: A qualitative analysis of peer support in 
dementia care. Dementia. 15(4), 560-77. 
Kipps, C.M. and Hodges, J.R. (2006) Theory of mind in frontotemporal 
dementia. Social Neuroscience. 1(3-4), 235-44. 
Kissane, D.W. and Bloch, S. (2002) Family focused grief therapy. Berkshire: 
Open University Press. 
Kitwood, T. (1997). Dementia reconsidered: the person comes first. 
Buckingham: Open University Press. 
Kjllman-Alm, A., Norbergh, K-G. and Hellzen, O. (2013) What it means to be 
an adult child of a person with dementia. International Journal of 
Qualitative Studies on Health and Well-being. Oct 22, 8, 21676. doi: 
10.3402/qhw.v8i0.21676. accessed 20 July 2016. 
Knapp, M. and Prince, M. (2007). Dementia UK: The full report. Kings 
College London, London School of Economics. Alzheimers Society. 
http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/News_and_Campaigns/Campaigning/PD
F/Dementia_UK_Full_Report.pdf accessed 30 March 2007.  
Korte, K.B. and Rogalski, E.J., (2013) Behavioural interventions for 
enhancing life participation in behavioural variant frontotemporal 
dementia and primary progressive aphasia, International Review of 
Psychiatry,  25(2), 237-45. 
Kwak, M., Ingersoll-Dayton, B. and Kim, J. (2012) Family conflict from the 
perspective of adult child caregivers: the influence of gender, Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 29(4), 470-87. 
La Fontaine, J. and Oyebode, J.R. (2014) Family relationships and dementia: 
a synthesis of qualitative research including the person with dementia. 
Ageing and Society. 34(7), 1243-72. 
Lage Barca, M., Thorsen, K., Engedal, K., Haugen, P.K. and Johannessen, 
A. (2014) Nobody asked me how I felt: experiences of adult children of 
persons with young-onset dementia. International Psychogeriatrics. 
16(12), 1935-44. 
Lal, S. Suto, M. and Ungar, M. (2012) Examining the potential of combining 
the methods of grounded theory and narrative inquiry: A comparative 
analysis, The Qualitative Report. 47(41), 1-22. 
Lambert, M. A., Bickel, H.,  Prince, M., Fratiglioni, L.,  Von Strauss, E., 
Frydecka, D., Kiejna, A., Georges, J. and Reynish, E. L. (2014) 
Estimating the burden of early-onset dementia: systematic review of 
disease prevalence. European Journal of Neurology. 21, 563-69 
Large, S. and Slinger, R. (2015) Grief in caregivers of persons with 
Alzheimers disease and related dementia: A qualitative synthesis. 
Dementia. 14(2), 164-83. 
Lazarus, R.S. and Folkman, S. (1984) Stress, appraisal and coping. Springer 
publishing company. 
Le Gals, C. and Bungener, M. (2016) The family accompaniment of persons 
with dementia seen through the lens of the capability approach. 
Dementia. Epub ahead of print. DOI: 10.1177/1471301216657476. 
Accessed 21 July 2016.  
Letts, L., Edwards, M., Berenyi, J., Moros, K., O Neill, C., O Toole, C. and 
McGrath, C. (2011) Using occupations to improve quality of life, health 
and wellness and client and caregiver satisfaction for people with 
Alzheimers disease and related dementias . American Journal of 
Occupational Therapy. 65, 497504. 
Lin, M-C., Macmillan, M. and Brown, N. (2011) A grounded theory 
longitudinal study of carers experiences of caring for people with 
dementia. Dementia. 11(2), 181-97. 
Livingston, G., Cooper, C. and Woods, J. (2008) Successful ageing in 
adversity: The laser AD longitudinal study, Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry. 79, 641-45. 
Lloyd, J., Patterson, T. and Muers, J. (2014) The positive aspects of 
caregiving in dementia: a critical review of the qualitative literature. 
Dementia. epub ahead of print, available at doi: 
10.1177/1471301214564792 1-28. accessed  20 July 2016. 
Lo Sterzo, E. and Ortega, V. (2015) Illness representation and sense of 
coherence in dementia caregiving. Journal of Health Psychology. Epub 
ahead of print doi: 10.1177/1359105315613132. Accessed 3 
September 2016. 
Lough, S., Kipps, C.M., Triese, C., Watson, P., Blair, J.R. and Hodges, J.R. 
(2006) Social reasoning, emotion and empathy in frontotemporal 
dementia, Neuropsychologia. 44(6), 950-58.  
Lders, C. (2004) Field observation and ethnography. In Flick, U, von 
Kardoff, E. and Steinke, I. (editors) A companion to qualitative research. 
London: Sage Publications. 222-30. 
Luengo-Fernandez, R., Leal, J. and Gray, A. (2010) Dementia 2010, 
Alzheimer's Research Trust. http://www.dementia2010.org/ accessed 3 
February 2010 
McCance, T.V., McKenna, H.P. and Boore, J.R.P. (2001) Exploring caring 
using narrative methodology: an analysis of the approach, Journal of 
Advanced Nursing. 33(3), 350-356. 
McDonnell, E. and Ryan, A.A. (2011) Male caregiving in dementia: a review 
and commentary, Dementia. 12(2), 238-50. 
McDonnell, E. and Ryan, A.A. (2014) The experience of sons caring for a 
parent with dementia, Dementia, 13(6), 788-802. 
McKhann, G.M., Knopman, D.S., Chertkow, H., Hyman, B.T., Jack, C.R., 
Kawas, C.H., Klunk, W.E., Koroshetz, W.J., Manly, J.J., Mayeux, R., 
Mohs, R.C., Morris, J.C., Rossor, M.N., Scheltens, P., Carillo, M.C., 
Thies, B., Weintraub, S. and Phelps, C.H. (2011) The diagnosis of 
dementia due to Alzheimers disease: Recommendations from the 
National Institute on Aging and the Alzheimers Association workgroup. 
Alzheimers & Dementia. 7(3), 263-9.  
Madsen, R. and Birkelund, R. (2013) The path through the unknown: the 
experience of being a relative of a dementia-suffering spouse or parent. 
Journal of Clinical Nursing. 22, 3024-31. 
Mason, A. and Wilkinson. H. (2002) Dont leave me hanging on the 
telephone, Interviews with people with dementia using the telephone. in 
Wilkinson, H. (editor) The Perspectives of People with Dementia,   
Research Methods and Motivations. London. Jessica Kingsley 
Publishers. 183-208. 
Massimo, L., Libon, D.J., Chandrasekaran, K., Dreyfuss, M., McMillan, C.T., 
Rascovsky, K., Boller, A. and Grossman, M. (2013a) Self-appraisal in 
behavioural variant frontotemporal degeneration. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry. 84, 148-53. 
Massimo, L., Evans, L.K. and Benner, P. (2013b) Caring for loved ones with 
frontotemporal degeneration: the lived experience of spouses. Geriatric 
Nursing. 34(4), 302-6. 
Massimo, L., Evans, L.K. and Grossman, M. (2014) Differentiating subtypes 
of apathy to improve person-centred care in frontotemporal 
degeneration. Journal of Gerontological Nursing. 40(10) 58-65. 
Mendez, M.F. and Shapira, J.S. (2011) Loss of emotional insight in 
behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia or frontal anosodiaphoria. 
Consciousness and Cognition. 20(4), 1690-96.  
Merrick, K., Camic, P. and OShaughnessy, M. (2016) Couples constructing 
their experiences of dementia: A relational perspective. Dementia. 15(1) 
35-50 
Milne, A. (2010) Dementia screening and early diagnosis: the case for and 
against. Health, Risk and Society. 12(1), 65-76. 
Mioshi, E., Foxe, D., Leslie, F., Savage, S., Hsieh, S., Miller, L., Hodges, J.R. 
and Piguet, O. (2013a) The impact of dementia severity on caregiver 
burden in frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimers disease. Alzheimer 
Disease and Associated Disorders. 27(1), 68-73. 
Mioshi, E., McKinnon, C., Savage, S., OConnor, C. and Hodges, J.R. 
(2013b) Improving Burden and Coping Skills in Frontotemporal 
Dementia Caregivers: a pilot study. Alzheimers disease and associated 
disorders. 27(1), 84-6. 
Mishler, E. (1995) Models of narrative analysis: a typology. Journal of 
Narrative and Life History. 5(2), 87-123. 
Mitriani, V.B., Lewis, J.E., Feaster, D.J., Czaja, S.J., Eisdorfer, C., Schulz, R. 
and Szapocznik, J. (2006) The role of family functioning in the stress 
process of dementia caregivers: A structural family framework. The 
Gerontologist. 46(1), 97-105.  
Mittelman, M.S., Epstein, C. and Pierzchala, A. (2003) Counseling the 
Alzheimers caregiver: a resource for health care professionals. 
American Medical Association.  
Mittelman, M.S., Haley, W.E., Clay, O.J. and Roth, D.L. (2006) Improving 
caregiver well-being delays nursing home placement of patients with 
Alzheimer disease. Neurology. 67, 1592-99.  
Mittelman, M.S., Brodaty, H., Wallen, A.S. and Burns, A., (2008) A 3 country 
randomized controlled trail of a psychosocial intervention for caregivers 
combined with pharmacological treatment for patients with Alzheimers 
disease: effects on caregiver depression. American Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry. 16(11), 893-904. 
Molyneaux, V.J. Butchard, S. Simpson, J. and Murray, C. (2012) The co-
construction of couplehood in dementia. Dementia. 11(4). 483-502. 
Morgan, D., Innes, A. and Kosteniuk, J. (2011) Dementia care in rural and 
remote settings: A systematic review of formal or paid care. Maturitas. 
68, 17-33. 
Morris, L.W., Morris, R.G. and Britton, P.G. (1988) The relationship between 
marital intimacy, perceived strain and depression in spouse caregivers 
of dementia sufferers. Psychology and Psychotherapy. 61(3), 231-36. 
Murphy, F. (2005) Preparing for the field: developing competence as an 
ethnographic field worker. Nursing Research. 12, 52-60. 
Murray, S.A.,  Kendall, M.,  Carduff, E.,  Worth, A., Harris, F.M., Lloyd, A.,  
Cavers, D., Grant, L. and Sheikh, A. (2009)  Use of serial qualitative   
interviews to understand patients evolving experiences and needs. 
British Medical Journal. 339, b3702. 
Nichols, K.R., Fam, D., Cook, C., Pearce, M., Elliot, G., Baago, S., 
Rockwood, K. and Chow, T.W., (2013) When dementia is in the house: 
needs assessment survey for young caregivers. Canadian Journal of 
Neurological Sciences. 40, 21-8. 
Nolan, M.R., Ryan, T., Enderby, P. and Reid, D. (2002) Towards a more 
inclusive vision of dementia care practice and research. Dementia. 
1(2),193-211. 
Nolan, M. R. Davies, S. Brown, J. Keady, J. and Nolan, J. (2004) Beyond 
'person-centred' care: a new vision for gerontological nursing. Journal of 
Clinical Nursing. 13(s1), 45-53. 
Nolas, S-M. (2011) Grounded theory approaches. In Frost, N. (editor) 
Qualitative research methods in psychology, combining core 
approaches. Maidenhead: Open University Press. 16-43. 
Nunnemann, S., Kurz, A., Leucht, S. and Deihl-Schmid, J. (2012) Caregivers 
of patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration: a review of burden, 
problems, needs and interventions. International Psychogeriatrics. 
24(9), 1368-86. 
Nursing and Midwifery Council (2015) The Code: Professional standards of 
practice and behaviour for nurses and midwives. Nursing and Midwifery 
Council, London https://www.nmc.org.uk/standards/code/ accessed 31 
March15 
Nygrd, L. (2006) How can we get access to the experiences of people with 
dementia? Suggestions and reflections. Scandinavian Journal of 
Occupational Therapy. 13(2), 101-112. 
NVivo (2010) qualitative data analysis software; QSR International Pty Ltd. 
Version 10. 
OConnor, C.M., Clemson, L., Lima de Silva, T.B., Piguet, O., Hodges, J.R. 
and Mioshi, E. (2013) Enhancement of carer skills and patient function 
in non-pharmacological management of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) 
Dementia e Neuropsycholgia. 7(2), 143-50. 
OConnor, C.M., Clemson, L., Brodaty, H., Gitlin, L.N., Piguet, O. and Mioshi, 
E. (2016) Enhancing caregivers understanding of dementia and 
tailoring activities in frontotemporal dementia: two case studies. 
Disability and Rehabilitation. 38(7), 704-714. 
Oyebode, J. R., Bradley, P and Allen, J.L. (2013) Relatives' experiences of 
frontal-variant frontotemporal dementia. Qualitative Health Research. 
23(2), 156-66.  
Padilla, R. (2011). Effectiveness of interventions designed to modify the 
activity demands of the occupations of self-care and leisure for people 
with Alzheimers disease and related dementias. American Journal of 
Occupational Therapy. 65, 52331. 
Perry-Young, L., Owen, G., Kelly, S. and Owens, C. (2016) How people 
come to recognise a problem and seek medical help for a person 
showing early signs of dementia: A systematic review and meta-
ethnography. Dementia. Epub ahead of print. DOI: 
10.1177/1471301215626889. Accessed 18 February 2016. 
Pesonen, H.M., Remes, A.M. and Isola, A. (2011) Ethical aspects of 
researching subjective experiences in early stage dementia, Nursing 
Ethics. 18(5), 651-61. 
Piercy, K.W. (2007) Characteristics of strong commitments to 
intergenerational family care of older adults. Journals of Gerontology. 
Social Sciences. 62(6), s381-87. 
Pinquart, M. and Sorenson, S. (2011) Spouses, adult children and children-
in-law as caregivers of older adults: a meta-analytic comparison. 
Psychology and Aging. 26(1), 1-14. 
Pysti, M.M., Laakkonen, M-L., Standberg, T., Savikko, N., Tilvis, R.S., 
Eloniemi-Sulkava, U. and Pitkl, K.H., (2012) Gender differences in 
dementia spousal caregiving, International Journal of Alzheimers 
disease, available from Hindawi publishing corporation  
http://www.hindawi.com/journals/ijad/2012/162960/ doi 
10.1155/2012/162960 accessed April 2013. 
Pozzebon, M., Douglas, J. and Ames, D. (2016) Spouses experience of 
living with a partner diagnosed with dementia: a synthesis of the 
qualitative research. International Psychogeriatrics. 28(4), 537-56 
Pratt, R. & Wilkinson, H. (2001) Tell me the truth The effect of being told the 
diagnosis of dementia from the perspective of the person with 
dementia.  The Mental Health Foundation. 
http://www.mentalhealth.org.uk/publications/tell-me-the-truth/ accessed 
10 January 2010. 
Pratt, R. (2002) Nobodys ever asked how I felt, in Wilkinson, H. (editor) The 
perspectives of people with dementia: research methods and 
motivations. London. Jessica Kingsley Publications. 165-82. 
Pretorius, C., Walker, S. and Malan, Hayens, P. (2009) Sense of coherence 
among male caregivers in dementia. Dementia. 8(1), 79-94. 
Prince, M., Knapp, M., Guerchet, M., McCrone, P., Prina, M., Comas-
Herrera, A., Wittenberg, R., Adelaja, B., Hu, B., King, D., Rehill, A. and 
Salimkumar, D. (2014) Dementia UK: update second edition. 
Alzheimers Society. 
https://www.alzheimers.org.uk/site/scripts/download_info.php?fileID=23
23 accessed 23 March 2015 
Prince, M., Wimo, A., Guerchet, M., Ali, G-C., Wu, Y-T. and Prina, M. (2015) 
World Alzheimer report 2015 The global impact of dementia, an 
analysis of prevalence, incidence, costs and trends. 
https://www.alz.co.uk/research/world-report-2015 accessed 5 
November 2015.  
Purves, B. A. (2011) Exploring positioning in Alzheimer Disease through 
analyses of family talk. Dementia. 10(1), 35-58.  
Quinn, C. Clare, L. and Woods, B. (2009). The impact of the quality of 
relationship on the experiences and wellbeing of caregivers of people 
with dementia: A systematic review. Aging and Mental Health. 13(2), 
143-54.  
Quinn, C., Clare, L., McGuinness, T. and Woods, R.T. (2012) The impact of 
relationships, motivations and meanings on dementia caregiving 
outcomes. International Psychogeriatrics. 24(11), 1816-26 
Quinn, C., Clare, L., McGuiness, T. and Woods, R.T. (2013) Negotiating the 
balance: The triadic relationship between spousal caregivers, people 
with dementia and admiral nurses, Dementia. 12(5), 588-605. 
Quinn, C., Clare, L. and Woods, R.T. (2015) Balancing needs, the role of 
motivations, meanings and relationship dynamics in the experience of 
informal caregivers of people with dementia. Dementia, 14(2), 220-37. 
Rascovsky, K., Hodges, J.R., Knopman, D., Mendez, M.F., Kramer, J.H., 
Neuhaus, J., van Swieten, J.C., Seelaar, H., Dopper, E.G.P., Onyike, 
C.U., Hillis, A.E., Josephs, K.A., Boeve, B.F., Kertesz, A., Seeley, 
W.W., Rankin, K.P., Johnson, J.K., Gorno-Tempini, M-L., Rosen, H., 
Prioleau-Latham, C.E., Lee, A., Kipps, C.M., Lillo, P., Piguet, O., 
Rohrer, J.D., Rossor, M.N., Warren, J.D., Fox, N.C., Galasko, D., 
Salmon, D.P., Black, S.E., Mesulam, M., Weintraub, S., Dickerson, 
B.C., Diehl-Schmid, J., Pasquier, F., Deramecourt, V., Lebert, F., 
Pijnenburg, Y., Chow, T.W., Manes, F., Grafman, J., Cappa, S.F., 
Freedman, M., Grossman, M. and Miller, B.L.  (2011) Sensitivity of 
revised diagnostic criteria for the behavioural variant of frontotemporal 
dementia. Brain. 134, 2456-77. 
Ribbens McCarthy, J., Holland, J. and Gillies, V. (2003) Multiple perspectives 
on the family lives of young people: Methodological and theoretical 
issues in case study research. International Journal of Social Research 
Methodology. 6(1), 1-23.  
Riessman, C.K. (1993) Narrative analysis. Qualitative Research Methods 
Series 30. California: Sage Publications Ltd.  
Riessman, C.K. (2008) Narrative methods for the human sciences. California: 
Sage Publications Ltd. 
Roach, P. and Keady, J. (2008). Younger people with dementia: time for fair 
play. British Journal of Nursing.  17, 690. 
Roach, P. Keady, J. Bee, P. et al. (2014a) We cant keep going on like this: 
Identifying family storylines in young onset dementia, Ageing and 
Society. 34(8), 1397-428. 
Roach, P., Keady, J. and Bee, P. (2014b) Familyhood and young-onset 
dementia: using narrative biography to understand longitudinal 
adjustment to diagnosis. In Hydn, L-C., Lindemann, H. and 
Brockmeier, J. (editors) Beyond loss, dementia, identity, personhood. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 173-90.  
Robinson, L. Clare, L. and Evans, K. (2005) Making sense of dementia and 
adjusting to loss: Psychological reactions to a diagnosis of dementia in 
couples. Aging and Mental Health. 9(4), 337-47.  
Roche, L., Croot, K., MacCann, C., Cramer, B. and Diehl-Schmid, J. (2015) 
The role of coping strategies in psychological outcomes for 
frontotemporal dementia caregivers. Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry and 
Neurology. 28(3). 218-28. 
Rolland, J. (1994) Families, illness and disability, an integrative treatment 
model. New York: Basic Books. 
Ross, J.A. and Green, C. (2011) Inside the experience of anorexia nervosa: 
A narrative thematic analysis. Counselling and Psychotherapy 
Research. 11(2), 112-9. 
Sabat, S. (2001) The Experience of Alzheimers Disease, Life through a 
tangled veil. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers. 
Sabat, S.R. (2010) Flourishing of the self while caregiving for a person with 
Dementia: A case study of education, counseling  and psychosocial 
support via email. Dementia. 10(1), 81-97. 
Sabat, S.R. (2014) The person with dementia as understood through Sterns 
critical personalism. In Hydn, L-C., Lindemann, H. and Brockmeier, J. 
(editors) Beyond loss, dementia, identity, personhood. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 24-38. 
Sakellariou, D. Boniface, G. and Brown, P. (2013) Using joint interviews in a 
narrative based study on illness experiences. Qualitative Health 
Research. 23(11), 1563-70. 
Sansoni, J., Duncan, C., Grootemaat, P., Capell, J., Samsa, P. and Westera, 
A. (2016) Younger Onset Dementia: A review of the literature to inform 
service development. American Journal of Alzheimers disease and 
other dementias. Epub ahead of print DOI: 10.1177/1533317515619481 
accessed 18 February 2016. 
Savundranayagam, M.Y., Montgomery, R.J.V. and Kosloski, K. (2011) A 
Dimensional analysis of caregiver burden among spouses and adult 
children. The Gerontologist, 51(3), 321-31. 
Schn, D. (1991) The reflective practitioner, how professionals think in 
action. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing Ltd. 
Sechrist, J., Suitor, J.J., Pillemer, K., Gilligan, M., Howard, A.R. and Keeton, 
S.A. (2012) Aging parents and adult children: determinants of 
relationship quality. in Blieszner, R. and Hilkevitch Bedford, V. (editors) 
Handbook of Families and Aging. California: Praeger Publications. 223-
Sheilds, G. C. (1992) Family interaction and caregivers of Alzheimer's 
disease patients: Correlates of depression. Family Process. 31, 19-33.  
Sherman, C.W. and Boss, P. (2007) Spousal dementia caregiving in the 
context of late-life remarriage. Dementia. 6(1), 245-70.  
Sherman, C.W. Webster, N.J. and Antonucci, T.C. (2015) Dementia 
caregiving in the context of late life remarriage: support networks, 
relationship quality and wellbeing. Journal of Marriage and Family. 
75(5), 1149-63. 
Sherrell, K., Buckwalter, K.C. and Morhardt, D. (2001) Negotiating family 
relationships: dementia care as a midlife developmental task. Families 
in Society. 82(4) 383-92. 
Shim, B., Barroso, J. & Davis, L.L., (2012) A comparative qualitative analysis 
of stories of spousal caregivers of people with dementia: Negative, 
ambivalent and positive experiences, International Journal of Nursing 
Studies, 49. 220-9. 
Shinebourne, P. (2011) Interpretative phenomenological analysis. In Frost, N. 
(editor) Qualitative research methods in psychology, combining core 
approaches. Maidenhead: Open University Press.44-65. 
Sikes, P and Hall, M. (2016) It was then that I thought whaat? This is not 
my Dad: The implications of the still the same person narrative for 
children and young people who have a parent with dementia. Dementia. 
Epub ahead of print.  doi: 10.1177/1471301216637204. 1-19. accessed 
20 July 2016. 
Snow, K., Cheston, R. and Smart, C. (2015) Making sense of dementia: 
Exploring the use of the Markers of Assimilation of Problematic 
Experiences in Dementia scale to understand how couples process a 
diagnosis of dementia. Dementia. Epub ahead of print DOI: 
10.1177/1471301214564447.  accessed 21 July 2016. 
Snowden, J. S., Thompson, J.C., Stopford, C.L., Richardson, A.M.T., 
Gerhard, A., Neary, D. and Mann, D.M.A. (2011) The clinical diagnosis 
of early-onset dementias: diagnostic accuracy and clinicopathological 
relationships. Brain. 134. 2478-92. 
Snyder, C.M., Fauth, E., Wanzek, J., Piercy, K.W., Norton, M.C., Corcoran, 
C., Rabins, P.V., Lyketsos, C.G. and Tschanz, J-A.T. (2015)  Dementia   
caregivers coping strategies and their relationship to health and well-
being: The Cache County Study. Aging and Mental Health. 19(5), 390-
Sorbi, S., Hort. J., Erkinjuntti, T., Fladby, R., Gainotti, G., Gurvit, H., Nacmias, 
B., Pasquier, F., Popescu, B.O., Retorova, I.,  Religa, D., Rusina, R., 
Rossor, M., Schmidt, R., Stafaova, E., Warren, J.D.  and Scheltens, P. 
(2012) EFNS-ENS Guidelines on the diagnosis and management of 
disorders associated with dementia, European Journal of Neurology. 
19, 1159-1179. 
Spector, A. & Orrell, M. (2010). Using a biopsychosocial model of dementia 
as a tool to guide clinical practice. International Psychogeriatrics, 22(6), 
957-965. 
Spector, A., Orrell, M., Charlesworth, G. and Marston, L. (2016) Factors 
influencing the person-carer relationship in people with anxiety and 
dementia. Aging and Mental Health. 20(10), 1055-62. 
Squires, A. (2009) Methodological challenges in cross-language qualitative 
research: a research review. International Journal of Nursing Studies. 
46(2), 277-87. 
Stiles, W. (2001). Assimilation of problematic experiences. Psychotherapy. 
38(4), 462465. 
Stopford, C.L., Thompson, J.C., Neary, D., Richardson, A.M.T. and 
Snowden, J.S. (2012) Working memory, attention  and executive 
function in Alzheimers disease and frontotemporal dementia. Cortex. 
48, 429-46. 
Sturm, V.E. and Levenson, R.W. (2011) Alexithymia in neurodegenerative 
disease. Neurocase. 17(3), 242-50. 
Sutter, M., Perrin, P.B., Chang, Y-P., Ramirez Hoyos, G., Buraye, J.A. and 
Arango-Lasprilla, J.C. (2014) Linking family dynamics and the mental 
health of Colombian dementia caregivers. American Journal of 
Alzheimers Disease and Other Dementias.  29(1), 67-75.  
Svanberg, E., Spector, A. and Stott, J. (2011) The impact of young onset 
dementia on the family: a literature review. International 
Psychogeriatrics. 23(3), 356-71. 
Svanstrm, R. and Dahlberg, K. (2004) Living with dementia yields a 
heteronomous and lost existence. Western Journal of Nursing 
Research. 26(6), 671-87.  
Thomas, J. and Harden, A. (2008) Methods for the thematic synthesis of 
qualitative research in systematic reviews. , BMC Medical Research 
Methodology, Open Access Biomed Central, 8. 
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2288/8/45  accessed 1 February 
2012. 
Thomas, C. Reeve, J. Bingley, A. Brown, J. Payne, S. and Lynch, T. (2009) 
Narrative Research Methods in Palliative Care Contexts, Two Case 
Studies, Journal of Pain and Symptom Management. 37(5), 788-96. 
Tolkacheva, N. van Groenou, M, B. de Boer, A and van Tilberg, T. (2011). 
The impact of informal care-giving networks on adult childrens care-
giver burden, Ageing and Society. 31(1), 34-51. 
Torraco, R.J. (2005) Writing integrative literature reviews: guidelines and 
examples. Human Resource Development Review. 4(3), 356-67 
Tremont, G., Davis, J.D. and Bishop, D.S. (2006) Unique Contribution of 
Family Functioning in Caregivers of Patients with Mild to Moderate 
Dementia, Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders. 21. 170-174. 
Trujillo, M.A., Perrin, P.B., Panyavin, I., Peralta, S.V., Stolfi, M.E., Morelli, E. 
and Arango-Lasprilla, J.C. (2016) Mediation of family dynamics, 
personal strengths and mental health in dementia caregivers. Journal of 
Latina/o psychology. 4(1), 1-17. 
van Baalen, A., Vingerhoets, A.J.J.M., Sixma, H.J. and  de Lange, J. (2011) 
How to evaluate quality of care from the perspective of people with 
dementia: An overview of the literature. Dementia. 10(1), 112-137.  
van Vliet, D. de Vugt, M. E. Bakker, C.  Koopmans R. T. C. M. and Verhey F. 
R. J. (2010) Impact of early onset dementia on caregivers: a review. 
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 25, 1091-110 
van Vliet, D. de Vugt, M. E. Bakker, C.  Koopmans R. T. C. M., Pijnenburg, Y. 
A. L., Vernooij Dassen, M. J. F. J. and Verhey F. R. J. (2011) 
Caregivers' perspectives on the pre-diagnostic period in early onset 
dementia: a long and winding road, International Psychogeriatrics. 
23(9), 1393  1404. 
Wadham, O.,Simpson, J., Rust, J. and Murray, C. (2016) Couples shared 
experiences of dementia: A meta-synthesis of the impact upon 
relationships and couplehood. Aging and Mental Health. 20(5), 463-73. 
Walmsley, B.D. and McCormack, L. (2014) The dance of communication: 
retaining family membership despite severe non-speech dementia. 
Dementia. 13(5), 626-41.  
Walsh, F. (2006) Strengthening family resilience second edition. London: The 
Guildford Press. 
Ward-Griffin, C., Bol, N. and Oudshoorn, A. (2006) Perspectives of women 
with dementia receiving care from their adult daughters. Canadian 
Journal of Nursing Research. 38(1), 120-46. 
Ward-Griffin, C. Oudshoorn, A. Clark, K. and Bol, N. (2007) Mother-adult 
daughter relationships within dementia care: A critical analysis. Journal 
of Family Nursing. 1(13), 13-32.  
Warren, J.D., Rohrer, J.D. and Rossor, M.N. (2013) Frontotemporal 
Dementia, British Medical Journal, Open Access 
http://www.bmj.com/content/347/bmj.f4827 accessed 11 August 2013 
Warin, J. (2011) Ethical Mindfulness and Reflexivity: Managing a research 
relationship with children and young people in a qualitative longitudinal 
research study. Qualitative Inquiry. 17(9), 805-14. 
Wawrziczny, E., Antoine, P., Ducharme, F., Kergoat, M-J. and Pasquier, F. 
(2014) Couples experiences with early-onset dementia: An interpretive 
phenomenological analysis of dyadic dynamics. Dementia. Epub ahead 
of print DOI: 10.1177/1471301214554720. 1-18. Accessed 20 July 
2016. 
Weaks, D., Wilkinson, H. and McLeod, J. (2015) Daring to tell: the 
importance of telling others about a diagnosis of dementia. Ageing and 
Society.35(4), 765-84.  
Whitlach, C.J. (2001) Including the person with dementia in family care-giving 
research. Aging and Mental Health. 5(s1), s20-2. 
Whittemore, R. and Knafl, K. (2005) The integrative review: updated 
methodology. Journal of Advanced Nursing. 52(5), 546-53 
Wilkinson, H. (2002) Including people with dementia in research, methods 
and motivations, in Wilkinson, H. (editor) The perspectives of people 
with dementia, research methods and motivations. London. Jessica 
Kingsley Publishers.9-24. 
Willig, C. (2016) Constructivism and the real world: can they co-exist? 
Qualitative Methods in Psychology. 21, Spring 2016, 33-37. 
Wong, C., Merrilees, J., Ketelle, R., Barton, C., Wallhagen, M. and Miller, B. 
(2012a) The experience of caregiving: differences between behavioural 
variant of frontotemporal dementia and Alzheimer disease. American 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 20(8), 724-28. 
Wong, C. and Wallhagen, M. (2012b) Frontotemporal dementia: the impact of 
patient behavioural symptoms on the physical and mental health of 
family caregivers. Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders. 2, 516-
Wong, C.C. and Wallhagen, M.I. (2014) Family caregivers of individuals with 
frontotemporal dementia, examining the relationship between coping 
and caregiver physical and mental health. Journal of Gerontological 
Nursing. 40(1), 30-40.  
Woods, R.T. (2001) Discovering the person with Alzheimers disease: 
cognitive, emotional and behavioural aspects. Aging and Mental Health. 
5(s1), s7-16. 
Wolverson, E.L., Clarke, C. and Moniz-Cook, E.D. (2016) Living positively 
with dementia: a systematic review and synthesis of the qualitative 
literature. Aging and Mental Health. 20(7), 676-99. 
Yardley, L. (2000) Dilemmas in qualitative health research. Psychology and 
Health. 15(2), 215-28. 
Yates, L. (2003) Interpretive Claims and Methodological Warrant in Small 
Number Qualitative Longitudinal Research. International Journal of 
Social Research Methodology. 6(3), 223-232. 
Youell, J., Callaghan, J.E.M. and Buchanan, K. (2016) I dont know if you 
want to know this carers understandings of intimacy in long-term 
relationships when one partner has dementia. Ageing and Society. 
36(5), 946-67. 
	cover_sheet_thesis.pdf
	University of Bradford eThesis
