Microsoft Word - PhD Thesis JD 2020 complete
BN-DOPED -CONJUGATED MATERIALS: FROM 
MONOMERIC TO POLYMERIC BORAZINE 
ARRAYS 
Jacopo Dosso 
PhD Thesis 
June 2020 
Thesis submitted in accordance with the requirements for 
the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Supervisor: 
Prof. Dr. Davide Bonifazi 
School of Chemistry 
Cardiff University
 Acknowledgments  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
First, I would like to thank Prof. Dr. Davide Bonifazi for giving me the opportunity to 
work in his group. His constant support and enthusiasm have been very inspirational 
and important during my PhD.  
Second, I would like to thank Dr. Grazia Bezzu for the precious help with this 
manuscript and for all the nice chats at lunchtime. Your kindness and patience are 
admirable. 
Many thanks to Tommaso, Cataldo, Rodolfo and Andrey. You contributed to make this 
PhD a great experience. 
I am grateful to the borazine team members: Francesco, Davide, Maria, and Diem. 
Your help has been fundamental during my time inside and outside the lab. 
Thanks to all the components of the Bonifazi research group for your help and 
patience, each one of you taught me something important during this experience. 
I am particularly grateful to Dr. Tanja Miletic for her help at the beginning of my 
experience in Cardiff. You have been inspirational during my master thesis and I will 
never forget your help when I first got here. 
I want to thank my parents for the constant support and for always believing in me. 
Without you this would have never been possible.  
Special thanks to Ilaria, you made this time in Cardiff amazing and your presence 
helped me through the hard times. You are a special and talented person, always 
believe in yourself  
Finally, I want to thank all my friends. You always managed to make me feel close 
despite the distance. Your friendship is a real honour. 
Fuarce Fril 
Table of contents 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
INTRODUCTION 
BORAZINE-DOPED NANOGRAPHENES: SYNTHESIS OF HEXA-
PERI-HEXABENZOBORAZINOCORONENE 
2.3 Ortho-functionalized borazines as precursors in the BN-doped nanographenes 
BN vs CC: EFFECTS OF BORAZINE DOPING ON PROPERTIES 
OF PAHs  
 Table of contents  
SYNTHESIS OF MULTI-BORAZINE SYSTEMS: TOWARDS 
EXTENDED BORAZINE-DOPED NANOGRAPHENES  
BORAZINE-DOPED POLYPHENYLENIC POLYMERS: 
SYNTHESIS AND APPLICATIONS  
EXPERIMENTAL PART 
APPENDIX A: 1H, 13C, 11B-NMR AND HRMS SPECTRA OF 
Abstract 
ABSTRACT 
Since the first isolation of graphene by Geim and Novoselov in 2004, a new field 
involving the preparation of tailored derivatives of this material has been exponentially 
growing. One of the major targets of this scientific endeavour is the conversion of 
graphene from conductor to semiconductor, leading to a new generation of 
miniaturized high-performance transistors and spintronics. To prepare semiconductors 
based on graphene, many different strategies have been pursued, mostly based on 
physical methods, or doping of graphene. In the latter approach, the most interesting 
results have been achieved using surface assisted chemistry, resulting in the formation 
of graphene presenting various heteroatoms as dopants (B, N, O, S) and 
semiconducting properties. However, this approach has been often limited by a difficult 
control over structure and inclusion of the dopants. A possible solution to these 
limitations comes from the preparation of BN-doped graphene. This highly polar couple 
is isoelectronic and isosteric with CC double bonds, thus allowing for an inclusion of the 
dopant without important changes in graphene structure. This results in a material with 
very similar morphology but different opto-electronic properties, featuring a wider 
bandgap compared to pristine graphene. From this point of view, evidence of a 
dependence of the bandgap size of graphene from doping percentage and position 
was obtained from theoretical investigations, highlighting the importance of a precise 
synthesis of the materials, which is not achievable with top-down methods. 
Consequently, a bottom-up approach in which BN-doped PAHs are synthesised using 
organic synthesis and then used as building blocks to form extended systems, 
represents the most reliable strategy towards precisely doped materials.  
A vast library of BN-doped PAHs has been synthesised by many different groups using 
different precursors, doping patterns, and strategies. Among these, the use of 
functionalized borazines as precursors has been often neglected and limited to the 
synthesis of the archetypal borazine-doped nanographene, namely Hexa-peri-
hexabenzoborazinocoronene (HBBNC). The high interest towards this molecule, 
which can be considered as the smallest unit of a borazine-doped graphene (Figure 
1A), is related to theoretical studies predicting an efficient HOMO-LUMO gap widening 
in this derivative compared to the full carbon congener. Synthetic attempts resulted in 
HBBNC formation in low yield as very insoluble product, thus resulting in incomplete 
characterizations, which failed to produce comprehensive experimental evidence for 
the effect of the borazine doping on nanographene systems.  
 Abstract  
Figure 1A: Example of a borazine-doped graphene and HBBNC as its smallest unit. 
In this dissertation we present a synthetic strategy towards soluble HBBNC derivatives, 
leading to an extensive characterization of the borazine doping effects, thus providing a 
solid experimental confirmation of the ability of this doping strategy to widen the 
HOMO-LUMO gap of PAHs.  
This work is presented in 5 chapters, starting with an introduction regarding the state-
of-the-art results in the field in Chapter I. In this part the most important achievements 
in the preparation of doped graphene and PAHs are reported, thus giving an overview 
on the open questions in the area, which will be addressed in the following chapters. 
Chapter II reports the synthesis of ortho halogen functionalised borazines and their use 
in the preparation of soluble HBBNC derivatives (Figure 2A). Various approaches are 
investigated to obtain the full planarization of the borazine precursors, leading to the 
successful use of fluoro hexaaryl-borazines in presence of silylium ion reagents 
resulting in a six-fold Friedel-Crafts like reaction producing the desired soluble HBBNC. 
Along with the target molecule, different by-products were formed depending on the 
precursors used. These PAHs, presenting B2N3H2 and B3N2O doping patterns, were 
isolated and characterized as well. Moreover, the suitability of the reaction towards a 
variety of functional groups has been tested, leading to a clear understanding of the 
viable precursors for this reaction.  
 Abstract  
Figure 2A: Strategy towards the synthesis of soluble HBBNC. 
In Chapter III a complete structural and opto-electronic characterization of the BN-
doped materials previously obtained is reported. This is enriched by the comparison 
with tailored reference compounds, leading to an unequivocal assessment of the effect 
of doping on the molecule properties. The results displayed in this chapter represent an 
exhaustive characterization of a borazine-doped hexabenzocoronene, thus filling an 
important gap in the literature on the topic by proving the ability of borazine doping to 
widen the HOMO-LUMO gap of PAHs. 
Chapter IV presents the preparation and study of extended borazine precursors (multi-
borazines) which can be used for the synthesis of borazine-doped nanoribbons. The 
synthesis is enriched by a complete study on the stability and properties of these 
unprecedented molecules. The results of these investigations allowed us to synthesise 
a fluorinated dimeric multi-borazine system which can be used in a future synthesis of 
borazine-doped extended graphene systems.  
Finally, in Chapter V, an approach towards borazine-doped polymeric materials is 
developed relying on the use of ethynyl functionalised borazines undergoing [4+2] 
cycloadditions with dimeric cyclopentadienone reagents. The result of this reaction is 
the formation of a borazine-doped polymeric polyphenylene, which was extensively 
studied using solid state NMR. The material proved to form gels efficiently in 
chlorinated solvents and due to the presence of the borazine rings and the high thermal 
and chemical stability, was used as a support material in solid state electrolytes. 
 List of abbreviations 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
  Degrees 
  Molar extinction coefficient 
  Wavelength 
 Conductivity 
fl  Quantum yield of fluorescence 
  Dipolar moment 
fl/ph  Fluorescence/phosphorescence lifetime 
tLi+  Lithium transference number 
A  Absorbance 
  Angstrom 
[A]  Concentration of molecule A 
Abs  Absorption 
ACID  Anisotropy of the Induced Current Density 
Ar  Aryl 
a.u.  Arbitrary unit 
ATR Attenuated total reflectance 
BET  Brunauer Emmett Teller 
Bu  Butyl 
C  Celsius degrees 
CDHC  Cyclo-dehydrochlorination 
cm  Centimetres 
COF  Covalent organic framework 
CP/MQ/MAS  Cross Polarization/Multi quantum/Magic angle spinning 
CV  Cyclic voltammetry 
CVD  Chemical vapour deposition 
D  Debye 
DDQ  2,3-Dichloro-5,6-dicyano-1,4-benzoquinone 
DFT  Density functional theory 
DMF  Dimethylformamide 
DSC  Differential scanning calorimetry 
E  Energy gap 
 List of abbreviations 
Eq.  Equivalent 
Em.  Emission 
ESI  Electrospray ionisation 
ESP  Electrostatic surface potential 
FT  Fourier transform 
eV  electron volt 
rec-GPC  Recycling gel permeation chromatography 
GIAO Gauge independent atomic orbitals 
GO  Graphene oxide 
GQD  Graphene quantum dots 
h  hour 
h1/2  half-life 
HBBNC  Hexa-peri-hexabenzoborazinocoronene 
HBC  Hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene 
h-BN  Hexagonal Boron-Nitride 
HOMO/LUMO  Highest occupied molecular orbital/Lowest occupied 
molecular orbital 
HR  High resolution 
K  Kelvin degrees 
KHMDS  Potassium hexamethyldisilazide 
LDA  Lithium diisopropylamide 
LF-NMR Low frequency NMR 
LSV  Linear sweep voltammetry 
LR  Low resolution 
IR  Infra-red 
min  Minutes 
MALDI  Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionisation 
MAS Magic angle spinning 
Me  Methyl 
Mes  Mesityl/(2,4,6-trimethylphenyl) 
mp  Melting point 
MQMAS NMR Multi quantum magic angle spinning NMR 
MS  Mass spectrometry 
 List of abbreviations 
m/z  Mass-to-charge ratio 
NICS  Nucleus independent chemical shift 
nm  Nanometres 
NMR  Nuclear magnetic resonance 
Nu-  Nucleophile 
ns  Nanoseconds 
ODCB  Ortho-dichlorobenzene 
OTIPS O-Tri-isopropylsilyl 
PAHs  polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons 
Ph  Phenyl 
PIFA  (Bis(trifluoroacetoxy)iodo)benzene 
ppm  Parts per million 
Py  Pyridine 
pXRD  Powder X-ray diffraction 
Pa  Pascal 
RMSD  Root mean square deviation 
r.t.  Room temperature 
S  Siemens 
SCC  Silica column chromatography 
SC-XRD  Single crystal X-Ray diffraction 
SEM Scanning electron microscopy 
SSE  Solid state electrolyte 
SSS Short stress sweep 
STM  Scanning tunnelling microscopy 
t  Time  
TADF  Thermally activated delayed fluorescence 
TBAF tetrabutylammoniumfloride 
TCB  trichlorobenzene 
TEGDME  Tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether 
TEM  Transmission electron microscopy 
TGA  Thermal gravimetric analysis 
THF  Tetrahydrofuran 
TIPS  Triisopropylsilane 
 List of abbreviations 
TLC  Thin layer chromatography 
TMS  Trimethylsilane 
TOF  Time of flight 
UHV  Ultra high vacuum 
UV-Vis  Ultraviolet-visible light 
V  Volt 
vdW  van der Waals 
WCA  Weakly coordinating anion 
w/w  weight on weight 
wt  Weight 
 Chapter 1 
CHAPTER 1 
INTRODUCTION 
1.1 Graphene: an overview 
Carbon is one of the most studied elements in the periodic table, not only because it 
represents the core of organic chemistry, but even because it is able to generate an 
incredible chemical diversity through its valency.[1] Due to this, in its elemental form, 
carbon can be found in many different allotropes which span from diamond to 
graphite.[2,3] Amongst all these possible allotropes, great attention has been devoted in 
the last 30 years to the so-called carbon nanoforms,[4] represented by fullerenes,[5,6] 
nanotubes,[710] nanohorns,[11] nanodiamonds,[12,13] nanorods[14] and graphene.[15,16] The 
large amount of studies, both theoretical and experimental, conducted on these 
materials is driven by the potential technological applications arising from a set of very 
appealing properties, which largely depend on the material structure.[17] From this point 
of view, graphene is certainly one of the most investigated carbon allotropes and it has 
been the subject of many theoretical studies in the last decades.[18] Due to the 
predicted thermodynamic instability of this material,[19] its possible existence as one 
atom thick crystalline layer has been matter of debate among the scientific community 
until its isolation by Geim and Novoselov in 2004, who managed to mechanically 
exfoliate graphite leading to the first identification of free-standing graphene sheets.[16]  
Figure 1.1: a): STM images of single layer graphene with model of the underlying structure 
reported; b): STM image of multilayer portion of graphene.[20] 
After its successful isolation, experimental proof of the nature of this material was 
obtained, confirming the predicted structure constituted by sp2 hybridized carbon atoms 
arranged in a periodic honeycomb structure, with CC distances of 1.42 .[15] This 
peculiar arrangement is determined by the three sp2 orbitals of each atom, which are 
involved in sigma bonds with neighbour carbons originating the honeycomb  scaffold, 
 Chapter 1 
while the remaining pZ orbital are engaged in a  system extended over the whole 
lattice (Figure 1.1).[21] 
Graphenes most interesting properties arise from its peculiar structure and constitute 
the main reason for the huge interest towards this material. In this regard, outstanding 
mechanical, thermal and electronical properties have been highlighted in many studies 
performed on this material. Graphene presents a very high thermal conductivity ranging 
from 2000 to 6000 W m K-1[22,23] along with a stability up to 500 C in air[24] which, 
coupled with a high Young modulus of 1.0  0.1 TPa,[25] make this material very 
promising for applications that require mechanical and thermal resistance. The 
electronic structure and properties of graphene are perhaps the most interesting 
features of this material, which presents room temperature quantum Hall effect[26] and 
behaves like a semi-metallic conductor with a very high charge carrier mobility, 
spanning from around 1104 up to 4104 cm2 V-1 s-1 with a maximum theoretical value 
of 2105 cm2 V-1 s-1 depending on quality of sample and experimental conditions.[27,28] 
Furthermore, temperature-independent carrier mobility between 10 K and 100 K was 
observed in the material.[29] These outstanding electronic properties contributed to 
create great expectations around graphene, due to its potential use in a new class of 
ultra-thin high-performance devices, which could lead to a revolution in the field of 
miniaturized electronics.[21,30] Moreover, properties such as quantum Hall effect, are of 
high interest in the growing field of spintronics, with potential applications in quantum 
devices.[31] The ability of graphene to behave like a semi-metallic conductor can be 
explained by observing the structure of the valence and conducting band, which 
present contact points (Dirac Points) at the vertices of the Brillouin zone (Figure 1.2).[32] 
Figure 1.2: Structure of the energy bands of graphene with zoom on the Dirac points. kx ky 
reported in A-1.[32] 
This electronic feature results in a semi-metallic conductor behaviour and in a 
pronounced ambipolar field effect, allowing for a continuous change from holes to 
electrons, depending on the applied electric field. The properties of graphene are 
 Chapter 1 
heavily influenced by the quality of the layer, in fact, the presence of Stone-Wales 
defects, vacancies or irregular edge morphologies are all factors that can result in 
variable properties.[15] From this point of view, one of the major challenges towards 
future applications is the ability to prepare high quality sheets in a reproducible way. 
Consequently, various production methods have been investigated in the last decades, 
following the first synthesis using mechanical exfoliation.[16,33,34] Generally, graphene is 
prepared by top-down approaches in which sheets of the material are obtained starting 
from graphite or surface based methods such as epitaxial growth by annealing suitable 
gases on metallic substrates (substrate-based methods). The latter resulting in 
extended sheets that are then cut down to the desired dimensions using techniques 
such as photolithography. The first synthesis of graphene involved a micromechanical 
cleavage of graphite with celluphene tape and still represents an excellent example of 
top-down strategy, as it can produce high quality sheets with dimensions bigger than 
100 m2. The main limit of this approach lies in the small amounts of graphene that can 
be obtained, which precludes the mass production needed for device applications. A 
possible solution is represented by the synthesis of chemically derived graphene using 
graphene oxide (GO).[35,36] In this strategy, graphite is oxidized, and the resulting GO 
layers are then suspended by applying mechanical force (sonication) relying on the 
strong interactions between the epoxide, hydroxy and carboxy groups on GO and the 
water medium. Subsequent reduction of GO sheets with hydrazine produces the 
desired graphene in a cheap and scalable manner (Scheme 1.1).[36]  
Scheme 1.1: Chemical synthesis of graphene starting from graphite via Hummers method. 
Despite the obvious advantages of this method, many problems can arise; amongst all, 
the tendency to aggregate after reduction, leading to multiple layers and the possible 
defects due to incomplete reactions, which result in oxygenated graphene.[34] Another 
common top-down method is the epitaxial growth of graphene sheets. In this method 
pioneered by De Heer, graphene is formed by heating silicon carbide at 1300 C in 
UHV.[37] Photolithography can then be used in order to pattern the sheets, obtaining 
material of the desired size for use in devices. The most used substrate-based 
graphene synthesis is based on chemical vapor deposition (CVD). In this technique, 
gases such as methane or other hydrocarbons are passed on a transition metal 
 Chapter 1 
surface at high temperature under vacuum, leading to the formation of extended 
graphene sheets. Both this method and the epitaxial growth allow the obtainment of 
high quality large area layers that can be recovered and transferred after 
etching/photolithography and used in devices.[38] However, many challenges remain, in 
particular the difficult control of the layering during the synthesis of the sheets, which 
results in materials composed by two or more layers, affecting the properties of the 
resulting graphene.[21] 
1.2 Towards semiconducting graphene 
Along with the above presented synthetic challenges, one of the major limitations in the 
use of this material in electronic devices is the absence of a bandgap. As previously 
stated, graphene presents contacts between the valence and conducting band, 
resulting in a semi-metallic conductor behaviour. This determines a poor Ion/Ioff ratio in 
graphene-based devices, resulting in the impossibility of turning off the device 
completely. This phenomenon is due to the presence of carrier populations at any 
temperature, which make this material not suitable for many promising applications, 
such as transistors and logic applications. To convert graphene into a semiconductor, 
different strategies based on both physical and chemical methods, have been studied.  
Figure 1.3: a,b) Schematic representations of monolayer and bilayer graphene with respective 
bandgap structure; c) Biased bilayer graphene with resulting open bandgap structure.[39] 
Physical methods present the advantage of using graphene without the need to modify 
it, thus avoiding problems related to side reactions or undesired variations in its 
properties and morphology.  
In this context, some of the most valuable results have been obtained by biasing 
graphene bilayers as reported by Vandersypen and co-workers. This method relies on 
 Chapter 1 
stacking two layers of graphene and then applying an electric field perpendicular to the 
stack, resulting in the opening of a bandgap (Figure 1.3). [39] 
Another method predicted to open a bandgap in this material, is the application of 
uniaxial strain on graphene sheets, as shown by calculations reported in a work of 
Shen et al. In this study, the application of a 1% strain on graphene is predicted to 
open a 0.3 eV bandgap in the material due to the breaking of the sublattice 
symmetry.[40,41] Finally, another promising approach is the growth of graphene layers on 
substrates able to induce a bandgap by interacting with its valence and conducting 
bands. Theoretical calculations suggest that growing graphene on a high bandgap 
insulator substrate like boron-nitride (h-BN) should result in the presence of a bandgap 
in the former.[42,43] Despite these promising results, physical methods suffer from many 
drawbacks such as the difficulty in obtaining a fine control of the properties and the low 
versatility, related to the necessity to induce a bandgap in the material using external 
stimuli or substrates, often resulting in difficult setups. An optimum solution to this 
problem could be the development of graphene-based materials which are intrinsically 
semiconducting and from this point of view, the easiest solution is to physically 
constrain large sheets into smaller units: nanoribbons and nanodots.  
1.3 Physically constrained graphene: nanoribbons 
In the last years, many different groups have devoted huge efforts towards the study 
and development of graphene nanoribbons, proving that the electronic characteristics 
of these materials are largely dependent on the topology of the edges and the size of 
the molecules. In fact, a different edge structure can determine a change from a semi-
metallic conductor behaviour (zig-zag edges) to the desired semiconducting one 
(armchair edges, Figure 1.4).[44]  
Figure 1.4: a): different edge topologies in graphene; b): band structure depending on edge 
topology in graphene nanoribbons.[44] 
 Chapter 1 
Even the size of the nanoribbons is important in determining the electronic properties: 
in general, as the size increases a general decrease in the bandgap is observed. From 
this point of view, to tailor the properties of the nanoribbons, a precise control of size 
and edges is required. Furthermore, when the dimensions of the nanoribbons get close 
to those of 0D molecules, a progressive loss in the peculiar properties of graphene is 
observed, with increased similarities to PAHs.[45] 
Therefore, to produce nanoribbons with tailored bandgaps retaining most of the 
properties of graphene, a precise synthesis resulting in an exact edge topology and 
size is required. From this point of view, a top-down approach consisting in cutting 
down large graphene sheets using photolithography or opening nanotubes has been 
employed.[46] By using such methods the actual presence of a bandgap dependent on 
the ribbon width was proved,[47] however, the preparation of nanoribbons presenting 
precisely designed edge topologies still remains challenging, thus limiting the control 
on the resulting bandgaps.[48] In order to obtain chemically precise nanoribbons with a 
defined edge topology, a bottom-up approach, in which small molecules are used to 
form the desired nanographenes, would be recommended.[49] 
In this context, the pioneering work carried out by Mllen and co-workers represents a 
milestone in the field and is essentially based on the synthesis of extended 
nanographene flakes via Scholl reactions performed on polyphenylenes.[50,51] In this 
strategy, relatively simple starting dienes and dienophiles are polymerized using [4+2] 
cycloaddition reactions to form tailored polyphenylenes in solution. The following 
cyclodehydrogenation reaction leads to the formation of nanographenes with high 
control on both the size and edge morphology (Scheme 1.2 a).[52]  
This strategy, however, suffers from the common drawbacks of solution phase 
chemistry, such as low solubility of the final products, high yield of reactions required to 
avoid by-products and difficult purifications. Another possible bottom-up strategy, which 
has been used extensively, relies on surface chemistry to induce an Ullmann coupling 
of halogen functionalised building blocks followed by surface mediated 
cyclodehydrogenation.[53,54] This strategy has been used by the groups of Fasel and 
Feng (Scheme 1.2 b, c) to synthesise extended nanographenes with chemically 
precise edge topology.[51,55] This resulted in an interesting study of the effects of 
morphology and substrates on the nanoribbon properties. 
 Chapter 1 
Scheme 1.2: examples of a) Synthesis in solution as reported by Mullen and co-workers[52]; b) 
and c) Surface assisted synthesis of graphene nanoribbons.[55,56] 
Despite the great advantage of providing a chemically precise synthesis of graphene-
based materials with relative ease, the surface assisted synthesis suffers of severe 
limitations, in particular the low scalability and the fact that interactions between the 
surface (generally transition metals) and the material are present, thus providing results 
that are dependent on the substrate used.  
1.4 Graphene heteroatom doping 
It would be desirable to obtain semiconducting graphene without being limited to 
certain dimensions or topologies and thus being able to fully exploit the potential of this 
material. Furthermore, it would be preferable to create the desired bandgap in a 
graphene sheet by changing only one parameter, as this would allow the design and 
synthesis of materials with controlled properties. This concept is at the roots of the 
heteroatom doping, which is extensively used in the semiconductors industry to 
precisely determine the electronic properties of materials by varying the dopant type 
and amount. This approach can be extended to the graphene case by introducing in 
the crystal lattice heteroatoms able to change the electronic properties, thus resulting in 
materials with precisely designed characteristics. In this context, a great amount of 
 Chapter 1 
work has been performed using various techniques in order to introduce atoms such as 
boron, nitrogen, phosphorus, oxygen and sulphur into graphene layers.[57] The best 
results overall have been obtained preparing doped graphene via CVD, ball milling, 
thermal annealing, wet chemical methods and plasma/arc-discharge.  
1.4.1 Boron doped graphene 
Due to the similar dimensions between boron and carbon atoms, the inclusion of the 
former in graphene leads to a small deviation in the lattice parameters due to a slightly 
different bond length (1.50  for C-B vs 1.42  in graphene) whereas the electronic 
properties of the material are affected importantly. In fact, the presence of the boron 
atom (electronegativity: 2.0) induces a polarization in the C-B bonds and the presence 
of the vacant p orbital leads to an electronic depletion accountable for the p-type 
behaviour and bandgap widening in the materials.[57]  
CVD represents probably the most used technique in the synthesis of boron doped 
graphene and indeed has been successfully employed by Liu and co-workers using 
phenyl boronic acid as feedstock.[58] In this procedure a flow of H2 containing the C and 
B source was passed on a copper substrate at 1030 C leading to the formation of the 
desired material. XPS analysis on the resulting boron containing graphene proved the 
inclusion of the boron atoms in the material lattice, which resulted to be a p-type 
semiconductor with a good carrier mobility of 800 cm2 V-1 s-1. Comparable results were 
obtained by Shen and co-workers with a similar strategy, using polystyrene and boric 
acid in different ratios as feedstock, again obtaining a p-type behaviour for the resulting 
material.[59] Thermal annealing has been used in the successful synthesis of B-doped 
graphene by heating GO in a furnace at 800C in the presence of BCl3.[60] The resulting 
material presented a 0.88% doping percentage and was used as anode in lithium ion 
batteries.  
1.4.2 Nitrogen doped graphene 
When nitrogen is considered as a dopant, again similar dimensions to carbon are 
found, however, due to the different valency, nitrogen atoms can be included in 
graphene in various ways, resulting in different effects and ultimately in a greater 
deviation from the morphology of pristine graphene compared to the boron case.[57] In 
general, the amount of the different nitrogen types depends on the conditions of the 
synthesis: higher temperatures and longer annealing times result in more abundant 
graphitic sites, while lower temperatures favour pyridinic and pyrrolic domains, in 
accordance with the expected thermal stability: graphitic N > pyridinic N > pyrrolic N 
(Figure 1.5).[57,61] The presence of differently bound nitrogen atoms heavily affects the 
properties of the material. In fact, the presence of pyridinic nitrogen is often associated 
 Chapter 1 
with a p-type behaviour whereas the presence of graphitic domains results in a n-type 
material.[62] A polarization of the CN bonds is present due to the higher electronegativity 
of nitrogen (3.0 vs 2.5 for C), thus resulting in polarized bonds that can influence the 
electronic properties of the material and can be active reaction sites. 
Figure 1.5: Different possible inclusion of nitrogen atoms in graphene lattice.[63]  
Good results have been obtained using nitrogen as dopant; in particular, Ajayan et al. 
and Yu and co-workers used CVD to synthesize nitrogen doped graphene on copper 
substrates.[63,64] In the first case, the synthesis was performed at 950C using hexane 
and CH3CN in a H2/Ar flow while in the second CH4 and NH3 were used with similar 
conditions leading to the formation of materials presenting n-type semiconducting 
behaviour and charge mobilities between 200 and 450 cm2 V-1 s-1. In another 
interesting work, Usachov et al. reported the synthesis of N doped graphene using 
CVD on nickel substrates at 540-635 C, employing s-triazine as feedstock. As a result, 
graphene presenting 0.4% of graphitic nitrogen was obtained, corresponding to a 0.2 
eV widening of the bandgap.[65]  
Along with CVD techniques, thermal annealing has been successfully used to prepare 
nitrogen doped graphene by heating GO or chemically produced graphene in the 
presence of various dopant sources such as N2, NH3, aniline, pyrrole, melamine 
etc.[66,67] In this case, the desired materials were obtained with doping percentages up 
to 10% and with a good control on the doping type by choosing carefully the reaction 
temperature and doping precursors. Furthermore, wet chemical methods have been 
used to produce nitrogen doped graphene by treating GO in the presence of urea, 
ammonia or hydrazine.[68] This method presents the advantage of using lower 
temperatures, resulting in a more scalable and simple synthesis. Another valuable 
example of this approach is presented by the work of Sun et al. in which a solvothermal 
approach has been used to achieve high nitrogen percentages starting from GO by 
 Chapter 1 
treatment with urea in water at 180 C. Despite the clear advantages, this method is 
limited by a difficult control of the doping percentage, which largely depends on the 
functionalization degree of the starting GO.[69] 
1.4.3 Oxygen doped graphene 
Oxygen doping of graphene is mostly related to the synthesis and production of GO. As 
previously reported this material is obtained by oxidation of graphite in solution using 
H2SO4, KMnO4 and NaNO2. The resulting material presents epoxy, hydroxy and 
carboxy groups and can be considered as an oxygen doped graphene. Since the 
degree of oxidation varies greatly depending on conditions, the properties of GO can 
vary from poorly conductive to non-conductive depending on the amount of sp3 carbons 
formed in the oxidation step. Despite these evident limitations, GO has been used in 
devices and as a starting material for further functionalization or graphene chemical 
synthesis. [70,71] 
1.4.4 Phosphorus and Sulphur doped graphene 
When third row elements such as P[72] and S are used, a greater distortion of the 
graphene sheets is observed due to their size and longer carbon-heteroatom bonds. 
Moreover, the insertion of large heteroatoms in the graphene lattice is energetically 
unfavourable, thus resulting in low doping percentages located especially at defect 
sites or edges.[57] A successful example of S-doped graphene using CVD technique 
has been reported by Ajayan using a sulphur solution in hexane as precursor. In this 
case doping percentages around 0.6% were detected, presenting p-type 
semiconducting characteristics.[73] Ball milling has been used by Jeon et al. to produce 
sulphur doped graphene which was used for catalysis. In this approach however, the 
functionalization of the material was limited to the edges of the sheets.[74]  
1.4.5 Boron-Nitrogen doped graphene 
A potential strategy towards the improvement of the properties of doped graphene 
materials, is represented by co-doping. This approach should allow the introduction of 
different heteroatoms at the same time, resulting in synergistic effects and enhanced 
bandgap widening compared to singly doped graphene.[57] From this point of view, 
since boron and nitrogen are the heteroatoms that produced the best results in 
converting graphene into a semiconductor, a lot of work has been performed towards 
the synthesis of BN-doped graphene.[75] The doping of graphene with h-BN is 
advantageous due to the properties of the BN bonds, which are isoelectronic and 
isosteric with CC bonds and thus can be included in the material lattice maintaining the 
sp2 honeycomb morphology of graphene.[75] This feature avoids the problems related to 
different types of bonding of the heteroatoms leading to different properties as 
 Chapter 1 
highlighted when nitrogen is used as dopant. Furthermore, the BN bonds are highly 
polarized (1.844 D)[76] thus leading to an active surface chemistry and to great 
variations in the electronic properties of the resulting materials. From this point of view, 
since h-BN is an insulator with high bandgap (5.971 eV)[77] its inclusion in the graphene 
lattice should results in the opening of a bandgap dependent on the doping 
percentage.[78] 
As in the previous cases, the most important results towards the synthesis of BN-
doped graphene have been obtained using CVD techniques. In the ground-breaking 
work of Ajayan and co-workers, extended sheets of graphene doped with h-BN were 
obtained by flowing ammonia borane and methane on a copper surface at 900-1000C 
using H2/Ar as carrier gas.[79] The ratio between C, N and B can be controlled by 
regulating the amount of the respective precursors, although since the precursor for B 
and N is ammonia borane (NH3-BH3) the ratio between the two components will always 
be one. As a result, large sheets mostly composed of 2/3 layers of BN hybridised 
graphene were obtained with percentages of BN up to 90%. XPS studies performed on 
the material proved that the BN atoms are arranged in boron-nitride islands segregated 
from the graphene lattice.  
Figure 1.6: a) HRTEM image of a single layer region; b) atomic model of the h-BNC film 
obtained. [79] 
This result is related to the larger binding energy of BN and CC bonds compared to BC 
and NC ones that are thus confined to the edges of the h-BN islands (Figure 1.6b).[79] 
As expected, the materials present semiconducting behaviour, as an example, an 
increase in the optical bandgap is observed moving from samples containing 26% h-
BN (3.85 eV, 1.51 eV) to the ones containing 35% h-BN (4.48 eV, 1.62 eV) with 
intermediate values between the ones of graphene and pure h-BN. The presence of 
two absorption edges, resulting in two values of bandgap, is due to the segregation 
between the h-BN islands (higher value) and graphene domains (lower value). This 
 Chapter 1 
factor is ascribable to a dimension of the h-BN islands in the nanometre size and thus 
ultimately producing a segregated rather than a uniform material. The presence of 
these islands results in irregular properties, with local discrepancies, that are not 
optimal when the materials are used in devices.  
A possible solution to this problem comes from the work of Bepete et al. in which a 
CVD using boric acid, N2 and CH4 as sources of B, N and C respectively was 
performed on a copper substrate heated at 995 C under a flow of 7% H2 in N2 gas.[80] 
As a result, a large area of uniform graphene was obtained. XPS data suggested the 
presence of C, B and N in 98%, 1.38% and 0.62% respectively, inserted in a uniform 
system with no h-BN islands present, thus suggesting the efficient creation of BNC 
domains (Figure 1.7). This result suggests that the segregation of h-BN only occurs at 
high concentrations of BN, limiting the ability of CVD methods to form uniform BN 
graphene to low doping percentages. A possible alternative synthesis of BN-doped 
graphene relies on the thermal annealing of glucose, urea and boron oxide at 1250C 
under a NH3 atmosphere as performed by Huang et al. The resulting material 
presented a 2.72 eV bandgap with a uniform composition without h-BN islands; 
however, only multiple layers of folded material were obtained with various amounts of 
impurities absorbed on surface.[81] 
Figure 1.7: Schematic representation of a uniform doping with BN domains in the graphene 
lattice.[80] 
Another interesting approach has been used recently by Chen et al. to form BN-doped 
graphene layers using acetylene functionalized borazines as starting materials. 
In this approach molecule 1-2 is annealed at 1000C, 1200C and 1500C leading to 
the formation of doped graphene sheets (Scheme 1.3). The resulting material proved to 
be a n-type semiconductor; however, the properties of the obtained graphene were 
largely dependent on the annealing temperature and a precise chemical control on the 
doping was not possible.[82]  
 Chapter 1 
Scheme 1.3: Preparation of BN-doped graphene using borazine derivatives as feedstock.[82] 
A possible solution to the problems related to the CVD and annealing method is 
represented by the segregation of the lattices itself by using a CVD heteroepitaxial 
growth of hybrid materials. In this approach h-BN islands are first grown on the 
substrate followed by the carbon part on the uncovered surface or vice versa[83,84]. This 
leads to a possibility of controlling the size of the h-BN and graphene islands by limiting 
the growth time; however, even in this case, a material presenting clear interfaces 
between h-BN and graphene is formed even if with a higher control on the doping 
percentage. Finally, another strategy is represented by the work of Levendorf et al. in 
which a patterned growth of hybrid materials is performed.[85] In this strategy, the 
semiconducting properties of the materials are obtained by growing precise patterns of 
h-BN into a graphene layer. First, a layer of graphene is formed with CVD on the 
metallic substrate. Photolithography or reactive ion etching is then used to remove part 
of the graphene, resulting in precise patterns where the metallic substrate is exposed. 
h-BN is then grown by annealing ammonia borane in the empty spaces, leading to 
different bandgap sizes depending on the patterns. This approach allows the 
preparation of atomically precise materials; however, it is based on very complicated 
setups that are suitable only for small scale production.  
 Chapter 1 
1.5 Top-down synthesis limits 
All the top-down methods presented in the previous paragraphs, rely on the synthesis 
of large sheets of BN-doped graphene using CVD or thermal annealing techniques (on 
pre-formed graphene oxide). These approaches suffer from a difficult control of the 
doping concentration and segregation between h-BN and graphene domains, 
especially at high concentrations of dopant. This results in a poor control of the material 
properties that can often be synthesised only in small amounts. The possible solutions 
to these problems rely on keeping low BN concentrations or in using complex 
techniques and expensive methods to obtain regular doping patterns. Despite this, 
obtaining atomically precise doped materials in large scale still represents a major 
challenge in the field.[57]  
When the precise doping of graphene is considered, it is convenient to introduce two 
doping parameters: the doping concentration () and the doping vector (d).  is defined 
as the number of carbon units (aryl rings or CC bonds) substituted by BN units. d 
defines the position of each doping unit in a cartesian coordinates system where the 
reference doping unit is defined as (0,0). This allows for the description of the doping 
position using vectors defined by the number of aryl rings separating the two doping 
units.[86]  
An important limitation of the previously mentioned methods is the lack of control on 
the d parameter. In fact, being able to control the relative position d of the doping units 
in the material lattice is very important in determining how the doping will affect the 
aromaticity and electronic properties of the system. In a theoretical study by Karamanis 
et al., the effect of doping with B3N3 (borazine) units in nanographenes has been linked 
to the position in which the substitution is occurring in the relevant Clar resonant 
structure. If full aromatic sextets are substituted by B3N3 units, a widening of the 
bandgap occurs, instead, when the substitution affects non-sextet rings, an opposite 
effect is observed (Figure 1.9).[87,88]  
This fact results in the irregular widening of the bandgap (Figure 1.9a) often visible in 
the previous examples in which, however, a widening is always observed due to loss in 
lattice symmetry associated with the random doping patterns.[89] The control of the two 
parameters d and  is therefore necessary to precisely govern the effect of doping on 
the bandgap of graphene, resulting in reproducible properties. 
 Chapter 1 
Figure 1.9: a) Bandgap differences in respect to doping concentration in a model C222 
graphene flake patched with h-BN segments of different sizes. Level of theory: CAM-B3LYP/6-
31G(d); b) Column plots representing the computed band gap differences, between a series of 
B3N3-doped graphene flakes and their pristine counterpart. Every (green or grey) column 
presents the effect arising from the substitution of the reported rings (green or grey) with B3N3. 
The red column represents the bandgap of the fragment with only the central ring substituted by 
B3N3.[88] 
The important effect of d highlighted by Karamanis et al. is related to how the 
substitution affects the relevant Clar resonance structure of the graphene material 
(Figure 1.10).  
Figure 1.10: Effect of the doping in different positions on the bandgap depending on the kind of 
BN rings formed. 
 Chapter 1 
Substitution of an aromatic sextet ring with a non-aromatic borazine moiety (HOMO-
LUMO gap 7.9 eV compared to benzene 6.6 eV, Figure 1.10)[90] results in an overall 
widening of the material bandgap and in general, in more localized sextets in the 
neighbouring aromatic rings due to a decrease in delocalization. On the other hand, the 
substitution of a non Clar-sextet ring results in the rupture of the aromaticity of the three 
neighbouring aromatic sextets which are converted in BNC4 (azaborine) units 
presenting a narrower HOMO-LUMO gap compared to benzene (5.3 eV vs 6.6 eV), 
which ultimately results in a shrinking of the bandgap (Figure 1.10).[90] As a general 
rule, the presence of partially substituted aromatic sextets is associated with non-
monotonic bandgap variations. 
When single BN bonds are used instead of borazine, similar assumption can be made. 
In fact, when the substitution of CC bonds with BN bonds intersects aromatic sextets of 
the Clar resonance structure, it results in the formation of lower HOMO-LUMO gap 
species such as azaborine or pyridine and borabenzene (Figure 1.11).[90,91] As for the 
previous case, the effect that this substitution has on the material bandgap depends on 
the position of the doping and in particular on how this affects the Clar resonance 
structure of the material.  
Figure 1.11: Effect of doping with single BN bonds on the aromaticity. 
Altogether, these studies confirm that to finely tune the bandgap of BN-doped 
graphene, it is necessary to precisely control not only parameter  but also d. A 
bottom-up preparation of graphene materials relying on organic synthesis should 
present the optimal solution to the problem, leading to the formation of chemically 
precise BN-doped graphene starting from molecular precursors (Scheme 1.4). The 
synthesis of designed molecular precursors and the study of their properties is 
therefore fundamental to produce doped graphene presenting tailored bandgaps. 
 Chapter 1 
Scheme 1.4: Bottom-up strategy towards precisely doped nanographenes via extension of BN-
doped building blocks. 
1.6 Bottom-up approach: Synthesis of BN-doped PAHs 
One of the first steps towards the bottom-up synthesis of BN-doped graphene is 
represented by the effective preparation of doped PAHs, which can be considered as 
building blocks of extended graphene systems. This passage is of central importance 
for the development of experimental procedures that can be used to introduce the 
dopant atoms in aromatic scaffolds. The study of BN-doped PAHs goes back to the 
1950s with the pioneering work by Dewar and co-workers, which led to the synthesis of 
the first BN-doped phenanthrene.[92] In this first approach, the introduction of the boron 
atom was achieved by treating 1-5 with BCl3 leading to the formation of adduct 1-6. BN-
doped phenanthrene 1-7 was then obtained by electrophilic aromatic substitution by 
treating 1-6 with AlCl3. Various substituents were introduced on the boron atom by 
treatment of 1-7 with nucleophiles (Scheme 1.5). 
Scheme 1.5: Synthesis of BN-doped phenanthrene 1-8.[92] 
Derivative 1-8b presents a 15-20 nm blueshift in the absorption and emission spectra 
when compared to parent phenanthrene, indicative of a larger HOMO-LUMO gap for 
the doped analogue. In fact, in 1-8b, the aromatic sextet rings are unaffected by doping 
and the result is a hypsochromic shift caused by reduced conjugation and enhanced 
sextet localization.[93]. This first example of a BN-doped PAH triggered a great interest 
in the scientific community in the following decades, leading to the synthesis and study 
 Chapter 1 
of many different BN-doped PAHs. A whole family of doped phenanthrene derivatives 
has been prepared, highlighting the effective importance of the doping position on the 
properties of PAHs (Figure 1.12).[94] Differently from 1-8b, when the BN-doping is 
intersecting the aromatic sextet rings of the relevant Clar resonance structure a general 
bathochromic shift of the emission is observed. However, the magnitude of this effect 
varies greatly depending on the relative position of the dopant unit in the phenanthrene 
molecule. This fact is highlighted by the great variation in emission wavelengths in 
derivatives with similar doping patterns such as 1-10e and 1-10b presenting a 
difference of 153 nm in the em. When derivative 1-10a is examined, the doping is 
affecting both the sextet rings in the molecule. This results in the formation of 
borabenzene, pyridine and azaborine systems, resulting in a lowest energy absorption 
at 446 nm and an emission centred at 450 nm. This data points out an important 
decrease of the HOMO-LUMO gap for this derivative compared to parent 1-9. 
Figure 1.12: Absorption and emission maxima of BN-doped phenanthrene congeners.[94] 
Along with phenanthrenes, other valuable examples of doped PAHs were proposed 
again by Dewar in 1960[95] and by Piers and co-workers in 2007[96] with the synthesis of 
BN-doped pyrene derivatives. The synthesis of 1-12 was performed with conditions 
similar to those used for doped phenanthrene 1-8b, whereas the synthesis of derivative 
1-16 relied on the cyclization of acetylene groups using a PtCl2 catalyst (Scheme 
1.6).[95,96] The lowest energy transition for 1-12 is visible at 335 nm suggesting a very 
small effect on the absorption energy (Pyrene abs= 333 nm). This result is very similar 
to the one observed for 1-8b, suggesting that even in this case the preservation of the 
Clar aromatic sextets is at the roots of this outcome.  
 Chapter 1 
Scheme 1.6: Synthesis of BN-doped pyrene derivatives as reported by Dewar and Piers.[95,96] 
On the other hand, the lowest energy absorption for derivative 1-16 appears at 443 nm 
with an emission maximum at 480 nm. This confirms the important effect determined 
by the substitution of the two Clar aromatic rings resulting in lower HOMO-LUMO gap 
species, in analogy with derivative 1-10a. Interestingly, the polar BN bond in derivative 
1-16 imparts a self-assembly behaviour to the derivative visible in the crystal structure, 
with the boron atom sitting on top of the nitrogen of the nearby molecule. 
BCl ClB
Me3Si SiMe3
-2Me3SiCl
R = i-Pr
R = i-Pr
R = i-Pr
R = H, 1-20a, 41%
R = i-Pr 1-20b, 59%
1-19, 91%
1-21, 93%
1-18, 81%
Scheme 1.7: Synthesis of BN-doped triphenylene derivatives.[97,98] 
More extended B2N2C2 doped triphenylene analogues were prepared by Piers et al. in 
a subsequent work, by reacting chloro borane 1-17 with various pyridazine derivatives 
(Scheme 1.7). In this case, due to the presence of the B2N2C2 system instead of the 
 Chapter 1 
central, non-sextet ring of triphenylene, pyridazine and borabenzene rings are obtained 
in place of the outer Clar aromatic sextets. Therefore, a redshift was observed in the 
absorption and emission energy when derivative 1-20a (abs= 546 nm, em= 558 nm) 
was compared to parent triphenylene (abs= 335 nm em= 355 nm) pointing out an 
important decrease in the HOMO-LUMO gap.[97,98] In this case, however, the great 
bathochromic shift in the absorption and emission is associated with the presence of a 
charge-transfer transition from the central B2N2C2 to the borabenzene rings, which is 
accountable for the great (1.5 eV) difference in the transition energy. 
Another addition to the BN-doped PAHs, came from Kaehler et al. with the synthesis of 
a doped perylene analogue including two BN bonds (Scheme 1.8). The lowest energy 
transition for derivative 1-23 appears at 416 nm, blue-shifted compared to perylene 
(abs= 438 nm), instead emission maxima are localized at 440 nm and 445 nm 
respectively, corresponding to a widening of the HOMO-LUMO gap of 1-23 (2.84 eV vs 
2.77 eV).[99]. This is consistent with the retention of the two fully aromatic sextets of 
perylene Clar resonance structure. 
Scheme 1.8: Synthesis of BN-doped perylene derivatives.[99] 
The synthesis of NBN-doped systems has been reported in the work of Hatakeyama, 
and Feng (Scheme 1.9).[100,101] In these derivatives, the doping intersects the non-
sextet rings of the Clar resonance structure of the hypothetical full carbon derivative.  
NICS calculations showed that, while the azaborine derived rings present non-aromatic 
character (-1.4 ppm), the Clar aromatic rings retain their aromaticity (from -8 to -10 
ppm). This data suggests that the doped derivatives should present a wider HOMO-
LUMO gap compared to the full carbon, however, in this case a direct comparison is 
not possible due to the open shell nature of the latter.  
The presence of the boron atom connected to the two N-H groups results in acidic 
protons, which can act as hydrogen bond donors. This feature has been recently 
exploited leading in the formation of DD-AA and ADDA-DAAD hydrogen bonded 
systems with 1-25c and NAP (naphthyridine) in the first case and 1-25d and DAN 
 Chapter 1 
(diacetyl-2,7-diaminonaphthyridine) in the second (Scheme 1.9d). This result 
represents a valuable example of how peripheral BN-doping of zig-zag edges can be 
used to induce self-assembly between PAHs.[102] 
Scheme 1.9: Synthesis of NBN-doped derivatives as reported by a) Hatakeyama; b) Feng; c) 
NICS(1) values calculated for 1-25b. d) DD-AA and ADDA-DAAD hydrogen bonded systems 
obtained using NBN-doped PAHs.[102] 
In the group of Feng, the synthesis of the extended NBN derivative 1-27 was carried 
out as well, showing a good example of how large doped systems can be obtained with 
a bottom-up approach through electrophilic substitution reactions (Scheme 1.10).  
The UV-Vis spectra of this NBN molecule presents narrow Stokes shift suggesting a 
rigid structure in line with the previous observations for similar derivatives.[101] 
Moreover, compared to 1-25b derivative 1-27 displays redshifted absorption and 
emission spectra due to the increased conjugation of the system (abs= 435 nm vs 351 
nm; em= 448 nm vs 369 nm). 
 Chapter 1 
Scheme 1.10: Synthesis of extended NBN derivative 1-27. 
Building on these results, Bettinger and co-workers used a multi-step approach to 
synthesise the complementary PAH featuring the BNB-doping motif (Scheme 1.11). In 
this synthesis KHMDS was used to deprotonate the NH group of 1-29 followed by a 
second electrophilic borylation to give 1-30. Notably mesityl groups are introduced to 
avoid the reaction of boron centres with water.[103] The study of this derivative 
highlighted a wide stokes shift compared to NBN derivative 1-25b (47 nm vs 18 nm) 
and a redshifted emission (em= 413 nm vs 369 nm). These differences compared to 1-
25b are likely caused by the twisting of the structure imposed by the bulky mesityl 
protecting groups.  
Scheme 1.11: a) Synthesis of BNB-doped derivative 1-30; b) NICS(1) values for the doped and 
full carbon scaffolds.[103] 
In the same group, derivatives of 1-25b were used as starting materials in the 
synthesis of molecules 1-33 and 1-36. Singly and doubly borylated derivatives 1-31 
and 1-34 were functionalized with aryl-BDan groups via Suzuki coupling, which was 
followed by deprotection of the dansyl group in the presence of H2SO4 leading to the 
formation of 1-33 and 1-36 (notably, 1-36 was published after the initial report from our 
group presented in chapter 2).  
For both molecules, narrow stokes shifts and blue emissions were observed (em= 404 
and 370 nm) with high em of 84% and 58% respectively.[104,105]  
 Chapter 1 
Scheme 1.12: Synthesis of extended BN-doped PAHs as reported by Bettinger and co-
workers.[104,105] 
Electrophilic substitution reactions on aromatic scaffolds have been effectively used in 
the synthesis of extended aromatic systems, which represent important steps towards 
the bottom-up preparation of BN-doped graphene. One of the most important 
contributions in the field is represented by the synthesis of extended BN-doped 
nanographenes from Hatakeyama group, who prepared molecules 1-38 and 1-40 
starting from amino functionalized polyphenylenes and by treating them with BCl3 or BI3 
(Scheme 1.13).[106,107] Derivative 1-38 displays an electrochemical HOMO-LUMO gap 
of 1.67 eV and an enhanced hole mobility that the authors address to the presence of 
the BN bonds. Together with a remarkable stability (no decomposition visible up to 358 
C) this features make this molecule very attractive for organic electronics. 
Scheme 1.13: Synthesis of nanographenes 1-32 and 1-34. 
 Chapter 1 
When 1-40 is considered, narrow blue emission centred at 455 nm is found in a 
poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) film along with a em= 53 %. The presence of 
phosphorescence centred at 488 nm (at 77 K in PMMA film) highlighted a small energy 
difference between singlet and triplet states (0.15-0.18 eV) suggesting efficient TADF 
(Thermally activated delayed fluorescence) for this molecule, which was used as 
emitter in OLEDs, yielding a pure blue emission with high quantum external efficiency 
(EQE) of 12.6% at 100 cd/m2.[106] 
The same group synthesised extended system 1-42 which again presents energetically 
close singlet and triplet states and was used in TADF OLEDs. In this paper these 
properties were linked to the localization of the HOMO and LUMO orbitals imposed by 
the presence of the boron and nitrogen atoms. This results in a decrease in the 
vibrionic coupling, vibrational relaxation and in a small singlet/triplet gap. As a result, 
pure narrow blue emission (em= 469 nm with 18 nm full width at half maximum) and 
efficient TADF were obtained from the devices with a 32.8% EQE at 100 cd/m2, much 
improved compared with devices based on 1-40.[108] 
Scheme 1.14: Synthesis of BN-doped derivative 1-42 as reported by Hatakeyama and co-
workers, this derivative presenting narrow blue emission was used as active material in TADF 
OLEDs. 
One of the most interesting examples of the use of doped PAHs in the synthesis of BN-
doped graphene comes again from the work of Feng and co-workers (Scheme 1.15). In 
this approach, precisely designed NBN-doped monomers are polymerized on surface 
using an Ullmann coupling, followed by dehydrogenation reaction resulting in precisely 
doped nanoribbons which were studied using STM and nc-AFM (non-contact atomic 
force microscopy) in UHV conditions. DFT calculations highlighted an increased 
bandgap for 1-48 compared to the pristine counterpart (0.90 eV vs 0.27 eV).[109]  
In the previously reported examples, the doping units are isolated BN, NBN or BNB 
moieties selectively placed either at the peripheries or in the core of aromatic 
precursors bearing amino groups at specific positions. Strategies relying on multiple 
electrophilic aromatic substitutions, allowed for the preparation of extended BN-doped 
PAHs. As expected, the result of the doping on the molecules HOMO-LUMO gap is 
 Chapter 1 
largely dependent on the CC bonds that are substituted and on how this affects 
aromaticity and the Clar resonant structure of the PAHs  
1-47 1-46, 33%
1-45, 92%1-441-43
Br Br
Multiple Cross Coupling
steps
TMS TMS
NO2O2N
2) Pt/C, THF/MeOH,
r.t. 12h.
1) ICl, DCM, 0C,
r.t., 12h.
BCl3, NEt3,
ODCB, 180C.
NH2 H2N
Surface assisted
cyclodehydrogenation
Surface assisted
Ullmann coupling
Scheme 1.15: Synthesis of NBN-doped precursor 1-46 and its use in the synthesis of 
nanoribbon 1-48.[109] 
Another possibility to obtain BN-doped nanographenes and then graphene, consists in 
the use of preorganized doping units, in which the BN bonds are clustered in six-
membered rings (borazines) and used to replace benzenoid rings in graphitic materials, 
leading to an increase of the bandgap due to the higher HOMO-LUMO gap of borazine 
compared to benzene. In this strategy, borazine derivatives are used as precursors in 
the synthesis of nanographenes.  
 Chapter 1 
1.7 BN clusters: borazines 
Borazine has often been dubbed as inorganic Benzene due to the similarities of this 
BN-based cycle with the most famous aromatic compound. Borazine presents a similar 
bond length (1.44 ) to benzene (1.40 ) and as in the latter, this distance is an 
average between the ones of a single and double bond (Figure 1.13).[110] 
Figure 1.13: Molecular and crystal structures of benzene and borazine.[111,112] 
This fact, along with the planarity of borazine derivatives, led to hypothesize the 
presence of an aromatic ring current in this molecule. Despite this, many theoretical 
studies indicate only a weak aromatic character for borazine, which is in line with the 
experimental properties of this molecule, such as the afore mentioned high 
susceptibility towards hydrolysis and the tendency to undergo addition reactions.[113] 
This difference in aromaticity and chemical behaviour, can be ascribed to the strongly 
polarized BN bonds in borazine, resulting in more localized electron densities on the 
more electronegative nitrogen atoms.[114] This results in delocalization only on isolated 
BNB fragments[113] ultimately opposing the presence of ring currents and widening the 
HOMO-LUMO gap with respect to benzene (7.9 eV vs 6.6 eV).[90] Due to these peculiar 
properties, borazine represents the ideal candidate for graphene doping in order to 
obtain a widening of the bandgap.[88] In order to synthesise borazine-doped 
nanographenes, the preparation of functionalized borazine derivatives that can 
subsequently undergo planarization reactions is required.  
1.7.1 Borazine synthesis 
Many different approaches have been developed for the synthesis of borazine and its 
derivatives, starting from the original work by Stock and Pohland in 1926 involving the 
thermal dehydrogenation of NH3BH3 at 200C.[115] This was followed by many 
variations involving the use of high pressure, lower temperatures or different 
precursors. In particular, the use of BH3 adducts with alkyl amines led to the synthesis 
of N-Alkyl borazines in high yields (>90%).[116] Along with borane adducts, ammonium 
 Chapter 1 
salts in the presence of lithium or sodium borohydride[117,118] have been used 
successfully and even nitriles proved to be valid precursors when reacted with diborane 
in dimethoxyethane at 85C.[119] Dehydrogenation reactions leading to borazine 
derivatives were performed at low temperature using transition metal complexes as 
reported by Manner and co-workers who treated CH3NH2BH3 with [Rh(1,5-cod)(-Cl)]2 
at 45C leading to the formation of N,N,N-trimethylborazine in a 95% yield.[120] A 
breakthrough in the synthesis of borazine derivatives was achieved in 1955 by Brown 
and Laubencayer using boron halides as precursors. In this procedure, BCl3 was 
reacted with NH4Cl in refluxing PhCl leading to the formation of B,B,B-trichloro 
borazine (Scheme 1.16).[121]  
Scheme 1.16: Synthesis of B,B,B-trichloroborazine 1-49. 
A further development of this synthesis came from the work of Groszos and Stafiej who 
prepared B,B,B-trichloro-N,N,N-triphenyl borazole (chloro-borazole) using a 
modified protocol based on the seminal work of Kinney and Jones.[122] In this 
procedure, aniline was reacted with BCl3 in refluxing toluene and the resulting chloro-
borazole functionalized on the boron atoms using a substitution reaction with Grignard 
reagents.[123,124] This new versatile approach allowed functionalisation of borazines on 
all the boron and nitrogen atoms, with the possibility of placing different substituents on 
different positions (Scheme 1.17).  
Scheme 1.17: Synthesis of hexa-functionalised borazines.[123] 
After the development of this synthetic strategy, the synthesis of borazines presenting 
six phenyl groups bonded to the borazine was achieved. The aryl rings could be 
functionalized in different ways as far as functional groups stable to the synthetic 
conditions were used. As an example of the versatility of this approach, Yamaguchi 
and co-workers obtained the formation of molecular bundles by reacting an i-Pr 
 Chapter 1 
functionalised chloro-borazole with the lithium reagent derivative of anthracene 
resulting in borazine 1-53 (Scheme 1.18).[125] 
Scheme 1.18: Synthesis of derivative 1-53.[125] 
The same approach, relying on condensation reactions between boron halides and 
aniline derivatives, has been successfully used by El-Kaderi and co-workers in the 
synthesis of COFs presenting high surface area for gas absorption applications. To 
obtain the formation of the frameworks, 4-1, 1-54 or 1-55 were treated with boron 
halides (BCl3 or BBr3) via a solvothermal approach. This resulted in the formation of the 
desired covalent networks (Scheme 1.19) and represents a valuable example of the 
synthesis of extended borazine-doped dendrimeric systems using these 
methods.[126,127] 
Scheme 1.19: Synthesis of borazine containing porous materials via condensation reaction as 
reported by El-Khaderi and co-workers. 
1.7.2 Mechanism of formation 
From the mechanistic point of view, various studies have been performed on the 
borazine synthesis to understand the key intermediates in the formation of this 
heterocycle. A 1+1+1+1+1+1 hexamerisation (via condensation or dehydrogenation) 
and a 2+2+2 trimerization have been proposed as possible mechanisms leading to the 
 Chapter 1 
formation of borazine rings. While the latter has been proposed by Paetzold and co-
workers[128] as the leading mechanism starting from dialkyliminoboranes (1-58, Scheme 
1.20), the former seems to be more reliable for the thermal synthesis of borazines 
starting from amine-boron halide adducts.  
Scheme 1.20: [2+2+2] mechanism involving iminoboranes.[128] 
In a paper published by Bettinger and co-workers the formation of borazine is elegantly 
studied by using 4-fluoro aniline as starting material and monitoring its reaction with 
BCl3 using 19F-NMR (Scheme 1.21).[129]  
Scheme 1.21: Plausible mechanism of formation of borazine derivatives based on recent 
studies by Bettinger and co-workers. 
These investigations confirmed the presence of the adduct 1-63 and borazine 1-50 
after mixing at 0C the two reagents. The formation of 1-50 in this step is still matter of 
debate and the role of trace impurities could not be ruled out. After heating at reflux, 
NMR studies confirmed the formation of anilinodichloroborane (1-64), however, 
computational studies ruled out the elimination of HCl from this derivative to give 
iminoborane 1-64b due to a very high energetic barrier associated to this step. No 
 Chapter 1 
evidence for intermediates between 1-64 and 1-50 was obtained, thus making 
impossible to draw conclusions for the conversion of 1-64 to 1-50, however, free aniline 
arising from the first equilibrium seems to be involved in the formation of the final 
product.[129] 
1.7.3 Stability of borazine derivatives 
As previously reported, borazine is particularly reactive toward nucleophiles. This is 
related to the Lewis acidity of the boron atoms which are susceptible to nucleophilic 
attack, resulting in the hydrolysis of the borazine ring to ammonia and boric acid.[110] 
This sensitive nature explains borazine tendency to hydrolyse in presence of 
atmospheric moisture (Scheme 1.22). The same characteristics are present in 
borazines functionalized with electron withdrawing groups on the boron atoms as in 
chloro-borazole derivatives. In this case, the presence of the chlorine further increases 
the Lewis acidity of the boron atom resulting in fast hydrolysis in presence of water.[122] 
Scheme 1.22: Hydrolysis of borazine in presence of moisture. 
The introduction of substituents on boron and nitrogen atoms importantly affects the 
stability of borazines and this was already noticed in the 1950s by Groszos and Stafiej, 
who reported that B,B,B-trialkyl-N,N,N-triphenyl borazines display remarkable 
stability to moisture.[124] This is related to a diminished Lewis acidity of the boron 
centres due to the electron donating nature of the sp3 carbon to which they are bonded. 
Borazines presenting alkynyl substituents on the boron atoms have been studied 
extensively by Nakagawa and co-workers, who proved that B,B,B-trialkynyl borazines 
present half-lives of days in an 80% dioxane/water mixture and thus are more stable 
than the parent borazine and chloro-borazoles.[130] Despite this, B,B,B-trialkynyl 
borazines still undergo hydrolysis in the presence of water. An interesting observation 
comes from the work of Brotherton and McCloskey, who studied the rate of hydrolysis 
of different borazines in 90% acetone/water mixtures, concluding that, in general, alkyl 
groups on boron atoms increase the stability of the borazine ring, whereas phenyl 
groups decrease it.[131] This result is highlighted by the comparison of the stability in 
boiling water between B,B,B-trimethyl-N,N,N-triphenyl borazine and B,B,B-
triphenyl-N,N,N-trimethyl borazine; in the first case, after boiling in water for 1 h the 
borazine was recovered quantitatively, whereas in the second a 94% degradation was 
observed (Scheme 1.23).[124] When hexaphenyl-borazines are considered, the same 
 Chapter 1 
rules apply. In this case, parent hexaphenyl-borazine is prone to hydrolysis (h1/2= 1.37 
h in acetone/water 90%) in the presence of moisture even if to a lesser extent 
compared to chloro-borazole derivatives.[132] This susceptibility to hydrolysis for 
B,B,B-triphenyl borazines, arises from the out-of-plane arrangement of the phenyl  
system and boron empty p orbital, resulting in the absence of conjugation between the 
two. As a result, boron atoms in B,B,B-triphenyl borazines present a quite high Lewis 
acidity, resulting in instability towards nucleophiles (Scheme 1.21).  
Scheme 1.23: Different stabilities between B-Alkyl and -Aryl borazines. 
As reported by Nagasawa et al., in order to obtain hexaaryl-borazines completely 
stable to hydrolysis, it is necessary to introduce ortho-substituents on the boron bonded 
phenyl rings.[133]  
1) BCl3, PhCl, reflux.
Li/MgBr
THF, r.t.
1-66,45%
Me Me
Scheme 1.24: Synthesis of hydrolysis stable borazine derivatives. 
This results in a steric protection of the boron centres and thus in borazines completely 
stable towards hydrolysis. The most famous example of hydrolysis stable borazine is 
represented by the B,B,B-trimesityl-N,N,N-triphenyl borazine 1-66, which has been 
synthesised by many groups and even used in optoelectronic applications (Scheme 
1.24).[134]  
 Chapter 1 
Borazines presenting mesityl or xylyl groups bonded to the boron atoms, proved to be 
resistant to cross-coupling reaction conditions, organometallics (RLi, RMgX), bases 
(TBAF, K2CO3), oxidants (FeCl3) and reductants (NaBH4, Fe, H2, Pd/C).[110]  
Scheme 1.25: Synthesis of borazine-doped polyphenylenes.[86] 
This stability allowed for the development of a rich chemistry on ortho-substituted 
hexaaryl-borazines, often resulting in very complex architectures. A notable example is 
represented by the work performed in our group, where the synthesis of complex 
borazine-based dendrimeric structures was obtained capitalizing on [4+2] 
 Chapter 1 
cycloadditions on B,B,B-trimesityl/xylyl-N,N,N-triphenyl borazine derivatives bearing 
acetylene and cyclopentadienone groups in specific positions (Scheme 1.25).[86] 
1.8 Borazines as precursors in the synthesis of nanographenes 
To use hexaphenyl-borazines as starting materials in nanographene synthesis, it is 
necessary to induce the formation of CC bonds among the phenyl substituents leading 
to the desired 2D structures. Many efforts have been dedicated to the conversion of 
hexaphenyl-borazine 1-65 into hexa-peri-hexabenzoborazinocoronene 1-1 which can 
be considered as the smallest unit of a borazine-doped graphene. 
Cyclodehydrogenations in the presence of various oxidants such as FeCl3 in CH3NO2, 
MoCl5 in CH2Cl2 and PIFA with BF3OEt2 in CH2Cl2, led to the formation of intractable 
mixtures with no indication of the formation of the desired product (Scheme 1.26).[135] 
Since all these attempts rely on oxidative conditions, oxidation of nitrogen atoms 
leading to degradation of the borazine rings can possibly explain the inability to form 
molecule 1-1.  
When AlCl3 with CuCl2 in CS2 was used, an insoluble polymeric material was obtained, 
suggesting a preference for intermolecular bond formation with these reaction 
conditions. Analyses performed on the product revealed the presence of the borazine 
ring, indicating that this feature was not destroyed during the reaction. [135]  
Scheme 1.26: Attempted synthesis of HBBNC 1-1 with Scholl reactions. 
Another valuable attempt was carried out in the group of Bettinger by irradiation of BN 
doped hexabenzotriphenylene 1-73 with I2 under UV irradiation at 280-400 nm 
(Scheme 1.27). This strategy is based on a similar procedure that proved to be very 
successful on stilbenes and polyphenylenes. However, in this case, the presence of the 
borazine ring dramatically reduces the CC bond formation yield, resulting in the 
exclusive formation of incomplete cyclization product 1-33b.[136]  
 Chapter 1 
Scheme 1.27: Attempted photophysical synthesis of 1-1. 
In a following study, Bettinger group used fs, ns and s time-resolved spectroscopy to 
study the effect of the presence of the borazine ring compared to that of benzene on 
the excited state properties of the derivatives. From this study, the presence of the 
borazine ring essentially leads to a faster decay of hexaphenyl-borazine excited state 
compared to the full carbon analogue (3 ps vs 428 ps). Furthermore, the decrease in 
the conjugation determined by the increased electronic localization in the borazine ring 
results in a higher diradical character of the cyclized intermediates, with a low energetic 
barrier for bond fission, leading to very low CC bond formation yields.[137]  
One of the most interesting results in the field was obtained again by Bettinger and co-
workers, who used a thermolysis approach relying on the high thermal stability of BN-
based materials to induce CC bond formation. In this strategy, biphenyl aniline 1-5 was 
treated with Et3NBH3 giving borazine 1-75, which by subsequent treatment at 550C 
under an inert atmosphere resulted in the formation of desired derivative 1-1 as a very 
insoluble material with a 3-5% yield (Scheme 1.28).  
Scheme 1.28: Thermolytic synthesis of 1-1 as reported by Bettinger and co-workers.[138] 
Due to the insolubility of 1-1, characterization was limited to solid state NMR 
techniques along with LR-MS and pXRD, which however presented two different 
phases in the pattern, one of which arising from an impurity.[138,139] A very important 
result in the use of hexaphenyl-borazines as precursors for nanographene synthesis 
was obtained by Casu and Sanchez-Sanchez groups, who managed to synthesise 
molecule 1-1 and a borazine-doped PAH network using surface-assisted Ullmann 
coupling and dehydrogenation.[140,141] In the work of Sanchez-Sanchez an Ullmann 
 Chapter 1 
coupling on derivative 1-76 was induced on a Ag(111) substrate at 425 K under UHV 
conditions. The resulting covalent network was then annealed at 625 K resulting in the 
formation of a precise network consisting of 1-1 units connected by covalent bonds 
(Scheme 1.29). The resulting material was formed only in small amounts and confined 
on surface, leading to an influence of the metallic substrate on the properties of the 
material. 
Scheme 1.29: Synthesis of HBBNC network using surface chemistry. 
1.9 Outlines of the dissertation 
In this doctoral work our objective was the development of a solution phase synthesis 
of soluble HBBNC derivatives. Since all previous approaches only produced very 
insoluble 1-1 using surface chemistry or thermolytic procedures, it has been impossible 
to study in detail the properties of this derivative. The synthetic strategy for the 
preparation of such molecule is reported in Chapter II and represents the first example 
of a soluble borazine-doped nanographene. In this chapter, the synthesis and 
 Chapter 1 
planarization of bromo, chloro and fluoro hexaaryl-borazines was carried out resulting 
in the formation of soluble HBBNC using a silylium ion promoted reaction on fluoro 
hexaaryl-borazines. 
Unveiling the optoelectronic properties of HBBNC represents a fundamental step in 
extending the knowledge on doping effects and towards the preparation of borazine-
doped graphene presenting a tailored bandgap. For these reasons, an extensive study 
on the properties of this derivative has been carried out in Chapter III by comparison 
with tailored reference compounds. The results of these studies confirmed the ability of 
borazine doping to widen the HOMO-LUMO gap of PAHs, resulting in materials with 
blue emissions and high quantum yields. 
Aiming at a successive synthesis of extended nanographenes, borazine-doped 
polyphenylene precursors (multi-borazines) were synthesised and these results are 
reported in Chapter IV. The resulting multi-borazines displayed doping concentrations 
between 12% and 18% and optoelectronic properties confirming the ability of borazine 
rings to break the conjugation of the polyphenylene backbone.  
Finally, decarbonylative [4+2] cycloadditions were used to produce a borazine-doped 
polymeric material using B,B,B-triethynyl-N,N,N-triphenyl borazine as starting 
material. The synthesis and complete characterization of the resulting polymer are 
reported in Chapter V. This unprecedented material formed gels in chlorinated solvents 
and thanks to its remarkable thermal and chemical stability, was used as support in 
solid state electrolytes (SSEs). 
1.10 References 
[1] J. Emsley, Natures Building Blocks: An AZ Guide to the Elements, Oxford 
University Press, 2011. 
[2] A. Hirsch, Nat. Mater. 2010, 9, 868871. 
[3] R. Hoffmann, A. A. Kabanov, A. A. Golov, D. M. Proserpio, Angew. Chemie Int. 
Ed. 2016, 55, 1096210976. 
[4] J. L. Delgado, M. . Herranz, N. Martn, J. Mater. Chem. 2008, 18, 14171426. 
[5] H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. OBrien, R. F. Curl, R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 
318, 162163. 
[6] P. R. Buseck, S. J. Tsipursky, R. Hettich, Science, 1992, 257, 215217. 
[7] V. M. Radushkevich, L. V, Lukyanovich, Zhurnal Fiz. Khimii 1952, 26, 8895. 
[8] S. Iijima, Nature 1991, 354, 5658. 
[9] D. S. Bethune, C. H. Kiang, M. S. de Vries, G. Gorman, R. Savoy, D. S. 
Bethune, C. H. Klang, J. Vazquez, R. Beyers, Nature 1993, 363, 605607. 
[10] S. Ijima, T. Ichihashi, Nature 1993, 363, 603605. 
 Chapter 1 
[11] S. Iijima, M. Yudasaka, R. Yamada, S. Bandow, K. Suenaga, F. Kokai, K. 
Takahashi, Chem. Phys. Lett. 1999, 309, 165170. 
[12] V. N. Mochalin, O. Shenderova, D. Ho, Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2012, 7, 
1123. 
[13] V. V. Danilenko, Phys. Solid State 2004, 46, 595599. 
[14] Y. Liu, W. Hu, X. Wang, C. Long, J. Zhang, D. Zhu, D. Tang, S. Xie, Chem. 
Phys. Lett. 2000, 331, 3134. 
[15] M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung, R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 132145. 
[16] K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, 
I. V Grigorieva, A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666669. 
[17] V. Georgakilas, J. A. Perman, J. Tucek, R. Zboril, Chem. Rev. 2015, 115, 4744
4822. 
[18] M. Taghioskoui, Mater. Today 2009, 12, 3437. 
[19] S. Y. Zhou, . . Girit, A. Scholl, C. J. Jozwiak, D. A. Siegel, P. Yu, J. T. 
Robinson, F. Wang, A. Zettl, A. Lanzara, Phys. Rev. B 2009, 80, 121409. 
[20] E. Stolyarova, T. R. Kwang, S. Ryu, J. Maultzsch, P. Kim, L. E. Brus, T. F. 
Heinz, M. S. Hybertsen, G. W. Flynn, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 2007, 104, 
92099212. 
[21] W. Choi, I. Lahiri, R. Seelaboyina, Y. S. Kang, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci. 
2010, 35, 5271. 
[22] J. H. Seol, I. Jo, A. L. Moore, L. Lindsay, Z. H. Aitken, M. T. Pettes, X. Li, Z. Yao, 
R. Huang, D. Broido, N. Mingo, S. R. Ruoff, L. Shi, Science 2010, 328, 213216. 
[23] A. Alofi, G. P. Srivastava, Phys. Rev. B 2013, 87, 115421. 
[24] H. Y. Nan, Z. H. Ni, J. Wang, Z. Zafar, Z. X. Shi, Y. Y. Wang, J. Raman 
Spectrosc. 2013, 44, 10181021. 
[25] C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar, J. Hone, Science 2008, 321, 385388. 
[26] K. S. Novoselov, Z. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Morozov, H. L. Stormer, U. Zeitler, J. 
C. Maan, G. S. Boebinger, P. Kim, A. K. Geim, Science 2007, 315, 1379. 
[27] S. V. Morozov, K. S. Novoselov, M. I. Katsnelson, F. Schedin, D. C. Elias, J. A. 
Jaszczak, A. K. Geim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2008, 100, 1114. 
[28] J. H. Chen, C. Jang, S. Xiao, M. Ishigami, M. S. Fuhrer, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2008, 
3, 206209. 
[29] K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, M. I. Katsnelson, I. V. 
Grigorieva, S. V. Dubonos, A. A. Firsov, Nature 2005, 438, 197200. 
[30] A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater. 2007, 6, 183191. 
[31] W. Han, R. K. Kawakami, M. Gmitra, J. Fabian, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2014, 9, 794
[32] A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, Rev. 
Mod. Phys. 2009, 81, 109162. 
[33] D. Wei, Y. Liu, Adv. Mater. 2010, 22, 32253241. 
[34] J. Zhu, Nat. Nanotechnol. 2008, 3, 528529. 
 Chapter 1 
[35] W. S. Hummers, R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1958, 80, 1339. 
[36] S. Park, J. An, I. Jung, R. D. Piner, S. J. An, X. Li, A. Velamakanni, R. S. Ruoff, 
Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 15931597. 
[37] W. A. de Heer, C. Berger, X. Wu, P. N. First, E. H. Conrad, X. Li, T. Li, M. 
Sprinkle, J. Hass, M. L. Sadowski, M. Potemski, G. Martinez, Solid State 
Commun. 2007, 143, 92100. 
[38] R. Muoz, C. Gmez-Aleixandre, Chem. Vap. Depos. 2013, 19, 297322. 
[39] J. B. Oostinga, H. B. Heersche, X. Liu, A. F. Morpurgo, L. M. K. Vandersypen, 
Nat. Mater. 2008, 7, 151157. 
[40] Z. H. Ni, T. Yu, Y. H. Lu, Y. Y. Wang, Y. P. Feng, Z. X. Shen, ACS Nano 2008, 
2, 23012305. 
[41] S. M. Choi, S. H. Jhi, Y. W. Son, Phys. Rev. B 2010, 81, 2326. 
[42] G. Giovannetti, P. A. Khomyakov, G. Brocks, P. J. Kelly, J. Van Den Brink, Phys. 
Rev. B 2007, 76, 25. 
[43] J. Jung, A. M. DaSilva, A. H. Macdonald, S. Adam, Nat. Commun. 2015, 6, 
6308. 
[44] T. Wassmann, A. P. Seitsonen, A. M. Saitta, M. Lazzeri, F. Mauri, Phys. Rev. 
Lett. 2008, 101, 14. 
[45] L. Li, G. Wu, G. Yang, J. Peng, J. Zhao, J. J. Zhu, Nanoscale 2013, 5, 4015
4039. 
[46] L. Ma, J. Wang, F. Ding, ChemPhysChem 2013, 14, 4754. 
[47] Y. W. Son, M. L. Cohen, S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2006, 97, 14. 
[48] K. A. Ritter, J. W. Lyding, Nat. Mater. 2009, 8, 235242. 
[49] J. F. Morin, A. Jolly, D. Miao, M. Daigle, Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 2020, 59, 4624-
4633. 
[50] J. Wu, L. Gherghel, M. D. Watson, J. Li, Z. Wang, C. D. Simpson, U. Kolb, K. 
Mllen, Macromolecules 2003, 36, 70827089. 
[51] A. Narita, X. Feng, Y. Hernandez, S. A. Jensen, M. Bonn, H. Yang, I. A. 
Verzhbitskiy, C. Casiraghi, M. R. Hansen, A. H. R. Koch, G. Fytas, O. Ivasenko, 
B. Li, K. S. Mali, T. Balandina, S. Mahesh, S. De Feyter, K. Mllen, Nat. Chem. 
2014, 6, 126132. 
[52] Y. Fogel, L. Zhi, A. Rouhanipour, D. Andrienko, H. J. Rder, K. Mllen, 
Macromolecules 2009, 42, 68786884. 
[53] L. Talirz, P. Ruffieux, R. Fasel, Adv. Mater. 2016, 28, 62226231. 
[54] J. Cai, P. Ruffieux, R. Jaafar, M. Bieri, T. Braun, S. Blankenburg, M. Muoth, A. 
P. Seitsonen, M. Saleh, X. Feng, K. Mllen, R. Fasel, Nature 2010, 466, 470
[55] P. Ruffieux, S. Wang, B. Yang, C. Sanchez-Sanchez, J. Liu, T. Dienel, L. Talirz, 
P. Shinde, C. A. Pignedoli, D. Passerone, T. Dumslaff, X. Feng, K. Mllen, R. 
Fasel, Nature 2016, 531, 489492. 
[56] A. Narita, X. Y. Wang, X. Feng, K. Mllen, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2015, 44, 6616
6643. 
 Chapter 1 
[57] X. Wang, G. Sun, P. Routh, D. H. Kim, W. Huang, P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2014, 43, 70677098. 
[58] H. Wang, Y. Zhou, D. Wu, L. Liao, S. Zhao, H. Peng, Z. Liu, Small 2013, 9, 
13161320. 
[59] T. Wu, H. Shen, L. Sun, B. Cheng, B. Liu, J. Shen, New J. Chem. 2012, 36, 
13851391. 
[60] Z. S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li, H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano 2011, 5, 54635471. 
[61] T. V. Khai, H. G. Na, D. S. Kwak, Y. J. Kwon, H. Ham, K. B. Shim, H. W. Kim, J. 
Mater. Chem. C 2012, 3, 1799218003. 
[62] T. Schiros, D. Nordlund, L. Plov, D. Prezzi, L. Zhao, K. S. Kim, U. Wurstbauer, 
C. Gutirrez, D. Delongchamp, C. Jaye, D. Fischer, H. Ogasawara, L. G. M. 
Pettersson, D. R. Reichman, P. Kim, M. S. Hybertsen, A. N. Pasupathy, Nano 
Lett. 2012, 12, 40254031. 
[63] D. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Huang, G. Yu, Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 1752
1758. 
[64] A. Leela, M. Reddy, A. Srivastava, S. R. Gowda, H. Gullapalli, M. Dubey, P. M. 
Ajayan, ACS Nano 2010, 4, 63376342. 
[65] D. Usachov, O. Vilkov, A. Grneis, D. Haberer, A. Fedorov, V. K. Adamchuk, A. 
B. Preobrajenski, P. Dudin, A. Barinov, M. Oehzelt, C. Laubschat, D. V. Vyalikh, 
Nano Lett. 2011, 11, 54015407. 
[66] Z. H. Sheng, L. Shao, J. J. Chen, W. J. Bao, F. Bin Wang, X. H. Xia, ACS Nano 
2011, 5, 43504358. 
[67] G. H. Jun, S. H. Jin, B. Lee, B. H. Kim, W. S. Chae, S. H. Hong, S. Jeon, Energy 
Environ. Sci. 2013, 6, 30003006. 
[68] P. Wu, Z. Cai, Y. Gao, H. Zhang, C. Cai, Chem. Commun. 2011, 47, 11327
11329. 
[69] L. Sun, L. Wang, C. Tian, T. Tan, Y. Xie, K. Shi, M. Li, H. Fu, RSC Adv. 2012, 2, 
44984506. 
[70] K. A. Mkhoyan, A. W. Contryman, J. Silcox, D. A. Stewart, G. Eda, C. Mattevi, S. 
Miller, M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 10581063. 
[71] D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski, R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2010, 39, 
228240. 
[72] Z. W. Liu, F. Peng, H. J. Wang, H. Yu, W. X. Zheng, J. Yang, Angew. Chemie 
Int. Ed. 2011, 50, 32573261. 
[73] H. Gao, Z. Liu, L. Song, W. Guo, W. Gao, L. Ci, A. Rao, W. Quan, R. Vajtai, P. 
M. Ajayan, Nanotechnology 2012, 23, 17. 
[74] I. Y. Jeon, S. Zhang, L. Zhang, H. J. Choi, J. M. Seo, Z. Xia, L. Dai, J. B. Baek, 
Adv. Mater. 2013, 25, 61386145. 
[75] M. Kan, Y. Li, Q. Sun, WIREs Comput. Mol .Sci. 2016, 6, 6582. 
[76] M. Sugie, H. Takeo, C. Matsumura, Chem. Phys. Lett. 1979, 64, 573575. 
[77] K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, H. Kanda, Nat. Mater. 2004, 3, 404409. 
[78] L. Liu, Z. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett. 2009, 95, 252104. 
 Chapter 1 
[79] L. Ci, L. Song, C. Jin, D. Jariwala, D. Wu, Y. Li, A. Srivastava, Z. F. Wang, K. 
Storr, L. Balicas, F. Liu, P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater. 2010, 9, 430435. 
[80] G. Bepete, D. Voiry, M. Chhowalla, Z. Chiguvare, N. J. Coville, Nanoscale 2013, 
5, 65526557. 
[81] C. Huang, C. Chen, M. Zhang, L. Lin, X. Ye, S. Lin, M. Antonietti, X. Wang, Nat. 
Commun. 2015, 7698. 
[82] C. Chen, K. Guo, Y. Zhu, F. Wang, W. Zhang, H. Qi, Appl. Mater. Interfaces 
2019, 11, 3324533253. 
[83] Y. Gao, Y. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Li, M. Liu, T. Gao, D. Ma, Y. Chen, Z. Cheng, X. 
Qiu, W. Duan, Z. Liu, Nano Lett. 2013, 13, 34393443. 
[84] L. Liu, J. Park, D. A. Siegel, K. F. McCarty, K. W. Clark, W. Deng, L. Basile, J. C. 
Idrobo, A. Li, G. Gu, Science 2014, 343, 163167. 
[85] M. P. Levendorf, C. J. Kim, L. Brown, P. Y. Huang, R. W. Havener, D. A. Muller, 
J. Park, Nature 2012, 488, 627632. 
[86] D. Marinelli, F. Fasano, B. Najjari, N. Demitri, D. Bonifazi, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017, 139, 55035519. 
[87] N. Otero, C. Pouchan, P. Karamanis, J. Mater. Chem. C 2017, 5, 82738287. 
[88] N. Otero, K. E. El-Kelany, C. Pouchan, M. Rrat, P. Karamanis, Phys. Chem. 
Chem. Phys. 2016, 18, 2531525328. 
[89] H. I. Sirikumara, E. Putz, M. Al-Abboodi, T. Jayasekera, Sci. Rep. 2016, 6, 
19115. 
[90] A. J. V. Marwitz, M. H. Matus, L. N. Zakharov, D. A. Dixon, S. Y. Liu, Angew. 
Chemie Int. Ed. 2009, 48, 973977. 
[91] X. Zheng, G. E. Herberich, Organometallics 2000, 19, 37513753. 
[92] M. J. S. Dewar, V. P. Kubba, R. Pettit, J. Chem. Soc. 1958, 30733076. 
[93] M. J. D. Bosdet, C. A. Jaska, W. E. Piers, T. S. Sorensen, M. Parvez, Org. Lett. 
2007, 9, 13951398. 
[94] A. Abengzar, D. Sucunza, P. Garca-Garca, D. Sampedro, A. Prez-Redondo, 
J. J. Vaquero, J. Org. Chem. 2019, 84, 71137122. 
[95] S. S. Chissick, M. J. S. Dewar, P. M. Maitlis, Tetrahedron Lett. 1960, 1, 810. 
[96] M. J. D. Bosdet, W. E. Piers, T. S. Sorensen, M. Parvez, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
2007, 46, 49404943. 
[97] D. J. H. Emslie, W. E. P. Piers, M. Parvez, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2003, 42, 
12511255. 
[98] C. A. Jaska, D. J. H. Emslie, M. J. D. Bosdet, W. E. Piers, T. S. Sorensen, M. 
Parvez, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128, 1088510896. 
[99] T. Kaehler, M. Bolte, H. Lerner, M. Wagner, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed 2019, 131, 
1150111506. 
[100] M. Numano, N. Nagami, S. Nakatsuka, T. Katayama, Chem. A Eur. J. 2016, 22, 
1157411577. 
[101] X. Wang, F. Zhang, K. S. Schellhammer, P. Machata, F. Ortmann, G. Cuniberti, 
Y. Fu, J. Hunger, R. Tang, A. A. Popov, R. Berger, K. Mllen, X. Feng, J. Am. 
 Chapter 1 
Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 1160611615. 
[102] J. Tasseroul, M. M. Lorenzo-Garcia, J. Dosso, F. Simon, S. Velari, A. De Vita, P. 
Tecilla, D. Bonifazi, J. Org. Chem. 2020, 85, 3454-3464. 
[103] M. Fingerle, C. Maichle-Mssmer, S. Schundelmeier, B. Speiser, H. F. Bettinger, 
Org. Lett. 2017, 19, 44284431. 
[104] M. Fingerle, H. F. Bettinger, Chem. Commun. 2020, 56, 38473850. 
[105] M. Fingerle, S. Stocker, H. F. Bettinger, Synthesis 2019, 51, 41474152. 
[106] K. Matsui, S. Oda, K. Yoshiura, K. Nakajima, N. Yasuda, T. Hatakeyama, J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 11951198. 
[107] T. Hatakeyama, S. Hashimoto, S. Seki, M. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 
133, 1861418617. 
[108] Y. Kondo, K. Yoshiura, S. Kitera, H. Nishi, S. Oda, H. Gotoh, Y. Sasada, M. 
Yanai, T. Hatakeyama, Nat. Photonics 2019, 13, 678682. 
[109] Y. Fu, H. Yang, Y. Gao, L. Huang, R. Berger, J. Liu, H. Lu, Z. Cheng, S. Du, H.-
J. Gao, X. Feng, Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 2020, 59, 88738879. 
[110] D. Bonifazi, F. Fasano, M. M. Lorenzo-garcia, D. Marinelli, J. Tasseroul, Chem. 
Commun. 2015, 51, 1522215236. 
[111] R. Boese, A. H. Maulitz, P. Stellberg, Chem. Ber. 1994, 127, 18871889. 
[112] A. Katrusiak, M. Podsiado, A. Budzianowski, Cryst. Growth Des. 2010, 10, 
34613465. 
[113] R. Islas, E. Chamorro, J. Robles, T. Heine, J. C. Santos, G. Merino, Struct. 
Chem. 2007, 18, 833839. 
[114] R. A. Iwaki, T. Udagawa, Chem. Phys. Lett. 2020, 745, 137271. 
[115] A. Stock, E. Pohland, Berichte der Dtsch. Chem. Gesellschaft 1926, 59, 2215
2223. 
[116] A. Meller, E. Schaschel, Inorg. Nucl. Chem. Lett. 1966, 2, 4143. 
[117] T. Wideman, L. G. Sneddon, Inorg. Chem. 1995, 34, 10021003. 
[118] G. W. Schaeffer, R. Schaeffer, H. I. Schlesinger, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1951, 73, 
16121614. 
[119] A. J. Leffler, Inorg. Chem. 1964, 3, 145146. 
[120] C. A. Jaska, K. Temple, A. J. Lough, I. Manners, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2003, 125, 
94249434. 
[121] C. A. Brown, A. W. Laubengayer, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1955, 77, 36993700. 
[122] R. G. Jones, C. R. Kinney, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1939, 61, 13781381. 
[123] J. H. Smalley, S. F. Stafiej, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1959, 81, 582586. 
[124] S. J. Groszos, S. F. Stafiej, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1958, 80, 13571360. 
[125] A. Wakamiya, T. Ide, S. Yamaguchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 14859
14866. 
[126] T. E. Reich, S. Behera, K. T. Jackson, P. Jena, H. M. El-Kaderi, J. Mater. Chem. 
2012, 22, 1352413528. 
 Chapter 1 
[127] T. E. Reich, K. T. Jackson, S. Li, P. Jena, H. M. El-Kaderi, J. Mater. Chem. 
2011, 21, 1062910632. 
[128] P. Paetzold, Phosphorus. Sulfur. Silicon Relat. Elem. 1994, 93, 3950. 
[129] J. Hahn, M. Krieg, C. Keck, C. Maichle-Mssmer, R. F. Fink, H. F. Bettinger, 
Dalt. Trans. 2018, 47, 1730417316. 
[130] H. Watanabe, T. Totani, T. Yoshizaki, Inorg. Chem. 1965, 4, 657660. 
[131] R. J. Brotherton, A. L. McCloskey, Adv. Chem. 1964, 42, 131138. 
[132] I. B. Atkinson, D. C. Blundell, D. B. Clapp, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 1972, 34, 3037
3041. 
[133] K. Nagasawa, Inorg. Chem. 1966, 5, 442445. 
[134] S. Kervyn, O. Fenwick, F. Di Stasio, Y. S. Shin, J. Wouters, G. Accorsi, S. 
Osella, D. Beljonne, F. Cacialli, D. Bonifazi, Chem. Eur. J. 2013, 19, 77717779. 
[135] C. Tnshoff, M. Mller, T. Kar, F. Latteyer, T. Chass, K. Eichele, H. F. 
Bettinger, ChemPhysChem. 2012, 13, 11731181. 
[136] M. Mller, S. Behnle, C. Maichle-Mssmer, H. F. Bettinger, Chem. Commun. 
2014, 50, 78217823. 
[137] J. A. Snyder, P. Grninger, H. F. Bettinger, A. E. Bragg, J. Phys. Chem. A 2017, 
121, 83598367. 
[138] M. Krieg, F. Reicherter, P. Haiss, M. Strbele, K. Eichele, M. J. Treanor, R. 
Schaub, H. F. Bettinger, Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 2015, 54, 82848286. 
[139] S. Biswas, M. Mller, C. Tnshoff, K. Eichele, C. Maichle-Mssmer, A. Ruff, B. 
Speiser, H. F. Bettinger, Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2012, 24, 46344639. 
[140] C. Snchez-Snchez, S. Brller, H. Sachdev, K. Mllen, M. Krieg, H. F. 
Bettinger, A. Nicola, V. Meunier, L. Talirz, R. Fasel, P. Ruffieux, ACS Nano 
2015, 9, 92289235. 
[141] F. Ciccullo, A. Calzolari, M. Krieg, H. F. Bettinger, E. Magnano, T. Chasse, M. B. 
Casu, J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120, 1764517651. 
Chapter 2 
CHAPTER 2 
BORAZINE-DOPED NANOGRAPHENES: SYNTHESIS OF HEXA-
PERI-HEXABENZOBORAZINOCORONENE 
This chapter describes the synthesis of the first soluble borazine-doped nanographene 
(2-1), focusing on the various attempts made to synthesize this long-sought molecule. 
With the aim of obtaining the desired product, various carbon-carbon (CC) sp2 bond 
forming reactions have been tested on different halogen-functionalized borazines. 
Ultimately, the development of ortho functionalized borazines presenting two fluorine 
atoms on the boron bonded aryl rings allowed us to perform a Friedel-Crafts like CC 
bond formation using a silylium ion as reported by Siegel et al. This approach produced 
the desired product in a 5% yield along with partially cyclized by-product 2-33. 
Theoretical studies gave an insight on the reaction mechanism and allowed for the 
design of a borazine derivative presenting one fluorine on each aryl ring (2-34) leading 
to increased yields and to the isolation of unprecedented B3N2O doped PAH 2-38. 
Finally, different silylium ion reagents were tested and the suitability of the reaction 
conditions for different functional groups was investigated offering a complete set of 
tools for the synthesis of borazine-doped nanographenes. 
The chapter is divided in 14 main sections: i) section 2.1 presents the aim of the 
project; ii) section 2.2 describes previous approaches towards the synthesis of a 
soluble derivative of hexa-peri-hexabenzoborazinocoronene (2-1); iii) section 2.3 
describes the use of ortho-functionalized borazines as precursors in the synthesis of 2-
1; iv) section 2.4 describes the CC bond forming reactions that can be used to obtain 2-
1 starting from halogen hexaaryl-borazines v) Section 2.5 displays the retrosynthetic 
approach towards 2-1 using halogen ortho-functionalized borazines; vi) section 2.6 
contains the synthesis of bromo hexaaryl-borazines; vii) section 2.7 contains the 
synthesis and planarization attempts on chloro hexaaryl-borazines; viii) section 2.8 
contains the synthesis and planarization attempts on fluoro hexaaryl-borazines; ix) 
Section 2.9 presents theoretical studies on reaction mechanism along with an 
optimization of reaction conditions; x) Section 2.10 contains the synthesis of non-
functionalised HBBNC 1-1; xi) Section 2.11 presents studies on the effect of different 
weakly coordinating anions (WCA) on the reaction outcome; xii) Section 2.12 presents 
planarization attempts on fluoro hexaaryl-borazines presenting different functional 
groups; xiii) Section 2.13 presents some conclusions and perspectives for future work; 
xiv) Section 2.14 contains references for the chapter. 
Chapter 2 
The research work described in sections 2.1-2.12 was carried out at Cardiff university. 
X-Ray analysis was performed by D. Marinelli and N. Biot (Cardiff University) and N. 
Demitri (Elettra-Sincrotrone, Basovizza, Trieste, Italy). Photophysical characterization 
was carried out by Dr. A. Fermi and T. Battisti. (Cardiff University) Computational 
investigations were performed by T. Battisti and B. D. Ward (Cardiff University), powder 
X-Ray diffraction was performed by K. D. M. Harris and C. Hughes (Cardiff University). 
Part of the work reported in this chapter has been published in the following articles: 
Dosso, J.; Tasseroul, J.; Fasano, F.; Marinelli, D.; Biot, N.; Fermi, A.; Bonifazi, D. 
Synthesis and Optoelectronic Properties of Hexa-peri-hexabenzoborazinocoronene. 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 44834487. 
Dosso, J.; Battisti T.; Ward B. D.; Demitri, N.; Hughes C.; Williams P.A.; Harris K. D. 
M.; Bonifazi, D. Boronnitrogendoped nanographenes: a synthetic tale from borazine 
precursors. Chem. A Eur. J. 2020, 26, 6608-6621. 
Chapter 2 
2.1 Aim of the project 
Representing the archetypal borazine-doped nanographene and the smallest unit of a 
borazine-doped graphene, elusive hexa-peri-hexabenzoborazinocoronene (1-1) has 
been at the centre of an extensive synthetic effort. To the best of our knowledge, the 
synthesis of this molecule has been achieved only with surface chemistry and a 
thermolytic approach, in both cases using hexaphenyl-borazine (1-65) derivatives as 
starting materials. The low yields and unpractical syntheses together with the very low 
solubility of 1-1, contributed to the low amount of experimental data available for this 
molecule. This work aims at the obtainment of a soluble and thus fully characterizable 
derivative of 1-1, resulting in an experimental confirmation of theoretical studies 
performed on this molecule. To form the desired soluble 2-1 using a solution-based 
synthesis, different strategies involving borazines as starting materials need to be 
investigated. From this point of view, borazines bearing ortho-functional groups able to 
undergo CC bond formation under the right conditions, represent the best approach 
towards a solution-based synthesis of 2-1 derivatives (Scheme 2.1). Consequently, a 
thorough study on the stability and reactivity of ortho-functionalized borazines needs to 
be carried out since many of these derivatives have never been prepared before. 
Theoretical investigations will be carried out to understand the reaction mechanisms 
and different starting materials, reagents and functional groups will be tested to reach a 
reliable procedure towards the synthesis of 2-1, 1-1 and various functionalized 
derivatives. The result of this work will be a complete investigation of the reaction 
conditions to form HBBNC derivatives.  
Scheme 2.1: General scheme towards the synthesis of soluble 2-1. 
Chapter 2 
2.2 Previous work towards the synthesis of 2-1 
In order to synthesise a soluble derivative of HBBNC (2-1) different approaches relying 
on the formation of BN, BC and CC bonds have been attempted in our group as well as 
others, as highlighted in Scheme 2.2.  
Scheme 2.2: Previous solution-based attempts towards synthesis of 2-1. 
In our group, the synthesis of amino-spherand derivative 2-3 was initially attempted 
(Path A), relying on a final electrophilic borylation to give 2-1. Despite some initial 
success in the synthesis of various intermediate products, the extremely complicated 
synthesis of 2-3, based on multiple cross-coupling reactions and 
protection/deprotection steps, resulted in very low yields, ultimately making impossible 
to obtain desired 2-3. This result required a change in the synthetic strategy and a 
synthesis involving the coupling of NBN and BNB fragments 2-6 and 2-5 (Path B) was 
attempted. This strategy relied on the formation of two BN and two CC bonds to give 
the final 2-1. However, despite the successful synthesis of fragment 2-6, the difficulties 
encountered in the synthesis of BNB derivative 2-5 along with the difficult coupling 
between the poorly reactive N-H moieties and the hydrolysis prone BCl made 
impossible to obtain 2-1. At this point, the only options remaining were represented by 
the formation of three (Path C) or six (Path D) CC bonds on a preformed borazine 
derivative. In path A, an attempt to form the missing three CC bonds on a borazino 
triphenylene derivative was carried out by Bettinger and co-workers. In this case, the 
Chapter 2 
strained starting material 2-7 is prone to hydrolysis and all attempts involving irradiation 
failed, leading only to partially planarized derivatives. To avoid the use of stained 
starting materials, the formation of six CC bonds starting from ortho functionalized 
hexaaryl-borazine derivatives (2-9) can be envisaged (pathway D). In this approach, 
borazines bearing ortho functional groups able to undergo CC bond formation reactions 
are used as starting materials for the synthesis of HBBNC derivatives. A careful choice 
of the ortho functional groups is necessary, since a balance between reactivity in the 
planarization reaction and stability of the borazine is required. To address these points, 
an investigation on the synthesis and planarization of ortho functionalised borazines 
needs to be carried out. 
2.3 Ortho-functionalized borazines as precursors in the BN-
doped nanographenes synthesis 
To obtain the desired soluble 2-1 a careful design of the starting borazines is required. 
Generally, hexaaryl-borazine derivatives are synthesized following the synthetic route 
displayed in Scheme 2.3. In this synthesis, aniline 1-60 is treated with BCl3 in refluxing 
toluene to give chloro-borazole 1-50. Subsequent treatment of 1-50 with an 
organometallic reagent (ArLi or ArMgX) results in a substitution reaction on the boron 
atoms giving the desired hexaaryl-borazines. 
Scheme 2.3: General synthesis towards stable ortho-functionalized hexaaryl-borazine 
derivative 4-8. Effects of steric parameters on reaction outcome are also reported. 
Chapter 2 
To obtain moisture stable easy to handle hexaaryl-borazines, it is necessary to 
sterically shield the boron centres. In fact, parent molecule 1-65 (R = H) is known to 
undergo nucleophilic attack at the boron resulting in degradation of the BN ring with 
formation of phenyl boronic acid and aniline.[1,2] The instability of 1-65 arises from the 
lack of conjugation between the  system of the phenyl rings and the empty p orbital 
on boron, resulting in a quite high Lewis acidity that makes the latter prone to 
nucleophilic attack. 
Further confirmation of this, comes from the pioneering work of Groszos and Stafiej,[3] 
who showed that stable borazines are obtained when electron donating groups such as 
alkyl chains are bonded to the boron instead of phenyl groups. This is due to the 
diminished Lewis acidity of the boron atoms determined by the sp3 carbon electron 
donating effect, resulting in borazines stable enough to be handled in air without 
moisture-free techniques. Oppositely, steric protection of boron is necessary to obtain 
stable derivatives of hexaaryl-borazines. Consequently, it is necessary to synthesize 
hexaaryl-borazines presenting ortho substituents (R, Scheme 2.3) able to protect the 
boron centres and at the same time act as leaving groups during the CC bond 
formation leading to 2-1.  
Focusing on the size of the ortho substituents, it is important to underline that too bulky 
groups (R = i-Pr, t-Bu, scheme 2.3) will not allow the formation of the borazine core 
due to the impossibility for six large groups to fit on the borazine together. As a general 
rule, ortho substituents presenting a steric hindrance equal or lower than the methyl 
group (Van der Waals radius = ca. 2.0 )[4] lead to the formation of hexaaryl-borazines. 
When the steric hindrance is higher, hydroxyl borazine 2-13 can be formed, but only if 
four groups can fit on the core, otherwise only N-phenyl boramines would be obtained 
(2-14, Scheme 2.3). Knowing this, to obtain stable borazines with ortho substituents 
able to act as leaving groups in CC bond formation reactions, it was decided to attempt 
the synthesis of hexaaryl-borazines presenting halogens as ortho functional groups. 
We considered that the van der Waals radii of bromine, chlorine and fluorine (vdW radii 
of 1.92 , 1.77  and 1.47  respectively),[5] which are less than the reported value for 
the methyl group, should result in the formation of stable borazines.[6] Moreover, the 
presence of the halogens (in particular chlorine and bromine) allows for the use of 
many different reaction conditions able to give CC bond formation. Indeed, several 
reactions have been exploited to form PAHs using chlorinated, brominated, and 
fluorinated precursors, which could be used to obtain 2-1 starting from halogenated 
borazines. 
Chapter 2 
2.4 Synthetic strategies for planarization of ortho-halo 
borazines 
When halogen precursors are considered, strategies involving different conditions and 
halogens have been used to form CC bonds. The use of Pd-catalysed reactions 
starting from C-X bonds (X = Cl, Br) and un-functionalized C-H bonds is very promising 
(Scheme 2.4a).[7,8] This approach has been extensively used in the synthesis of PAHs 
(Scheme 2.4a) and generally combines high yields with controlled reaction conditions. 
This approach could be used on bromo and chloro hexaaryl-borazines to form 2-1 with 
high yields and in a scalable manner.  
Scheme 2.4: examples of reactions able to induce CC bond on triphenylene model with 
synthetic potential in the synthesis of 2-1 using ortho-halogenated borazines. 
Another possible approach relies on photoreactions, since different conditions have 
been developed on halogenated polyphenylene systems leading to PAH formation. 
From this point of view, notable work has been performed by Morin and co-workers 
who developed a cyclodehydrochlorination (CDHC) reaction under UV light irradiation 
on various chlorine-functionalized polyphenylenes, yielding the corresponding PAHs in 
very high yields (Scheme 2.4b).[9] This reaction is reported as a 6 e  electrocyclization 
followed by elimination of HCl (Scheme 2.5) and it should avoid problems related to 
radical pathways such as rearrangements with formation of complex mixtures. 
Scheme 2.5: Mechanism of CDHC reaction as reported by Morin et al.[10] 
Chapter 2 
When fluoro-functionalized borazines are considered, the lower reactivity of the C-F 
bond contributes to make this option the most challenging. However, in the last 
decade, the branch of chemistry concerning C-F bonds has flourished, leading to many 
new reactions. In particular, CC sp2 bonds have been obtained starting from fluorinated 
polyphenylenes with various approaches, usually involving Friedel-Crafts like reactions 
using strong Lewis acids such as activated -alumina[11] and silylium ions[12] (Scheme 
2.4c). A silylium ion induced Friedel-Crafts like cyclisation of C-F bonds has been 
developed by Siegel and co-workers. In this reaction, triphenylene 2-18 is obtained in 
almost quantitative yield by treating 2-17 with silylium ion reagent 2-22 (Scheme 2.6).  
Scheme 2.6: Reaction mechanism for silylium ion induced Friedel-Crafts like CC bond 
formation starting from fluoro-arenes.[13] 
In the mechanism, the C-F bond is activated by carborane stabilized silylium ion 2-22 
leading to the formation of Wheland intermediate 2-17d. The latter undergoes re-
aromatization leading to the formation of CC sp2 bonds in 2-18 as displayed in Scheme 
2.6.[13] In this procedure dimethyldimesitylsilane 2-19 is used as a Bronsted base to 
scavenge the acidic proton on 2-17d and thus rearomatizing the system to give 2-18. 
Furthermore, the resulting protonated dimethyldimesithylsilane 2-19b in turn 
rearomatizes by breaking the weaker C-Si bond regenerating silylium ion 2-21, allowing 
the use of catalytic amounts of the expensive and difficult to synthesise 2-22. 
Chapter 2 
2.5 Retrosynthetic approach towards 2-1 
A retrosynthetic strategy towards 2-1 was then designed and is presented in Scheme 
2.7. In this strategy, target molecule 2-1 can be synthesised by planarizing ortho 
halogen hexaaryl-borazines using CC bond forming reactions involving halogen 
substituents (see paragraph 2.4). The desired halogenated hexaaryl-borazines can be 
in turn obtained by treating chloro-borazole 2-24 with suitable organolithium reagents. 
Finally, 2-24 can be synthesised by reacting aniline 2-10 bearing a xylene solubilizing 
moiety with BCl3 in refluxing toluene.  
Scheme 2.7: Retrosynthetic plan towards soluble HBBNC derivative 2-1. 
2.6 Bromo Hexaaryl-borazine 
The synthesis of the bromo hexaaryl-borazine 2-25 was then started (Scheme 2.8). In 
this procedure, LDA in THF at -84 C was used to obtain organolithium reagent 2-28 
starting from 1,3-dibromobenzene.[14] Notably, the use of LDA instead of the more 
common n-BuLi was necessary to avoid the halogen-lithium exchange with bromine 
and therefore obtaining the desired metalation with formation of 2-28. Low temperature 
with no excess of LDA was required to avoid rearrangements such as halogen-dance 
reactions, and LiBr elimination resulting in benzyne derivatives.[14,15]  In order to obtain 
a less hindered system and more general results, instead of aniline 2-10, 1-60 was 
used in this reaction. 1-60 was then treated with BCl3 in refluxing toluene and the 
resulting chloro-borazole 1-50 reacted with aryl-lithium derivative 2-28. Hydroxy-
borazine 2-29 was obtained from the reaction as the only product in a 51% yield and its 
structure confirmed by SC-XRD (Figure 2.1). 
Chapter 2 
BCl3,
THF,-84 C 
to r.t., 24h.
NH2 B
Br Br1-60
2-29, 51%
2-25, 0%
toluene, 
reflux, 
Scheme 2.8: Synthesis of borazines 2-25. 
The absence of 2-25 or degradation products in the mixture suggests that this result is 
plausibly due to steric hindrance effects, which make impossible to place six bromine 
atoms on the borazine core. Since van der Waals values suggest that six bromine 
atoms should fit on the borazine core, this result might be related to the steric 
hindrance of the lithium reagent. Indeed, coordination and formation of aggregates is a 
common feature of organolithium derivatives and in this case, 2-28 might be forming 
bulky aggregates with diisopropylamine and THF resulting in the exclusive formation of 
hydroxy-borazine 2-29.  
Figure 2.1: Crystal structure of derivative 2-29; a) molecular structure, b) capped sticks crystal 
structure, c) spacefill crystal structure. Space group: P-1. Crystals obtained from slow 
evaporation of a CH2Cl2 solution. Colour code: grey: C, pink: B, blue: N, red: O and brown: Br. H 
atoms omitted for clarity. 
In order to establish whether the use of LDA was accountable for the formation of 2-29 
and to obtain the desired borazine 2-25b, aniline 2-10, was refluxed with BCl3 and the 
resulting chloro-borazole reacted with aryl-lithium 2-28, obtained by treating 1-iodo-2,6-
dibromobenzene with t-BuLi at -84 C. 
Br Br
toluene, 
reflux, 18h.
THF,-84 C 
to r.t., 24h.
2-25b
BCl3,
Scheme 2.9: Synthesis of borazines 2-25 using t-BuLi. 
Chapter 2 
As a result, no borazine was formed suggesting an inefficient halogen-lithium exchange 
(Scheme 2.9). At this point, a final reaction to assess the effect of LDA on borazine 
formation was carried out (Scheme 2.10). In this case the metalation with LDA was 
carried out on 1,2,4,6-tetrachlorobenzene to understand if the formation of hydroxy 
borazine was ascribable to the use of LDA or to the presence of the bromine atoms on 
2-28. 
Lithium reagent 2-28b was then formed by treating 1,2,4,6-tetrachlorobenzene with 
LDA at -84 C for 30 min. Aniline 1-60 was refluxed with BCl3 in toluene forming chloro-
borazole 1-50 which was then reacted with 2-28b. Again, only the hydroxy-borazine 
derivative 2-25c was obtained in a 43% yield.  
Scheme 2.10: Synthesis of borazines 2-25c using LDA. 
This result strengthens the hypothesis that in the case of borazine 2-25 the selective 
formation of hydroxy-derivative 2-29 is related to the use of LDA and possibly to the 
formation of aggregates involving diisopropylamine. Altogether, these results prompted 
us to move towards the synthesis of chloro-borazine derivative 2-26.  
2.7 Chloro Hexaaryl-borazine 
Since all the attempted strategies to form bromo-functionalized borazines failed, we 
decided to synthesize chloro-derivative 2-26 (Scheme 2.11).  
Scheme 2.11: Synthesis of borazine 2-26. 
Aniline 2-10 was reacted with BCl3 in refluxing toluene and the resulting chloro-
borazole treated with aryl-lithium derivative 2-30 which had been obtained via halogen-
Chapter 2 
lithium exchange using n-BuLi on 1-bromo-2,6-dichlorobenzene in THF at -84 C 
(Scheme 2.11). Temperature control is extremely important in order to avoid 
nucleophilic substitution reactions on carbons bearing Cl substituents, which are known 
to occur above -45 C.[16] The reaction resulted in the formation of desired product 2-
26, although with a modest 8% yield due to the formation of unexpected derivative 2-
31. Crystal structure analysis confirmed the structure of borazine 2-26, displaying an 
orthogonal arrangement of the peripheral aryl groups with respect to the borazine ring, 
with tilting angles of almost 90  for both nitrogen and boron bonded aryl rings (87.37  
and 88.47 average, Figure 2.2).  
Figure 2.2: Crystal structure of derivative 2-26; a) molecular structure, b) capped sticks crystal 
structure, c) spacefill crystal structure. Space group: P-1. Crystals obtained from MeOH 
diffusion in CH2Cl2. Colour code: grey: C, pink: B, blue: N, red: O and green: Cl. H atoms 
omitted for clarity. 
As previously stated, while purifying borazine 2-26, derivative 2-31 (Figure 2.3) was 
also isolated as the only other product in a 14% yield, which can be linked to the low 
yield observed for 2-26.  
Figure 2.3: Crystal structure of derivative 2-31; a) molecular structure, b) capped sticks crystal 
structure, c) spacefill crystal structure. Space group: P 21/c. Crystals obtained from MeOH 
diffusion in CHCl3. Colour code: grey: C, pink: B, blue: N, red: O and green: Cl. H atoms omitted 
for clarity. 
The formation of unexpected derivative 2-31 might be attributed to the low reactivity of 
organolithium 2-30. In fact, the presence of the two chlorine atoms ortho to the C-Li 
Chapter 2 
bond determines a decrease in the overall nucleophilicity of the reagent, resulting in a 
competition between unreacted n-BuLi and 2-30. 
Having managed to synthesise 2-26, the planarization of this derivative was then 
attempted using the CDHC reaction under UV irradiation. Since 2-26 was poorly 
soluble in decaline and acetonitrile (the most common solvents for this reaction), dry 
degassed acetone was used (scheme 2.12).  
h, 254 nm, Acetone
2-26 2-1
Scheme 2.12: Attempted synthesis of 2-1 using UV irradiation (254 nm) to induce a CDHC 
reaction as reported by Morin et al. 
The resulting solution of 2-26 in acetone was irradiated in a sealed quartz tube at 254 
nm for 48 h in a Luzchem reactor. TLC analysis of the reaction showed a very 
complex mixture of products, which was analysed with MALDI mass spectroscopy 
(Figure 2.4). 
Figure 2.4: LR-MALDI mass analysis spectrum of reaction mixture after 48 h irradiation of 2-26 
at 254 nm. 
From the mass spectrum it is clearly visible the formation of partially planarized 
derivative 2-6, however, no trace of 2-1 was observed. Despite the inability to form the 
desired product, the formation of two CC bonds suggests that the reaction is working to 
some extent but, probably due to a low quantum yield of bond formation, it does not 
Chapter 2 
lead to the final product. This ultimately results in hydrolysis of the partially planarized 
intermediates upon quenching. Furthermore, the presence of acetone as sensitizing 
solvent, which is in a triplet state at 254 nm, could result in a different mechanism of 
reaction, possibly a radical one, arising from a homolytic cleavage of C-Cl bonds. This 
would be consistent with the complex reaction mixture observed. These considerations, 
along with the low solubilities of borazine derivatives in the solvents required by this 
kind of reactions led to a change of strategy. The synthesis of 2-1 was then attempted 
by palladium catalysed C-H bond activation, which is a valuable option to form aromatic 
CC bonds starting from aromatic C-Cl and C-H bonds (Scheme 2.13).  
Scheme 2.13: Attempted synthesis of 2-1 using Pd catalysed C-H activation reaction on 
borazine 2-26. 
Borazine 2-26 was then treated with [PdCl2(PCy3)2] and DBU in dry DMF under N2 at 
160 C for 36 h. Even in this case, the target molecule was not obtained and only 
starting material or degradation products were visible from TLC analysis. This outcome 
is probably determined by an inefficient oxidative addition, while the presence of DBU 
and high temperature can be linked to the degradation of part of the starting material 
due to nucleophilic attack on the boron atom.  
This initial set of attempts suggested that UV promoted C-Cl bond activation and cross-
coupling conditions are not suitable for the synthesis of 2-1 prompting us to move on C-
F bonds. 
2.8 Fluoro Hexaaryl-borazine 
Since all attempts to planarize derivative 2-26 failed, we decided to attempt the 
synthesis and planarization of fluoro hexaaryl-borazine 2-27 (Scheme 2.14). Xylyl 
aniline 2-10 was reacted with BCl3 and the resulting chloro-borazole intermediate 
treated with aryl-lithium 2-32 resulting in the formation of borazine 2-27 in a 42% yield. 
Notably, it is necessary to keep low temperatures (-84 C) during both the lithium-
halogen exchange and the subsequent reaction of 2-32 with the chloro-borazole to 
avoid the formation of undesired benzyne intermediates, which would result in the 
formation of triphenylenes.  
Chapter 2 
BCl3,
THF,-84 C 
to r.t., 24h.
2-27, 42%
toluene, 
reflux, 
Scheme 2.14: Synthesis of borazine 2-27. 
As for the previous cases, the molecular structure of molecule 2-27 was confirmed by 
SC-XRD, as shown in Figure 2.5. When the crystal structure of 2-27 is compared to the 
one of 2-26, a smaller tilting of the side rings (67.10  to 80.16 ) is visible, resulting in a 
propeller-like arrangement of the fluorine atoms. Borazine 2-27 is stable in solution or 
when stored under air, probably because of the high electronegativity of the fluorine 
atoms, which generate a hydrophobic pocket on the borazine ring shielding boron 
atoms from moisture. However, when derivative 2-27 is treated with strong bases, 
fluoride sources or, more in general, nucleophiles, degradation of the borazine occurs, 
thus restricting possible planarization reactions to Lewis acid conditions.  
Figure 2.5: Crystal structure of derivative 2-27; a) molecular structure, b) capped sticks crystal 
structure, c) spacefill crystal structure. Space group: P21/c. Crystals obtained from MeOH 
diffusion in CH2Cl2. Colour code: grey: C, pink: B, blue: N, red: O and yellow: F. H atoms 
omitted for clarity. 
Having obtained desired borazine 2-27, the synthesis of HBBNC 2-1 was attempted 
using activated -alumina as reported by K.Y. Ashmarov and co-workers (Scheme 
2.15).[11] In this procedure the strong Lewis acidity and fluorophilicity of the Aluminium 
active sites on the surface of -alumina is used to cleave C-F bonds leading to the 
formation of CC bonds and consequent elimination of HF. -alumina was then activated 
by heating at 250 C under air for 10 min. followed by 370 C for 2 h under vacuum. 
Borazine 2-27 was added to activated alumina and reacted at 200 C under vacuum for 
18 h. Despite the harsh reaction conditions and high Lewis acidity of -alumina, even in 
Chapter 2 
this case only starting 2-27 was recovered. A stronger activation of -alumina at 550 C 
under N2 flow did not improve the reaction outcome. This result can be probably related 
to quenching of the active sites by the nitrogen of the borazine ring via its adsorption on 
the surface of alumina. An indication of this comes from the exclusive use of this 
reaction for PAH scaffolds, which suggests a possible incompatibility with molecules 
bearing Lewis basic sites. 
Scheme 2.15: Attempted synthesis of 2-1 using activated -alumina as Lewis acid. 
Given these results, we decided to attempt the synthesis of 2-1 using the procedure 
developed by Siegel et al. employing silylium ions as strong Lewis acids with high 
fluorophilicity and low affinity for nitrogen in a homogeneous phase reaction (Paragraph 
2.4). Borazine 2-27 was then treated with carborane stabilized silylium ion 2-22 in the 
presence of dimethyldimesitylsilane 2-19 in anhydrous PhCl at 110 C, leading to the 
formation of the desired 2-1 in a 5% yield (61% per CC bond formation, Scheme 2.16) 
as a white powder soluble in CH2Cl2.[17] 
Scheme 2.16: Synthetic procedure towards the formation of 2-1 and by-product 2-33. 
HBBNC derivative 2-1 was characterized with NMR, UV-Vis (Chapter 3), SC-XRD 
(Figure 2.6) and HRMS. In particular, the latter led to the first identification of the 
molecule due to the peak corresponding to the molecular ion at m/z 837.3652 
(C60H42B3N3+, calc.: 837.3658).  
Chapter 2 
Figure 2.6: Crystal structure of derivative 2-1; Space group: I2/a. Crystals obtained from i-PrOH 
diffusion in C6H6. Colour code: grey: C, pink: B, blue: N. H atoms omitted for clarity. 
When the crystal structure of 2-1 is considered, the presence of the central borazine is 
confirmed along with an almost planar structure, with some distortion visible probably 
due to the presence of the xylene groups. The BN bonds present lengths from 1.433(3) 
to 1.442(2) , slightly shorter than the ones found in h-BN (1.446 ). Along with 2-1, 
incomplete cyclisation product 2-33 was also isolated in a 17% yield (scheme 2.16). As 
for 2-1, confirmation of the structure of by-product 2-33 came from NMR, HRMS and 
especially SC-XRD (Figure 2.7), with the latter showing a distorted structure consistent 
with the presence of a cove region constituted by the incomplete BN ring.  
Figure 2.7: Crystal structure of derivative 2-33; a) Front view of 2-33 with BN distances b), c) 
front view and side view with axial enantiomers (M and P highlighted) of 2-33. Crystals obtained 
from i-PrOH diffusion in CH2Br2. Colour code: pink B, blue N, gray C; space group: P21/n. 
The free N-H groups at the edge of the BN system determine the steric hindrance 
leading to the distortion of the structure with a resulting 37  tilt between the two sides 
of the molecule. This distortion leads to the presence of two axial enantiomers in the 
crystal structure (Figure 2.7b, c). The observed BN bond lengths for 2-33 are 1.414(4)-
Chapter 2 
1.422(3)  for the BNH couple and 1.448(3)-1.454(4)  for the NBN fragment 
respectively, thus reflecting an effect of the distortion on the bond lenghts in the BN 
system. 
To explain the formation of 2-33 as major product and the low yield of 2-1 it was 
decided to perform computational studies to figure out the lowest energy intermediates 
for each step of the reaction (Figure 2.8). The structures and energies of the 
intermediates were computed using B3LYP hybrid functional[18] with a 6-31(d,p) basis 
set[19] on all centres with Gaussian 09.[20] The solvent (THF) was incorporated using the 
polarized continuum model, in which the molecular cavity is defined by the united atom 
model that incorporates hydrogen into the parent heavy atom.[21]  
Figure 2.8: Step wise Friedel-Crafts-based planarization mechanism according to route A. 
Calculated Gibbs free energies (G) for the possible intermediates formed at each cyclization 
step [B3LYP/6-31G(d,p)]. 
For the sake of clarity, the different intermediates are named 2-27ncx where n refers to 
the intermediate within the cyclization subset whereas cx corresponds to the cyclization 
step. After the first cyclization step only derivative 2-27c1 can be formed, presenting a 
phenanthrene portion. The following three steps in the cyclization reaction lead to 4 
Chapter 2 
possible intermediates each (subsets c2, c3 and c4) finally giving the single 
intermediate 2-27c5 for cyclization 5 and the final product 2-1 for cyclization 6. 
When the first set of intermediates (c2) is considered, it is possible to see that the 
lowest energy intermediate is represented by 2-27ac2 which is formed by reaction of the 
most conjugated part of 2-27c1 with one of the neighbouring rings, further extending the 
 system. The presence of intermediate 2-27ac2 was confirmed by the isolation of the 
resulting hydrolysis product 2-6. Similarly, in the third cyclization step, the lowest 
energy intermediate 2-27ac3 is again generated by reaction of the most extended  
system with the neighbouring ring and in this case the presence of the hydrolysis 
product 2-53 arising from 2-27ac3 was visible when the reaction mixtures were analysed 
by mass spectroscopy. When the fourth cyclization is considered, the most favoured 
intermediate is again the one with the most extended  system corresponding to 2-
27ac4, in which a ring with two fluorine atoms is left to planarize generating a strained 
intermediate. Hydrolysis of 2-27ac4 leads to the formation of 2-33, thus giving a 
theoretical explanation for the formation of this by-product in the reaction. Since 
evidence for the presence of 2-27c5 was never observed, cyclization six is probably 
very fast and this, along with the relatively high yield of 2-33, confirms the suspected 
rate determining nature of cyclization five.  
The higher stability of the more conjugated systems is quite intuitive; however, a more 
precise explanation can be achieved by using Natural Bond Orbital (NBO) analysis of 
starting borazine 2-27. From this point of view the presence of 3-centre 4-electron 
hyperbonds is noticed in the B3N3 core of 2-27, each centred on a NBN unit and 
described as a combination of a N-centred p orbital and a BN  bond as NB:NN:BN 
(Figure 2.9a) which describe a strongly delocalized structure.  
Figure 2.9: a) A 3-centre, 4-electron bond described by NBO analysis of precursor 5; b) NBO-
derived donor-acceptor interaction between a fluorine lone pair and an ipso carbon of the aryl 
group [B3LYP/6-31G(d,p)]. 
Chapter 2 
When a deviation from planarity occurs in the B3N3 core, less delocalized structures are 
obtained due to a loss of the hyperbonds, which are substituted by donor-acceptor 
interactions that involve the N-based occupied p orbitals and the B-based vacant p 
orbitals, thereby indicating a lesser degree of delocalization. It must be said that, 
however, deviation of the borazine ring from planarity does not always directly correlate 
with their relative free energies. As an example, intermediate 2-27cc2 (figure 2.9b) 
presents the greatest deviation from planarity (RMSD = 0.294 ; G = 44.6 kJ mol-1) 
in the 2-27ac22-27dc2 series but the higher energy intermediate in the subset is 
represented by 2-27dc2 (RMSD = 0.250 ; G = 48.4 kJ mol-1). This result arises from 
a stabilizing effect relating to the unlinked non-fluorinated aryl group in 2-27cc2 via two 
donor-acceptor interactions from the proximal fluorine lone pairs to a lone valence 
(vacant p orbital) on the ipso-carbon of the aryl moiety (Figure 2.9b). These analyses 
give an overall picture of the BN delocalization being the dominant factor in determining 
stability, but where comparatively minor stereoelectronic factors can have a significant 
contribution to the overall stability of intermediate species in the reaction process. 
2.9 Optimization of the reaction conditions 
Since the rate determining step for the previous mechanism proved to be the reaction 
of intermediate 2-27ac4, a good strategy towards an increased yield was to design a 
new borazine precursor which would avoid the formation of strained 2-27ac4. It was then 
decided to prepare a borazine with a different distribution of fluorine atoms on the aryl 
rings possibly resulting in different intermediates. Borazine 2-34, bearing one fluorine 
atom on each aryl ring was then prepared (Scheme 2.17). From the synthetic point of 
view, aniline 2-35 was treated with BCl3 in refluxing toluene and the resulting chloro-
borazole 2-36 reacted with 2-37 forming 2-34 as mixture of atropoisomers in a 36% 
yield.  
Scheme 2.17: Synthesis of borazine derivative 2-34 which is obtained as a mixture of 
atropoisomers. 
Final product 2-34 is composed by a mixture of 10 atropoisomers. This is determined 
by the fact that steric hindrance blocks rotation of the aryl moieties, resulting in 
Chapter 2 
configurations presenting different fluorine arrangements on each side of the borazine 
ring.  
Figure 2.10: 376 MHz 19F-NMR of derivative 2-34 in CDCl3. 
Evidence for this comes from the 19F-NMR of 2-34 reported in Figure 2.10, which 
shows two main groups of signals, corresponding to the fluorine substituents on the 
nitrogen bonded ring and to those on the boron ring, respectively. These two blocks of 
signals are constituted by multiple peaks with small variations in the chemical shift, 
ascribable to the different atropoisomers present in the mixture. Separation of the 
single atropoisomers of 2-34 was not possible with SCC, especially because the 
mixture proved to be somehow unstable if exposed to moisture for long periods of time.  
2-1, 15% 2-38, 4%
2-22, 2-19, PhCl, 110 C B
Scheme 2.18: Planarization reaction performed on 2-34 leading to the formation of derivatives 
2-1 and 2-38. 
This difference from 2-27 might arise from different degrees of steric protection of the 
borazine ring in the different atropoisomers, leading to degradation of the least stable 
Chapter 2 
ones. Consequently, the cyclization reaction was performed directly on the isomeric 
mixture using the previously reported conditions. Borazine 2-34 was treated with 
silylium ion 2-22 in the presence of dimethyldimesitylsilane 2-19 in degassed PhCl at 
110 C (Scheme 2.18) giving 2-1 in a 15% yield.  
Along with 2-1, molecule 2-38 was obtained as well in a low 4% yield and fully 
characterized. From the crystal structure of 2-38 the presence of the gulf region arising 
from the oxygen in the B3N2O ring is highlighted along with an almost planar structure 
with an average RMSD of 0.13(9) . The BN bond lengths are comprised between 
1.437(4) and 1.441(4)  while BO bond lengths are comprised between 1.386(4) and 
1.375(4) , very close to the distances measured for boric acid and phenyl boroxine[22] 
thus suggesting a small degree of  character for these bonds (Figure 2.11). 
Figure 2.11: Crystal structure of derivative 2-38; a) Front view of 2-38 with BN and BO 
distances. Colour code: pink B, blue N, gray C, red O. space group: P21/n, crystals obtained via 
diffusion of i-PrOH in CH2Br2 solution. 
The presence of this by-product, which is different from the ones obtained in cyclization 
of 2-27, suggests that this reaction follows a mechanism involving different 
intermediates compared to the one of 2-27. Moreover, 2-38 represents the first 
example of a B3N2O doped PAH, which plausibly arises from the insertion of an oxygen 
atom with loss of an aniline molecule from one of the intermediates of the reaction. To 
shed some light in the cyclization mechanism even in this case computational studies 
were performed (Figure 2.12).  
In this investigation, due to the high number of possible intermediates for cyclizations 
c2 (8) and c3 (14), only the last two cyclization steps c4 and c5 were analysed. Again, 
it can be hypothesized that the reaction proceeds stepwise with extension of the  
system. This finds confirmation in the fact that 2-34ac4 is the lowest energy intermediate 
for c4 and indeed constitutes the intermediate with the biggest  system between the 
different options. Furthermore, 2-34ac4 is the intermediate that most probably leads to 
2-38 via hydrolysis and loss of the fluorine atom still attached to the  system. 
However, further investigations are needed to unravel the possible source of hydride 
yielding the fluoride-hydrogen exchange reaction. When c5 is considered, two different 
intermediates are possible: 2-34ac5 and 2-34bc5, where the remaining fluorine is present 
either on a boron bonded ring or on the nitrogen bonded one. However, again, it was 
Chapter 2 
not possible to find evidence for these intermediates in any analysis, suggesting a fast 
reaction towards 2-1.  
Figure 2.12: Friedel-Crafts-based stepwise planarization mechanism according to route B. In 
this case, the calculated Gibbs free energies (G) of the intermediates intervening in the fourth 
and fifth cyclization steps are considered. The presence of different isomers in steps 1-3 
deterred us from tackling the calculation of all steps [B3LYP/6-31G(d,p)]. 
As a result of these studies it was confirmed that the cyclization reaction of 2-34 occurs 
with a different mechanism from that of 2-27. This difference in the mechanism could 
explain the higher yield of 2-1 and the presence of 2-38 as by-product in place of 2-33.  
Chapter 2 
2.10 Synthesis of unsubstituted HBBNC 1-1  
To prove the versatility of this new strategy, it was decided to perform the reaction on 
borazine 2-40 obtaining HBBNC 1-1. This system was chosen due to the low solubility 
of the final product which should determine a simple purification by consecutive 
washings of the final molecule, allowing for an easier assessment of the effects of 
different conditions on the reaction outcome.  
2-22, 2-19, PhCl, B
1-1, 18%
2-40, 53%
1) BCl3, toluene, reflux, 18h.
2) 2-37, THF, -84 
C to r.t., 18h.
110 C, 18h.
Scheme 2.19: Planarization reaction performed on derivative 2-40. 
The synthesis started with the preparation of borazine 2-40 which was obtained by 
treating 2-fluoroaniline 2-38 with BCl3 in refluxing toluene, followed by treatment of the 
resulting chloro-borazole with lithium derivative 2-37 (Scheme 2.19). As for 2-34 even 
2-40 was obtained as a mixture of atropoisomers. Separation of the different isomeric 
components was not possible using SCC and thus the following cyclization reaction 
was performed on the mixture (Scheme 2.19). 
Figure 2.13: LR-MS LD+ of planarization of derivative 2-40.  
Chapter 2 
Even in this case, 1-1 was formed along with fragments originated by the rupture of the 
BN core such as B3N2O derivative 2-41 and the last cyclization intermediate 2-42, 
which was never found in previous reactions. Since the latter was never observed 
when soluble derivatives were formed, the presence of 2-42 in this case might be 
related to the low solubility of the system, resulting in the precipitation of part of 2-42 
before the last cyclization could occur. This result represents another important proof of 
the stepwise mechanism predicted by computational studies. 
After multiple cycles of sonication and washing with various solvents (ODCB, PhCl, 
EtOAc etc) desired clean product 1-1 was obtained in a 18% yield as a grey solid. 
This result is comparable with the yield obtained for 2-1 within experimental error. Mass 
analysis of the sample showed only one peak corresponding to the desired product at 
m/z 525.1763 (C36H18B3N3+, calc.: 525.1780), as previously reported by Bettinger et al. 
for the same derivative.[23] To further confirm the structure of the obtained material, 
powder-XRD (pXRD) analysis was carried out. A previous pXRD study[23] has been 
reported for 1-1 by Bettinger et al. involving a profile-fitting using the Le Bail technique 
of the pXRD pattern recorded for a two-phase sample comprising 1-1 together with 
another crystalline phase arising from an impurity. The Le Bail fitting showed that the 
unit cell of 1-1 closely matches the unit cell in the reported crystal structure[24,25] of 
hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene. However, in their work only the preliminary profile-
fitting was carried out and no structure solution and refinement were performed. The 
pXRD pattern of 1-1, which was prepared using the reaction depicted in scheme 2.19, 
closely matches the one previously reported but, in this case, since 1-1 was pure and 
presented a single phase in the sample, structure determination was possible using the 
pXRD pattern. 
Profile fitting and unit cell refinement from the pXRD data were carried out using the Le 
Bail technique[26] implemented in the program GSAS[27], starting from a unit cell (a = 
12.929 , b = 5.119 , c = 17.9983 ,  = 108.984 ) and space group (P21/n) that 
were derived from the reported[25] unit cell of HBC by transformation to the conventional 
setting (which has the shortest lengths of the a- and c-axes and the value of  closest 
to 90). A good-quality Le Bail fit was achieved (Figure 2.15a; Rwp = 0.57%, Rp = 
0.44%), with the following refined unit cell parameters: a = 12.921(5) , b = 5.0996(7) 
, c = 18.002(5) ,  = 109.151(16). The fact that this unit cell accounts for all peaks 
observed in the experimental pXRD data confirms the purity of 1-1 which is constituted 
by a single phase. From the unit cell volume and density considerations, it is deduced 
that there are two molecules of 1-1 in the unit cell, and therefore the asymmetric unit 
for space group P21/n comprises one half molecule of 1-1. Structure solution of 1-1 was 
Chapter 2 
carried out using the direct-space strategy,[28,29] implemented using a genetic algorithm 
(GA) in the program EAGER.[3037] In the direct-space structure solution calculations, 
the molecular model was derived from the molecule in the crystal structure of HBC, but 
with the central C6 ring replaced by a central B3N3 ring. The asymmetric unit comprised 
the whole molecule of 1-1 with half occupancy of all atoms, and with the centre of the 
molecule fixed at a crystallographic inversion centre. Clearly, the inversion symmetry 
operation creates disorder in the positions of the B and N atoms in the central ring, 
resulting in an occupancy of B0.5 N0.5 for each atomic site in the central ring. 
In the GA structure solution calculations, each trial structure was defined by three 
structural variables {, , }, which specify the overall orientation of the molecule 
relative to the unit cell. In total, 40 independent GA calculations were carried out, with 
each GA calculation involving the evolution of a population of 100 trial structures for 
100 generations. In each generation, 10 mating operations and 50 mutation operations 
were applied. All 40 independent GA calculations produced essentially the same 
structure giving best fit to the experimental pXRD data (i.e., lowest Rwp). This trial 
structure was used as the initial structural model for Rietveld refinement. In the Rietveld 
refinement, restraints were applied to bond lengths and bond angles (derived from the 
known molecular geometry[25] of the carbon analogue), and a planar restraint was 
applied to the whole molecule. As in the structure solution, the asymmetric unit 
comprised a whole molecule of 1-1 with half occupancy of all atoms, with the centre of 
the molecule fixed at an inversion centre. A common isotropic displacement parameter 
was refined for all non-hydrogen atoms, and the value for hydrogen atoms was set at 
1.2 times this value.  
Figure 2.15: a) Le Bail fitting of the powder XRD pattern of 1-1. Red + marks, experimental 
data (background subtracted); green line, calculated data; magenta line, difference plot; black 
tick marks, predicted peak positions b) Final Rietveld refinement for 1-1. Red + marks, 
experimental data (background subtracted); green line, calculated data; magenta line, 
difference plot; black tick marks, predicted peak positions. 
Chapter 2 
The final Rietveld refinement produced a good-quality fit (Figure 2.15; Rwp = 0.60%, 
Rp = 0.45%), comparable to the quality of fit obtained in the Le Bail fitting procedure 
(Figure 2.15a), with the following refined unit cell parameters: a = 12.934(5) , b = 
5.1022(8) , c = 18.009(5) ,  = 109.188(17) , V = 1122.4(7) 3. 
The crystal structure of 1-1, shown in Figure 2.16a and 2.16b, is essentially iso-
structural to the crystal structure of the carbon analogue as demonstrated by the 
overlay of the two structures shown in Figure 2.16c. According to the classification of 
aromatic hydrocarbon crystal structures,[38] the structure is assigned to the  packing 
type. The molecules are arranged in "slabs" parallel to the ab-plane; all molecules in a 
given slab are related by translation and hence have the same orientation. Adjacent 
slabs are related by the 21 screw axis (parallel to the b-axis), and the molecules in 
adjacent slabs have different orientations. As discussed above, the crystal structure of 
1-1 is disordered, with each atomic site in the central ring represented as B0.5 N0.5. This 
representation of the average structure may be readily interpreted in terms of the 
molecule of 1-1 adopting two orientations with equal probability (the two orientations 
differ by 60 rotation about an axis perpendicular to the plane of the molecule). In the 
average structure, the positions of the C and H atoms for the two molecular 
orientations occupy the same set of sites. 
To assess whether there is any significant energy difference between the two 
molecular orientations in the disordered (average) structure, periodic DFT-D 
calculations were carried out for two ordered structures, in each case containing only 
one of the two molecular orientations. To generate these ordered structures, the 
crystallographic inversion centre was removed to give space group P21 (with one 
molecule in the asymmetric unit), and the central ring was an ordered B3N3 ring (i.e., 
with each atomic site occupied by only B or only N, and with the B and N atoms 
alternating around the ring). The two ordered structures differ by 60 rotation about an 
axis perpendicular to the plane of the molecule. Each structure was subjected to DFT-
D geometry optimization (with fixed unit cell). The resulting geometry optimized 
structures are very similar (except regards the assignment of B and N atoms to the 
atomic sites of the central ring); the largest displacement between atomic sites in the 
two structures is 0.111 , with an RMSD of 0.072 . The energy difference between 
the two optimized structures is only 4  104 kJ mol1. This very small energy difference 
is fully compatible with the existence of disorder involving equal populations of the two 
molecular orientations in the average crystal structure determined from pXRD data. 
Chapter 2 
Figure 2.16: Crystal structure of 1-1 viewed a) along the b-axis and b) along the a-axis. In this 
disordered structure, the occupancy of each atomic site in the central ring is B0.5 N0.5. The slabs 
of molecules discussed in the text are parallel to the ab-plane, which is horizontal in both (a) 
and (b). c) Overlay of the crystal structures of 1-1 (magenta) and the carbon analogue of 1-1 
(cyan). The overlay was constructed by matching the unit cell axes (not shown) of the two 
structures. 
The outcome of this crystallographic study confirmed the successful formation of 
derivative 1-1, although with similar yields to 2-1, thus ruling out any effect of the xylyl 
groups on the reaction outcome. At this point the focus was moved on the investigation 
of the effect of different WCA on the reaction to access a broader set of silylium 
reagents. 
2.11 Effects of different WCAs on the reaction outcome 
Due to the difficult multistep synthesis, the commercial availability of carborane 2-22 is 
limited to few companies, resulting in a high price per gram of this compound. This fact, 
along with the strong influence of WCA on the reactivity of silylium ions, has led us to 
the decision to study the effect of different WCA on the reaction outcome. The 
synthesis was then repeated on 2-40 using tetrakis pentafluorophenyl borate stabilized 
silylium ion 2-43 as reagent (Scheme 2.20). Tetrakis pentafluorophenyl borate is known 
to be a more coordinating anion than the previously used carborane present in 2-22, 
thus resulting in less ionic silicon centres. The ionic degree of silylium ions is usually 
assessed using 29Si-NMR in which low field values suggest a more ionic nature of the 
silicon centre. When this analysis is performed on 2-22, a value of 115 ppm is found, 
whereas, for 2-43, a shift of 107 ppm is obtained,[39,40] thus confirming a slightly less 
ionic nature for the latter, which should result in a lower reactivity. Despite this, the 
easier preparation, and the lower price per gram of tetrakis pentafluorophenyl borate 
make it very appealing in this reaction when compared to carborane reagents. The 
reaction was then performed with the new reagent and when 2-40 was treated with 2-
43 and 2-19 in PhCl at 110 C the desired product 1-1 was again formed. However, in 
Chapter 2 
this case, a 13% yield was obtained, which is lower than the one achieved in previous 
attempts. 
Scheme 2.20: Planarization reaction involving 2-40 and silylium ion 2-43. Structure of 2-43 
reported. 
This result is quite interesting since it shows that the use of the more accessible 2-43 in 
the reaction is an available option, even if providing generally lower yields compared to 
2-22.  
The reaction was then repeated using TMSOTf (29Si-NMR = 44 ppm close to the ones 
reported for TMSClO4 = 47 ppm)[41] and in this case the silicon reagent was used as 
solvent in the presence of P(o-tolyl)3 as Bronsted base at 140 C for 18 h. These harsh 
conditions were used to overcome the much lower ionic degree of this silicon reagent 
but, despite these modifications, no products were formed and only starting borazine 
was visible. This result confirms that the silicon reagent must be a strong Lewis acid 
with high ionicity to obtain the desired CC bond formation, thus limiting the viable WCA 
to ones presenting a very low coordination ability. 
From the obtained results, it appears that the removal of the xylene groups does not 
increase the reaction yield and results in the formation of insoluble products which led 
to the first identification of 2-42, representing an important proof of the stepwise 
mechanism of cyclization. Furthermore, when 2-43 was used in place of 2-22 the 
reaction still worked producing the desired product even if with a lower yield.  
Chapter 2 
2.12 Synthesis of functionalized HBBNC derivatives 
To synthesise functionalized HBBNC derivatives, different starting fluoro hexaaryl-
borazines had to be prepared. Since the yield was not the focus of this study, 
borazines bearing two fluorine atoms on the boron bonded aryl ring were used to avoid 
mixtures of atropoisomers resulting in difficult characterizations. As a first test, the xylyl 
solubilizing group was substituted with a t-Bu moiety by using aniline 2-44 as starting 
material in the borazine synthesis (Scheme 2.21).  
tBu tBu
tButBu
2-22, 2-19, PhCl,
2-45, 65% 2-46
1) BCl3,toluene, reflux, 18h.
2) 2-32, THF, -84 C, 24h.
110 C, 18h.
Scheme 2.21: Synthetic pathway towards t-Bu derivatives 2-45 and 2-46. 
Aniline 2-44 was then treated with BCl3 in refluxing toluene followed by reaction of 
resulting chloro-borazole with organolithium 2-32 giving molecule 2-45 in a 65% yield. 
Derivative 2-45 structure was confirmed by SC-XRD (Figure 2.16). As previously seen 
for molecule 2-27 the fluorine atoms in the crystal structure are arranged in a gear like 
fashion and as for the previous case even 2-45 is stable to normal handling conditions. 
Figure 2.16: Crystal structure of derivative 2-45; a) molecular structure, b) capped sticks crystal 
structure, c) spacefill crystal structure. Space group: P21/c. Crystals obtained from MeOH 
diffusion in CH2Cl2. Colour code: grey: C, pink: B, blue: N, red: O and yellow: F. H atoms 
omitted for clarity. 
The planarization reaction conditions involving carborane 2-22 were then applied to 2-
45 to obtain t-Bu functionalized 2-46. However, a black insoluble material was obtained 
from the reaction, which after various washings gave a grey insoluble powder.  
Chapter 2 
Figure 2.17: LR-MS EI+ mass spectra of insoluble material obtained from cyclization of 2-45.  
The insoluble material was then studied with LR-MS and in the spectra only one peak 
at m/z: 525.1832 was visible, corresponding to 1-1 (Figure 2.17). This evidence 
suggests that the cyclization is occurring successfully on 2-45, but the strong acidic 
conditions induce the loss of the t-Bu groups, leading to the formation of the non-
functionalized 1-1. 
At this point, it was decided to substitute the t-Bu group with a dodecyl moiety (-C12H25) 
to disfavour the formation of carbocations resulting in loss of the functional groups. The 
synthesis of 2-48 was then started by refluxing dodecyl aniline 2-47 with BCl3 in toluene 
(Scheme 2.22).  
C12H25C12H25
C12H25
C12H25 C12H25
C12H25
2-22, 2-19, PhCl,
2-48, 32% 2-49
C12H25
1) BCl3, toluene, reflux, 18h.
2) 2-32, THF, -84 C, 24h.
110 C, 18h.
Scheme 2.22: Synthetic strategy towards dodecyl derivatives 2-48 and 2-49. 
The resulting chloro-borazole intermediate was then treated with the lithium derivative 
2-32 giving borazine 2-48 in a good 32% yield. Treatment of 2-48 with silylium 
Chapter 2 
carborane 2-22 and dimethyldimesitylsilane 2-19 led to the formation of a mixture of 
products that proved to be soluble only in hot toluene. 
Figure 2.18: HR-MS LD+ of reaction mixture obtained from cyclization of 2-48.  
As a result of the low solubility it was not possible to separate the different components 
of the mixture, limiting the characterization to HR-MS (Figure 2.18). The presence of 
target molecule 2-49 was confirmed by the peak corresponding to the molecular ion 
m/z 1029.7424 (C72H90B3N3+, calc.: 1029.7414). However, the incomplete cyclization 
product 2-50 was present as well at m/z 947.7396, whereas the two main peaks at m/z 
874.5626 and 792.5596 are due to fragmentations of the C12H25 chains during 
ionization of the molecules. 
After these results, it is evident that xylene moieties provide the best solution to impart 
solubility to the final product while preserving its stability to the reaction conditions. 
Consequently, to obtain soluble products that could undergo further functionalization, it 
is necessary to synthesize borazines bearing both xylene groups as solubilizing 
moieties and protected functional groups stable to the cyclization conditions. The use 
of the OH group represents the best option, since it can be protected in many ways and 
is quite versatile. For instance, it can easily undergo conversion to triflate which can be 
in turn employed in cross-coupling reactions. 
Chapter 2 
The retrosynthetic approach towards the derivative bearing triflate groups is reported in 
Scheme 2.23.  
Scheme 2.23: Retrosynthetic approach towards molecule 2-54. 
According to this plan, the final product 2-54, should be obtained by triflation of hydroxy 
derivative 2-53. In the outlined strategy, hydroxy derivative 2-53 can be in turn obtained 
by deprotection with fluoride of TIPS protected 2-52. The TIPS protecting group 
represent the best choice due to its bulkiness, which should be able to avoid reaction of 
the hydroxy moieties with the silylium ion. At this point, 2-52 could be formed applying 
the silylium ion cyclization on borazine 2-51 which should be obtained starting from 2-
10 and lithium derivative 2-57 obtained via lithium-halogen exchange on TIPS 
protected 4-bromo-3,5-difluorophenol 2-56. The latter can be formed by treatment of 2-
55 with TIPSCl (Scheme 2.23). 
The synthesis started with treatment of 2-10 with BCl3 in refluxing toluene. The 
resulting chloro-borazole intermediate was reacted with lithium derivative 2-57 leading 
to the formation of desired borazine 2-51 in a 18% yield (Scheme 2.24). The side 
product n-butyl derivative 2-31 was formed as well in a 26% yield, suggesting a 
competition between n-BuLi and lithium derivative 2-57.  
Chapter 2 
2-22, 2-19, PhCl,
2-51, 18% + 2-31, 26% 2-52
1) BCl3,toluene, reflux, 18h.
2) 2-57, THF, -84 C, 24h.
OTIPS
TIPSO OTIPS
OTIPS
TIPSO OTIPS
imidazole, TIPSCl
DMF, r.t., 18h.
FTIPSO
2-56, 92%
n-BuLi, THF, -84C.
FTIPSO
110 C, 18h.
Scheme 2.24: Preparation of 2-56, synthesis and attempted planarization of borazine 2-51. 
At this point, planarization of molecule 2-51 was performed using 2-22 and 2-19 in 
PhCl at 110 C. However, in this case, TLC analysis highlighted the formation of a 
complex mixture of very polar products. This result suggests that, although being very 
bulky, TIPS is not effectively protecting the hydroxy groups and a deprotection/reaction 
is occurring in the reported conditions. This results in reactions between the silylium ion 
and the hydroxy moieties, possibly leading to polymerized materials.  
Figure 2.19: 300 MHz 1H-NMR in THF/MeOH of mixture of products obtained from cyclization 
of 2-51. 
Chapter 2 
To shed light on the reaction outcome, the obtained mixture was analysed with 1H-
NMR (Figure 2.19). In the obtained spectra, aromatic signals are present between 7.80 
and 6.52 ppm, compatibly with a planarized system presenting donor OH groups. 
Absence of the TIPS signals in the region comprised between 0.50 ppm and 0.00 ppm 
confirms the loss of the protective groups. Furthermore, the presence of multiple 
signals ascribable to the xylene methyl groups between 1.95 ppm and 1.71 ppm 
suggests the presence of different products, possibly resulting from reactions of the 
unprotected OH groups (Figure 2.19). 
This result points out that the reaction is not suitable for molecules containing 
functional groups different from aromatic scaffolds and primary alkanes due to the 
strong Lewis acid nature of the silylium ion. Since it was impossible to introduce 
functional groups that could allow further functionalization and extension of the system, 
the focus was moved on the characterization of the obtained derivatives to shed light 
on the BN-doping effects.  
2.13 Conclusions and perspectives 
In conclusion, to obtain the desired target molecule various unprecedented halogen-
functionalized borazines have been synthesized, extending the knowledge on this class 
of derivatives. The use of a silylium ion induced Friedel-Crafts like reaction on fluoro-
borazine 2-27 led to the formation of the desired soluble 2-1 in a 5% yield along with 
derivative 2-33 as major product. To improve the reaction conditions and understand 
the formation of 2-33, theoretical studies were performed, confirming a stepwise 
mechanism in which the low energy intermediates are constituted by the structures 
presenting the most extended and less distorted conjugate structure. Consequently, a 
new synthesis involving a fluoro-borazine bearing one fluorine atom on each ring was 
designed. Planarization of this borazine led to the formation of the desired product in a 
15% yield along with unprecedented B3N2O doped 2-38. Computational studies on this 
reaction confirmed the presence of different intermediates in the stepwise mechanism 
possibly accounting for the higher yield and formation of 2-38. The versatility of the 
reaction was proved by synthesising HBBNC 1-1, which was obtained in a 18% yield 
and characterized by pXRD and HR-MS. To widen the scope of the reaction, fluorine 
functionalized borazines bearing other functional and solubilizing groups have been 
synthesized and the planarization reaction attempted. However, these studies pointed 
out that only aromatic scaffolds and primary alkyl chains can survive the harsh reaction 
conditions of the silylium ion induced C-F bond activation reaction. This result excluded 
the possibility of using functionalized borazines in the cyclization reaction to obtain 
functionalized HBBNC derivatives, which could be further functionalized and possibly 
Chapter 2 
used to construct extended nanographene systems (Scheme 2.25). Therefore, the 
production of nanoribbon systems will have to rely on the preparation of extended 
dendrimeric systems that can be planarized straightaway.  
Furthermore, a complete characterization of derivatives 2-1 and 2-38 will be performed 
and all-carbon reference compounds for derivatives 2-1 and 2-38 will be synthesised 
as well to assess the differences imparted on the derivatives by the borazine based 
rings. The outcome of this work will provide a useful base of experimental data for the 
future design of doped nanographenes presenting tailored bandgap and properties. 
Scheme 2.25: Attempted synthesis of functionalized derivative 2-52. 
2.14 References 
[1] I. B. Atkinson, D. C. Blundell, D. B. Clapp, J. Inorg. Nucl. Chem. 1972, 34, 3037
3041. 
[2] D. Bonifazi, F. Fasano, M. M. Lorenzo-garcia, D. Marinelli, J. Tasseroul, Chem. 
Commun. 2015, 51, 1522215236. 
[3] S. J. Groszos, S. F. Stafiej, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1958, 80, 13571360. 
[4] L. Pauling, The Nature of the Chemical Bond 1960, 260. 
[5] A. Bondi, J. Phys. Chem. 1964, 68, 441451. 
[6] K. Nagasawa, Inorg. Chem. 1966, 5, 442445. 
[7] K. Ota, T. Tanaka, A. Osuka, Org. Lett. 2014, 16, 29742977. 
[8] X. H. Cheng, S. Hger, D. Fenske, Org. Lett. 2003, 5, 25872589. 
[9] M. Daigle, A. Picard-lafond, E. Soligo, J. F. Morin, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed 2016, 
55, 20422047. 
[10] J. F. Morin, A. Jolly, D. Miao, M. Daigle, Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 2020, 59, 4624-
4633. 
[11] K. Y. Amsharov, M. A. Kabdulov, M. Jansen, Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 2012, 124, 
46724675. 
[12] H. F. T. Klare, ACS Catal. 2017, 7, 69997002. 
[13] O. Allemann, S. Duttwyler, P. Romanato, K. K. Baldridge, J. S. Siegel, Science 
2011, 332, 574577. 
Chapter 2 
[14] S. Luliski, J. Serwatowski, J. Org. Chem. 2003, 68, 53845387. 
[15] M. Schnrch, M. Spina, A. F. Khan, M. D. Mihovilovic, P. Stanetty, Chem. Soc. 
Rev. 2007, 36, 10461057. 
[16] A. Saednya, H. Hart, Synthesis 1996, 1, 14551458. 
[17] J. Dosso, J. Tasseroul, F. Fasano, D. Marinelli, N. Biot, A. Fermi, D. Bonifazi, 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 44834487. 
[18] T. Yanai, D. P. Tew, N. C. Handy, Chem. Phys. Lett. 2004, 393, 5157. 
[19] W. J. Hehre, R. Ditchfield, J. A. Pople, J. Chem. Phys. 1972, 52, 22572561. 
[20] W. C. M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. 
R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, G. A. Petersson, H. 
Nakatsuji, M. Caricato, X. Li, H. P. Hratchian, A. F. Izmaylov, J. Bloino, G. 
Zheng, J. L. Sonnenberg, M. Had, Gaussian 09, Revis. D.01, Gaussian 
Inc.,Wallingford CT 2010. 
[21] J. Tomasi, B. Mennucci, R. Cammi, Chem. Rev. 2005, 105, 29993093. 
[22] D. K. Straub, j. chem. educ. 1995, 72, 494497. 
[23] M. Krieg, F. Reicherter, P. Haiss, M. Strbele, K. Eichele, M. J. Treanor, R. 
Schaub, H. F. Bettinger, Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 2015, 54, 82848286. 
[24] J. M. Robertson, J. Trotter, J. Chem. Soc 1961, 12801284. 
[25] R. Goddard, M. W. Haenel, W. C. Herndon, C. Krueger, M. Zander, J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 1995, 117, 3041. 
[26] A. Le Bail, H. Duroy, J. L. Fourquet, Mat. Res. Bull. 1988, 23, 447452. 
[27] A. C. Larson, R. B. Von Dreele, Los Almos Natl. Lab. Los Almos, NM 2004, 
LAUR, 86748. 
[28] K. D. M. Harris, M. Tremayne, P. Lightfoot, P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
1994, 116, 35433547. 
[29] K. D. M. Harris, Adv. X-Ray Crystallogr., Springer, 2011, pp. 133177. 
[30] K. D. M. Harris, S. Habershon, E. Y. Cheung, R. L. Johnston, Z. Krist. 2004, 219, 
838846. 
[31] B. M. Kariuki, P. Calcagno, K. D. M. Harris, D. Philp, R. L. Johnston, Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed 1999, 38, 831835. 
[32] B. M. Kariuki, K. Psallidas, K. D. M. Harris, R. L. Johnston, R. W. Lancaster, S. 
E. Staniforth, S. M. Cooper, Chem. Commun. 1999, 16771678. 
[33] D. Albesa-jove, B. M. Kariuki, S. J. Kitchin, L. Grice, E. Y. Cheung, K. D. M. 
Harris, ChemPhysChem 2004, 5, 414418. 
[34] F. Guo, J. Mart, Z. Pan, C. E. Hughes, K. D. M. Harris, J. Phys. Chem. C 2008, 
112, 1979319796. 
[35] P. A. Williams, C. E. Hughes, G. K. Lim, B. M. Kariuki, K. D. M. Harris, Cryst. 
Growth Des. 2012, 12, 31043113. 
[36] C. E. Hughes, G. N. M. Reddy, S. Masiero, S. P. Brown, P. A. Williams, K. D. M. 
Harris, Chem. Sci. 2017, 8, 39713979. 
[37] O. Al Rahal, C. E. Hughes, P. A. Williams, A. J. Logsdail, Y. Diskin-posner, K. D. 
Chapter 2 
M. Harris, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed 2019, 131, 1896418968. 
[38] G. R. Desiraju, A. Gavezzotti, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1989, 26, 621623. 
[39] T. A. Kochina, D. V Vrazhnov, E. N. Sinotova, M. G. Voronkov, Russ. Chem. 
Rev. 2006, 75, 95110. 
[40] J. B. Lambert, S. Zhang, S. M. Ciro, Organometallics 1994, 13, 24302443. 
[41] M. Arshadi, D. Johnels, U. Edlund, C. H. Ottosson, D. Cremer, J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 1996, 118, 51205131. 
Chapter 3 
CHAPTER 3 
BN vs CC: EFFECTS OF BORAZINE DOPING ON PROPERTIES 
OF PAHs. 
In this chapter an extensive study of the optoelectronic properties of borazine-doped 
derivatives 2-1 and 2-38 has been carried out. To compare the effect of doping on the 
different derivatives, tailored reference compounds have been synthesised. 
Hexabenzocoronene 3-2 has been compared with HBBNC 2-1 highlighting an 
important widening of the HOMO-LUMO gap resulting from the substitution of the 
central ring in 3-2 with a borazine ring. In a similar fashion, unprecedented B3N2O 
doped derivative 2-38 has been compared with the corresponding full carbon 3-13 and 
pyrilium analogue 3-27BF again proving the ability of borazine based rings to widen the 
HOMO-LUMO gap and lead to increased rigidity of the structures of PAHs. Along with 
the optoelectronic properties, the aromaticity of the different derivatives has been 
studied as well. Finally, since the inclusion of the B3N2O based system leads to the 
formation of a gulf region in the PAH, a comparison between hexabenzocoronene 
based derivatives (2-1, 3-2) and the gulf presenting ones (2-38, 3-13) allowed us to 
understand the effect of the topological element in these aromatics.  
This chapter is divided in 13 main sections: i) Section 3.1 defines the aim of the project 
ii) Section 3.2 presents the synthesis of derivative 3-2; iii) Section 3.3 describes the 
synthesis of gulf full-carbon derivative 3-13; iv) Section 3.4 reports the synthesis of 
pyrilium reference compound 3-27BF; v) Section 3.5 presents crystal structure 
comparisons between doped (2-1 and 2-38) and full carbon derivatives (3-2 and 3-13); 
vi) Section 3.6 presents a comparison between ESP plots of molecules; vii) Section 3.7 
presents a study on solvates of 2-1 with different aromatic solvents. viii) Section 3.8 
displays a study on the aromaticity of the derivatives; ix) Section 3.9 displays a full 
comparison between the optical properties of the molecules; x) Section 3.10 presents 
electrochemical studies on the derivatives; xi) Section 3.11 presents and HOMO-LUMO 
calculations on derivatives; xii) Section 3.12 draws some conclusions and perspectives; 
xiii) Section 3.13 contains references for the chapter. 
The research work described in sections 3.1 to 3.11 was carried out at Cardiff 
university. X-Ray analysis were performed by N. Demitri (Elettra-Sincrotrone, 
Basovizza, Trieste, Italy), N. Biot and D. Romito (Cardiff University). Photophysical 
characterization was carried out by T. Battisti, computational studies were performed 
by T. Battisti (Cardiff University). 
Chapter 3 
The results reported in this chapter have been published in the following articles:  
Dosso, J.; Tasseroul, J.; Fasano, F.; Marinelli, D.; Biot, N.; Fermi, A.; Bonifazi, D. 
Synthesis and Optoelectronic Properties of Hexa-peri-hexabenzoborazinocoronene. 
Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 44834487. 
Dosso, J.; Battisti T.; Ward B. D.; Demitri, N.; Hughes C.; Williams P.A.; Harris K. D. 
M.; Bonifazi, D. Boronnitrogendoped nanographenes: a synthetic tale from borazine 
precursors. Chem. A Eur. J. 2020, 26, 6608-6621. 
Chapter 3 
3.1 Aim of the Project 
As previously reported in chapter 2, the synthesis of molecule 2-1 represents a very 
important result since it constitutes the first example of a soluble PAH presenting a 
borazine ring as a dopant unit. To assess the effect of the borazine doping on this 
system, the synthesis of reference hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene 3-2 (Scheme 3,1 
bottom left) will be carried out, thus allowing for a direct comparison between 2-1 and 
3-2. Since the effect of the substitution of a full aromatic ring in PAHs with a borazine 
was investigated only by theoretical means in the literature, an in-depth study on the 
borazine-doped derivative and corresponding reference involving UV-Vis absorption 
emission spectroscopy, Cyclic voltammetry (CV) and computational studies will be 
carried out. Furthermore, the formation of 2-38 obtained by planarizing borazine 2-34 
bearing one fluorine on each ring, represents an important breakthrough since no 
examples of B3N2O doped PAHs are known in the literature (a paper reporting a similar 
derivative by Bettinger and co-workers was published immediately after our 
contribution, see Chapter 1). Differently from 2-1, in the case of 2-38 the presence of 
the oxygen atom results in a gulf region (Figure 3.1, top row). It was anticipated that 
this topological element along with the presence of the almost unknown B3N2O system 
would have almost certainly led to variations in the properties compared to 2-1 and 
could be important for the future development of doped materials and PAHs. While a 
direct comparison with 2-1 is possible, this would not distinguish between the 
topological and doping contributions to the properties of 2-38. The only way to 
determine the unknown effects of the B3N2O ring on the properties of PAHs is to 
compare the properties of 2-38 with tailored reference compounds (Figure 3.1 top left 
and right). From this point of view, the gulf full carbon analogue of 2-38 (Scheme 3.1 
top left) will be synthesised together with heteroatom doped pyrilium derivative 
(Scheme 3.1, top right) in order to have a comparison with a system presenting an 
aromatic oxygen doped ring. After assessing the effect of the different borazine based 
rings on the properties of PAHs, the cross comparison between the coronene and gulf 
derivatives will clarify the effect of the edge topology difference between the two 
classes of PAHs (Figure 3.1). The synthesis and study of these reference compounds 
will give a clear picture on the effects of the doping and topology on the aromaticity and 
spectroscopic properties of this class of PAHs, resulting in an important fundamental 
contribution to the field.  
Chapter 3 
Figure 3.1: Nanographenes model compounds used to study the effects of doping and 
topology. 
Chapter 3 
3.2 Synthesis of soluble hexa-peri-hexabenzocoronene 
To understand the effect of the substitution of a benzene ring with a borazine in a 
hexabenzocoronene scaffold, the full carbon analogue HBC 3-2 was synthesized in 
accordance with the synthesis reported in Scheme 3.1, based on literature procedures 
for similar derivatives. The first step in the synthesis consisted in the trimerization of the 
methoxy alkyne derivative 3-1 in the presence of [Co2(CO)8] to give a mixture of 1,3,5 
and 1,2,4 trimethoxy hexaphenyl isomers, which were subjected to deprotection in the 
presence of BBr3. Separation of the two isomers was performed by silica gel column 
chromatography (SCC) affording 3-3 in a 17% yield. 3-3 was then triflated using Tf2O in 
pyridine and the resulting 3-4 was cross coupled with xylyl boronic acid in the presence 
of Pd(OAc)2, SPhos and K2CO3 yielding polyphenylene 3-5 in a 65% yield. Finally, a 
Scholl reaction with FeCl3 in CH3NO2/CH2Cl2 with N2 bubbling gave the desired 3-2 in a 
20% yield after multiple purifications on preparative TLC.  
Scheme 3.1: synthetic pathway towards reference compound 3-2. 
Chapter 3 
3.3 Synthesis of all-carbon gulf derivative 
At this point, a suitable retrosynthetic approach towards full-carbon analogue 3-13 was 
designed (Scheme 3.2). According to this strategy, target molecule 3-13 can be 
obtained with a Scholl reaction starting from polyphenylene derivative 3-12, in which 
the solubilizing moieties could be inserted by Suzuki cross coupling with triflate 
derivative 3-11. The latter can be in turn formed by triflation of di-hydroxy functionalized 
3-10, derived from 3-9 by deprotection of the methoxy groups with BBr3 (Scheme 3.2). 
Derivative 3-9 can be prepared by Suzuki coupling of dibromo 3-8 with 3-15, where the 
former can be obtained by trimerization of acetophenone 3-6 and 3-7 in the presence 
of triflic acid.  
Scheme 3.2: Retrosynthetic approach towards derivative 3-13. 
The synthesis started with the trimerization reaction of 3-6 and 3-7 in the presence of 
triflic acid at 130 C (Scheme 3.3) to give a mixture of brominated derivatives 
containing 3-8 along with mono-bromo 3-8a and tri-bromo 3-8b. Molecule 3-15 was 
prepared by Miyaura coupling on 3-bromoanisole 3-14 with B2Pin2, [Pd(dppf)Cl2] and 
KOAc in dry degassed DMF at 90 C giving molecule 3-15 in an 81% yield. Since 
products 3-8, 3-8a and 3-8b presented very similar polarities it was impossible to purify 
them with SCC and the mixture was directly used in the following Suzuki cross-
coupling with 3-15 (Scheme 3.3).  
Chapter 3 
Scheme 3.3: Synthesis of full carbon 3-13. 
The resulting mixture of methoxy derivatives containing 3-9 was directly dissolved in 
CH2Cl2 and BBr3 was added at 0 C followed by stirring at r.t. for 18 h. This resulted in 
a mix of hydroxy derivatives easily separated using SCC giving dihydroxy derivative 3-
10 in a 23% yield (over two steps). The hydroxy groups of 3-10 were converted to 
triflates using Tf2O in pyridine (Scheme 3.3) and a Suzuki cross coupling of 3-11 with 
2,6-dimethylphenyl boronic acid 3-16 in the presence of Pd(OAc)2, SPhos and K2CO3 
gave 3-12 in a 50 % yield. The final step of the synthesis involved a Scholl reaction on 
3-12 but, when the standard conditions with FeCl3 in CH3NO2 and CH2Cl2 were used, 
complex mixtures of products were formed without regard for temperature and reaction 
time. This can be due to the formation of chlorinated by-products which is a common 
feature of this kind of reactions.[1] For this reason, we attempted the synthesis using 
DDQ and TfOH in degassed CH2Cl2 at 0 C (Scheme 3.3). The resulting reaction 
mixture was purified with a preparative TLC affording desired product 3-13 in a low 
14% yield. 3-13 could be identified via 1H-NMR (Figure 3.2), 13C-NMR, HR-MS and SC-
XRD, with results comparable to the ones reported for similar derivatives described in 
previous works.[2,3]  
From the reported 1H-NMR all the signals expected for 3-13 are visible, in particular the 
highly deshielded singlet at 10.54 ppm corresponding to proton Ha along with singlets 
Hf and Hg (8.99 and 8.86 ppm) represent a good proof of the formation of the polycyclic 
system. 
Chapter 3 
Figure 3.2: 400 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-13 in CDCl3 structure and assigned protons reported. 
Chapter 3 
3.4 Synthesis of pyrilium gulf derivative 
After 3-13 was obtained, a strategy towards pyrilium reference compound 3-27 was 
designed. The retrosynthetic approach reported in Scheme 3.4 is partially based on the 
work by Mllen and co-workers on similar derivatives.[4] In accordance with the planned 
strategy, the final molecule 3-27 can be obtained via irradiation of 3-26, with 
consequent formation of two CC bonds within the molecule. Aromatization of the 
central xanthene ring to form 3-26 can be obtained in two ways: i) starting from 3-24 by 
treatment with Br2 to form 3-26 as salt with Br- as counterion or ii) by oxidation of 3-24 
with PbO2 to obtain 3-25, which is then dehydrated with a mineral acid leading to 3-26 
as a salt with a counterion dependant on the acid used (for the sake of simplicity we 
will identify the molecule with the relative counterion with the following nomenclature: 
Nxx N = molecule number, xx = Br for bromide and xx = BF for tetrafluoroborate). 
Scheme 3.4: Retrosynthetic approach towards derivative 3-27Br and 3-27BF. 
At this point, derivative 3-24 can be formed via an acid catalysed aldolic condensation 
of phenanthrol derivative 3-23. To obtain the latter, a metalation of the methyl group of 
3-22 followed by intramolecular addition of the resulting lithium reagent on the amide 
can be performed. Finally, 3-22 can be obtained by cross coupling reaction between 3-
20 and 3-21, where the former could be obtained by two consecutive cross coupling 
reactions starting from 3-17 while the latter is obtained via an amidation of acyl chloride 
3-18. 
Chapter 3 
The synthesis started with the preparation of 3-21, which was obtained in quantitative 
yield by treating acyl chloride 3-18 with diethylamine and triethylamine in CH2Cl2. At 
this point, 3-17 was cross coupled with boronic acid 3-16 (Scheme 3.5) in the presence 
of [Pd(PPh3)4] and Ba(OH)28H2O in a 5/2/1 mixture of toluene/EtOH/H2O at 100 C. 
Notably Ba(OH)2 had to be used due to the best results of this base when sterically 
hindered substrates are present.[5]  
As a result, the desired 3-19 was formed in a 69% yield and subsequently converted in 
the boronic ester derivative 3-20 via a Miyaura coupling giving the desired product in a 
63% yield. The coupling between 3-20 and 3-21 was performed using [Pd(dppf)Cl2] as 
catalyst and K2CO3 in Dioxane/H2O 5/1 at 100 C as reported by Jorgensen et al.[6] 
giving 3-22 in a good yield (73%, Scheme 3.5). 
Scheme 3.5: Synthesis of derivative 3-23. 
The protocol developed by Snieckus and co-workers was then followed in order to 
perform an amide directed metalation using LDA on the methyl bonded to the central 
ring of 3-22. This resulted in the attack of the lithium derivative on the amide carbonyl 
and elimination of diethyl amine giving derivative 3-23.[7] The successful synthesis of 
derivative 3-23 was confirmed with 1H, 13C-NMR and HR-MS, proving the formation of 
the desired material. Molecule 3-23 exists as an equilibrium with the keto-form, which 
results in the presence of a strong carbonyl signal at 1674 cm-1 in the IR spectra.  
At this point, derivative 3-23 was used in an aldolic condensation in the presence of 
benzaldehyde, HCl and AcOH giving xanthene 3-24 as the major product with an 87% 
yield (Scheme 3.6). 
Chapter 3 
Scheme 3.6: Synthesis of derivatives 3-24 and 3-27Br. 
Derivative 3-24 was then treated with Br2 in AcOH at 100C to obtain derivative 3-26Br. 
However, when purification of the latter was attempted, formation of violet material 
occurred, suggesting that derivative 3-26Br is light-sensitive resulting in formation of 3-
27Br. For this reason, the reaction mixture from the previous step was directly irradiated 
at 365 nm to form the desired product 3-27Br as a deep purple solid in a 41% yield. 
When the product was analysed, a low solubility resulting in aggregation and broad 1H-
NMR signals was observed. To obtain a more soluble product, an alternative synthesis 
was performed to form 3-27BF presenting tetrafluoro borate as counterion (Scheme 
3.7). In this synthetic pathway, derivative 3-24 was treated with PbO2 in AcOH at 120 
C leading to the formation of 3-25 with a 41% yield.[4] The low yield derives from the 
fact that 3-25 is unstable when purified on silica, resulting in the formation of coloured 
materials probably due to dehydration resulting in the formation of charged species. 
Molecule 3-25 was then treated with an Et2O solution of HBF4 using a 1/1 Ac2O/toluene 
mixture as solvent, leading to the formation of an orange precipitate.  
PbO2, AcOH, 120 C
h , 365 nm
3-25, 41%
HBF4, Ac2O/toluene 1/1
0C to r.t., 20 min.
3-26BF
3-27BF,80%
AcOH/CH2Cl2 1/1,
Scheme 3.7: Synthesis of derivatives 3-25 and 3-27BF. 
Chapter 3 
Due to the light sensitivity of this derivative, the reaction mixture was washed with 
anhydrous Et2O, centrifuged and the resulting orange powder (3-26BF) was immediately 
dissolved in an AcOH/CH2Cl2 1/1 mixture and irradiated at 365 nm. The resulting bright 
red solution was evaporated to give 3-27BF as a purple solid in an 80% yield. In this 
case 3-27BF did not show much aggregation and it was possible to record a good 
quality 1H-NMR in CD2Cl2 (Figure 3.3). 
The lower tendency to aggregate resulted in the possibility of fully characterizing the 
derivative, however, despite all the attempts made, no crystals of 3-27BF were ever 
grown. From the 1H-NMR spectrum reported it is possible to see all the signals 
expected for the system, in particular the presence of singlets Hf and He at 9.30 and 
9.23 ppm indisputably proof the formation of the two CC bonds in the last step of the 
synthesis. Furthermore, the presence of tetrafluoro borate as counterion was proved by 
11B-NMR and 19F-NMR with signals at -1.21 ppm and -153.14 ppm respectively, in both 
cases consistent with literature reports for this anion.[8] 
Figure 3.3: 400 MHz 1H-NMR of derivative 3-27BF in CD2Cl2. 
Chapter 3 
3.5 Crystal structure comparison  
The crystal structures of obtained molecules were then compared, starting from 
hexabenzocoronene derivatives 2-1 and 3-2 (Figure 3.4).  
Figure 3.4: a) front (top) and side (bottom) view of the X-Ray crystal structure of 3-2 space 
group: P-1; b) front (top) and side (bottom) view of 2-1, bond lengths reported, space group: 
I2/a. Colour code: grey: C, pink: B, blue: N. H atoms omitted for clarity. 2-1 was obtained from 
diffusion of i-PrOH in a C6H6 solution. 
From the crystal structures of 3-2 and 2-1 it is evident that the molecular morphology is 
not altered by the substitution of the central benzene ring with a borazine. Both 
molecules present a certain degree of distortion, probably ascribable to the presence of 
the xylene moieties, since previous pXRD characterization on derivative 1-1 provided a 
completely flat structure. 
When 3-13 and 2-38 were analysed, it could be further confirmed that BN-doped 
systems retain the morphology of the pristine PAHs (Figure 3.5). In fact, both structures 
are almost planar and present a small degree of distortion, with an average RMSD of 
the atoms in the aromatic scaffold from their mean plane of 0.13(9)  for 2-38 and 
0.15(12)  for 3-13 (Figure 3.5 a, b). In both cases, a similar columnar packing is 
observed (Figure 3.5 c, d) with the molecules undergoing - stacking interactions and 
with antiparallel units arranged into columns with average distances of 3.52(20)  and 
3.43(16)  for 3-13 and 2-38, respectively. In the case of 2-38, a distance between 
boron and oxygen between consecutive molecules smaller than the vdW sum of radii is 
observed (distance = 3.31  vdW = 3.35). This result seems to suggest that in 2-38 a 
certain degree of donation from the electronegative oxygen to the empty p orbital of 
boron might be present in the solid state. However, this feature seems to be more a 
Chapter 3 
consequence of - stacking interactions than a factor influencing the assembly of the 
molecules in the solid state.  
Figure 3.5: a) Side and c) top (bottom) view of the packing of 2-38, b) Side and d) top view of 
the packing of 3-13. Atom colors: pink B, blue N, red O, gray C. Space groups: P 21/c and P-1. 
2-38 was obtained from diffusion of i-PrOH in a CH2Br2 solution. 
3.6 ESP Plots 
Having confirmed the retention of the molecular morphology in derivative 2-1 and 2-38, 
ESP plots (Figure 3.6) were calculated on the previously reported crystal structures to 
understand the electronic effects of the borazine doping in these derivatives.  
Figure 3.6: ESP mapped on the vdW surface up to an electron density of 0001 electron bohr-3. 
Calculation performed with Gaussian 09 at B3LYP/6-31G-(d,p) level of theory. 
When 2-1 and 3-2 are considered, the ESP plots appear visibly different for the two 
structures, with 3-2 (Figure 3.6a) showing an extended negatively charged  system 
Chapter 3 
occupying most of the structure surface (as expected for this kind of enlarged PAHs). 
When the charge distribution of 2-1 is considered (Figure 3.6b), charge polarization 
corresponding to the BN bonds is clearly visible in the central part of the molecule, with 
negatively charged nitrogen and positively charged boron atoms. These results point 
out that the substitution of a benzene ring with a borazine in nanographene molecules 
represents a valuable method to change the electronic properties of materials without 
affecting the morphology.  
ESP surfaces were computed as well (mapped on the vdW surface up to an electron 
density of 0.05 electron/bohr-3) for molecules 3-13 and 2-38 to assess the electronic 
effects of doping with B3N2O (Figure 3.7)  
Figure 3.7: ESP surfaces mapped on the vdW surface up to an electron density of 0.05 
electron/bohr-3 for molecules a) 2-38 and b) 3-13. 
Similarly to 2-1 and 3-2, even in this case an important difference is induced by the 
presence of the borazine derived ring. While 3-13 presents an extended negatively 
charged surface due to the  electrons, 2-38 presents an evident polarization of the 
central part of the molecule with slightly negative nitrogen and positively charged boron 
atoms. Oxygen results more negative than the other heteroatoms due to the higher 
electronegativity. Similarly to 2-1, the fully aromatic benzenoid rings in 2-38 are more 
negative than the corresponding ones in 3-13 and this effect can be ascribed to the 
enhanced localization of this sextets, resulting in higher electron density in these 
regions. This effect has been predicted in BN-doped systems where a fully benzenoid 
ring is substituted by a borazine based ring.[9] 
3.7 HBBNC solvates  
The presence of the polarized BN bonds in 2-1 is expected to enable dipolar surface 
interactions in the BN-doped derivatives and thus potential interactions with polarized 
species, which are of great interest towards various applications, from sensing to 
catalysis. When 2-1 is considered, both boron and nitrogen atoms are confined in a sp2 
hybridization, which cannot convert to a sp3 one as requested for any kind of covalent 
interaction, limiting potential interactions to non-covalent ones. If the borazine ring 
Chapter 3 
resonance is considered, the boron formally presents only a partially empty p orbital 
and similarly, nitrogen atoms present a decreased nucleophilic nature due to the 
electron withdrawing effect of the attached boron atoms. Despite this, a strong 
polarization of the BN bonds is still present as highlighted in the ESP plots (Paragraph 
3.6) and suggests that weak electrostatic interaction might occur with spatially close 
polarized groups.  
To prove the recognition capabilities of this system, we decided to grow crystals of both 
2-1 and 3-2 in solvents presenting highly polarized groups, ideally resulting in solvates 
showing interactions in the solid state. Firstly, 2-1 and 3-2 were crystallized in 
fluorobenzene (PhF). The choice of this solvent is due to the presence of the highly 
electronegative fluorine atom which results in a strongly polarized C-F bond and thus in 
a highly negative potential on the fluorine atom, which should be able to interact with 
the positive potential present on boron (Figure 3.8). 
Figure 3.8: a) Crystal structure of 2-1, space group: P-1; b) Crystal structure of 3-2, space 
group: P-1. Both structures measured at 150(2) K. Crystals obtained via diffusion of i-PrOH in 
From the crystal structures reported in Figure 3.8 it is quite clear that, in the case of 2-
1, the molecule of PhF presents one preferred orientation in the solvate, with the 
negative fluorine atom sitting atop of the positive boron. The presence of a recognition 
is further confirmed when the solvate of 3-2 is considered, in which no preferential 
position of the fluorine atom on the  structure (1/6 occupancy of the fluorine for each 
position) is evidenced. Moreover, distances calculated on the crystal structure give 
further confirmation of this effect, with values well below the vdW sum of radii for 2-1 
(3.28 vs 3.39 ) and above for 3-2 (3.34 vs. 3.17 ). When the distance between the 
hexabenzocoronene plane and PhF is considered, it emerges that in 2-1 the fluorine 
atom is closer to the plane (3.28 ) than the phenyl ring (3.34 ). This suggests that 
Chapter 3 
the interaction between fluorine and boron is not merely a consequence of - 
interactions. On the other hand, when the solvate of 3-2 is considered, an almost 
identical distance between the fluorine and the phenyl ring of PhF from 3-2 plane is 
found (3.36 vs 3.38 ) suggesting a  stack driven association. 
We then decided to repeat the same experiment using chlorobenzene (PhCl), which 
presents a less hard and negative nature compared to PhF. The resulting crystal 
structures for 2-1 and 3-2 in PhCl are reported in Figure 3.9 a, b.  
Figure 3.9: a) Crystal structure of 2-1 PhCl, space group: P-1; b) Crystal structure of 3-2 in 
PhCl, space group: P-1. Both structures measured at 150(2) K. Crystals obtained via diffusion 
of i-PrOH in PhCl. 
In this case, the same identical disposition of the PhCl molecules is found in both 
structures, with the chlorine atom sitting in the middle of the BN bond in the case of 2-1 
and of a CC bond of the central benzene in 3-2. This suggests that there is no 
noticeable recognition between chlorine and boron. This is probably due to the less 
electronegative nature and worse overlap provided by the 3p orbitals of chlorine 
compared to the 2p of boron and fluorine. The proximity between the chlorine atom and 
the central ring of the two derivatives (3.43 and 3.46 ) is probably ascribable to the 
presence of - interactions between the phenyl ring of PhCl and the  system of 2-1 
and 3-2 resulting in the observed solvate structure. This is highlighted by a higher 
distance from 2-1 and 3-2 of the chlorine atom (3.43 and 3.46 ) compared to the 
phenyl ring (3.37 and 3.40 ), suggesting that indeed - interaction are driving the 
association between PhCl and the hexabenzocoronene cores. 
From these results, recognition is limited to highly electronegative second row 
elements and, for this reason, we envisaged that oxygen should be able to undergo 
recognition. Solvates of 2-1 were then grown in anisole (Figure 3.10).  
Chapter 3 
Figure 3.10: Crystal structure of 2-1 PhOMe, space group: P-1, measured at 150(2) K. Crystals 
obtained via diffusion of MeOH in PhOMe. 
In this case, the recognition between the electronegative oxygen and the positive boron 
atom is again present, with a distance between boron and oxygen of 3.32 , well below 
the sum of vdW radii (3.44 ). This result confirms the previous hypothesis of the ability 
of 2-1 to give recognition of highly electronegative second row elements, which paves 
the way for a potential use of these materials in sensing devices. At the present time, 
an assessment of the nature and energy of this interaction is still being carried out and 
will be the focus of future investigations. 
3.8 Aromaticity of heteroatom doped nanographenes 
When the aromaticity and NMR properties of derivative 2-1 are considered, many 
different theoretical studies have been carried out during the last decades. In general, 
the substitution of a full aromatic sextet in 3-2 with a borazine ring (thus generating 2-1) 
is expected to result in an aromaticity decrease in the central part of the molecule and 
in more localized sextets.[9] In other words, 2-1 and consequently 2-38 should present 
more localised ring currents and a generally less electron rich nature (as already 
introduced in ESP studies). To investigate experimentally the effect of the doping on 
the ring currents, we compared the aromatic regions of the 1H-NMR of 
hexabenzocoronene derivatives (Figure 3.11). From the 1H-NMR it is possible to assign 
the different protons to the corresponding signals, thus obtaining further confirmation of 
the structure of 2-1. Coupled Ha and Hb appear as a triplet (8.02 ppm) and doublet 
(8.50 ppm) respectively, while Hc is instead a singlet at 8.56 ppm. This pattern of 
signals is very similar to the one observed for 3-2, however, in the case of 2-1, the 
signals appear at higher fields due to a decrease in the magnetic anisotropy of the 
system. Furthermore, the inversion in the position of the chemical shifts for the signals 
corresponding to Hc and Hb in molecule 2-1 compared to the corresponding ones in 
Chapter 3 
the full carbon, can be linked to the presence of boron and nitrogen bonded to the 
rings, with the boron determining a lower chemical shift for proton Hb compared to Hc.  
Figure 3.11: Exerts of the 1H-NMR spectra of aromatic region recorded at 400 MHz in CHCl3 
for 3-2 (above) and 2-1 (below). 
When the gulf derivatives were studied, a similar decrease in the ring currents could be 
expected (Figure 3.12). Since, no computational studies were ever performed on these 
derivatives, we decided to perform NICS(1) and ACID calculations on the gulf 
molecules in order to compare the experimental results with the theoretical ones.  
Figure 3.12: Derivatives 2-38, 3-27 and 3-13 with gulf region and doping moieties highlighted. 
We started by calculating the NICS(1) and ACID plots for derivatives 2-38, 3-13 and 3-
27BF, thus confronting the effect on aromaticity of the substitution of the central ring of 
Chapter 3 
3-13 with the B3N2O system and with an oxygen-containing heteroaromatic ring (Figure 
3.13). 
Figure 3.13: top: NICS(1)-GIAO surfaces for a) 2-38, b) 3-13, and c) 3-27BF calculated from the 
B3LYP/6-31+G** optimized geometry in vacuum; bottom: AICD Surfaces calculated for a) 2-38, 
b) 3-13 and c) 3-27BF. 
From the results of this calculation, a strong decrease in aromaticity is evident in the 
central part of 2-38 with values for the B3N2O ring falling in the non-aromatic region (-
0.95 ppm, Figure 3.13a, top). This result is further confirmed by ACID calculations 
(Figure 3.13a, bottom), in which an absence of ring currents in the central ring of 2-38, 
resulting in electronic localization on the single atoms, is visible. On the other hand, 
similar aromaticity values (-17 ppm) in the outer rim of aromatic rings are noticed when 
compared to 3-13. This is in line with previous computational studies and this effect is 
ascribed to a higher localization of the sextets resulting from the substitution of the 
central ring.[9] This is again confirmed by ACID studies displaying a higher localization 
of the ring currents on the single benzenoid rings in 2-38 when compared to 3-13, in 
which delocalization is occurring on the whole structure (Figure 3.13b, bottom). 
Interestingly, the aromaticity of the non-sextet rings of the Clar resonance structure in 
2-38 is further decreased by the substitution of the central ring when compared to 3-13 
(0 ppm vs -3 ppm). When 3-27BF is considered (Figure 3.13c top and bottom), an 
intermediate situation is visible. As expected, the NICS(1) values of the central ring are 
comprised between the previous ones (-8 ppm) suggesting an intermediate degree of 
aromaticity. At the same time ACID measurements for this derivative evidence a similar 
situation to 3-13 with ring currents involving the full aromatic surface and delocalization 
occurring on the entire  surface. This result is reflected in the similar situation 
between the Clar-sextet and non-sextet rings of 3-27BF compared to 3-13.  
Chapter 3 
Figure 3.14: Excerpts of the 1H-NMR spectra (400 MHz, CDCl3) in the aromatic region for a) 2-
38, b) 3-13 and c) 3-27BF. 
As previously performed for hexabenzocoronene derivatives, a comparison between 
the NMR spectra of the three derivatives was carried out (Figure 3.14 a, b, c). From 
this analysis a strong high field shift is observed for proton Ha in 2-38 (8.82 ppm) 
compared to the same proton in 3-13 (9.30 ppm). This result is related to the overall 
decrease in the magnetic anisotropy of the system arising from the loss of aromaticity 
in the central part of the molecule in accordance with results obtained from 2-1 and 3-2. 
Surprisingly, 3-27BF does not present the halfway situation expected, instead, the Ha 
proton of this molecule is the most deshielded in the series (9.77 ppm). This result 
however should not be related to aromaticity, but instead could be the result of the 
presence of the charged oxygen in the system. Indeed, when resonance structures of 
3-27BF are considered, it results that a partial positive charge is present on the  
carbon, which is accountable for the low field shift of the Ha proton. 
The results obtained from these studies highlight a quite similar situation for the 
substitution of the central benzene ring in both HBC 3-2 and gulf derivative 3-13. In 
general, the substitution of the central aromatic ring with a B3NnOo based system 
results in a decrease in the aromaticity in the central part of the molecule. This results 
in more localised aromatic sextets and ring currents as highlighted by ACID 
calculations on the gulf derivatives. This effect is exposed nicely in the excerpts of the 
Chapter 3 
1H-NMR spectra of the different derivatives in which a decrease of the magnetic 
anisotropy is always associated to the introduction of the borazine based systems.  
3.9 UV-Vis Comparison 
To assess the effect of borazine doping on the optical properties of PAHs, absorption 
and emission spectra were recorded for hexabenzocoronene and gulf derivatives 
(Figure 3.15, table 3.1). From these measurements 2-1 presents strongly blue-shifted 
absorption and emission when compared with 3-2, particularly when absorption is 
considered. The lowest energy transition for 2-1 appears at 375 nm while in 3-2 it is 
found at 446 nm, resulting in a 71 nm blueshift. In addition, the absorption bands of 2-1 
show noticeable vibrational substructures, evidencing a high degree of rigidity of the 
molecular skeleton. Fluorescence and 77 K phosphorescence follow a similar 
behaviour with em at higher energies (fl = 404 nm, ph = 492 nm) for 2-1 and lower 
ones (fl = 485 nm, ph = 570 nm) for 3-2. Both these results are in line with theoretical 
predictions for these systems, suggesting an efficient widening of the HOMO-LUMO 
gap induced by the borazine doping, which results in an increase of 0.53 eV in the 
optical bandgap moving from 3-2 to 2-1. Interestingly, the quantum yield of 
fluorescence (fl) increases dramatically moving from 3-2 (3%) to 2-1 (43%).  
Figure 3.15: Absorption (), fluorescence () in aerated CH2Cl2 solutions at r.t., 
phosphorescence () at 77 K in a 1:1 CH2Cl2:CHCl3 glassy matrix of 3-2 (ex = 355 nm), 2-1 (ex 
= 315 nm), 3-13 (ex = 265 nm), 2-38 (ex = 265 nm), and 3-27BF (ex = 267 nm). 
This effect can be probably ascribed to the higher HOMO-LUMO gap, which can help 
preventing non-radiative decay of the excited state. Notably, when the measure is 
performed in degassed CH2Cl2, the fl increases to 77%.  
Chapter 3 
At this point, the steady-state UV-Vis absorption and emission properties of gulf 
derivatives 2-38, 3-13 and 3-27BF were also studied in order to assess the effect of 
doping on the electronic properties of the gulf molecules. The results of these studies 
are reported in table 3.1 and figure 3.15. Derivative 3-13 presents a lowest energy 
transition at 430 nm ( < 1000 cm-1M-1) whereas the maximum of absorption is 
localized at 332 nm ( = 70400 cm-1M-1). When the central ring is substituted with the 
B3N2O moiety a blueshift of 59 nm in the absorption occurs with the lowest energy 
transition appearing at 367 nm and the maximum of absorption at 292 nm ( = 18500 
cm-1M-1) with a much lower  then its all-carbon congener.  
These results are in line with what observed moving from 3-2 to 2-1. As for 2-1, even in 
the case of 2-38 the absorption is well structured suggesting a high degree of rigidity 
for the system. When the absorption of 3-27BF is taken in consideration, a broad 
unstructured band is observed at 575 nm ( = 25027 cm-1M-1) strongly redshifted with 
respect to 3-13, this result is most likely due to the presence of the charged oxygen in 
the system.  
Focusing on emission spectra, 2-38 presents the most blueshifted fluorescence (max = 
371 nm, fl =3.37 ns, fl = 0.90) followed by 3-13 (max = 408 nm, fl< 1 ns, fl = 0.11) 
and finally 3-27BF (max = 595 nm, fl = 8.1 ns, fl = 0.48). Both 2-38 and 3-27BF present 
narrow Stokes shifts as already seen for derivative 2-1, again confirming the rigid 
nature of this derivatives. Interestingly, fl increases nine-fold moving from 3-13 to 2-
38. This can be due to the increased band gap of this derivative and the higher rigidity 
imposed by the BN system as previously noticed for the case of 2-1 and 3-2. No 
phosphorescence was detected for 2-38 in a frozen matrix at 77 K and this result can 
possibly be a consequence of the highly efficient radiative singlet deactivation which 
results in a low population of the triplet state that possibly undergoes non-radiative 
relaxation.  
Chapter 3 
Table 3.1. Photophysical data in aerated CH2Cl2 and in glassy matrix for molecules 3-5, 3-18, 3-
32BF, 2-2 and 2-1.  
Molecule Absorption Emission 
 [nm]  
(, L mol
max,fl 
fl max,ph 
446 (1000) 
388 (53800) 
358 (159100) 
485 2.76 16.4 0.03 570 0.8 
375 (24000) 
314 (31200) 
404 3.29 8.2 0.43 492 4.0 
367 (16250) 
362 (11860) 
348 (13600) 
292 (18500) 
 3.37 0.90 - - 
430 (800) 
377 (10900) 
366 (31300) 
332 (70400) 
319 (45000) 
306 (41500) 
 <1.0 0.11
3-27BF 
575 (25027) 
539 (9635) 
480 (4117) 
364 (18116) 
343 (23378) 
595 2.12
 8.1 0.48 - - 
 Recorded in an aerated CH2Cl2 solution at r.t. 
Calculated from the lowest energy intersection 
between absorption and emission spectra normalized on the lowest energy peak (Eopt [eV] = 
1240.5/cross[nm]).
Calculated from the average between the energies of the lowest emission 
and absorption peak. 
9,10-Diphenylanthracene was used as reference standard (0.97 in 
aerated Cyclohexane).
 Recorded at 77 K in a 1:1 CH2Cl2:CHCl3 glassy matrix.
Among the examined molecules, only 3-13 presented phosphorescence emission with 
a max at 540 nm and a fl = 2.7 s. Altogether these data allowed us to estimate an 
increase of 0.25 eV in the optical HOMO-LUMO gap when the central ring of 3-13 is 
substituted with the boroxadiazine system. This result is again consistent with the data 
reported for 2-1 (Eopt = 0.53 eV), however this time a smaller increase in the gap is 
observed.  
A general comparison with derivatives 2-1 and 3-2 was performed as well to compare 
the effects induced by the presence of the gulf region on the absorption/emission 
properties of nanographenes. When the results obtained for derivatives 2-38 and 3-13 
are compared to those for 2-1 and 3-2 it is possible to see that the presence of the gulf 
region results in a blueshift in both absorption and emission. This difference is however 
Chapter 3 
of small proportion for 2-38 and 2-1 (abs = 0.07 eV) whereas is more marked for 3-13 
and 3-2 (abs = 0.10 eV). This fact is probably related to the more localized nature of 
the sextets in the doped derivatives, resulting in a less important effect on the 
absorption and emission properties related to the removal of one aromatic ring. The 
Stokes shift for derivatives 2-1 and 2-38 are very narrow and this, along with the 
structured absorptions observed for both systems, suggests a high rigidity of the 
molecular scaffolds. Since these features are not observed in 3-2 and 3-13 this effect is 
most probably related to the presence of the BN bonds. When quantum yields are 
considered, it emerges that the removal of one ring from the system results in an 
increase of the fl from 43% to 90% between 2-1 and 2-38 and from 3% to 11% 
between 3-2 and 3-13; this effect is related to the absence of phosphorescence 
emission for 2-38, which was instead observed for 2-1.  
3.10 Electrochemistry 
To establish the HOMO and LUMO energy levels for the different derivatives, cyclic 
voltammetry (CV) was performed. We started with the experiments on both 2-1 and 3-2 
(Figure 3.16). 
Figure 3.16: a) cyclic voltammograms of 2-1 in CH2Cl2 (ca. 0.70 mM). Scan rates: 0.5 V s-1 
(black line), 0.05 V s-1 (red line). B) Comparison between cyclic voltammograms of 2-1 (blue 
line, scan rate 0.5 V s-1) and 3-2 (red line, scan rate 0.05 V s-1) in CH2Cl2. TBAPF6 (0.08 M) is 
used as a supporting electrolyte; ferrocene (Fc) is introduced as internal reference (EFc+/Fc=0.46 
V vs SCE; -4.8 eV vs vacuum). 
From the data obtained, it emerges that 2-1 presents a quasi-reversible first oxidation 
wave at 1.46 V vs SCE in CH2Cl2, which is higher in energy than the one observed for 
3-2 (E1/2ox = 1.27 V vs SCE). This can be translated in a more difficult oxidation of 2-1, 
which is consistent with a less electron rich nature of this derivative. On the other hand, 
no reduction peaks were observed for the two molecules at any scan rate under the 
same conditions. HOMO and LUMO energies calculated from the data obtained for the 
two derivatives are respectively -5.80 eV and -2.51 eV for 2-1 and -5.61 eV and -2.85 
Chapter 3 
eV for 3-2. These data underline that the 0.53 eV extension of the HOMO-LUMO gap 
of 2-1 is emerging from both a decrease in the HOMO energy and an increase in the 
LUMO one (Figure 3.17).  
Figure 3.17: Frontier orbital energies estimated from the CV and photophysical data for 3-2 and 
2-1. Reduction potentials of the triplet excited states are evidenced by the narrower optical 
energy gaps (ET*=E1/2ox -EoptT). Fc+/Fc=0.46 V vs SCE; -4.8 eV vs vacuum. 
When the same electrochemical studies were performed on the gulf series of 
derivatives, only quasi reversible oxidation waves were detected for 2-38 and 3-13 and 
irreversible oxidative events for 3-27BF with no reduction waves visible for any of the 
derivatives at any scan rate. Moreover, all the oxidative events took place between 0.8 
and 1.2 V vs Fc+/Fc at a 0.2 Vs-1 scan rate. In this analysis, 2-38 presented the highest 
energy oxidation at 1.09 V followed by 3-13 with 1.01 V, again confirming the electron 
depleting effect of the BN based ring systems. When 3-27BF is considered, a value of 
0.50 V is observed for the first oxidation wave, thus making this derivative the more 
oxidizable in the series (Figure 3.18), this oxidation however results in degradation of 
the species. The CV studies along with the values of the optical HOMO-LUMO gaps 
previously reported, allowed us to estimate the energies of the frontier orbitals for the 
gulf derivatives. As expected, the HOMO of 2-38 (-6.19 eV) is lower in energy 
compared to 3-13 (-6.11 eV) and the LUMO levels of 2-38 and 3-13 are quite different 
in energy (-2.83 eV and -3.00 eV), with the latter at lower potentials. Therefore, the 
variation in energy of the HOMO-LUMO gap is due to the variation in both the energy 
levels as previously observed for derivative 2-1.  
Chapter 3 
Figure 3.18: CV of 2-38 (top, left), 3-13 (top, right), 3-27BF (bottom) recorded in CH2Cl2 
solutions at room temperature under N2. Scan rate 0.1 V s-1. TBAPF6 was used as supporting 
electrolyte. The couple Fc+/0 has been used as internal standard. 
When 3-27BF is considered, the HOMO level obtained from CV is placed at -5.6 eV 
while the LUMO is found at -3.48 eV. A much smaller optical gap between the orbitals 
is found (2.12 eV), and this can be attributed to the presence of charge separation 
states in this derivative, which is related to the great difference in the energy levels 
compared to the other derivatives in the series (Figure 3.19). 
Figure 3.19: Frontier orbital energies estimated from the CV and photophysical data for 2-38, 3-
13 and 3-27BF.  
Chapter 3 
3.11 HOMO-LUMO calculations 
To shed light on the electrochemistry results and give a theoretical confirmation to the 
experimental data, the HOMO and LUMO orbitals for the derivatives were calculated in 
vacuum at B3LYP/6.31G (d,p) level of theory (GAUSSIAN09) (Figure 3.20) and at the 
B3LYP/6-31+G** level of theory (Figure 3.21). From the calculation, clearly the 
presence of the borazine ring in 2-1 induces a different arrangement of the HOMO and 
especially the LUMO orbitals. While in 3-2 both these orbitals are distributed on all the 
 surface, in the case of 2-1 the orbitals are more irregular and the LUMO is sitting 
exclusively on the hexaphenylene ring. This result provides further evidence on the 
important effects determined by the substitution of a phenyl ring with a borazine in 
PAHs. The calculated values of the HOMO and LUMO levels for derivatives 3-2 and 2-
1 are reported as well in Figure 3.20 and show a good agreement with the results 
obtained experimentally. Furthermore, as in the experimental results, the extension of 
the computational HOMO-LUMO gap is arising from both a decrease in HOMO energy 
and increase in the LUMO one, resulting in a 0.48 eV widening of the gap, in very good 
agreement with the observed one (0.53 eV). 
Figure 3.20: HOMO and LUMO profiles for 2-1 and 3-2 at B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) level of theory 
(GAUSSIAN09), calculated values for HOMO LUMO levels vs vacuum are reported as well. 
At this point, the HOMO-LUMO profiles for the gulf derivatives were calculated as well 
(figure 3.21). From these data it is possible to see that, similarly to the previous case, 
the presence of the B3N2O system determines a change in the distribution of the 
HOMO and LUMO orbitals compared to 3-13. In fact, the HOMO of 2-38 is distributed 
evenly on the structure except for the two rings of the gulf region, whereas the LUMO is 
distributed on the outer rim of the molecule and not on the central B3N2O ring very 
similarly to what observed for 2-1.  
Chapter 3 
Figure 3.21: HOMO and LUMO energy levels calculated for molecules 2-38, 3-13 and 3-27BF at 
the B3LYP/631+G** level of theory. 
On the other hand, the orbitals in 3-13 appear uniformly distributed on all the  surface 
again in a similar fashion to what reported for 3-2. Finally, derivative 3-27BF presents a 
less uniform distribution compared to 3-13 especially for the LUMO, which might be 
related to the presence of the charge in the system. The values of the computational 
HOMO-LUMO gap for 2-38 and 3-13 (4.31 eV and 3.71 eV) are generally in agreement 
with the experimentally obtained ones (3.36 eV, 3.11 eV) despite presenting some 
overestimation. When 3-27BF is considered, the biggest discrepancy from the 
experimental value is found (4.67 eV vs 2.12 eV) probably due to the presence of the 
charged system and a charge transfer state, which is not considered in the calculation. 
3.12 Conclusions and perspectives 
As a result of the work described in this chapter an extensive characterization of BN-
doped derivatives 2-1 and 2-38 is now available. Moreover, the synthesis of reference 
compounds 3-2, 3-13 and 3-27BF allowed for a comparison between the doped 
derivatives and full-carbon/heteroaromatic ones. From this study, the ability of borazine 
doping to widen the HOMO-LUMO gap of PAHs is highlighted along with an increased 
rigidity and quantum yield. The comparison between gulf derivatives (2-38, 3-13 and 3-
27BF) and the hexabenzocoronene ones (2-1 and 3-2) allowed the identification of the 
effect of the different edge topology on the properties of the PAHs. In particular, the 
presence of the gulf region results in higher quantum yields for derivatives 2-38 and 3-
Chapter 3 
13 compared to 2-1 and 3-2. Computational studies highlighted a decrease in 
aromaticity in the central part of the molecule for the doped systems, indirectly 
confirmed by analysis of 1H-NMR spectra, in which a strong decrease of the magnetic 
anisotropy is visible for derivatives 2-1 and 2-38. This fact is correlated with the 
expected decrease in the ring current associated with a higher localization of full 
aromatic sextets in these derivatives. CV studies show a general decrease in the 
electron abundance of borazine-doped derivatives with first oxidation waves at higher 
voltages compared to full carbon analogues. This work provides exhaustive 
experimental evidence of the effect of borazine doping on PAHs, confirming the 
theoretically predicted ability of borazine based systems to increase the HOMO-LUMO 
gap of PAHs and consequently the bandgap of graphene systems.  
3.13 References 
[1] L. Zhai, R. Shukla, R. Rathore, Org. Lett. 2009, 11, 34743477. 
[2] C. Kbel, K. Eckhardt, V. Enkelmann, G. Wegner, K. Mllen, J. Mater. Chem. 
2000, 10, 879886. 
[3] M. Daigle, A. Picard-lafond, E. Soligo, J. F. Morin, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed 2016, 
55, 20422047. 
[4] D. Wu, W. Pisula, M. C. Haberecht, X. Feng, K. Mllen, Org. Lett. 2009, 11, 
56865689. 
[5] A. Suzuki, Pure appl. Chem. 1994, 66, 213222. 
[6] K. B. Jrgensen, T. Rantanen, T. Drfler, V. Snieckus, J. Org. Chem. 2015, 80, 
94109424. 
[7] X. Cai, S. Brown, P. Hodson, V. Snieckus, Can. J. Chem. 2004, 205, 195205. 
[8] D. Moser, Y. Duan, F. Wang, Y. Ma, M. J. ONeill, J. Cornella, Angew. Chemie 
Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 1103511039. 
[9] N. Otero, K. E. El-Kelany, C. Pouchan, M. Rrat, P. Karamanis, Phys. Chem. 
Chem. Phys. 2016, 18, 2531525328. 
Chapter 4 
CHAPTER 4 
SYNTHESIS OF MULTI-BORAZINE SYSTEMS: TOWARDS 
EXTENDED BORAZINE-DOPED NANOGRAPHENES. 
In this chapter the synthetic efforts towards multi-borazine derivatives are reported. 
These BN-doped polyphenylene dendrimers are of central importance as starting 
materials for the synthesis of extended borazine-doped nanographenes. To prepare 
fluoro-multiborazine derivatives able to undergo the planarization reaction presented in 
chapter 2, a study on model compounds presenting xylyl moieties bonded to the boron 
atom of the borazine ring was carried out. The study of these derivatives highlighted 
the central importance of steric hindrance on the stability of the multi-borazine systems 
and led to the development of a synthesis resulting in the formation of the first fluoro-
functionalized multi-borazine. Despite the success and complete characterization of 
this derivative, the subsequent cyclization reaction could not be carried out due to low 
yields and partial instability of the molecule. 
This chapter is divided in six main sections: i) section 4.1 presents the aim of the 
project; ii) Section 4.2 describes the synthesis of multi-borazine derivatives via 
condensation reactions along with their spectroscopic properties; iii) Section 4.3 
presents a study on the UV-Vis properties of the multiborazine derivatives; iv) Section 
4.4 presents the synthesis of fluoro-functionalized multi-borazine 4-19. v) Section 4.5 
draws some conclusions and perspectives from the obtained results; vi) Section 4.6 
contains the references for the chapter. 
The research work described in sections 4.2 and 4.3 was carried out jointly with D. 
Marinelli at Cardiff university. X-Ray analysis were performed by N. Demitri (Elettra-
Sincrotrone, Basovizza, Trieste, Italy). Photophysical characterization was carried out 
by T. Battisti (Cardiff university). 
The results reported in sections 4.2 and 4.3 have been published in the following 
article: J. Dosso, D. Marinelli, N. Demitri, D. Bonifazi, ACS Omega 2019, 4, 9343
9351.[1] 
Chapter 4 
4.1 Aim of the project 
The aim of the work described in this chapter is the development of a suitable 
synthesis towards polyphenylenic borazine-doped systems, namely multi-borazines. 
These derivatives consist in multiple borazine cores bonded by a bridging moiety, 
represented by a diamine unit such as p-phenylenediamine (4-1). The synthetic 
strategy towards these molecules will rely on a condensation reaction involving aniline 
and 4-1, followed by treatment of the resulting chloro-borazoles with suitable 
organolithium reagents (scheme 4.1). The presence of the bridging 4-1 will allow the 
formation of the dendrimeric systems leading to multidispersed mixtures of products. 
As a first step, the synthesis of model compounds presenting mesityl groups bonded 
on the boron atoms of the borazine ring needs to be carried out to optimize the reaction 
conditions and study the stability of such derivatives. The choice of the mesityl group is 
due to its ability to effectively shield the boron atoms from nucleophilic attack, thus 
leading to stable derivatives which can be studied and fully characterized.[2,3] Once 
suitable conditions have been developed, the synthesis of fluoro-functionalized multi-
borazines will be performed, leading to derivatives that can be used in planarization 
reactions to form borazine-doped nanoribbons (Scheme 4.1). 
Scheme 4.1: Synthetic strategy towards fluoro-multiborazine derivatives and their use as 
precursors in borazine-doped nanographene synthesis. 
Chapter 4 
Furthermore, model compounds themselves represent interesting derivatives which will 
be of central importance in understanding the effect of high doping percentages (16-
18%) on polyphenylene systems. This will allow a comparison with previous results 
obtained in our group with similar derivative with a lower doping percentages (0-8%)[4]. 
4.2 Synthesis of test Multi-borazine derivatives 
To synthesize the desired mesityl multi-borazino derivatives a synthetic route involving 
a condensation polymerization was followed (Scheme 4.2). 
Scheme 4.2: Synthetic route towards mesityl multi-borazino derivatives. 
As a first attempt, a 4:1 mixture of 1-60 and 4-1 was reacted with BCl3 in refluxing 
toluene. The resulting chloro-borazole mixture was then treated with mesityl lithium (4-
6) leading to a statistical distribution of products. Notably, addition of BCl3 was 
performed at 80 C to increase the solubility of 4-1 in toluene. Purification of the 
mixture with SCC led to the isolation of 1-66 and 4-3 in 10% and 2% yield, respectively. 
Aiming at the synthesis of more extended BN polyphenylene derivatives, the reaction 
was repeated using a higher amount of the bridging diamine and thus a 2:1 ratio 
between 1-60 and 4-1 was used. After quenching with 4-6, a mixture of products was 
obtained. Again, 1-66 was isolated by SCC in 6% yield along with a quite complex 
mixed fraction. Purification of this last part was carried out using rec-GPC (Figure 4.1) 
leading to the isolation of 4-3 (5% yield) and 4-4 (3% yield).  
Chapter 4 
Figure 4.1: Rec-GPC trace of the crude mixture after silica gel column chromatography, 
showing the waste (black), recycle (blue) and collection (red) sequence. Inset: zoom of the 
chromatogram of 4th cycle. 
Despite the high ratio of 4-1 used, it was not possible to isolate oligomeric products 
suggesting that this could be due to stability issues of derivatives. This hypothesis was 
confirmed when degradation of both 4-3 and particularly 4-4 was noticed in presence of 
moisture, resulting in the impossibility to isolate 4-4 in pure form. Despite the partial 
instability, 4-3 was isolated and completely characterized suggesting that the observed 
instability could be directly correlated with the increase in molecular weight. Crystals of 
4-3 suitable for SC-XRD were obtained by slow evaporation of a solution of CHCl3. 
Examination of the resulting crystal structure (Figure 4.2) gives a valuable explanation 
of the reactivity of this system, which arises from the high steric hindrance in the bay 
regions of the molecule (Scheme 4.2). This effect is due to the presence of the para-
methyl groups of the mesityl rings belonging to different borazine units. The steric clash 
between the mesityl groups in the bay area of 4-3 develops in a deviation from the 
arrangement between the aryl substituents and the borazine ring observed in 1-66, 
resulting in an interplanar angle between 55.5 to 77.3 degrees in 4-3. Furthermore, the 
central BN core in 4-3 displays a significant structural deformation, with a RMSD of 
0.14  of the core BN atoms from the average plane. The result of these steric effects 
in 4-3 is a distorted arrangement of the borazine cores that are forced in shifted parallel 
planes with no rotation (interplanar distance of 0.14 , Figure 4.2b). This ultimately 
results in a decreased steric shielding of the boron atoms by the methyl groups, leading 
to an enhanced susceptibility of the BN cores towards hydrolysis, which is otherwise 
unexpected in borazine derivatives presenting mesityl groups bonded on boron atoms. 
Chapter 4 
Figure 4.2: Crystal structure of 4-3 a) front view ellipsoids representation of ASU contents (50% 
probability). b) side view (stick representation) it is visible how steric hindrance between 
neighbour BN cores is minimized with shifting. c) front view (spacefill representation) d) side 
view (spacefill representation) steric hindrance between neighbour mesityl groups highlighted. 
To reduce the structural strain and therefore obtaining more stable derivatives, the 
synthesis of derivatives with decreased steric hindrance in the bay regions should be 
envisaged. Since the para-methyl of the mesityl groups is the major source of steric 
hindrance, the most efficient approach should be the replacement of mesityl lithium 4-6 
with xylyl lithium 4-7 (Scheme 4.3). The resulting xylyl multi-borazine derivatives should 
present a much lower steric hindrance in the bay regions of the molecules, leading to 
increased stability towards nucleophilic attack and possibly to the isolation of high 
molecular weight oligomers (Scheme 4.3). The reaction of Scheme 4.2 was then 
repeated refluxing a 2:1 ratio between 1-60 and 4-1 with BCl3 and the resulting mixture 
of chloro-borazoles was treated with 4-7 in THF, leading to the formation of a quite 
complex statistical mixture. Multiple chromatographic purifications involving both SCC 
and preparative TLCs allowed us to isolate 4-8 (16% yield), 4-9 (7% yield), 4-10 (1% 
yield), 4-11 (2% yield) and 4-12 (0.1% yield) along with an inseparable mixture of 
oligomeric products. The structural identity of the monodispersed fractions was firstly 
demonstrated by HR-MS spectrometry, which confirmed the molecular mass for all 
oligomers (4-8, [C42H43B3N3]+, calc.: 622.3736, found: 622.3766; 4-9, [C78H78B6N6]+, 
calc.: 1164.6846, found: 1164.6812; 4-10, [C114H114B9N9]+, calc.: 1708.0035, found: 
1707.9987; 4-11, [C70H70B6N6O]+, calc.: 1076.6169, found: 1076.6207; and 4-12, 
[C150H150B12N12]+, calc.: 2251.3223, found: 2251.3375). 
Chapter 4 
Scheme 4.3: Synthetic route towards xylyl multi-borazino derivatives. 
The single components of the final multi-dispersed fraction were not separable via SCC 
and thus the mixture was analysed using size exclusion chromatography calibrated on 
a series of poly(methylmethacrylate) standards. The result of this analysis proved that 
this fraction was composed by oligomers up to 104 Da (corresponding to 16-18 
borazine units), with an average molecular weight of 1900 Da and a dispersity of 1.97 
(Figure 4.3). 
Figure 4.3: Molecular weight distribution of oligomeric fraction. 
To understand better the nature of the mixture, 11B-NMR and FT-ATR analyses were 
carried out. The 11B-NMR spectrum shows a peak at 37.5 ppm, indicative of the 
Chapter 4 
borazine core, along with a smaller peak at 25.2 ppm indicating presence of boron 
linked to oxygen (Figure 4.4).  
Figure 4.4: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of oligomeric fraction in CDCl3 (probe residual signal visible from 
10 to -10 ppm). 
The presence of B-OH groups in the mixture finds further confirmation in the FT-ATR 
spectrum of these oligomers, which closely resembles that of 4-11, with an OH-
stretching absorption band centred at 3612 cm-1 which suggests that at least a part of 
the higher oligomers is composed of hydroxylated species (Figure 4.5).  
Figure 4.5: a) FT-ATR spectra of 4-11. b) FT-ATR spectra of oligomeric fraction. 
This result points out that, despite the decrease in the steric hindrance, the high 
molecular weight derivatives are to some extent instable and thus partially 
hydrolysable. Another possible explanation could be that the increased steric hindrance 
hinders the nucleophilic attack of 4-7 on some boron atoms, leading to unreacted B-Cl 
groups that are hydrolysed during workup. Both these explanations are plausible and 
Chapter 4 
further investigation is required to assess the exact mechanism resulting in the 
instability of the higher oligomers. Moving on the monodispersed fractions, derivatives 
from 4-8 to 4-10 were fully characterized with 1H, 13C-NMR and UV-Vis spectroscopy. 
Furthermore, suitable crystals for SC-XRD were obtained for 4-8 (slow evaporation of 
CHCl3 solution, Figure 4.6), 4-9, 4-10, (diffusion of pentane in a CHCl3 solution, Figure 
4.7 and 4.10) and 4-11, (slow evaporation of a 1:1 CH2Cl2:petroleum ether mixture, 
Figure 4.8 and 4.9). 
Figure 4.6: 4-8 front view ellipsoids representation of ASU contents (50% probability), crystals 
obtained by slow evaporation of CHCl3 solution. 
From the obtained structures it is possible to see that in the case of 4-8 the crystal 
structure is very similar to previously reported examples of 1-66, which is expected due 
to the very similar chemical structure.[5]  
Figure 4.7: Crystal structure of 4-9 a) front view ellipsoids representation of ASU contents (50% 
probability). b) side view (stick representation) it is visible how steric hindrance between 
neighbour BN cores is drastically reduced with xylyl groups. c) front view (spacefill 
representation) d) side view (spacefill representation) some steric hindrance between neighbour 
xylyl groups is still present. 
Chapter 4 
In the case of 4-9 important differences emerge when compared with 4-3 (Figure 4.7). 
Firstly, a relevant suppression of the strain in bay regions of the system (Figure 4.7b) 
with a more homogeneous protection of the reactive boron centres (Figure 4.7c) is 
visible in 4-9. No shifting on different planes of the borazine cores is visible, although a 
tilting of 32 between the two cores is present, suggesting that a certain level of steric 
hindrance is still present in the bay regions of the molecule. Despite this, 4-9 appears 
to be indefinitely stable upon storage in the presence of atmospheric moisture just as 
4-8, thus confirming that most of the strain present in 4-3 has been successfully 
removed. 
When crystals of 4-11 are considered, two different polymorphs are observed, one with 
rod shaped crystals ( P 21/c unit cell: a = 18.861(4) ; b = 22.390(4) ; c = 14.820(3) 
  = 104.44(3)), the other with plate shaped ones  (P 21/c a = 11.350(2)  ; b = 
16.679(3); c = 32.207(6)   = 99.29(3)).  
Figure 4.8: Crystal structure of the  polymorph of 4-11 a) front view ellipsoids representation of 
ASU contents (50% probability). b) side view (stick representation) it is visible how steric 
hindrance between neighbour BN cores is eliminated with substitution of a xylyl group with a 
hydroxyl. c) front view (spacefill representation) d) side view (spacefill representation).  
In both polymorphs the substitution of a xylyl group with a hydroxyl one is observed, 
and this change leads to a further suppression of the residual strain between neighbour 
xylyl moieties in the bay regions compared to 4-9 (Figure 4.8d and 4.9d).  
In the  crystals this results in a flat structure, with coplanar borazine cores (1.5 tilting, 
Figure 4.8b). In the  crystals (Figure 4.9), a tilt angle of 39 is present between the 
two different BN cores. The tilting between the cores in this case does not arise from 
strain in the molecule but is related to a greater degree of flexibility, due to the reduced 
Chapter 4 
hindrance, which allows a different arrangement of the BN cores in the solid state, 
ultimately resulting in the two different polymorphs.  
Moreover, 4-11 resulted to be stable towards moisture just as 4-9, thus confirming the 
presence of an effective steric shielding on the boron atoms. Since 4-9 is stable under 
normal handling conditions, it is unlikely that 4-11 is formed by degradation of 4-9. 
Considered that the OH derivatization was observed only in boron atoms close to the 
bridging position, one can hypothesize that the nucleophilic attack of xylyl-lithium in that 
position is more difficult due to steric hindrance. This possibly results in the previously 
reported formation of hydroxyl multi-borazino derivatives in the oligomeric fraction. In 
fact, it could be inferred that the increase in molecular weight leads to a higher strain in 
the bay positions of the derivatives that results in higher percentages of hydroxylated 
derivatives. 
Figure 4.9: Crystal structure of the polymorph  of 4-11 a) front view ellipsoids representation 
of ASU contents (50% probability). b) side view (stick representation) c) front view (spacefill 
representation) d) side view (spacefill representation).  
When the crystal structure of 4-10 (Figure 4.10a) is considered, an increased strain in 
the concave bay region comprised between the three BN cores is visible as previously 
postulated (Figure 4.10c).  
This leads to a distortion of the structure resulting in a helicoidally fashioned distribution 
of the xylene moieties (figure 4.10 b-d). In Figure 4.10b it is clearly visible a 53.0-53.5  
tilting of the peripheric borazine centres with respect to the central one, which allows 
the structure to release some of the strain arising from the crowded concave bay area 
of the molecule.  
Chapter 4 
Figure 4.10: Crystal structure of 4-10 a) front view ellipsoids representation of ASU contents 
(15% probability). b) side view (stick representation) it is visible how steric hindrance between 
neighbour BN cores leads to a tilting of the borazine cores xylyl. c) front view (spacefill 
representation) d) side view (spacefill representation), helicoidally distribution of xylyl groups in 
evidence.  
This distortion could be a valid explanation for the low yield of the high molecular 
weight derivatives despite the relatively high ratio between 2-4 and 4-1.  
Figure 4.11: a) Detail (stick representation) of crystal structure showing CH- interactions 
between xylyl groups b) detail (stick representation) of solvent position in the crystal c) Scheme 
representing molecules arrangement and solvent position in the crystal d) highlight of pores and 
solvent (spacefill representation).  
When looking at the crystal packing, molecule 4-10 forms an hexagonal porous network 
in which each pore is formed by six molecules of 4-10 (Figure 4.11c) held together by 
CH- interactions resulting from the interdigitation of peripheral phenyl rings (Figure 
4.11 a). Three molecules of the solvent are included in the structure in specific 
positions (Figure 4.11 b, d), with non-covalent interactions that stabilize the crystal. The 
Chapter 4 
pores present in the crystal structure have a diameter of 32  and are filled with 
disordered pentane molecules.  
As previously stated, trace amounts of 4-12 were obtained as well (0.1% yield). Due to 
the very low yield of this derivative only a limited characterization was possible, and the 
identification of this molecule relied mostly on the HR-MS analysis (Figure 4.12). 
Figure 4.12: MALDI+ HR-MS spectrum of 4-12 derivative: [C150H150B12N12]+, calc.: 
2251.3223, found: 2251.3375. 
Despite various attempts using different solvent mixtures it was never possible to grow 
crystals of 4-12. The low yield can be ascribed to the increased steric hindrance for the 
larger multi-borazino derivatives, as it leads to the preferential formation of hydroxyl 
multi-borazines. In analogy with alkanes, the four-unit multi-borazine 4-12 presents two 
possible isomers which can be identified with the nomenclature n-4-12 and i-4-12 
(Scheme 4.4).  
The two isomers were not separable and no attempts using rec-GPC were carried out 
due to the very small amount obtained. Oligomers longer than 4-12 are expected to be 
formed as mixtures of isomers, which above the pentamer, could include even cyclic 
structures.  
Chapter 4 
Scheme 4.4: Representation of the possible isomers up to the 5-unit derivatives. 
4.3 UV-Vis properties of multi-borazine derivatives 
To study the effect of high doping dosages on the optoelectronic properties of 
borazine-polyphenylenes, the steady-state UV-Vis absorption and emission properties 
of 4-8, 4-9, 4-10 and 4-12 (both isomers) were studied (Figure 4.13). 
Figure 4.13: Absorption (solid line) at r.t., fluorescence at r.t. (black dashed line) and 
fluorescence at 77 K (red dashed line), and phosphorescence at 77 K (dotted line) of 4-8 (exc = 
265 nm), 4-9 (exc = 265 nm), 4-10 (exc = 267 nm) and 4-12 (exc = 267 nm) in an aerated 
CH2Cl2 solution. 
When the emissive properties of air-equilibrated CH2Cl2 solutions of all borazine 
derivatives are considered, significant radiative UV emission profiles (max = 300, 297, 
298 and 299 nm, Table 4.1) and very short lifetimes, (fl = 1.24  1.66 ns, Table 4.1) 
consistent with the presence of excited singlet radiative deactivation, are observed for 
Chapter 4 
all molecules. These observations suggest that the absorption properties of these 
oligomers are additive, and that no significant -conjugation occurs upon extension of 
the oligomers. All solutions showed very low quantum yields (em = 2%  7%; Table 
4.1) suggesting that the borazine core leads to a quenching of the fluorescence 
compared to less doped polyphenylene derivatives.[4] From these data, a confirmation 
that high BN dosages enhance the deactivation rate of the singlet excited state is 
obtained. When cooled to 77 K, non-negligible phosphorescence emission has been 
also observed (Figure 4.13) showing very similar emission profiles for the different 
derivatives, all placed at ca. 390 nm. The presence of this phosphorescence emission 
is also in line with previously reported borazino-polyphenylenes.[4] Representative 
phosphorescence lifetime measurements showed long-lasting emission profiles (ph ca. 
~1.11  1.56 s). 
Table 4.1: UV-Vis Absorption and emission properties of derivatives 4-8, 4-9, 4-10 and 4-12. 
Molecule Absorption Emission 
 [nm] (, Lmol1cm-1) 
max,fla) 
Eoptb) 
fl max,phe) 
phe)[s]  
260 (3300) 
266 (3831) 
272 (3342) 
300 4.31 1.24 0.02 383 1.11(single) 
1.42 (76%) 
0.37 (24%)  
266 (6702) 
272 (5630) 
280 (2755) 
297 4.18 1.66 0.02 389 1.49 (single) 
1.70 (88%) 
0.27 (12%) 
4-10 266 (11747) 
272 (10300) 
280 (5813) 
298 4.16 1.39 0.06 386 1.56(single) 
1.71 (88%) 
0.14 (12%) 
4-12 266 (15669) 
272 (13949) 
280 (9100) 
299 4.15 1.36 0.07 
1.46(48%) 
0.26 (52%) 
a)Recorded in an aerated CH2Cl2 solution at r.t.b) Calculated from the lowest energy crossing 
point between the absorption and emission spectra normalised on the lowest energy peak (Eopt 
[eV] = 1240.5/ cross[nm]). c) 9,10-Diphenylanthracene was used as reference standard (0.97 in 
Cyclohexane).[6]e)Recorded at 77K in a 1:1 CH2Cl2:CHCl3 glassy matrix. 
The only parameter that changes consistently among the different derivatives is the 
extinction coefficient, which regularly increases from 4-8 to 4-12. This effect plausibly 
arises from the increasing number of phenyl rings in the system, which leads to a linear 
increase in the absorption for the molecules, since each derivative increases by the 
same number of rings compared with the previous one (Figure 4.14). This confirms the 
additive nature of the observed effects in these derivatives, which is related only to the 
number of units in each molecule and rules out any kind of extended conjugation 
between the different sub-units. 
Chapter 4 
Figure 4.14: graph reporting the linear correlation between MW of the derivatives and molar 
extinction coefficient. 
Chapter 4 
4.4 Synthesis of fluorine-functionalized multi-borazine 
derivatives 
The synthesis of multi-borazine derivatives bearing fluorine atoms in ortho position on 
the boron bonded aryl rings was then attempted. To avoid the formation of mixtures of 
atropoisomers, the synthesis was initially performed using lithium derivative 2-32 
(Scheme 4.5). Moreover, to obtain soluble nanographenes after the final planarization 
reaction, aniline 2-10 was used in place of aniline 1-60. A 4:1 mixture of 2-10 and 4-1 
was used to achieve a higher yield of the lower molecular weight derivatives 4-13 and 
4-14, avoiding isomeric products. The mixture of 2-10 and 4-1 was then suspended in 
dry toluene and heated at 80C until complete solubilization before adding BCl3 and 
refluxing for 18 h. The resulting suspension of chloro-borazoles was then treated with 
lithium derivative 2-32, in turn obtained via halogen-lithium exchange using n-BuLi in 
THF at -84C.  
Scheme 4.5: Synthetic route towards fluorine-functionalised multi-borazino derivatives. 
When purification was attempted, only borazine 2-27 was successfully isolated in a 
18% yield, whereas the other derivatives underwent rapid degradation on silica and 
when exposed to atmospheric moisture. The only possible explanation for this result is 
related to the much smaller size of the fluorine atoms compared to that of the methyl 
groups of the previous derivatives. In fact, in the xylyl derivatives the methyl groups are 
bulky enough to protect the boron atoms despite the presence of some residual strain 
in the systems. In the case of 4-13 instead, the residual strain plausibly leads to a 
Chapter 4 
deviation of the fluorine atoms positions away from the boron atom. This results in 
unprotected boron centres which easily undergo nucleophilic attack leading to the 
observed rapid degradation.  
Given these results, a new strategy to further reduce the steric hindrance arising in the 
bay and concave bay regions of the molecules was needed. Aiming at this, it was 
decided to increase the distance between the neighbouring borazine cores, and this 
could be achieved by using a substituted benzidine 4-17 instead of phenylenediamine 
4-1 (Scheme 4.6).  
Scheme 4.6: Strategy towards stable fluorine-functionalised multi-borazines using a benzidine 
ligand in place of 4-1. 
In fact, one phenyl ring more in the bridging unit would work as a spacer between the 
borazine units, thus resulting in their independent behaviour and consequently in stable 
derivatives. 
The new retrosynthetic strategy towards extended nanographenes is reported in 
scheme 4.7. 
Chapter 4 
Scheme 4.7: Retrosynthetic strategy towards nanographene 4-21 using fluorine-functionalised 
multi-borazine systems. 
According with this approach the final nanographene molecule 4-21 should be obtained 
from a Scholl reaction on partially planarized derivative 4-20 which can be formed 
using the silylium ion induced cyclization reaction employing silylium carborane 2-22 
and dimethyldimesitylsilane 2-19 on multi-borazine derivative 4-19. The desired multi-
borazine 4-19 should be formed by reaction of chloro-borazole 4-18 with the lithium 
derivative 2-32. 4-18 can be obtained by reacting 2-10 and 4-17 in the presence of 
BCl3 in refluxing toluene. Aniline 2-10 can be used to introduce the solubilizing groups 
necessary to obtain soluble nanographenes. Finally, the desired benzidine derivative 4-
17 should be formed by benzidine rearrangement of hydrazobenzene 4-16 which can 
be in turn obtained from meta-nitrobiphenyl 4-15 by reduction with ethylene diamine.  
The synthesis started with the reduction of commercially available 4-15 (Scheme 4.8) 
using ethylenediamine as solvent in a sealed vessel under vacuum at 150C which 
resulted in the formation of the desired hydrazobenzene 4-16 in a 52% yield after 
precipitation from petroleum ether. 
Chapter 4 
Derivative 4-16 was then subjected to a benzidine rearrangement by refluxing in 10% 
aq. HCl under N2, resulting in the formation of a mixture of products which was purified 
via column chromatography, giving the desired benzidine derivative 4-17 in a 25% yield 
(Scheme 4.8). 
Scheme 4.8: Benzidine rearrangement of 4-16 resulting in formation of 4-17. 
At this point a mixture of 4-17 and 4 equivalents of aniline 2-10 were reacted with BCl3 
in refluxing toluene and the resulting chloro-borazoles mixture was treated with lithium 
derivative 2-32 (Scheme 4.9). 
Scheme 4.9: Synthesis of fluorine-functionalised multi-borazine 4-19. 
Purification of the reaction mixture on a silica gel plug using petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 
(90:10 to 60:40) as eluents led to the isolation of both 2-27 and 4-19 in a 13% and 3% 
yield, respectively. This result proves that indeed the use of 4-17 as bridging unit in the 
synthesis increases the stability of the multi-borazine derivatives by further reducing 
the residual strain in the molecules. The structure of 4-19 was proved by both 1H-NMR 
and HR-MS (Figure 4.15) with identification of the molecular ion peak at m/z 1856.7334 
(C116H86B6N6F12+, calc: 1856.7281) leading to the unambiguous identification of this 
derivative.  
Chapter 4 
Figure 4.15: AP+ HR-MS spectrum of derivative 4-19 with molecular ion visible at m/z 
1856.7334 (C116H86B6N6F12+, calc: 1856.7281). 
During the characterization of 4-19 some degradation of the material was visible, 
especially if left in solution for long periods of time. This seems to suggest that, despite 
the great improvement in the molecule stability due to the increased distance between 
the borazine units, the boron atoms are still susceptible to nucleophilic attack in this 
molecule. This result can be linked with both the very low yield obtained for 4-19 and 
the absence of higher oligomers, which can be due to partial degradation of these 
compounds during purification. This reactivity observed for 4-19 suggests that, despite 
all efforts, the small dimensions of fluorine are not able to completely shield the boron, 
especially in large systems in which many steric contributions are present. 
Furthermore, it is plausible that despite the reduction of the steric hindrance in the bay 
region, the two borazine units are not behaving as independent parts but are still 
influenced by the presence of each other, leading to deviations from the stable 
conformation observed in 2-27. 
Considering these results and the low overall yield of the synthesis, it was not possible 
to perform the cyclization reaction on derivative 4-19, leading to the consideration that 
in order to obtain extended nanographene systems a different approach could be more 
effective.  
Chapter 4 
4.5 Conclusions 
The synthesis through a condensation reaction of borazine-doped polyphenylene 
derivatives displaying high doping dosages (16%-18%) was reported. This work 
represents a steppingstone towards the synthesis of starting materials for the 
preparation of extended borazine-doped nanographenes. To assess the stability and to 
find the best conditions towards multi-borazino derivatives, model mesityl and xylyl 
compounds were prepared. The use of mesityl lithium 4-6 yielded strained mesityl 
multi-borazines, which revealed to be unstable in the presence of moisture. However, 
when 4-6 was substituted with xylyl lithium 4-7, chemically stable xylyl multi-borazines 
derivatives were obtained, with a maximum degree of oligomerization of 16-18 units. 
While dimer 4-9, trimer 4-10 and tetramer 4-12 were isolated as pure products, higher 
oligomers could be only obtained as mixtures with various degrees of hydroxylation 
and characterized by GPC. SC-XRD studies on 4-9 and 4-3 highlighted the paramount 
importance of steric hindrance in the stability of this derivatives. When the synthesis of 
planarisable fluorine functionalized derivatives was carried out, only degradation 
compounds were obtained, indicating that the smaller dimensions of the fluorine atoms 
were not enough to counteract the distortion induced by the strain in the system. The 
use of a longer benzidine spacer between the borazine cores led to the isolation of 4-
19, which despite being stable enough to be isolated still proved to be sensitive 
towards moisture. This result, along with the consequent lower yields, led to the 
impossibility of using 4-19 in the planarization reaction. In summary, these findings 
suggest that a different approach is required to successfully synthesise extended 
borazine-doped nanographenes, possibly relying on different polymerization reactions 
or planarization reactions. From this point of view the work will focus mainly in finding 
new ways to polymerize borazine cores exploiting cycloaddition reactions. 
Furthermore, efforts are currently dedicated to finding alternative ways towards the 
planarization of borazine derivatives with higher yields, which could possibly lead to 
efficient synthetic pathways for the formation of borazine-doped nanographenes in 
such amounts that would allow their application in electronic devices.  
4.6 References 
[1] J. Dosso, D. Marinelli, N. Demitri, D. Bonifazi, ACS Omega 2019, 4, 93439351. 
[2] K. Nagasawa, Inorg. Chem. 1966, 5, 442445. 
[3] D. Bonifazi, F. Fasano, M. M. Lorenzo-garcia, D. Marinelli, J. Tasseroul, Chem. 
Commun. 2015, 51, 1522215236. 
[4] D. Marinelli, F. Fasano, B. Najjari, N. Demitri, D. Bonifazi, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
Chapter 4 
2017, 139, 55035519. 
[5] S. Kervyn, O. Fenwick, F. Di Stasio, Y. S. Shin, J. Wouters, G. Accorsi, S. 
Osella, D. Beljonne, F. Cacialli, D. Bonifazi, Chem. Eur. J. 2013, 19, 77717779. 
[6] K. Suzuki, A. Kobayashi, S. Kaneko, K. Takehira, T. Yoshihara, H. Ishida, Y. 
Shiina, S. Oishi, S. Tobita, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys. 2009, 11, 98509860. 
Chapter 5 
CHAPTER 5 
BORAZINE-DOPED POLYPHENYLENIC POLYMERS: 
SYNTHESIS AND APPLICATIONS. 
In this chapter the synthesis of a novel borazine-doped polyphenylene material via an 
unprecedented [4+2] cycloaddition reaction on ethynyl borazines is reported. This 
approach led to the formation of a borazine-doped polymeric material in a simple and 
scalable manner. The material was characterized by comparison with its monomeric 
unit via ATR-IR, Solid state 13C and 11B-NMR. Furthermore, the polymer formed gels in 
chlorinated solvents and a gel composed by 4% w/w of the material in CHCl3 was 
thoroughly characterized and studied, showing rheological properties comparable to 
those of polyacrylamide gels with low crosslinker percentage. Finally, due to its high 
thermal and chemical stability, the material was studied as potential support for SSEs 
(solid state electrolytes) proving to have properties comparable to those of PEG based 
electrolytes, thus opening up for the application of this new class of materials in lithium 
ion batteries. 
This chapter is divided in 10 main sections: i) section 5.1 presents an introduction on 
the topic; ii) Section 5.2 contains the aim of the project; iii) Section 5.3 presents the 
synthesis of borazine 5-2 and monomer 5-4; iv) Section 5.4 displays the synthesis of 
polymeric material 5-1; v) Section 5.5 presents the solid state NMR characterization of 
5-1 and 5-4; vi) section 5.6 displays the pXRD analysis of 5-4; vii) Section 5.7 reports 
the rheological studies performed on gels obtained from 5-1 in chlorinated solvents. viii) 
Section 5.8 presents the application of 5-1 as solid-state electrolyte. ix) Section 5.9 
draws some conclusions and perspective for this new class of materials; x) Section 
5.10 contains the references for the chapter. 
X-Ray analysis were performed by N. Demitri (Elettra-Sincrotrone, Basovizza, Trieste, 
Italy). Rheological characterization was performed by M. Abrami and M. Grassi 
(University of Trieste). SSE preparation and related studies was performed by H. 
Oubaha (University of Louvain), solid state NMR analysis was performed by K.D.M 
Harris and C. E. Hughes (Cardiff University), BET measurements were performed by 
M. Carta at Swansea University, NMR analysis of 5-4 in C6D6 was performed at Vienna 
University by Dr. K. Hanspeter. 
Chapter 5 
5.1 Introduction 
In the last decades polyphenylene based materials have been the object of extensive 
research efforts.[1,2] This interest is related to the many different applications of these 
derivatives, spanning from precursors in graphene synthesis[3,4] to antennae systems,[5
7] proton exchange membranes,[8,9] optoelectronic devices,[10] and self-assembling 
materials.[11] Doping with heteroatoms[12,13] along with the tailored addition of functional 
groups,[14,15] are possible strategies employed to further widen the range of applications 
of polyphenylenes. In particular, polar BN bonds have been used to replace CC sp2 
couples in polymeric materials[1618] leading to variations in the optoelectronic properties 
largely dependent on the number and position of bonds replaced.[13,19] The complete 
replacement of a phenyl ring with a borazine has been exploited as well to generate 
BN-doped polyphenylenes and the multi-borazine derivatives reported in chapter 4.[20] 
This strategy proved to be particularly effective in breaking the conjugation of the 
materials, leading to blueshifted emissions and lower quantum yields when compared 
to the all carbon counterparts.[20,21] Furthermore, the presence of borazine rings and in 
general, of polar BN bonds can impart a different reactivity to the materials, especially 
when interactions between these peculiar bonds and polar or charged species are 
envisaged.[22,23] This is particularly true for gas adsorption/storage applications[23,24] and 
for solid state electrolytes (SSEs), in which the presence of doping units can lead to 
improved performances.[2527] The potential use of BN-doped polyphenylene materials 
in SSEs is mostly related to the high local dipole of the BN bonds which is expected to 
be able to interact with charged species. This ability of rings presenting high local 
dipoles, has been highlighted in polyethylene oxide (PEO) based systems presenting 
boroxine rings as reported by Fujinami and co-workers.[25] In this work, an improvement 
of the lithium transfer number associated with the presence of the boroxine rings was 
observed, due to the ability of the B3O3 ring to interact with the anions thus increasing 
the mobility of the Li+ ions (Figure 5.1).  
Figure 5.1: Plausible interactions between anions and boroxine rings in SSEs; a) Interaction 
with one boron; b) interaction with three boron atoms. 
From the synthetic point of view, the careful design is of central importance when 
preparing polyphenylene materials, especially when the resulting product presents 
characteristics that make purification or processing particularly challenging. In the 
design and synthesis of borazine-doped polyphenylene materials, one of the limiting 
Chapter 5 
factors is the stability of borazines, which dictates the presence of groups able to shield 
the boron atom from nucleophilic attack in order to have easy to handle materials.[28,29] 
Most of the work on borazine-doped polyphenylenic materials consists in forming them 
using directly the borazine core formation reaction (Scheme 5.1). In this strategy, a 
diamine or triamine unit such as 4-1 or 1-55 is used to induce the polymerization, which 
occurs with condensation reactions in presence of boron halides resulting in the 
formation of borazine rings connected by bridging units. This strategy has been used 
successfully in Chapter 4 to obtain multi-borazine derivatives. However, the increased 
steric hindrance in the higher oligomers resulted in a difficult reaction of the chloro-
borazole intermediates with xylyl-lithium, causing low yields and the formation of B-OH 
moieties.  
Scheme 5.1: Polymerization through condensation reactions; a) Multiborazine oligomers as 
reported in chapter 4; b) Borazine based porous networks for gas adsorption applications by El-
Khaderi e co-workers. 
In the work of El-Kaderi (Figure 5.1b) the same approach relying on condensation 
reactions is employed. In this case, the polymeric chloro-borazoles are used directly as 
the active material for gas absorption thus avoiding the difficult functionalization of the 
polymeric chloro-borazoles. However, this limits the use of such materials to moisture-
free conditions in order to avoid the hydrolysis of the sensitive B-Cl and B-Br groups. 
[23,24,30] 
Other possible strategies towards borazine-doped polymeric materials are the 
polymerization of pre-formed hexaphenyl-borazine units or chloro-borazole derivatives 
Chapter 5 
(Scheme 5.2a, b).[21,31] The use of functionalized hexaphenyl-borazines requires the 
synthesis of complex systems, bearing functional groups that can induce the 
polymerization. At the same time, protection of the boron atoms from nucleophilic 
attack is required to avoid moisture sensitive materials and thus be able to perform the 
reactions without degradation (Scheme 5.2a). The presence of the protective methyl 
groups allows the use of this building blocks without moisture-free conditions in a 
variety of reactions. Nevertheless, the introduction of the protecting groups tames the 
ability of the borazine rings to interact with polar species, thus limiting the effects of the 
doping to the optoelectronic properties.  
Scheme 5.2: Polymerization via reaction of pre-formed borazine units. a) Borazine-doped 
polyphenylenes obtained by [4+2] cycloadditions of hexaphenyl-borazine derivatives; b) 
Polymeric materials formed via precipitation-polycondensation of chloro-borazoles.  
Another strategy is represented by the polymerization of monomeric chloro-borazoles 
(Scheme 5.2b). In the work by Helten and co-workers, chloro-borazole 5-14 was 
polymerized using silicon/boron exchange reactions involving silylamine derivatives of 
linker units (X, Scheme 5.2b). With this strategy, it is possible to use linkers presenting 
various degrees of functionalization, thus introducing more functional groups in the 
material (Scheme 5.2b). However, the main drawback of this approach consists in the 
necessity to deal with the highly moisture sensitive nature of the chloro-borazoles, 
which limits their manipulation to moisture-free techniques (Scheme 5.2b). 
Chapter 5 
[4+2] cycloadditions are of paramount importance in the preparation of both all-carbon 
and borazine-doped polyphenylenes.[17,32] In particular, the pioneering work by Mllen 
and co-workers has heavily contributed in highlighting the potential of carefully 
designed dienes and alkyne functionalized moieties in forming chemically precise 
polyphenylenes.[33] Consequently, to synthesise borazine-doped materials, it would be 
highly desirable to have ethynyl functionalized borazines able to undergo [4+2] 
cycloadditions without the need of protecting groups or complex syntheses. From this 
point of view, the most interesting starting materials are B,B,B-triethynyl-N,N,N-
triphenyl borazines, which despite being reported as moisture sensitive in solution,[34] 
are known to be bench stable, differently from chloro-borazoles.[35] When 
polymerization of ethynyl borazines is envisaged, [4+2] cycloadditions on the alkynes 
directly bonded to the boron atom of the borazine core are required. Due to the high 
synthetic potential of [4+2] cycloadditions on boron bonded alkynes, various examples 
of these reactions are reported.[36,37] A [4+2] cycloaddition of 
tetraphenylcylopentadienone (5-3) on a phenyl alkyne bonded to a o-carborane (Figure 
5.3a) was reported by Craciun et al., leading to the formation of polyphenyl-
functionalized o-carboranes. 
Scheme 5.3: Previous examples of reactions involving boron bonded acetylenes. a) [4+2] 
cycloaddition on a carborane bonded acetylene as reported by Craciun et al. b) and c) [4+2] 
cycloaddition on acetylene groups bonded to boronic ester as reported in the group of Harrity. 
[38,39] 
Chapter 5 
Other interesting examples came from the group of Harrity, in which functionalised 
borylated benzenes were obtained using [4+2] cycloaddition reactions involving 
cyclopentadienone derivative 5-22 or Pyrone derivative 5-25 and various alkyne 
derivatives bonded to a boronic ester. This resulted in the formation of functionalized 
benzene derivatives 5-24 and 5-26 bearing boronic ester functionalities together with 
different functional groups (Scheme 5.3b, c).[38,39] When alkynes bonded to borazines 
are considered, no examples of [4+2] cycloaddition reactions were ever reported to the 
best of our knowledge. Consequently, before using this approach to form polymeric 
materials, a study of the cycloaddition reaction on alkynyl borazines is required. 
5.2 Aim of the project 
The aim of this chapter is to prepare borazine-doped polymeric materials. To obtain a 
clean and efficient reaction, an unprecedented [4+2] cycloaddition on ethynyl borazines 
will be performed using tetraphenyl cyclopentadienone leading to the formation of 
monomeric unit 5-4 (Scheme 5.1).  
Scheme 5.4: General approach towards the synthesis of borazine-doped polymers using [4+2] 
cycloadditions. 
If this approach will be successful, suitable dimeric dienes will be prepared and used to 
induce the polymerization of ethynyl borazine 5-2 resulting in the formation of polymeric 
material 5-1. After the synthesis of the desired polymer, extensive characterization will 
be carried out to determine the structure and composition of the material. Due to the 
Chapter 5 
expected thermal stability of 5-1 and the presence of polar BN bonds possibly able to 
interact with charged species[25,26], this material could be a good support component in 
Li+ containing SSEs. For these reasons, the use of 5-1 as support in SSEs will be 
investigated as well.  
5.3 Synthesis of Monomer 5-4 
B,B,B-triethynyl-N,N,N-triphenyl borazine 5-2 was synthesized based on a modified 
procedure derived from the original work by Groszos and Stafiej[40] and Yamaguchi.[41] 
Following this protocol, aniline 1-60 was reacted with BCl3 in refluxing toluene and the 
resulting chloro-borazole treated with a solution of ethynyl magnesium bromide at 0 C 
giving 5-2 in a 70% yield (Scheme 5.4).  
THF, 0 C, 6h.
1) BCl3, toluene, 126C, 15h.
5-2, 70%   
Scheme 5.5: Left: Synthetic approach towards derivative 5-2; Right: Crystal structure of 
derivative 5-2 obtained from slow evaporation of a 1/1 solution of petroleum ether/CH2Cl2. 
Space group: R-3. 
The resulting product proved to be moisture sensitive, especially when in solution, 
resulting in aniline formation. Despite this, 5-2 was found to be stable for months when 
kept dry,[34] thus allowing for an easy handling and storage of the material.  
Ph Ph
Ph Ph
5-4, 45%
cc ct
B 5-3, Ph2O, 220 C.
5-3 =
Scheme 5.6: Synthetic approach towards derivative 5-4 using borazine 5-2 as starting material. 
The [4+2] cycloaddition reaction was then performed on 5-2 using commercially 
available tetraphenylcyclopentadienone 5-3 in dry degassed Ph2O at 220 C (Scheme 
5.6), leading to the formation of desired product 5-4 in a 45% yield (77% yield for single 
Chapter 5 
reaction) as a mixture of cc and ct atropoisomers. The formation of two atropoisomers 
is expected since the attack of the diene can occur on both sides of the borazine ring. 
This results in two possible configurations arising from three reactions on the same 
side of the molecule (cc) or two on one side and one on the other (ct). Confirmation of 
the structure of the two isomers was achieved via SC-XRD (Figure 5.2). Since 
separation of the two isomers proved impossible, crystallization of the mixture was 
carried out, resulting in a combination of 2 different crystals, each arising from one of 
the two different atropoisomers. It was then possible to diffract each type of crystal by 
manually selecting them from the mixture, allowing for structure solution of the two 
atropoisomers (Figure 5.2). From SC-XRD analysis the cc isomer presents the 
innermost rings of the pentaphenyl system on the same side of the borazine ring. 
Whereas, in the ct atropoisomer, two rings are on the same side of the borazine 
system, while one is on the opposite. 
Figure 5.2: Crystal structure for both cc and ct isomers of 5-4 are reported. Space groups: P 63 
and: P-1 respectively. Crystals obtained from slow diffusion of i-PrOH in CH2Br2. 
To understand the relative ratio between the two isomers a multidimensional NMR 
analysis was carried out in C6D6. From the 1H-NMR spectrum of the atropoisomeric 
mixture three singlets are visible at 7.52, 7.45 and 7.32 ppm, integrating for 1, 2 and 
0.3 protons, respectively. As the only protons visible as singlets are those on the aryl 
group bonded on the boron atom (Hct and Hcc), it is reasonable to assume that the 
proton resonances in a 1:2 ratio (at 7.52 and 7.45 ppm) derive from ct atropoisomer, 
whereas the peak at 7.32 ppm is that of the cc isomer. To confirm this assignment, 13C-
DEPTq, 1H-13C HSQC and HMBC were performed. From the HSQC experiment the 
protons visible at 7.52 and 7.45 ppm correlate with 13C signals at 136.41 and 135.82 
ppm, whereas the signal at 7.32 ppm correlates with the carbon atom visible at 135.75 
Chapter 5 
Figure 5.3: a) Zoom of the aromatic signal of 700 MHz 1H-NMR of 5-4; b) Chemical structure of 
atropoisomers ct and cc of 5-4 with diagnostic protons highlighted; c) 176 MHz 13C DEPTq-NMR 
of 5-4; d) Detail of 1H-13C HSQC-NMR for protons Hct and Hcc; e) Detail of 1H-13C HMBC-NMR 
for protons Hct and Hcc; All spectra were performed in C6D6. 
The DEPTq spectra confirms that these carbons are indeed bonded to protons and not 
quaternary. The fact that in the HMBC experiment the protons at 7.52, 7.45 and 7.32 
Chapter 5 
ppm correlate only with quaternary carbons confirms the correct assignment for the 
singlets. In fact, the only protons depicting an exclusive correlation with quaternary 
carbons are those on the B-aryl ring (Figure 5.3). Since the ratio between integrals of 
signals at 7.52 and 7.45 ppm is 1:2, these signals must be those related to the ct 
atropoisomer. This result suggests a ct:cc ratio of ca. 10:1 in the mixture (90% ct-
atropoisomer. excess). 
5.4 Synthesis of Polymer 5-1 
To use this novel approach to prepare borazine-doped polyphenylenic polymers, it was 
necessary to design a new dimeric diene able to induce the polymerization between 
the ethynyl borazine units. The synthesis of the dimeric diene started with a double 
Sonogashira coupling of phenylacetylene 5-6 with 4,4 diodobiphenyl 5-5 which led to 
bis alkyne derivative 5-7 in almost quantitative yield.  
Scheme 5.7: Synthesis of derivative 5-10.  
Oxidation of 5-7 at 60 C in the presence of KMnO4 gave tetracarbonyl derivative 5-8 in 
a 97% yield, which was in turn subjected to an aldolic condensation with 5-9 producing 
the desired dimeric diene 5-10 in a 52% yield.  
The cycloaddition reaction on borazine 5-2 with 5-10 was then performed in degassed 
Ph2O at 230 C and a strong evolution of CO was observed when the reaction mixture 
reached 220 C (Scheme 5.8). A red solid material was formed after ca. 3 h, which very 
interestingly led to the gelification of Ph2O despite the high temperature conditions (230 
C). After 18 h the reaction mixture was dropped in cold petroleum ether, filtered and 
subjected to 3 cycles of sonication-centrifugation in petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 mixtures. 
The resulting reddish material was formed in a 67% yield and reacted with 
phenylacetylene in dry degassed Ph2O at 230 C to end-cap the unreacted 
Chapter 5 
cyclopentadienone units. The resulting pale-yellow solid was precipitated in petrol, 
filtered, and subjected to various sonication-centrifugation cycles using different 
solvents (petroleum ether/CH2Cl2, Acetone, MeOH and Et2O) giving desired 5-1 
quantitatively compared to the previous step (no trace of unreacted cyclopentadienone 
visible, see following characterisations).  
Scheme 5.8: Synthesis of polymer 5-1. 
Due to the insolubility of the product in organic solvents, its characterization was 
performed by FT-ATR and solid-state NMR techniques. The spectra were compared to 
those of monomeric unit 5-4. In particular, ATR-IR analysis (Figure 5.3) evidences 
similar signals in the spectra in both cases, with the presence of intense peaks at ca. 
1355 cm-1 and 1321 cm-1 assignable to the BN stretching, suggesting the retainment of 
the borazine core in both materials. Notably for both 5-4 and 5-1 no signals related to 
C=O bonds are visible implying an effective end-capping reaction. The main difference 
between the spectra is the presence of a peak ascribable to the stretching of OH 
moieties (3211 cm-1) in the polymeric material. A possible explanation for this signal 
could be the presence of trapped MeOH which was used in the purification of the 
polymer.  
Chapter 5 
Figure 5.4: a) FT-ATR of monomer 5-4 (mixture of isomers). b) FT-ATR of 5-1. 
This assumption was confirmed by a TGA experiment performed under N2, in which a 
ca. 10% weight loss is occurring at around 100 C, suggesting that solvent is entrapped 
within the material. A high thermal stability of the polymer was evidenced by the 
presence of a second 50% weight loss corresponding to degradation of the polymeric 
material appearing only above 400 C and reaching a maximum at 550 C. This was 
followed by a final loss of ca. 5% occurring between 650 to 900 C, which can be linked 
to more extensive degradation of the organic component. (Figure 5.4).  
Figure 5.5: TGA trace of BN-Polymer performed under N2. 
5.5 Solid state NMR studies 
The high-resolution solid-state 13C-NMR spectra recorded (using the 1H13C CPMAS 
technique) for 5-2, 5-4 and 5-1 are shown in Figure 5.6a, b and c, respectively. The 
solid-state 13C-NMR spectrum of 5-2 displays resonances at 84 and 101 ppm and 125 
to 150 ppm due to ethynyl and aromatic environments, respectively. The fact that the 
Chapter 5 
peaks due to ethynyl groups are absent from the solid-state 13C-NMR spectra of 5-4 
and 5-1 is consistent with complete conversion of starting material 5-2 in the reactions.  
Figure 5.6: 100 MHz 1H13C CP MAS NMR spectra recorded for (a) 5-2, (b) 5-4, and (c) 5-1. 
Peaks marked with asterisks are spinning sidebands. 
The solid-state 13C-NMR spectra of 5-4 and 5-1 contain multiple overlapped peaks 
between 120 and 150 ppm, corresponding to the aromatic 13C environments in these 
materials. The fact that the 13C-NMR spectra of the monomer and polymer are virtually 
identical in this region (see the overlay of the spectra in Figure 5.7) strongly suggests 
that the local structure around the central aromatic ring (including the conformations of 
the substituents) is very similar in these materials. Low intensity peaks between ca. 
15 ppm and 60 ppm are assigned to residual solvent (sharp low-intensity peaks for the 
polymer sample MeOH, Acetone or grease) or spinning sidebands, as annotated on 
the spectra in Figure 5.6. 
Chapter 5 
Figure 5.7: Overlay of the 100 MHz 1H13C CPMAS NMR spectra recorded for 5-4 (red) and 5-
1 (black). 
The sample was then analysed using solid-state 11B MQMAS-NMR. MQMAS is a solid-
state 2D NMR experiment used to obtain high resolution spectra of quadrupolar nuclei. 
This procedure allows the suppression of the dipolar-dipolar interaction and chemical 
shift anisotropy by using MAS while the use of MQ (multi quantum) coherence allows 
the disentanglement of quadrupolar and isotropic interactions.[42] The result is a 2D 
spectra in which peaks otherwise overlapped (due to the quadrupolar coupling) are 
separated along the indirect (isotropic) dimension (y axis), whereas the quadrupolar 
broadening is still present on the direct (anisotropic) one (x axis). The projection of the 
contours on the indirect dimension is the high-resolution spectra for the atom, allowing 
the identification of the number of species and relative intensities. The projection on the 
direct dimension instead corresponds to the spectra presenting the second order 
quadrupolar interaction, containing information on the quadrupolar coupling constant 
(Q) and asymmetry of electric field ( for the quadrupolar atoms (Figure 5.9). 
Solid-state 11B MQMAS-NMR spectra recorded for 5-4 and 5-1 are shown in Figure 
5.8, and one-dimensional projections of these spectra onto the direct dimension 
(horizontal in Figure 5.8) are shown in Figure 5.9.  
Figure 5.8: 128 MHz 11B MQMAS NMR spectra for (a) 5-4 and (b) 5-1. The contours are on a 
logarithmic scale using a factor of 1.3 between adjacent contours. 
The projections in Figure 5.9 were obtained from the 11B MQMAS-NMR spectra by 
summation of all data between 39 and 49 ppm along the indirect dimension (vertical in 
Figure 5.8). The 11B MQMAS-NMR spectra for both 5-4 and 5-1 contain two broad 
peaks with shifts in the indirect dimension between 40 and 50 ppm (the peak at 0 ppm 
in both dimensions in the spectrum of the polymer is a diagonal artefact, which may be 
ignored).  
Chapter 5 
Figure 5.9: Projection of the 11B MQMAS NMR spectra onto the direct dimension (by 
summation of the data between 39 and 49 ppm along the indirect dimension) for 5-4 (red) and 
5-1 (black). 
The shapes of the peaks are very similar for the monomer and polymer samples, as 
clearly evident both from the two-dimensional contour plots in Figure 5.8 and from the 
projections onto the direct dimension shown in Figure 5.9, indicating that 5-4 and 5-1 
have similar values of the quadrupolar parameters and isotropic chemical shifts for the 
11B environments. Again, this observation suggests that the local structure in the 
vicinity of the central B3N3 rings (including the conformations of the substituents 
bonded to the B atoms) is very similar in the monomer and polymer materials. 
5.6 PXRD on 5-4 Sample 
PXRD data recorded for 5-4 and 5-1 obtained directly from the chemical reaction 
indicate that both materials are amorphous. In order to gain insights into the 
stereochemistry of the chemical reaction (for example, to establish whether the spatial 
distribution of the substituents bonded to the boron atoms of the B3N3 rings 
corresponds to the cc isomer, the ct isomer, or a mixture of the cc and ct isomers), 
sample 5-4 was crystallized from CH2Br2. The structural properties of the bulk 
crystallized monomer phase were then investigated using pXRD.  
Figure 5.10 shows the results from Le Bail fitting[43] of the pXRD data for the 
crystallized 5-4 sample, starting from the unit cell of the triclinic form of the monomer 
determined from SC-XRD data, which contains the ct isomer of the monomer as a 
solvate with CH2Br2. The Le Bail fitting procedure led to a good-quality fit, with final 
refined unit cell parameters: a = 12.4760(12) , b = 16.3471(15) , c = 21.5362(20) , 
 = 71.848(5),  = 88.747(7),  = 83.658(7), V = 4147.7(9) . The unit cell volume is 
larger by ca. 0.7% than the unit cell determined for the same material from SC-XRD 
data (the SC-XRD data collection was carried out 100 K whereas the pXRD data were 
recorded at 294 K).  
Chapter 5 
Figure 5.10: Le Bail fitting of the pXRD data (background subtracted) recorded for the 
crystallized 5-4 sample (red + marks, experimental data; green line, calculated data; magenta 
line, difference plot; black tick marks, predicted peak positions). 
From the good quality of the Le Bail fit (Figure 5.10), we conclude that the only 
crystalline phase present in the crystallized sample of 5-4 contains the ct isomer of the 
monomer as a solvate with CH2Br2. The minor discrepancies evident in the difference 
plot in Figure 5.10 may be attributed to small errors in the baseline and line shape, and 
there is no evidence for the presence of any other crystalline phase (for example, 
containing the cc isomer of the substituted B3N3 ring). This result suggests that, 
accordingly with the NMR results the cc isomer is formed only in a low amount 
compared to the ct one (probably less than 10%). Given the very close agreement 
between the solid-state NMR data (both high-resolution 13C-NMR spectra and 11B 
MQMAS-NMR spectra) for 5-4 and 5-1 samples, and given that the pXRD study 
indicates that the crystallized monomer sample contains mainly the ct isomer of the 
substituted B3N3 ring, it is a reasonable inference that the polymer sample also 
contains mainly the ct isomer of the substituted B3N3 ring. 
5.7 Gel formation and rheological studies 
As previously mentioned, gelification of Ph2O occurred at 230 C during the 
cycloaddition polymerization, which suggested that 5-1 could form gels. To assess if 
the material was able to form gelated systems in solvents different from Ph2O, 5-1 was 
suspended in different solvents and swelling, resulting in gel formation, was observed 
in chlorinated ones. CHCl3 and CH2Cl2 gave the best results with a critical gelification 
concentration of 4% w/w for CHCl3. The rheology of the gel was then studied in CHCl3 
due to the higher boiling point of this solvent which leads to an easier handling and 
characterization of the material. In order to understand the interactions between the 
solvent and the polymeric material in the gel, low field NMR (LF-NMR) was performed 
at three different concentrations (2, 4 and 8% w/w) of 5-1 in CHCl3, thus obtaining data 
Chapter 5 
from a sub-gelated system (2%) to a super-geleated one (8%). LF-NMR detects the 
response of the solvent hydrogen atoms in magnetic fields, focusing on the FID decay, 
which is related to the spin-spin relaxation time T2. Since T2 not only depends on B0 
intensity and temperature, but also on the presence of solid surfaces (such as those of 
polymeric chains of a polymeric solution or gel) the values of T2 for the solvent 
hydrogens can be used to obtain information on the material. Indeed, solvent 
hydrogens near the solid surface relax faster than those in the bulk as the surface 
behaves as magnetization absorber.[44] Hence, the higher the concentration of solid 
part, the faster the relaxation process is. This, in turn, reflects in a smaller T2 and a 
more rapid FID decay. In the case of not homogeneous systems such as gels, where 
meshes of different size can exist, the average T2 depends on the relaxation time 
pertaining to each mesh size. Since the smaller the mesh size, the faster the 
hydrogens relaxation is, deconvolution of the exponential FID decay signal allows for 
identification of different T2 values arising from the various mesh sizes present in the 
material. 
Table 5.1: LF-NMR T2 times for various concentrations of polymer in CHCl3. 
T23 (ms) 
T24 (ms) A4 (%) 
CHCl3 2531 100       
5-1 2% 2373 81 1350 19     
5-1 4% 1927 73 981 18 108 9   
5-1 8% 1537 51 635 20 133 11 23 17 
The results for our system are reported in Table 5.1; as expected, a decrease in T2 
occurs when the polymer concentration increases. More interestingly, when moving 
from 2% to 8% concentration, an increasing number of relaxation times (T2i numbers) 
are detected, reflecting a higher heterogeneity of the system network that indicates the 
existence of meshes of different size (with small T2i times corresponding to small cavity 
size).  
From the rheological point of view, only the 4% w/w gel was analysed by short stress 
sweep (SSS) and frequency sweep (FS) measures. The two measures are performed 
on a sample using two metallic plates to apply different shear force at the same 
frequency (SSS) or a shear force at different frequencies (FS). Short stress sweep 
tests were performed in the stress () range spanning form 0.33 Pa to 12 Pa at 1 Hz. 
Then, frequency sweep tests, were performed inside the linear viscoelastic region ( = 
1 Pa), allowing the determination of the systems mechanical spectra (dependence of 
the elastic (G) and viscous (G) moduli on pulsation =2f) in the frequency range 
spanning from 0.1 to 10 Hz. Elastic modulus G is determined by the solid component 
Chapter 5 
in the gelified system, which is able to store mechanical energy and release it when the 
external mechanical stimulus is removed (returning to the pre-stress situation). 
Whereas G is the viscous component of the system arising from the liquid part of the 
material, which is dissipative in nature resulting in inelastic behaviour. Gelified systems 
present a G modulus >> of G, instead emulsions or dispersions present the opposite 
behaviour, similar to viscous liquids.[45] Consequently, the determination of parameters 
G and G is important to determine the mechanical properties and processability of 
materials. Moreover, the fitted plots obtained from FS measurements can be used to 
calculate Shear modulus (G), cross linking (x) and the mesh size (RHEO) of the 
material. From SSS measure (Figure 5.11) the presence of an elastic module G much 
greater than viscous module G was observed confirming the presence of a gelified 
system for 4% polymer 5-1 in CHCl3. 
Figure 5.11: SSS plot for 4% w/w gel in CHCl3. 
FS measure (Figure 5.12c) along with Maxwell best fitting (solid lines) allowed us to 
estimate the Shear modulus (G), cross linking (x) and the mesh size (RHEO) of the 
gel resulting in a G of 667  54 Pa, x of 2.710-7  2.210-8 and RHEO of 23.0  0.6 
nm, suggesting that the material has a G comparable with that of a polyacrilamide gel 
with a low crosslinking percentage.[46]  
Figure 5.12: a) dry xerogel; b) gel obtained mixing polymer with CHCl3; c) FS plot (dotted line) 
and Maxwell fitting (solid line) for 4% w/w gel in CHCl3. 
Chapter 5 
The mesh size is compatible with that of a mesoporous material, however, the isotherm 
of N2 adsorption at 77 K measured on the xerogel indicates a macroporous/non-porous 
material with a calculated apparent Brunauer-Emmett-Teller (BET) surface area of 62 
m2/g. This seems to suggest that probably the polyphenyl structure is folding when dry, 
whereas when gelified the unfolding of the phenyl groups lead to mesoporous size 
cavities in the gel. 
5.8 BN-Polymer as support in solid state electrolytes (SSE) 
5-1/TEGDME (Tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether)LiClO4 based solid state 
electrolytes were prepared following the process depicted in Figure 5.13 and tested. 
Polymer 5-1 was first suspended in CH2Cl2 (2 mL) under ultrasonication at 35 C for 2 
h followed by a vigorous stirring at r.t. for 12 h.  
Figure 5.13: Preparation methodology for 5-1/TEGDMELiClO4 based solid state electrolytes.  
Then the TEGDME solution in CH2Cl2 (0.5 mL) was added and the obtained mixtures 
stirred at r.t. for 12 h. Finally, the LiClO4 solutions at different concentrations (15, 20 
and 25 wt.%) in THF (0.5 mL) were added to the 5-1/TEGDME suspensions and 
ultrasonicated at 35 C for 2 h followed by vigorous stirring at r.t. for 48 h, so that 
homogeneous suspensions were obtained. The solid-state electrolytes were deposited 
by solution cast on stainless steel discs adapted for Swagelok cells and dried at r.t. for 
18 h followed by drying under vacuum at 70 C for 2 h (Figure 5.13). 
The ion transport behaviour of the obtained SSEs was investigated by electrochemical 
impedance spectroscopy (EIS) at r.t., using TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4 liquid electrolyte 
as reference (Figure 5.14a and table 5.2). Impedance is a measure of the ability of a 
circuit to resist the flow of electrical current. This parameter is much more explicative 
Chapter 5 
than resistance for an AC system since it is not limited by the boundaries of an ideal 
resistor (Ohm law, resistance independent from frequency and AC current voltage 
signals though resistor in phase with each other).  
Measurements of EIS are usually carried out by applying an alternate potential to an 
electrochemical cell and then measuring the current flow through it. If a sinusoidal 
potential excitation is applied, the response will be an AC signal. When the excitation 
signal is small (mV) the response of the cell will be pseudolinear and as a result the AC 
signal will be a sinusoid of the same frequency but shifted in phase compared to the 
excitation potential. This allows to define the impedance as a function of a phase shift 
() and magnitude (Z0 defined as ratio between potential and current at t= 0).  
Eq. 1: () = =  ( ) =  ( + ) 
Since impedance Z() is composed by a real and an imaginary part (Eq. 1) it is 
possible to plot the real part on the x axis and the imaginary one on the y axis 
originating a Nyquist plot, in which each point of the graph represents the impedance at 
one specific frequency.[47] From this plot, the bulk resistance of the samples can be 
calculated from the curves allowing for determination of the ionic conductivity () using 
the following equation: 
where  is the ionic conductivity (Scm1), Rb the bulk resistance, t and A are the 
thickness and the area of the SSE samples, respectively.  
Solid electrolytes containing 5-1 showed a decrease in ionic conductivity with 
increasing salt content, displaying the highest ionic conductivity of 1.51  105 Scm1 
for the sample containing 15 wt.% of LiClO4 (Figure 5.14b and table 5.2).  
Chapter 5 
Figure 5.14: a) Nyquist plots of pure 5-1, TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4 and 5-1/TEGDME/x wt.% 
LiClO4 (x = 15, 20 or 25 wt.% of LiClO4) at r.t; b) Ionic conductivity of TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4 
reference and 5-1based SSEs as a function of LiClO4 content. 
The Rb (resistivity) value increased with increasing lithium salt amount incorporated into 
5-1/TEGDME matrix due to the decrease in the available coordination sites of 
TEGDME by ion pairing, which is consistent with ether crown ion chelation 
mechanism.[48,49] This could be due to a decrease in distance between dissociated ions, 
enabling the recombination into neutral ion pairs. This in turn leads to the formation of 
large aggregates of ions which reduces the segmental motion of ethylene oxide sites in 
the matrix, resulting in a hampering of the polymer motion, essential for fast ion 
conduction.[5054] 
Table 5.2: Characteristic properties at r.t. of the prepared SSEs as a function of Lithium salt 
content. 
Sample 
wt. % 
t[cm] A[cm2] Rb[] [Scm1] 
5-1 TEGDME LiClO4 
0 100   0.018 1.33   
1  85 15 0.02159 1.33 526 3.08105 
2 42.5 42.5 15 0.02451 0.79 2060 1.51105 
3 40 40 20 0.03 0.79 5580 6.80106 
4 37.5 37.5 25 0.036 0.79 20586 1.50106 
Since conductivity is influenced by temperature, "" was studied as a function of T for 
pure TEGDME, liquid TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4 and 5-1/TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4 and 
the results are reported in the temperature dependent conductivity plots shown in 
Figure 5.15. The ionic conductivity of 5-1/TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4 electrolyte 
increases, up to 2.7  104 Scm1 at 373 K. Figure 5.15 shows a linear variation of the 
log () versus 103/T plots suggesting an Arrhenius type thermally activated process:[55] 

 
where  is the conductivity, Ea, the activation energy associated with conduction, k, the 
Boltzmann constant, T the temperature, and 0 a preexponential term. 
Chapter 5 
Figure 5.15: Arrhenius plots of ionic conductivity versus reciprocal absolute temperature for 
pure TEGDME, liquid TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4 and 5-1/TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4 electrolytes. 
At low temperature, the 5-1 based electrolyte exhibits a lower ionic conductivity than 
the liquid TEGDME/15 % wt. LiClO4 system. However, it presents a similar behaviour 
to the liquid TEGDME/15 % wt. LiClO4 system at high temperatures. The higher 
conductivity at high temperatures is probably due to the amorphous nature of the 
polymer which is promoting more free volume in the polymer electrolyte system upon 
increasing the temperature.[56,57] In addition, the interaction of Lithium salts with 
TEGDME helps to weaken the ionic interaction in the salt and thus, the barrier to ion 
transport is lower and less energy is needed for ion mobility[58,59] 
Table 5.3: Room temperature (25 C) and 100 C values of ionic conductivity for the pure 
TEGDME, liquid TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4, 5-1/TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4 electrolytes. 
Sample 
/Scm1 
25 C 
/Scm1 
100 C 
Pure TEGDME 1.62  108 4.43  108 
Liquid TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4 3.08  105 1.18  104 
5-1/TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4 1.51  105 2.75  104 
To investigate how the morphological changes of the 5-1/TEGDME/LiClO4 based 
electrolytes could affect the performances, the films were subjected to scanning 
electron microscopy (SEM) analysis (Figure 5.16). Pristine 5-1 (see Figure 5.16a) 
presented a spongelike structure with formation of cavities with an average diameter 
in the micrometre range (from 1 m to 20 m) whereas no pores were visible in 5-
1/TEGDME/LiClO4 based electrolytes (Figure 5.16b, c, d). For the 15 wt.% LiClO4 
containing sample 5-1/TEGDME/LiClO4, the higher conductivity could be attributed to 
Chapter 5 
the relatively homogenous structure, implying a good dispersion of all components in 
the electrolyte film (Figure 5.16b).  
Figure 5.16: SEM images of a) 5-1 pristine and 5-1/TEGDME/LiClO4 electrolytes at different 
wt.% LiClO4 contents; b) 15 wt.%, c) 20 wt.%, and d) 25 wt.%. 
However, the 20 wt.% LiClO4 sample presents spherical aggregates with an average 
diameter in the m range which could be ascribed to the lithium salt not completely 
dissolving in the polymer matrix (Figure 5.16c). Increasing the amount of the Li salt to 
25 wt.% leads to a further decrease in the conductivity of the SSE. This could be 
attributed to the bigger aggregates formed in the polymer matrix leading to a 
microstructure that is interspersed with big pores. (Figure 5.16d). 
The thermal stability of the obtained 5-1/TEGDME/LiClO4 SSEs was studied by TGA, 
with heating rate of 10 C/min from r.t. to 1000 C under N2 atmosphere, and 
differential scanning calorimetry (DSC, performed under N2 flow at a ramp rate of 10 
C/min) on both the single components and the films. As expected, samples of 5-
1/TEGDME/LiClO4 displayed the same behaviour as the single components (Figure 
5.17a). A gradual weight loss of about 5% was observed during the initial heating up to 
100 C, which can be considered as the result of moisture present in the electrolytes. 
The first significant weight loss (about 45%55%) is due to the TEGDME evaporation or 
degradation at 150 C, followed by a gradual loss of about 5% in the temperature range 
of 300450 C due to LiClO4. The complete decomposition of the sample takes place 
between 500 and 600 C with a weight loss of about 75%, this result is in line with the 
TGA performed on the pristine 5-1 (Figure 5.5). The DSC thermograms (Figure 5.17b) 
Chapter 5 
obtained for 5-1/TEGDME/LiClO4 in the range 30250 C showed no endothermic peak 
associated with a melting temperature. This further demonstrated the amorphous 
nature of the polymer and the polymersalt systems. The absence of the temperature of 
glass transition suggested the high rigidity of 5-1, possibly related to the blocking of 
segmental motion which could explain the low conductivity. 
Figure 5.17: a) Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA). b) Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) 
thermograms of 5-1/TEGDME/LiClO4 based electrolytes.  
The electrochemical stability of the highest conducting SSE system was studied as well 
with linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) and cyclic voltammetry (CV), using stainless steel 
working electrode and Li metal as reference and counter electrode. The SSE system 
proved to be electrochemically stable between 1.84 to 3.70 V vs Li/Li+ with no 
decomposition of any of the components in this potential region (Figure 5.18a). CV 
responses for seven cycles (Figure 5.18b) present redox peaks around 1.55 V and at 
3.86 V. No changes in the redox peak voltages were observed during the cycles, 
furthermore, the overlapping of the sweeps indicates that the charge transfer reaction 
at the interface between the solid electrolyte and Li metal is reversible. From the CV 
study the range of electrochemical stability is observed from 2.00 V to 3.60 V which is 
in very good accordance with LCV results (Figure 5.18a). 
Chapter 5 
Figure 5.18: a) Linear sweep voltammogram of the 5-1/TEGDME15 wt.% LiClO4 electrolyte at 
a scan rate of 1.0 mVs1 from 0.0 V to 5.0 V at r.t.; b) Cyclic voltammogram of the 5-
1/TEGDME15 wt.% LiClO4 electrolyte at a scan rate of 1.0 mVs1 in the voltage range of 
0.05.0 V vs Li/Li+ at r.t. 
Finally, the Lithium ion transference number (tLi+) was evaluated following the 
potentiostatic polarization method. tLi+ describes the relative amount of current 
transported by the lithium ion compared to the counter ion and is related to the 
formation of gradients of concentration of the ionic component during operation.[60] This 
phenomenon can result in precipitation of dissolved salt at the anode and depletion at 
cathode especially while operating at high current, possibly resulting in cell failure. High 
tLi+ values (close to 1) help preventing these effects, resulting in a good high-rate 
performance and power output from the cell. In our system, the tLi+ measurement was 
achieved at r.t. by applying a 10 mV DC polarization to a symmetric Li/5-
1/TEGDMELiClO4/Li cell configuration until the current reached a steady state (Figure 
5.19). In these conditions, in absence of redox reaction with the anion, the anion 
current will vanish in the steady state and the total current will be caused by Li+ ions. In 
fact, the initial total current decreased with time from 1.405 A and reached a steady 
state value of 0.238 A after 18 h allowing determination of the tLi+ using the 
BruceVincentEvans equation:[61] 
I (V  I R )
I (V  IsRs)
where I0 and Is are the initial and steadystate currents, R0 and Rs are the initial and 
steadystate interfacial resistances and V is the applied polarization voltage. 
Figure 5.19: Currenttime profile of a symmetrical Li/5-1/TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4/Li cell 
configuration after applying a DC voltage of 10 mV on the cell, for determining Li+ transfer 
number. 
The interfacial bulk resistance increased from 2260  to 21713  through polarization. 
From this study it emerged that the 5-1/TEGDME/15 wt.% LiClO4 electrolyte presents a 
Chapter 5 
transference number of about 0.2, a value in the range those observed for PEG based 
electrolytes and in the range of most common solid polymer electrolytes (0.2-0.5).[60] 
5.9 Conclusion 
In conclusion a novel BN-doped polymeric material was synthesized using a [4+2] 
cycloaddition reaction on B,B,B triethynyl borazines. The resulting polymer 5-1 was 
characterized by comparison with monomeric unit 5-4 using solid state 13C, 11B-NMR 
and FT-ATR, allowing the structural determination of 5-1. The new BN-doped 
polyphenylenic material formed gels efficiently in chlorinated solvents, producing one of 
the few examples of a BN-doped gel. From rheological studies it was possible to 
estimate the shear modulus, the mash size and the crosslinking in the gel. Due to the 
high thermal and chemical stability, the polymer was tested for use as a support 
component in SSE for lithium ion batteries. In particular, the SSE with 5-1/TEGDME/15 
wt.% LiClO4 composition, presented an Arrhenius behaviour and a r.t. ionic conductivity 
of 1.51 x 105 Scm-1 with a Li+ transference number of about 0.2 comparable with PEG 
based electrolytes. Furthermore, the  value increased with T, suggesting an enhanced 
performance of the 15 wt.% SSE at higher temperatures. This very interesting result 
represents a steppingstone towards future possible applications of borazine-doped 
polyphenylenic materials in the field of lithium ion batteries. 
5.10 References 
[1] B. A. G. Hammer, K. Mllen, Chem. Rev. 2016, 116, 210321040. 
[2] K. Mllen, ACS Nano 2014, 8, 65316541. 
[3] A. Narita, X. Feng, K. Mllen, Chem. Rec. 2015, 15, 295309. 
[4] C. D. Simpson, G. Mattersteig, K. Martin, L. Gherghel, R. E. Bauer, H. J. Rder, 
K. Mllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126, 31393147. 
[5] T. Weil, E. Reuther, K. Mllen, Angew. Chemie - Int. Ed. 2002, 41, 19001904. 
[6] L. Chen, Y. Honsho, S. Seki, D. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 6742
6748. 
[7] D. Liu, S. De Feyter, M. Cotlet, A. Stefan, U. M. Wiesler, A. Herrmann, D. 
Grebel-Koehler, J. Qu, K. Mllen, F. C. De Schryver, Macromolecules 2003, 36, 
59185925. 
[8] M. Adamski, T. J. G. Skalski, B. Britton, T. J. Peckham, L. Metzler, S. Holdcroft, 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed 2017, 6, 91869189. 
[9] J. Miyake, R. Taki, T. Mochizuki, R. Shimizu, R. Akiyama, M. Uchida, K. 
Miyatake, Sci. Adv. 2017, 3, 18. 
[10] C. Li, M. Liu, N. G. Pschirer, M. Baumgarten, K. Mllen, Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 
68176855. 
Chapter 5 
[11] Y. Huang, Y. Mai, X. Yang, U. Beser, J. Liu, F. Zhang, D. Yan, K. Mllen, X. 
Feng, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 1160211605. 
[12] D. Bonifazi, F. Fasano, M. M. Lorenzo-Garcia, D. Marinelli, H. Oubaha, J. 
Tasseroul, Chem. Commun. 2015, 51, 1522215236. 
[13] H. Helten, Chem. Eur. J. 2016, 22, 1297212982. 
[14] B. A. G. Hammer, Y. Wu, S. Fischer, W. Liu, T. Weil, K. Mllen, ChemBioChem 
2017, 18, 960964. 
[15] H. John, R. Bauer, P. Espindola, P. Sonar, J. Heinze, K. Mllen, Angew. Chemie 
- Int. Ed. 2005, 44, 24472451. 
[16] W. M. Wan, A. W. Baggett, F. Cheng, H. Lin, S. Y. Liu, F. Jkle, Chem. 
Commun. 2016, 52, 1361613619. 
[17] I. C. Y. Hou, Y. Hu, A. Narita, K. Mllen, Polym. J. 2018, 50, 320. 
[18] M. Ct, P. D. Haynes, C. Molteni, Phys. Rev. B 2001, 63, 125207125207. 
[19] X. Y. Wang, J. Y. Wang, J. Pei, Chem. Eur. J. 2015, 21, 35283539. 
[20] J. Dosso, D. Marinelli, N. Demitri, D. Bonifazi, ACS Omega 2019, 4, 93439351. 
[21] D. Marinelli, F. Fasano, B. Najjari, N. Demitri, D. Bonifazi, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2017, 139, 55035519. 
[22] S. Bagheri, H. R. Masoodi, Chem. Phys. Lett. 2015, 629, 4652. 
[23] S. Behera, K. T. Jackson, H. M. El-Kaderi, T. E. Reich, P. Jena, J. Mater. Chem. 
2012, 22, 1352413528. 
[24] T. E. Reich, K. T. Jackson, S. Li, P. Jena, H. M. El-Kaderi, J. Mater. Chem. 
2011, 21, 1062910632. 
[25] M. A. Mehta, T. Fujinami, Chem. Lett. 1997, 26, 915916. 
[26] M. A. Mehta, T. Fujinami, Y. Yang, T. Inoue, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 2002, 84, 17
[27] R. Tao, T. Fujinami, J. Appl. Electrochem. 2005, 35, 163168. 
[28] R. Islas, E. Chamorro, J. Robles, T. Heine, J. C. Santos, G. Merino, Struct. 
Chem. 2007, 18, 833839. 
[29] K. Nagasawa, Inorg. Chem. 1966, 5, 442445. 
[30] K. T. Jackson, T. E. Reich, H. M. El-Kaderi, Chem. Commun. 2012, 48, 8823
8825. 
[31] N. A. Riensch, A. Deniz, S. Khl, L. Mller, A. Adams, A. Pich, H. Helten, Polym. 
Chem. 2017, 8, 52645268. 
[32] G. Hizal, U. Tunca, A. Sanyal, J. Polym. Sci. 2011, 49, 41034120. 
[33] U. M. Wiesler, A. J. Berresheim, F. Morgenroth, G. Lieser, K. Mllen, 
Macromolecules 2001, 34, 187199. 
[34] H. Watanabe, T. Totani, T. Yoshizaki, Inorg. Chem. 1965, 4, 657660. 
Chapter 5 
[35] Y. Uchimaru, N. Koda, H. Yamashita, Phosphorus, Sulfur, and Silicon 2001, 169, 
231234. 
[36] L. Craciun, D. M. Ho, M. Jones, R. A. Pascal, Tetrahedron Lett. 2004, 45, 4985
4987. 
[37] J. E. Moore, M. York, J. P. A. Harrity, Synlett 2005, 860862. 
[38] J. D. Kirkham, A. G. Leach, E. C. Row, J. P. A. Harrity, Synthesis 2012, 44, 
19641973. 
[39] P. M. Delaney, J. E. Moore, J. P. A. Harrity, Chem. Commun. 2006, 33233325. 
[40] S. J. Groszos, S. F. Stafiej, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1958, 80, 13571360. 
[41] A. Wakamiya, T. Ide, S. Yamaguchi, J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 14859
14866. 
[42] K. Chen, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2020, 21, 5666. 
[43] A. Le Bail, H. Duroy, J. L. Fourquet, Mater. Res. Bull. 1988, 23, 447452. 
[44] K. R. Brownstein, C. E. Tarr, Phys. Rev. A 1979, 19, 24462453. 
[45] C. Yan, D. J. Pochan, Chem. Soc. Rev. 2010, 39, 35283540. 
[46] C. M. Perrault, D. Juncker, H. E. Park, AIP Conf. Proc. 2008, 1027, 615617. 
[47] A. Sacco, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 2017, 79, 814829. 
[48] A. M. Stephan, Eur. Polym. J. 2006, 42, 2142. 
[49] S. Moins, J. C. Martins, A. Krumpmann, V. Lemaur, J. Cornil, N. Delbosc, A. 
Decroly, P. Dubois, R. Lazzaroni, J. F. Gohy, et al., Chem. Commun. 2017, 53, 
68996902. 
[50] P. H. Huh, M. G. Choi, J. J. Nam, J. K. Lee, J. O. Lee, W. Yang, Macromol. Res. 
2004, 12, 422426. 
[51] L. C. Rodrigues, P. C. Barbosa, M. M. Silva, M. J. Smith, Electrochim. Acta 
2007, 53, 14271431. 
[52] N. A. Stolwijk, C. Heddier, M. Reschke, M. Wiencierz, J. Bokeloh, G. Wilde, 
Macromolecules 2013, 46, 85808588. 
[53] S. Terada, T. Mandai, S. Suzuki, S. Tsuzuki, K. Watanabe, Y. Kamei, K. Ueno, 
K. Dokko, M. Watanabe, J. Phys. Chem. C 2016, 120, 13531365. 
[54] N. K. Karan, O. K. Pradhan, R. Thomas, B. Natesan, R. S. Katiyar, Solid State 
Ionics 2008, 179, 689696. 
[55] P. Yang, L. Liu, L. Li, J. Hou, Y. Xu, X. Ren, M. An, N. Li, Electrochim. Acta 
2014, 115, 454460. 
[56] M. S. Michael, M. M. E. Jacob, S. R. S. Prabaharan, S. Radhakrishna, Solid 
State Ionics 1997, 98, 167174. 
[57] S. G. Rathod, R. F. Bhajantri, V. Ravindrachary, P. K. Pujari, G. K. Nagaraja, J. 
Naik, V. Hebbar, H. Chandrappa, Bull. Mater. Sci. 2015, 38, 12131221. 
[58] T. S. R. Naiwi, M. M. Aung, A. Ahmad, M. Rayung, M. S. Suait, N. A. Yusof, K. 
Chapter 5 
Z. W. Lae, Polymers. 2018, 10, 1142. 
[59] L. Carbone, M. Gobet, J. Peng, M. Devany, B. Scrosati, S. Greenbaum, J. 
Hassoun, J. Power Sources 2015, 299, 460464. 
[60] D. Dong, H. Zhang, B. Zhou, Y. Sun, H. Zhang, M. Cao, J. Li, H. Zhou, H. Qian, 
Z. Lin, et al., Chem. Commun. 2019, 55, 14581461. 
[61] S. Zugmann, M. Fleischmann, M. Amereller, R. M. Gschwind, H. D. Wiemhfer, 
H. J. Gores, Electrochim. Acta 2011, 56, 39263933. 
Chapter 6 
CHAPTER 6 
EXPERIMENTAL PART 
6.1 Instrumentation 
Thin layer chromatography (TLC): was conducted on pre-coated aluminium sheets 
with 0.20 mm Merk Millipore Silica gel 60 with fluorescent indicator F254. Column 
chromatography: was carried out using Merck Gerduran silica gel 60 (particle size 40-
63 m). Preparative thin layer chromatography was conducted on UNIPLATETM 
analtech silica gel GF TLC plates glass-backed 20  20 cm 1500 m. Melting points 
(mp): were measured on a Gallenkamp apparatus in open capillary tubes and have not 
been corrected. Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR): spectra were recorded on a 
Bruker Fourier 300 MHz spectrometer equipped with a dual (13C, 1H) probe, a Bruker 
AVANCE III HD 400MHz NMR spectrometer equipped with a Broadband multinuclear 
(BBFO) SmartProbe or a Bruker AVANCE III HD 500MHz Spectrometer equipped 
with Broadband multinuclear (BBO) Prodigy CryoProbe. 1H spectra were obtained at 
500, 400 or 300 MHz, 13C spectra were obtained at 125, 100 or 75 MHz, 19F spectra 
were obtained at 376 or 470 MHz and 11B were obtained at 128 MHz or 160 MHz. All 
spectra were obtained at r.t. if not otherwise stated. Chemical shifts were reported in 
ppm according to tetramethylsilane using the solvent residual signal as an internal 
reference (CDCl3: H = 7.26 ppm, C = 77.16 ppm; CD2Cl2: H = 5.32, C = 54.00; 
DMSO-d6: H = 2.50 ppm, C = 39.52 ppm; CD3OD: H = 3.31 ppm, C = 49.00 ppm; 
Acetone-d6: H = 2.05 ppm, C = 29.85, 206.26 ppm, C6D6: H = 7.16 ppm, C = 128.06 
ppm). Coupling constants (J) were given in Hz. Resonance multiplicity was described 
as s (singlet), d (doublet), t (triplet), dd (doublet of doublets), dt (doublet of triplets), td 
(triplet of doublets), q (quartet), m (multiplet) and bs (broad signal). Carbon, boron and 
fluorine spectra were acquired with a complete decoupling for the proton. NMR spectra 
of monomer 5-4 were recorded at the NMR centre of the Faculty of Chemistry, 
University of Vienna, on a Bruker AV III HD 700 MHz NMR spectrometer (Bruker 
BioSpin, Rheinstetten, Germany). The instrument is equipped with a quadruple (1H, 
13C, 15N, 19F) inverse helium cooled cryo probe operating at 700.40 MHz for 1H, and 
176.12 MHz for 13C, respectively. The spectra were acquired at a temperature of 25 C 
in C6D6 as solvent. For all 1D and 2D NMR experiments the appropriate pulse 
sequences were used as supplied by the manufacturer, e.g. for 13C spectra a DEPTq 
sequence with a 135 pulse for multiplicity selection, for heteronuclear correlation 
spectra gradient selected HSQC and HMBC experiments. Solid state NMR: Solid-
state 1H13C CPMAS NMR and 11B MQMAS NMR spectra were recorded on a Bruker 
Chapter 6 
Avance III HD spectrometer at 9.4 T [Larmor frequencies: 400.2 MHz (1H), 100.6 MHz 
(13C), 128.4 MHz (11B)]. Magic-angle spinning was carried out at 12 kHz for the 
monomer and polymer samples and at 10 kHz for the starting material. 1H13C 
CPMAS NMR spectra were acquired using ramped CP.[1] 11B MQMAS NMR spectra 
were recorded using a four-pulse split-t1 sequence[2] with the indirect dimension scaled 
to have the same contribution from the isotropic shift as the direct dimension.[3] 
Infrared spectra (IR): were recorded on a Shimadzu IR Affinity 1S FTIR spectrometer 
in ATR mode with a diamond mono-crystal. Mass spectrometry: (i) High-resolution 
ESI mass spectra (HR-MS) were performed on a Waters LCT HR TOF mass 
spectrometer in the positive or negative ion mode. (ii) High-resolution MALDI mass 
spectra (HR-MS) was performed on a Bruker Autoflex speed MALDI-TOF. The sample 
was prepared with a 1:1 ratio of sample to the matrix DCTB (15 mg/mL) in CH2Cl2, all 
these analyses were carried out at Cardiff university. Irradiation equipment: 
Photochemical reactions were performed in a LZC-ICH2 Luzchem equipped with 8 
LZC-UVA lamps centred at approx. 350 nm (8 Watt). Photophysical analysis: 
Absorption spectra were recorded on air equilibrated solutions at room temperature 
with an Agilent Cary 5000 UV-Vis spectrophotometer, using quartz cells with path 
length of 1.0 cm. Emission spectra were recorded on an Agilent Cary Eclipse 
fluorescence spectrofluorometer. Emission lifetime measurements were performed on 
a JobinYvon-Horiba FluoroHub single photon counting module, using Nano-LED 
pulsed sources at 372 nm. Electrochemical measurements: Cyclic voltammetry (CV) 
measures were carried out at room temperature in N2 purged dry CH2Cl2 with an 
AUTOLAB PGSTAT 204. Glassy carbon electrode with a 3 mm diameter has been 
used as a working electrode, an Ag wire as a pseudo-reference electrode (AgQRE) 
and a Pt spiral as a counter electrode. Working electrode and AgQRE electrodes were 
polished on a felt pad with 0.05 or 0.3 m alumina suspension and then sonicated in 
deionized H2O for few minutes before each experiment: the Pt wire was flame-cleaned. 
Tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (TBAPF6) has been exploited as a 
supporting electrolyte at a concentration around 0.1 M. Ferrocene (Fc) and 
Decamethylferrocene (FcMe10) have been added as internal reference: E1/2 (Fc+/0) = 
0.46 V vs SCE in CH2Cl2; E1/2(FcMe10+/0) = -0.072 V vs SCE in CH2Cl2. HOMO and 
LUMO energies were calculated from the first formal redox potentials (half- wave 
potentials) using equations (1) and (2): 
E (HOMO) = - (5.1 eV + E1/2ox.1 vs Fc+/0) (1) 
E (LUMO) = - (5.1 eV + E1/2 red.1 vs Fc+/0) (2) 
Chapter 6 
E (HOMO) = -(4.8 eV + E1/2ox vs Fc+/Fc) (3)  
E (LUMO) = -(4.8 eV + E1/2red vs Fc+/Fc) (4) 
When oxidation or reduction waves were not detected by means of cyclic voltammetry, 
HOMO or LUMO levels have been calculated using the optical gap E0-0, considering 
the lowest energy crossing point between normalized absorption and emission spectra 
eV = 1240.5(eVnm)/cross (nm). Theoretical Calculations: All the calculations were 
performed using Gaussian09 including the D.01 revision.[4] Geometry optimizations and 
frontier orbitals calculations were carried out in vacuum at the B3LYP/6-31+G** level of 
theory. When possible, the resolved crystal structure was used as a starting geometry 
for the optimization. NICS surfaces were calculated using a flat array of ghost atoms 
separated by 0.1  placed 1  over the molecular plane and plotted using Originlab 
2019b. ESP surfaces were mapped on the van der Waals surface of molecules up to 
electron density of 0.05 eletron/bohr-3 and plotted using Gaussianview4. ACID surfaces 
were calculated using the script kindly provided by the Herges Group[5] and plotted 
using POV-Ray software. Mechanism studies: Density functional theory calculations 
were performed using Gaussian 09.[4] Structures were optimised without geometrical 
constraints using the B3LYP hybrid functional[6] with a 6-31(d,p) basis set on all 
centres.[7] Solvent (THF) was incorporated using the polarised continuum model, in 
which the molecular cavity defined by the united atom model that incorporates 
hydrogen into the parent heavy atom.[8] Geometry optimisations were followed by 
frequency calculations to ascertain the nature of the stationary points; none of the 
structures contained imaginary frequencies. NBO calculations were performed using 
NBO 6.0, invoked via the Gaussian 09 program interface.[9] Recycling Gel Permeation 
Chromatography (GPC): was performed on a LC-9110G NEXT system equipped with 
JAIGEL 2HH and 2.5HH columns and a FC-3310 collector. Multi-borazine oligomeric 
fraction GPC: performed at university of Warwick, Polymer Characterization Research 
Technology Platform, Gibbet Hill Road, Coventry. CV4 7AL. All SEC data was recorded 
on an Agilent Infinity II MDS instrument equipped with a differential refractive index 
(DRi), dual angle light scatter (LS) and viscometry (VS) detectors. The system was 
equipped with 2  PL gel Mixed C columns (300  7.5 mm) and a PL gel 5 m guard 
column. The mobile phase was CHCl3 stabilized with 2 % TEA (triethylamine) and run 
at a flow rate of 1 mL min-1 at 30 C. Agilent poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) 
EasiVials were used to create a third order calibration from DRi data between: 
1,568,000 and 550 g mol-1. LF-NMR: LF-NMR characterization was performed at 20 C 
by means of a Bruker Minispec mq20 (0.47 T, Germany). The determination of the 
average water protons transverse (spin-spin) relaxation time (T2m) was performed 
according to the CPMG sequence (CarrPurcellMeiboomGill)[10] {90[--180-
Chapter 6 
(echo)]n-TR} with a 8.36 s wide 90 pulse,  = 250 s, and TR (sequences repetition 
rate) equal to 5 s. Rheology measures: were performed by a stress controlled 
rotational rheometer (Haake Mars Rheometer, 379-0200 Thermo Electron GmbH, 
Karlsruhe, Germany) equipped by parallel plate geometry (PP35,  = 35 mm, serrated 
surfaces to avoid slippage at the wall). The measuring device was kept at 10 C inside 
a glass bell at saturated conditions to avoid evaporation effects. To evaluate the 
extension of the linear viscoelastic range, oscillatory stress sweep tests were 
performed in the stress () range spanning form 0.33 Pa to 12 Pa at 1 Hz. Then, 
frequency sweep tests, performed inside the linear viscoelastic region ( = 1 Pa), 
allowed the determination of the systems mechanical spectra (dependence of the 
elastic (G) and viscous (G) moduli on pulsation =2f) in the frequency range 
spanning from 0.1 to 10 Hz. The generalized Maxwell model[11] was used to fit the 
experimental mechanical spectra in order to determine the shear modulus G given by 
the sum of the elastic spring constants (gi) of all the Maxwell elements[12]: 
G'=  
G''=  
G=            (7) 
where i is the relaxation time of the ith Maxwell element. The number, n, of the 
Maxwell elements was determined by minimizing the product 2*(n+1), where 2 is the 
sum of the squared errors and (n+1) represents the number of fitting parameters of eq. 
(5)-(6). Indeed, following a consolidate strategy,[11] eq. (5) and (6) fitting to experimental 
mechanical spectra was performed assuming that relaxation times (i) were scaled by 
a factor 10 ( =10 ). 
The evaluation of the average network mesh size (RHEO) was performed starting 
from the Flory theory[13]: 
x= G RT          (8) 
where x is the network crosslink densitydefined as the moles of crosslinks between 
different polymeric chains per gel unit volume, T is temperature and R is the universal 
gas constant. The link between x and RHEO is provided by the equivalent network 
theory,[14] according to which the following relation holds: 
= 6 xNA
3           (9) 
where NA is Avogadro number. 
Chapter 6 
6.2 Materials and general methods 
Synthesis: Chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Acros Organics, TCI, 
Apollo Scientific, Alfa Aesar, Fluorochem and were used as received. Solvents were 
purchased from Fisher scientific, while deuterated solvents from Eurisotop and Sigma 
Aldrich. THF, CH2Cl2 and toluene were dried on a Braun MB SPS-800 solvent 
purification system and further dried over activated 4  molecular sieves. PhCl and 
Hexane were washed with conc. H2SO4 and a KMnO4 solution in 1M NaOH (1 g of 
KMnO4 every 50 mL of 1M NaOH solution) and then distilled from CaH2 or P2O5 and 
stored over 4  molecular sieves. Aniline was distilled from CaH2 under N2 and stored 
away from light in a N2 atmosphere. Aniline, PhCl and hexane were left on CaH2 
overnight prior distillation. Low temperature baths were prepared using different solvent 
mixtures depending on the desired temperature: -84 C with Ethyl acetate/liq. N2, and 0 
C with ice/H2O. Anhydrous conditions were achieved by drying Schlenk flasks or 2-
neck flasks by 3 cycles of flaming with a heat gun under vacuum and purging with N2. 
The inert atmosphere was maintained using N2-filled balloons equipped with a syringe 
and needle that was used to penetrate the silicon stoppers used to close the flasks 
necks. Additions of liquid reagents were performed using N2 purged plastic syringes. 
Degassing of solutions was performed by bubbling with N2 while sonicating or Freeze-
pump-thaw procedure: solutions were frozen using liquid nitrogen and kept under 
vacuum for 10 min. before thawing. Molecular sieves (4 ) were activated by heating at 
165 C under vacuum (less than 1 mbar) for 18 h. All reactions were performed in dry 
conditions and under inert atmosphere unless otherwise stated. SSE preparation: 
LiClO4 (battery grade) was obtained from Acros was used without further purification. 
TEGDME from SigmaAldrich was dried under vacuum for 48 h prior to use. CH2Cl2 
and THF (spectroscopy grade) were purchased from VWR and were used as received. 
6.3 X-Ray Measurements 
CCDC 1523993, 1523994 and 1523995 contain the supplementary crystallographic 
data for compounds 2-1, 3-2 and 2-27; 1963744, 1963743, 1963745 and 1973297 
contain the supplementary crystallographic data for compounds 3-13, 2-33, 2-38 and 1-
1. CCDC 1873312, 1873316, 1873314, 1873313, 1873315 and 1873317 contain the 
supplementary crystallographic data for compounds 4-8, 4-9, 4-11, 4-11, 4-3 and 4-
10. These data can be obtained free of charge from The Cambridge Crystallographic 
Data Centre via https://www.ccdc.cam.ac.uk/structures.  
X-ray diffraction analysis - Structural characterization. 
Derivatives 2-1, 3-2, 2-26, 2-29, 2-31, 2-45 and 2-27 
Chapter 6 
Single crystals of 2-1, 3-2, 2-27, 2-26, 2-45 and 2-31 were grown by slow diffusion of i-
PrOH in CHCl3 or C6H6 or alternatively MeOH in CH2Cl2. 2-29 was obtained from slow 
evaporation of CH2Cl2. Crystallographic studies were undertaken on single crystal 
mounted in paratone and studied on an Agilent SuperNova Dual three-circle 
diffractometer using Cu-K (= 1.540598 ) or Mo-K (= 0.7093187 ) radiation and a 
CCD detector. Measurements were typically made at 150(1) K with temperatures 
maintained using an Oxford Cryostream unless otherwise stated. Data were collected, 
integrated and corrected for absorption using a numerical absorption correction based 
on gaussian integration over a multifaceted crystal model within CrysAlisPro.[15] The 
structures were solved by direct methods and refined against F2 within SHELXL-
2013.[16] 
Derivatives in Chapter 3, 4 and 5 
Data collections were performed at the X-Ray diffraction beamline (XRD1) of the 
Elettra Synchrotron, Trieste (Italy).[17] The crystals were dipped in NHV oil (Jena 
Bioscience, Jena, Germany) and mounted on the goniometer head with kapton loops 
(MiTeGen, Ithaca, USA). Complete datasets were collected at 100 K (nitrogen stream 
supplied through an Oxford Cryostream 700 - Oxford Cryosystems Ltd., Oxford, UK) 
through the rotating crystal method. Data were acquired using a monochromatic 
wavelength of 0.700  on a Pilatus 2M hybrid-pixel area detector (DECTRIS Ltd., 
Baden-Daettwil, Switzerland). The diffraction data were indexed and integrated using 
XDS.[18] Scaling have been done using CCP4-Aimless[19,20]. Two data collections had to 
be merged for 2-33 and 3-13 crystals to obtain complete data sets. The structures were 
solved by the dual space algorithm implemented in the SHELXT code.[16] Fourier 
analysis and refinement were performed by the full-matrix least-squares methods 
based on F2 implemented in SHELXL (Version 2018/3). The Coot program was used 
for modelling.[21] Anisotropic thermal motion refinement have been used for all atoms 
with occupancies equal or greater than 50%. Geometric and thermal motion 
parameters restrains (DFIX, DANG, SIMU) have been applied on disordered solvent 
molecules. Hydrogen atoms were included at calculated positions with isotropic 
Ufactors = 1.2Ueq or Ufactors = 1.5Ueq for methyl and hydroxyl groups (Ueq being 
the equivalent isotropic thermal factor of the bonded non hydrogen atom). Pictures 
were prepared using Ortep3[22] and Pymol[23] software. Essential crystal and refinement 
data are reported below.  
None of the 4-10 crystals tested diffracted better than ~1.0 : this is consistent with the 
presence of huge voids in the crystal packing, filled with disordered solvent molecules. 
Electron content of cavities have been estimated with the SQUEEZE routine of 
PLATON.[24] One ordered pentane molecule (with 50% occupancy) has been modelled 
Chapter 6 
in the asymmetric unit (ASU) of 4-10, while not construable residual density have been 
squeezed (3103 electrons in 12195 3 - 45% of the unit cell volume). The disordered 
solvent has been estimated as additional 11.5 pentane molecules in the ASU; 
contributions of these molecules have been included in the properties reported in 
crystallographic data tables. Anisotropic thermal motion refinement has been used for 
all non-solvent atoms. Hydrogen atoms were included at calculated positions with 
isotropic Ufactors = 1.2 Ueq or Ufactors = 1.5 Ueq for methyl groups (Ueq being the 
equivalent isotropic thermal factor of the bonded non hydrogen atom). Restrains on 
bond lengths, angles and thermal motion parameters (DFIX, DANG, SIMU and DELU) 
have been applied on disordered borazine fragments (in 4-9 and 4-10) and for pentane 
molecule (in 4-10). Pictures were prepared using Ortep3[22] and Pymol[23] software.  
Multiple data collections had to be merged, for triclinic crystals (5-4-ct) to obtain 
complete sets, using CCP4-Aimless[19,20] code. The structures were solved by the dual 
space algorithm implemented in the SHELXT code.[16] Fourier analysis and refinement 
were performed by the full-matrix least-squares methods based on F2 implemented in 
SHELXL (Version 2018/3)[16]. The Coot program was used for modelling.[21] Anisotropic 
thermal motion refinement have been used for all atoms with full occupancies. 
Geometric and thermal motion parameters restrains (DFIX, DANG, SIMU) have been 
applied on disordered solvent molecules. Hydrogen atoms were included at calculated 
positions with isotropic Ufactors = 1.2Ueq or Ufactors = 1.5Ueq for methyl and 
hydroxyl groups (Ueq being the equivalent isotropic thermal factor of the bonded non 
hydrogen atom). Disordered solvent molecules have been modelled in 5-2 (0.16 
dichloromethane/ASU), 5-4-cc (1.75 methanol/ASU + 0.25 water/ASU) and 5-4-ct (0.35 
CH2Br2/ASU) structures. An additional disordered solvent contribution has been 
identified in 5-4-cc, where methanol and waters fill inner parts of crystal channels 
without specific intermolecular contacts with the ordered borazine packing scaffold. The 
corresponding not construable residual electron density couldnt be modelled and has 
been removed with Platon SQUEEZE[24] routine (120 e-/cell squeezed, corresponding 
to additional ~5.5 methanol and ~1.5 water molecules/cell in 420 3 volume voids). 
Crystals of 5-2 show merohedral twinning (direct lattice two-fold twinning axis [100]), 
with a twin fraction of 45%, identified using Platon TWINROTMAT algorithm.[22] Pictures 
were prepared using Ortep3[22] and Pymol[23] software. Essential crystal and refinement 
data are reported below. 
Chapter 6 
Crystallographic data tables 
 2-26 
[C60H48B3N3Cl6] 
[C30H22B3Br4N3O] 
[C54H66B3N3] 
2-45 
[C48H48B3N3F6] 
Chemical Formula C60H48B3N3Cl6 C30H22B3Br4N3O C54H66B3N3 C48H48B3N3F6 
Formula weight (g/mol) 1053.2259 788.8776 789.5536 813.4032 
Temperature (K) 293(2) 150(2) 150(2) 283(2) 
Wavelength () 1.54184 1.54184 1.54184 1.54184 
Crystal system  Triclinic Triclinic Monoclinic Monoclinic 
Space Group  P-1 P-1 P 21/c P 21/c 
Unit cell dimensions a = 12.1875 (6)  a = 11.7497(3)  a = 13.1945(5)  a = 10.9244(6)  
 b = 12.5868 (4)  b = 16.5362(4)  b = 36.3967(11)  b = 20.9184(13)  
 c = 20.4846 (9)  c = 18.7461(5)  c = 10.0266(3)  c = 19.9847(18)  
  = 90.539 (3)  = 90.149(2)  = 90  = 90
  = 94.781 (4)  = 107.676(2)  = 96.071(3)  = 94.326(6)
 = 118.895 (4)  = 110.591(2)  = 90 = 90
Volume (3) 2737.1 (2) 3224.10 (15) 4788.13 4553.9(6) 
Z  12 4 4 20 
Density (calculated) 
(gcm-3) 
1.180 1.720 1.095 1.186 
Absorption coefficient 
(mm-1) 
0.640 7.09 0.060 0.701 
F(000)  972 1628 1704.0 1704.0 
Crystal habit Colorless thin rods Colorless needles Colorless prisms Colorless thin rods 
Theta range for data 
collection 
4.0 to 74.1. 3.6 to 74.1 3.0 to 29.7 4.1 to 74.4. 
Index ranges -15  h  15 
-10  k  15 
-25  l  25 
-13  h  14 
-20  k  20 
-23  l  23 
-13  h  17 
-45  k  50 
-13  l  9 
-13  h  13 
-25  k  25 
-24  l  24 
Reflections collected 19619 32017 27688 15787 
Independent reflections 
(data with I>2(I)) 
9072 [R(int) = 0.040] 
11305 [R(int) = 
0.0375] 
7632 [R(int) = 
0.043] 
10446 [R(int) = 
0.0698] 
Data completeness  96.9%  94.1 %  79.1% 97.4%  
Refinement method  
Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / 
parameters  
10783 / 0 / 649 12362 / 0 / 790 10692 / 1 / 577 15787 / 228 / 643 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.07 1.13 1.042 0.927 
Final R indices [I>2(I)] R1 = 0.123,  
wR2 = 0.450 
R1 = 0.052,  
wR2= 0.142 
R1 = 0.079,  
wR2 = 0.235 
R1 = 0.070,  
wR2 = 0.184 
Largest diff. peak  
and hole (e-3) 
1.17 and -0.71 1.47 and -1.68 0.47 and -0.36 0.48 and -0.36 
Chapter 6 
2-27[C60H48B3N3F6] 
[C60H45B3N3] 
[C66H48] 
CCDC Number 1523995 1523993 1523994 
Chemical Formula C60H48B3N3F6 C60H45B3N3 C66H48 
Formula weight (g/mol) 957.4142 837.4246 834.3287 
Temperature (K) 150(2) 150(2) 150(2) 
Wavelength () 1.54184 1.54184 1.54184 
Crystal system  Triclinic Triclinic Monoclinic 
Space Group  P-1 P-1 P I 2/a 
Unit cell dimensions a = 9.9104(10)  a = 7.8357(4)  a = 25.0707(6)  
 b = 11.2360(14)  b = 18.8882(8)  b = 16.0942(4)  
 c = 25.2756(11)  c = 18.9726(10)  c = 26.2129(7)  
  = 83.961(6)  = 64.191(4)  = 90 
  = 85.819(6)  = 79.617(4)  = 100.269(2) 
 = 67.366(10)  = 82.496(4)  = 90 
Volume (3) 2581.7(5) 2482.2(2) 10407.3(5) 
Z  2 2 8 
Density (calculated) (gcm-3) 1.232 1.277 1.265 
Absorption coefficient (mm-1) 0.702 0.554 0.542 
F(000)  996 1002 4176 
Crystal size (mm3) 0.885 x 0.151 x 0.120 0.607 x 0.144 x 0.083 0.452 x 0.116 x 0.045 
Crystal habit Colorless thin rods Colorless thin rods yellow thin rods 
Theta range for data 
collection 
4.278 to 74.599. 4.401 to 74.153 3.279 to 74.368 
Index ranges -12  h  11 
-13  k  12 
-24  l  31 
-9  h  9 
-23  k  18 
-20  l  23 
-30  h  19 
-18  k  19 
-31  l  32 
Reflections collected 16695 17385 20940 
Independent reflections 
(data with I>2(I)) 
9832 [R(int) = 0.0810] 9795 [R(int) = 0.0375] 
10311 [R(int) = 
0.0459] 
Data completeness  97.4%  99.8 %  99.8% 
Refinement method  Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / 
parameters  
9832 / 0 / 655 9795 / 0 / 682 10311 / 0 / 728 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.054 1.032 1.032 
Final R indices [I>2(I)] R1 = 0.1050,  
wR2 = 0.2626 
R1 = 0.0565,  
wR2= 0.1518 
R1 = 0.0716,  
wR2 = 0.1873 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.1542,  
wR2= 0.3023 
R1 = 0.0716,  
wR2= 0.1697 
R1 = 0.1072,  
wR2 = 0.2260 
Largest diff. peak  
and hole (e-3) 
0.661 and -0.502 0.341 and -0.374 0.355 and -0.388 
Chapter 6 
 3-131/2CH2Br2 
[C52H341/2CH2Br2] 
[C54H43B2N3] 
2-381/8CH2Br27/8CH3OH 
[C46H33B3N2O1/8CH2Br27/8CH3OH] 
CCDC Number 1963744 1963743 1963745 
Chemical Formula C52.5H35Br C54H43B2N3 C47H36.75B3B0.25N2O1.88 
Formula weight (g/mol) 745.71 755.53 711.94 
Temperature (K) 100(2) 100(2) 100(2) 
Wavelength () 0.700 0.700 0.700 
Crystal system  Triclinic Monoclinic Monoclinic 
Space Group  P-1 P 21/n P 21/c 
Unit cell dimensions a = 7.853(2) a = 15.313(3) a = 14.765(3) 
 b = 14.615(3) b = 15.891(3) b = 33.278(7) 
 c = 17.556(4) c = 16.401(3) c = 7.612(2) 
  = 65.73(3)  = 90  = 90 
  = 88.99(3)  = 99.82(3)  = 92.20(3) 
 = 89.56(3)  = 90  = 90 
Volume (3) 1836.6(8) 3932.6(14) 3737.4(13) 
Z  2 4 4 
Density (calculated) (gcm-3) 1.348 1.276 1.265 
Absorption coefficient (mm-
1.115 0.070 0.328 
F(000)  770 3674 1486 
Crystal size (mm3) 0.10 x 0.02 x 0.02 0.10 x 0.05 x 0.05 0.08 x 0.03 x 0.02 
Crystal habit Colorless thin rods Colorless thin rods Colorless thin rods 
Theta range for data 
collection 
1.25 to 28.23 1.66 to 25.60 1.20 to 26.66 
Index ranges -10  h  10 
-19  k  19 
-23  l  23 
-18  h  18 
-19  k  19 
-20  l  19 
-18  h  18 
-42  k  42 
-9  l  9 
Resolution () 0.74 0.81 0.78 
Reflections collected 41687 44477 18488 
Independent reflections 
(data with I>2(I)) 
9283 (4446) 7634 (4634) 7984 (4502)  
Data multiplicity (max resltn) 4.39 (4.19) 5.64 (5.51) 2.23 (2.17) 
I/(I) (max resltn) 4.35 (1.05) 7.13 (2.63) 5.41 (2.13) 
Rmerge (max resltn) 0.0995 (0.6825) 0.0916 (0.3461) 0.0794 (0.3037) 
Data completeness  
(max resltn) 
97.8% (96.2%) 98.3% (97.6%) 97.0% (97.3%) 
Refinement method  Full-matrix  
least-squares on 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / 
parameters  
9283 / 3 / 501 7634/ 0 / 538 7984/ 36 / 505 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 0.993 1.022 1.003 
max 0.000 0.000 0.013 
Final R indices [I>2(I)] R1 = 0.0931,  
wR2 = 0.2597 
R1 = 0.0563,  
wR2= 0.1432 
R1 = 0.0865,  
wR2 = 0.2380 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.1735,  
wR2= 0.3192 
R1 = 0.1033,  
wR2= 0.1641 
R1 = 0.1348,  
wR2 = 0.2820 
Largest diff. peak  
and hole (e-3) 
1.496 and -0.868 0.695 and -0.256 0.854 and -0.442 
R.M.S. deviation  
from mean (e-3) 
 0.103  0.056  0.077 
Chapter 6 
[C42H42B3N3] 
[C78H78B6N6] 
4-11 
[C70H70B6N6O] 
CCDC Number 1873312 1873316 1873314 
Chemical Formula C42H42B3N3 C78H78B6N6 C70H70B6N6O 
Formula weight (g/mol) 621.21 1164.32 1076.18 
Temperature (K) 100(2) 100(2) 100(2) 
Wavelength () 0.700 0.700 0.700 
Crystal system  Monoclinic Triclinic Monoclinic 
Space Group  C c P -1 P 21/c 
Unit cell dimensions a = 12.091(2)  a = 12.472(3)  a = 18.861(4)  
 b = 21.639(4)  b = 15.108(3)  b = 22.390(4)  
 c = 13.768(3)  c = 19.725(4)  c = 14.820(3)  
  = 90  = 80.08(3)  = 90 
  = 101.26(3)  = 75.32(3)  = 104.44(3) 
  = 90  = 68.48(3)  = 90 
Volume (3) 3532.8(13) 3331.8(14) 6061(2) 
Z  4 2 4 
Density (calculated) (gcm-3) 1.168 1.161 1.179 
Absorption coefficient (mm-1) 0.064 0.064 0.066 
F(000)  1320 1236 2280 
Crystal size (mm3) 0.10 x 0.10 x 0.05 0.05 x 0.03 x 0.02 0.10 x 0.02 x 0.02 
Crystal habit Colorless prisms Colorless prisms Colorless rods 
Theta range for data collection 1.85 to 30.00 1.06 to 30.00 1.10 to 25.27 
Resolution () 0.70 0.70 0.82 
Index ranges -17  h  17 
-28  k  28 
-19  l  19 
-17  h  17 
-21  k  21 
-28  l  28 
-22  h  22 
-27  k  27 
-18  l  17 
Reflections collected 33042 96765 36597 
Independent reflections  
(data with I>2(I)) 
10445 (10422) 19920 (16202) 11459 (5118) 
Data multiplicity (max resltn) 5.53 (4.80) 4.76 (4.21) 3.14 (3.15) 
I/(I) (max resltn) 38.86 (28.12) 20.50 (9.47) 5.05 (0.98) 
Rmerge (max resltn) 0.0350 (0.0630) 0.0357 (0.1088) 0.1149 (0.6937) 
Data completeness  
(max resltn) 
97.1% (93.7%) 97.9% (95.2%) 99.4% (99.1%) 
Refinement method  Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters  10445 / 2 / 440 19920 / 256 / 1079 11459 / 0 / 759 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.039 1.067 0.983 
/max 0.001 0.005 0.000 
Final R indices [I>2(I)]a R1 = 0.0325,  
wR2 = 0.0898 
R1 = 0.0615,  
wR2 = 0.1748 
R1 = 0.0720, 
wR2 = 0.1693 
R indices (all data)a R1 = 0.0325,  
wR2 = 0.0899 
R1 = 0.0729, 
wR2 = 0.1866 
R1 = 0.1760, 
wR2 = 0.2255 
Largest diff. peak and hole (e-3) 0.323 and -0.225 0.452 and -0.374 0.271 and -0.218 
R.M.S. deviation from mean (e-3) 0.047 0.040 0.054 
a R1 =  ||Fo||Fc|| /  |Fo|, wR2 = { [w(Fo2  Fc2 )2] /  [w(Fo2 )2]} 
Chapter 6 
 4-11 
[C70H70B6N6O] 
[C84H90B6N6] 
4-1012C5H12 
[C114H114B9N912C5H12] 
CCDC Number 1873313 1873315 1873317 
Chemical Formula C70H70B6N6O C84H90B6N6 C174H258B9N9 
Formula weight (g/mol) 1076.18 1248.47 2573.17 
Temperature (K) 100(2) 100(2) 100(2) 
Wavelength () 0.700 0.700 0.700 
Crystal system  Monoclinic Orthorhombic Trigonal 
Space Group  P 21/c P bca P -3 
Unit cell dimensions a = 11.350(2)  a = 21.268(4)  a = 50.994(7)  
 b = 16.679(3)  b = 14.952(3)  b = 50.994(7)  
 c = 32.207(6)  c = 22.475(5)  c = 12.034(2)  
  = 90  = 90  = 90 
  = 99.29(3)  = 90  = 90 
  = 90  = 90  = 120 
Volume (3) 6017(2) 7147(2) 27101(9) 
Z  4 4 6 
Density (calculated) (gcm-3) 1.188 1.160 0.946 
Absorption coefficient (mm-1) 0.066 0.037 0.051 
F(000)  2280 2664 8460 
Crystal size (mm3) 0.08 x 0.08 x 0.02 0.50 x 0.12 x 0.08 0.05 x 0.05 x 0.03 
Crystal habit Colorless rods Colorless prisms Colorless thin rods 
Theta range for data collection 1.26 to 25.94 1.78 to 30.96 1.20 to 20.07 
Resolution () 0.80 0.68 1.02 
Index ranges -14  h  14 
-20  k  20 
-40  l  40 
-31  h  31 
-21  k  21 
-31  l  31 
-49  h  49 
-49  k  49 
-11  l  11 
Reflections collected 44465 78255 123980 
Independent reflections  
(data with I>2(I)) 
12263 (6258) 11797 (10575) 17767 (10193) 
Data multiplicity (max resltn) 3.55 (3.54) 6.36 (5.59) 6.98 (7.01) 
I/(I) (max resltn) 6.89 (1.52) 29.85 (18.18) 15.47 (2.15) 
Rmerge (max resltn) 0.0993 (0.5533) 0.0331 (0.0609) 0.0430 (0.5092) 
Data completeness  
(max resltn) 
99.6% (99.7%) 99.3% (98.0%) 99.8% (99.8%) 
Refinement method  Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters  11459 / 0 / 759 11797 / 0 / 443 17767 / 668 / 1098 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.007 1.030 1.016 
/max 0.002 0.001 0.037 
Final R indices [I>2(I)]a R1 = 0.0675, 
wR2 = 0.1453 
R1 = 0.0496, 
wR2 = 0.1474 
R1 = 0.1044, 
wR2 = 0.2510 
R indices (all data)a R1 = 0.1497, 
wR2 = 0.1813 
R1 = 0.0539, 
wR2 = 0.1429 
R1 = 0.1454, 
wR2 = 0.2857 
Largest diff. peak and hole (e-3) 0.230 and -0.237 0.482 and -0.245 0.322 and -0.335 
R.M.S. deviation from mean (e-3) 0.055 0.057 0.036 
a R1 =  ||Fo||Fc|| /  |Fo|, wR2 = { [w(Fo2  Fc2 )2] /  [w(Fo2 )2]} 
Chapter 6 
 5-2 5-4-cc 5-4-ct 
Chemical Formula C24.12H18.25B3Cl0.25N3 C116H113B3N3O9.5 C108.35H78.7B3Br0.7N3 
Formula weight (g/mol) 391.46 1733.52 1511.01 
Temperature (K) 100(2) 100(2) 100(2) 
Wavelength () 0.700 0.700 0.700 
Crystal system  Trigonal Hexagonal Triclinic 
Space Group  R -3 P 63 P -1 
Unit cell dimensions a = 33.662(5)  a = 25.694(4)  a = 12.429(2)  
 b = 33.662(5)  b = 25.694(4)  b = 16.259(3)  
 c = 13.762(3)  c = 9.446(2)  c = 21.464(4)  
  = 90 a = 90 a = 71.24(3) 
  = 90 b = 90 b = 88.86(3) 
  = 120 g = 120 g = 83.77(3) 
Volume (3) 13505(5) 5400.6(19) 4082.2(16) 
Z  24 2 2 
Density (calculated) (gcm-
1.155  1.066 1.229 
Absorption coefficient 
(mm-1) 
0.091 0.064 0.395 
F(000)  4878 1842 1579 
Theta range for data 
collection 
1.19 to 29.97 2.31 to 30.96 0.99 to 30.00 
Index ranges -45  h  46 
-47  k  47 
-17  l  17 
-37  h  37 
-37  k  34 
-13  l  13 
-17  h  16 
-23  k  23 
-30  l  30 
Resolution () 0.70 0.68 0. 
Reflections collected 44602 61077 82600 
Independent reflections  
(data with I>2(I)) 
8874 (6292) 11870 (6997)  23937 (18973)  
Data multiplicity (max 
resltn) 
4.88 (4.01) 9.70 (8.32) 3.31 (2.96) 
I/(I) (max resltn) 12.89 (3.02) 10.41 (2.25) 7.00 (4.76) 
Rmerge (max resltn) 0.0604 (0.3447) 0.1111 (0.6042) 0.0454 (0.1633) 
Data completeness  
(max resltn) 
97.2% (92.8%) 99.9% (99.6%) 96.0% (91.9%) 
Refinement method  
Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on F2 
Full-matrix  
least-squares on 
Data / restraints / 
parameters  
8874 / 5 / 328 11870 / 23 / 397 23937 / 17 / 1050 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.014 1.000 1.021 
D/smax 0.001 0.006 0.000 
Final R indices [I>2(I)] R1 = 0.0597,  
wR2 = 0.1407 
R1 = 0.0683,  
wR2 = 0.1581 
R1 = 0.0765,  
wR2 = 0.2063 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0. 0927,  
wR2 = 0.1616 
R1 = 0.1237,  
wR2 = 0.1861 
R1 = 0.0932,  
wR2 = 0.2229 
Largest diff. peak  
and hole (e-3) 
0.336 and -0.239  0.264 and -0.242 1.105 and -1.140 
R.M.S. deviation  
from mean (e-3) 
0.049 0.049 0.075 
6.4 PXRD Parameters  
High-quality pXRD data were recorded for a powder sample of 1-1 at ambient 
temperature (294 K) on a Bruker D8 diffractometer (CuK1, Ge-monochromated) 
operating in transmission mode. The powder sample was packed into a glass capillary, 
which was flame-sealed and attached to the disc sample holder of the pXRD 
instrument. Data were recorded from 2 = 4 to 70 (step size, 0.016; total time, 60h). 
Periodic DFT-D calculations were carried out using CASTEP[25] (Academic Release 
Version 19.1). Geometry optimization calculations utilized ultrasoft pseudopotentials,[26] 
Chapter 6 
the PBE functional,[27] semi-empirical dispersion correction using the TS correction 
scheme,[28] fixed unit cell, preserved space group symmetry, periodic boundary 
conditions, a basis set cut-off energy of 700 eV and a Monkhorst-Pack grid[29] of 
minimum sample spacing 0.05  2 1. Convergence criteria for geometry 
optimization were 0.01 eV 1 for forces, 0.00001 eV per atom for energy, and 0.001  
for atomic displacements. 
Chapter 6 
6.5 Synthetic Procedures 
Chapter 2 
Synthesis of B,B-Bis(2,6-dibromophenyl)-B-hydroxy-N,N,N-triphenyl-
borazine (2-29)  
To a solution of aniline (500 mg, 5.37 mmol) in dry toluene (7.0 mL) under N2, BCl3 (1.0 
M solution in heptanes; 6.4 mL; 6.4 mmol) was added dropwise at 0 C and the 
suspension stirred for 10 min. The Schlenk flask was then equipped with a condenser 
connected to a CaCl2 trap and the reaction refluxed for 18 h. The condenser was then 
exchanged with a septum and the resulting white suspension degassed 5 times 
following the freeze-pump-thaw procedure to remove residual HCl. In parallel, 1,3-
dibromobenzene (1.38 g, 5.91 mmol) was dissolved in 10.0 mL of anhydrous THF in a 
flame dried Schlenk flask and LDA (1.0 M in hexane/THF, 7.0 mL, 7.0 mmol) added 
dropwise at -84 C. The suspension was stirred for 2 h at the same temperature. The 
chloro-borazole intermediate was cannulated to the THF solution at -84 C and allowed 
to react at this temperature for 30 min., at 0 C for 30 min. and at r.t. for 24 h. The 
reaction was quenched with H2O, diluted in CH2Cl2 (50 mL), washed with H2O (100 mL 
 2) and brine (100 mL). The organic layer was dried over MgSO4, filtered and 
evaporated under vacuum. Precipitation of the residue in MeOH afforded pure 2-29 as 
a white solid (923 mg, 51%). mp: 288-290 C. 1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.59 (d, J 
= 7.7 Hz, 2 H), 7.46 (d, J = 7.7 Hz, 4 H), 7.19 (t, J = 7.7 Hz, 4 H), 7.09-7.04 (m, 6 H), 
6.87 (t, J = 7.7 Hz, 2 H), 6.80 (t, J = 7.3 Hz, 1 H), 6.63 (t, J = 7.9 Hz, 2 H), 3.58 (s, 1 H). 
13C{1H} NMR (126 MHz, CDCl3) : 144.87, 143.12, 130.18, 129.84, 128.52, 127.81, 
127.35, 127.04, 126.26, 126.02, 125.39. (One signal missing due to 11B quadrupolar 
relaxation) 11B{1H} NMR (128 MHz, CDCl3) : 33.49, 25.25. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3564, 
3026, 1541, 1491, 1454, 1429, 1398, 1379, 1206, 1138, 1047, 1028, 912, 770, 750, 
708, 696, 550. ASAP+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for [C30H23B3N3O79Br4]+: 789.8854, found: 
789.8884. Crystals suitable for X-Ray diffraction were obtained from slow evaporation 
of a CH2Cl2 solution. 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of B,B-Bis(2,3,5,6-tetrachlorophenyl)-B-hydroxy-N,N,N-
triphenyl-borazine (2-25c)  
To a solution of aniline (200 mg, 2.15 mmol) in dry toluene (5.0 mL) under N2, BCl3 (1.0 
M solution in heptanes; 2.6 mL; 2.6 mmol) was added dropwise at 0 C and the 
suspension stirred for 10 min. The Schlenk flask was then equipped with a condenser 
connected to a CaCl2 trap and the reaction refluxed for 18 h. The condenser was then 
exchanged with a septum and the resulting white suspension degassed 5 times 
following the freeze-pump-thaw procedure to remove residual HCl. In parallel, 1,2,4,5-
tetrachlorobenzene (510 mg, 2.37 mmol) was dissolved in 10.0 mL of anhydrous THF 
in a flame dried Schlenk flask and LDA (1.0 M in hexane/THF, 2.8 mL, 2.8 mmol) 
slowly added dropwise at -84 C. The suspension was stirred for 30 min at the same 
temperature. The chloro-borazole intermediate was cannulated to the THF solution at -
84 C and allowed to react at this temperature for 30 min followed by for 30 min at 0 C 
and then 4 h at r.t.. The reaction was then quenched with H2O, diluted in CH2Cl2 (50 
mL), washed with H2O (100 mL  2) and brine (100 mL). The organic layer was dried 
over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under vacuum. Precipitation of the residue in 
MeOH afforded pure 2-25c as a white solid (230 mg, 43%). mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (500 
MHz, CDCl3) : 7.34-7.24 (m, 10 H), 7.14 (s, 4 H), 6.94-6.88 (m, 3 H), 3.63 (s, 1 H). 
13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 144.02, 142.47, 132.37, 130.79, 130.49, 128.99, 
127.86, 127.18, 126.59, 126.30, 126.16. (One signal missing due to 11B quadrupolar 
relaxation) 11B{1H} NMR (128 MHz, CDCl3) : 33.34, 25.06. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 1595, 
1491, 1375, 1161, 1074, 752, 698, 677, 644, 627, 517. ASAP+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for 
[C30H1810B11B2N3Cl8O]+: 747.9274, found: 747.9300.  
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 2',6'-Dimethyl-[1,1'-biphenyl]-4-amine (2-10) 
In a Schlenk flask, dioxane (20 mL) and H2O (4 mL) were degassed 2 times following 
freeze-pump-thaw procedure. 4-Iodoaniline (800 mg, 3.65 mmol), boronic acid (1.02 g, 
6.78 mmol), Pd(OAc)2 (41 mg, 0.18 mmol), K3PO4 (1.55 g, 7.30 mmol) and SPhos (150 
mg, 0.37 mmol) were then added to the solution that was immediately frozen and 
degassed two more times with the same procedure. The suspension was then stirred 
at 90 C for 18 h under N2. The reaction was diluted with EtOAc (10 mL), H2O (10 mL) 
and extracted with EtOAc (30 mL  5). The combined organic layers were dried over 
MgSO4 and evaporated under vacuum to give a red liquid. The crude product was 
purified by silica gel column chromatography (Eluents: petroleum ether/EtOAc; gradient 
from 100% to 70:30) to afford an orange liquid that was distilled under reduced 
pressure (0.5 mbar, 150C) to give the desired 2-10 as a pale yellow liquid (337 mg, 
47%). 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.19-7.10 (m, 3 H), 6.95 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 2 H), 6.77 
(d, J = 8.5 Hz, 2 H), 3.70 (bs, 2 H), 2.09 (s, 6 H). 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 
144.90, 141.99, 136.78, 131.31, 129.98, 127.29, 126.78, 115.24, 21.07. IR (ATR)  
(cm-1): 3368, 3057, 2911, 1622, 1578, 1558, 1508, 1466, 1452, 1271, 1177, 1165, 
1123, 1101, 1026, 1005, 964, 827, 787, 775, 766, 750, 716, 621, 579, 563, 532, 525, 
519, 498, 484. ESI+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C14H15N]+: 197.1204; found 197.1209. 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of B,B,B-Tri[2,6-(dichloro)phenyl]-N,N,N-tri[4-(2,6-
dimethylphenyl)phenyl]borazine (2-26) 
To a solution of aniline 2-10 (300 mg, 1.52 mmol) in dry toluene (2.0 mL) under N2, 
BCl3 (1.0 M solution in heptanes; 1.8 mL; 1.8 mmol) was added dropwise at 0 C and 
the suspension stirred for 10 min The Schlenk flask was then equipped with a 
condenser connected to a CaCl2 trap and the reaction refluxed for 18 h. The condenser 
was then exchanged with a septum and the resulting white suspension degassed 5 
times following the freeze-pump-thaw procedure to remove residual HCl. In parallel, 2-
bromo-1,3-dichlorobenzene (378 mg, 1.67 mmol) was dissolved in 3.0 mL of 
anhydrous THF in a flame dried Schlenk flask, n-BuLi (1.6 M in hexanes, 1.2 mL, 1.9 
mmol) added dropwise at -84 C and the suspension stirred for 10 min. The chloro-
borazole toluene suspension was then cannulated to the THF solution at -84 C. The 
mixture was allowed to react at this temperature for 1 h and then at r.t. for 24 h. The 
reaction was quenched with H2O, diluted with CH2Cl2 (20 mL) and washed with H2O (30 
mL  3). The resulting organic layer was dried on MgSO4, filtered and concentrated 
under vacuum. Addition of MeOH to the residue resulted in a white precipitate which 
was filtered. Purification of the resulting white powder by silica gel column 
chromatography (Eluent: petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 80:20) afforded desired product 2-26 
(42 mg, 8%) together with borazine 2-31 (55 mg, 14%) as white solids. mp: >300 C. 
1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.51 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 6 H), 7.07-6.95 (m, 9 H), 6.89-6.78 
(m, 9 H), 6.66 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 6 H), 1.63 (s, 18 H). 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 
143.68, 141.77, 138.19, 136.65, 136.11, 129.48, 127.90, 127.06, 126.77, 126.71, 
125.96, 20.31. One signal missing due to 11B quadrupolar relaxation. 11B{1H} NMR (128 
MHz, CDCl3) : 36.35. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3032, 2945, 2868, 1628, 1566, 1508, 1385, 
1339, 1146, 1007, 841, 766. AP+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for [C60H49B3Cl6N3]+: 1053.2259, 
found: 1053.2374. Crystals suitable for X-Ray diffraction analysis were obtained from 
vapor diffusion of MeOH to a CH2Cl2 solution. 
Borazine 2-31: mp: 260-262 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.20 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 6 H), 
7.16-7.08 (m, 15 H), 2.05 (s, 18 H), 1.04-0.94 (m, 6 H), 0.88-0.77 (m, 6 H), 0.53-0.47 
Chapter 6 
(m, 15 H). 13C{1H} NMR (126 MHz, CDCl3) : 146.15, 141.96, 137.70, 136.34, 129.07, 
128.95, 127.35, 127.04, 26.70, 26.03, 20.78, 16.32, 13.26. 11B{1H} NMR (128 MHz, 
CDCl3) : 36.99. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3026, 2955, 2928, 2853, 1508, 1464, 1429, 1371, 
1200, 1163, 1099, 1005, 843, 770, 748, 583, 525. AP+-HRMS: [M]+ calc. for 
[C54H6610B211BN3]+: 789.5650, found: 789.5663. Crystals suitable for X-Ray diffraction 
were obtained from vapor diffusion of MeOH to a CHCl3 solution. 
Synthesis of B,B,B-Tri[2,6-(difluoro)phenyl]-N,N,N-tri[4-(2,6-
dimethylphenyl)phenyl]borazine (2-27) 
To a solution of freshly distilled aniline 2-10 (210 mg, 1.06 mmol) in dry toluene (1.82 
mL) under N2, BCl3 (1.0 M solution in heptanes; 1.3 mL; 1.3 mmol) was added 
dropwise at 0 C and the suspension stirred for 10 min. The Schlenk flask was then 
equipped with a condenser connected to a CaCl2 trap and the reaction refluxed for 18 
h. The condenser was then exchanged with a septum and the resulting white 
suspension degassed 5 times following the freeze-pump-thaw procedure to remove 
residual HCl. In parallel, 2-bromo-1,3-difluorobenzene (225 mg, 1.17 mmol) was 
dissolved in 0.80 mL of anhydrous THF in a flame dried Schlenk flask, n-BuLi (1.6 M in 
hexanes, 0.9 mL, 1.4 mmol) added dropwise at -84 C and the suspension stirred for 
10 min. The chloro-borazole toluene suspension was cannulated to the THF solution at 
-84 C and allowed to react at this temperature for 3 h, followed by 3 h at 0 C and at 
r.t. for 12 h. The reaction was quenched with H2O, diluted with CH2Cl2 (20 mL) and 
washed with H2O (30 mL  3). The resulting organic layer was dried on MgSO4, filtered 
and concentrated under vacuum. Addition of MeOH to the residue resulted in a white 
precipitate which was filtered, affording desired product 2-27 as a white solid (143 mg, 
42%). mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 7.19 (d, J = 7.9 Hz, 6 H), 7.07-7.02 
(m, 3 H), 6.98-6.91 (m, 9 H), 6.70 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 6 H), 6.48 (t, J = 7.6 Hz, 6 H), 1.63 (s, 
18 H). 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 163.15 (dd, J = 241.2 Hz, 14.6 Hz), 144.81, 
141.90, 138.78, 136.44, 131.08 (t, J = 10.0 Hz), 128.97, 127.52, 127.44, 127.27, 
110.20 (d, J = 26.5 Hz), 20.42. One signal missing due to 11B quadrupolar relaxation. 
11B{1H} NMR (128 MHz, CDCl3) : 35.59, 19F NMR (276 MHz, CD2Cl2) : -101.67. IR 
Chapter 6 
(ATR)  (cm-1): 3055, 2953, 2920, 1622, 1578, 1508, 1452, 1389, 1256, 1225, 1165, 
1146, 1103, 1051, 1024, 1005, 964, 843, 789, 777, 766, 750, 714, 621, 579, 546, 534, 
525, 500, 484. ESI+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for [C60H49B3F6N3]+: 958.4136, found: 
958.4142. Crystals suitable for X-Ray diffraction analysis were obtained from vapor 
diffusion of MeOH to a CH2Cl2 solution. 
Synthesis of Dimethyldimesithylsilane (2-19) 
To a solution of 2-bromo mesitylene (4.00 g, 20.0 mmol) in dry THF (13.0 mL) under 
N2, n-BuLi (1.6 M in hexane, 12.5 mL, 20.0 mmol) was added dropwise at -84 C. The 
white suspension was stirred for 1 h at the same temperature and dichlorodimethyl 
silane (1.2 mL, 10.0 mmol) added. The mixture was stirred at -84 C for 90 min. 
followed by r.t. for 18 h. The reaction was quenched with H2O and extracted with 
EtOAc (50 mL  3). The combined organic layers were dried over MgSO4, filtered and 
evaporated under vacuum. The crude was purified by silica gel column 
chromatography (Eluent: petroleum ether 100%) to give product 2-19 as colourless 
crystals (1.14 g, 38%). Further purification is recommended for the planarization 
reaction and can be achieved by crystallization from pentane at -25 C resulting in 
large colourless prisms. Spectral properties are in agreement with those reported in the 
literature;[30] 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 6.76 (s, 4 H), 2.25 (s, 12 H), 2.24 (s, 6 H), 
0.67 (s, 6 H), 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 143.27, 138.29, 135.13, 129.25, 24.19, 
21.09, 6.18. 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 2-8-14-Trixylyl-hexaphenyl borazinocoronene (2-1)  
A solution of Triphenylmethinium-1-carba-hexachlorododecaborate (100 mg, 0.17 
mmol) in freshly distilled PhCl (0.8 mL) under N2 was treated with a large excess of 
anhydrous triisopropylsilane (0.8 mL, 3.9 mmol) and the reaction stirred at r.t. under N2 
for 3 h. The volume of the suspension was then reduced to 20% and the resulting pale-
yellow solid washed with anhydrous hexane (3 mL  4) and dried under vacuum. The 
resulting silylium carborane 2-22 was dissolved in dry PhCl (4 mL) under N2 and 
cannulated to a flame dried Schlenk flask containing dimethyldimesithylsilane 2-19 
(490 mg, 1.65 mmol) and borazine 2-27 (98 mg, 0.10 mmol). The resulting solution was 
diluted with 6 mL of anhydrous PhCl (reaction turns dark) and stirred at 110 C for 24 h 
under N2. After cooling down, the reaction was diluted with CH2Cl2 (10 mL), quenched 
with some drops of H2O and solvents removed under vacuum. The crude was purified 
by silica gel column chromatography (Eluent: petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 80:20) giving 2-
33 (12.8 mg, 17 %) and 2-1 which was further purified via recycling GPC (Eluent: 
CHCl3) to give 2-1 (4.3 mg, 5%) as white solid.  
Molecule 2-1. mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 8.58 (s, 6 H), 8.55 (d, J = 
8.0 Hz, 6 H), 8.05 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 3 H), 7.31-7.25 (m, 9 H), 2.25 (s, 18 H). 13C{1H} NMR 
(75 MHz, CDCl3) : 142.24, 140.04, 137.18, 135.94, 135.75, 133.14, 128.00, 127.89, 
126.83, 126.31, 121.36, 21.53. (One signal missing due to 11B quadrupolar relaxation) 
11B{1H} NMR (128 MHz, CDCl3) : 30.64, IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3065, 2955, 2909, 1653, 
1647, 1636, 1597, 1582, 1555, 1508, 1491, 1466 1439, 1373, 1315, 1250, 1163, 1101, 
1072, 1030, 878, 822, 772, 746, 679, 646, 627, 575, 532, 492, 459. MALDI-TOF-
HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C60H42B3N3]+ 837.3658; found: 837.3652. Crystals suitable for X-
Ray diffraction were obtained from vapor diffusion of i-PrOH to a benzene solution. 
CCDC: 1523993 contains the supplementary crystallographic data for compound 2-1. 
Molecule 2-33. mp: >300C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 8.25-8.17 (m, 9 H), 7.84 (t, J 
= 7.9 Hz, 2 H), 7.63 (s, 2 H), 7.36 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2 H), 7.24-7.18 (m, 10 H), 2.21 (s, 6 
H), 2.17 (s, 12H). 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 141.89, 141.82, 139.82, 138.83, 
138.39, 136.89, 136.80, 134.08, 133.99, 132.04, 129.61, 127.60, 127.56, 127.40, 
Chapter 6 
127.30, 126.47, 125.95, 125.03, 122.76, 120.18, 119.92, 119.21, 21.40, 21.31. 11B{1H} 
NMR (128 MHz, CDCl3) : 30.79, IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3402, 3057, 3015, 2918, 2851, 
1595, 1570, 1501, 1460, 1429, 1396, 1344, 1285, 1233, 1190, 1032, 881, 822, 777, 
768, 754, 733, 692, 667, 644, 623, 592, 565, 557, 529, 513. ESI- HRMS: [M]- calc. for 
[C54H43B2N3]- 755.3649; found: 755.3679. 
Synthesis of 3-Fluoro-2',6'-dimethyl-[1,1'-biphenyl]-4-amine (2-35) 
In a Schlenk flask, a mixture of dioxane (20 mL) and H2O (4.0 mL) was added to 2-
fluoro-4-bromonitrobenzene (3.00 g, 13.6 mmol), 2,6-dimethylboronic acid (2.30 g, 15.3 
mmol), [Pd(PPh3)2] (628 mg, 0.34 mmol) and K2CO3 (5.60 g, 40.8 mmol). The resulting 
suspension was degassed for 20 min. with N2 bubbling under sonication and stirred at 
90 C under N2 for 18 h. The reaction was then diluted with EtOAc (10 mL), H2O (10 
mL), extracted with EtOAc (30 mL  5) and the combined organic layers dried over 
MgSO4, filtered and concentrated under vacuum. Filtration on silica plug (eluent: 
Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 80:20) gave 2.6 g of a white powder that was used straight 
away in the reduction reaction. The product from the previous step (2.6 g, 10.6 mmol) 
was added to a suspension of Zn (6.8 g, 104 mmol) in a mixture of AcOH (50 mL) and 
EtOH (100 mL). The reaction was stirred at r.t. for 30 min. and then filtered on celite, 
washing thoroughly with EtOAc. The resulting solution was neutralized with sat. K2CO3, 
washed with H2O (100 mL  2), brine (100 mL), dried over MgSO4, filtered and 
evaporated under reduced pressure to give an orange oil. Distillation under reduced 
pressure (0.7 mbar, 150 C) afforded 2-35 as a pale-yellow oil (1.8 g, 62%). 1H NMR 
(300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.17-7.07 (m, 3 H), 6.87-6.77 (m, 2 H), 6.71 (dd, J = 8.2, 2.0 Hz, 1 
H), 3.74 (bs, 2 H), 2.05 (s, 6 H). 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 151.74 (d, J = 239.3 
Hz), 140.90, 136.64, 132.87 (d, J = 12.9 Hz), 131.85 (d, J = 6.5 Hz), 127.36, 127.12, 
125.18 (d, J = 3.1 Hz), 117.12 (d, J = 3.9 Hz), 116.03 (d, J = 18.2 Hz), 20.93 (d, J = 3.3 
Hz).19F{1H} NMR (376 MHz, CDCl3) : -135.34. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3381, 3032, 2922, 
1634, 1510, 1391, 768, 413, EI+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C14H14FN]+: 215.1110; found: 
215.1100. 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of B,B,B-Tri[2-fluorophenyl]-N,N,N-tri[2-fluoro-4-(2,6-
dimethylphenyl)phenyl]borazine * (2-34) 
*mixture of atropoisomers 
To a solution of freshly distilled aniline 2-35 (500 mg, 2.33 mmol) in dry toluene (2.6 
mL) under N2, BCl3 (1.0 M solution in heptanes; 2.8 mL; 2.8 mmol) was added 
dropwise at 0 C and the resulting suspension stirred for 10 min. The Schlenk flask was 
then equipped with a condenser connected to a CaCl2 trap and the reaction refluxed for 
18 h. The condenser was then exchanged with a septum and the resulting white 
suspension degassed 5 times following the freeze-pump-thaw procedure to remove 
residual HCl. In parallel, 1-bromo-2-fluorobenzene (0.3 mL, 2.6 mmol) was dissolved in 
3.9 mL of anhydrous THF in a flame dried Schlenk flask, n-BuLi (1.6 M in hexanes, 1.9 
mL, 3.1 mmol) added dropwise at -84 C and the reaction stirred for 10 min. at the 
same temperature. The chloro-borazole toluene suspension was cooled to -84 C and 
cannulated to the THF solution at the same temperature. The resulting suspension was 
allowed to react at -84 C for 1 h, followed by 1 h at 0 C and at r.t. for 20 h. The 
reaction was then quenched with some drops of H2O, diluted with CH2Cl2 (20 mL), 
washed with H2O (30 mL  3), brine (20 mL), dried on MgSO4 and filtered. The organic 
layer was then evaporated under vacuum and addition of MeOH to the residue resulted 
in a white precipitate, which was filtered affording 2-34 as a white powder (270 mg, 
36%). mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.18-6.98 (m, 18 H), 6.77 (bs, 3 H), 
6.60 (bs, 3 H), 6.52-6.39 (m, 6 H), 1.75-1.65 (m, 18 H). 13C{1H} NMR (125 MHz, 
CDCl3) : 164.92, 164.38, 163.90, 163.00, 162.46, 162.00, 159.01, 158.50, 158.15, 
157.04, 156.58, 156.20, 140.91, 140.47, 140.07, 139.94, 136.64, 135.91, 133.93, 
133.21, 132.94, 132.34, 131.76, 130.83, 130.46, 130.37, 130.23, 129.91, 129.78, 
129.72, 127.40, 127.19, 125.26, 124.30, 123.97, 123.11, 122.86, 117.34, 116.14, 
115.49, 115.17, 115.06, 114.04, 113.90, 113.76, 113.45, 20.94, 20.25, 20.22, 20.18, 
20.15. 11B{1H} NMR (160 MHz, CDCl3) : 36.99, 19F{1H} NMR (276 MHz, CD2Cl2) : -
102.43; -103.69 (m), -121.04; -122.33 (m). IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3061, 3022, 2920, 2857, 
Chapter 6 
1612, 1510, 1439, 1385, 827, 754. ESI+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for [C60H49B3F6N3]+: 
958.4136, found: 958.4191. 
Synthesis of 6,12-Bis(2,6-dimethylphenyl)-18-oxa-17b1,18a1-diaza-
7b2,17b,18a-triboradibenzo[fg,ij]phenanthro[9,10,1,2,3-pqrst]pentaphene 
(2-38) 
A solution of Triphenylmethinium-1-carba-hexachlorododecaborate (87 mg, 0.15 mmol) 
in anhydrous PhCl (1.0 mL) under N2 was treated with a large excess of anhydrous 
triisopropylsilane (0.86 mL, 4.2 mmol) and the reaction stirred at r.t. under N2 for 3 h. 
The volume of the suspension was then reduced to 20%, the resulting pale-yellow solid 
washed with dry hexane (3 mL  4) and dried under vacuum. The resulting 2-22 was 
then dissolved in anhydrous PhCl (1.0 mL), degassed 3 times with freeze-pump-thaw 
procedure and cannulated under N2 to a flame dried Schlenk flask containing a solution 
of 2-19 (500 mg, 1.70 mmol) and borazine 2-34 (200 mg, 0.21 mmol) in anhydrous 
degassed PhCl (8.0 mL). The resulting solution (reaction turns violet) was stirred at 110 
C under N2 for 24 h, diluted with CH2Cl2 (20 mL) and quenched with some drops of 
H2O. The organic layer was washed with H2O (30 mL  2), brine (30 mL), dried over 
MgSO4, filtered and the solvents removed under vacuum. The crude was purified by 
silica gel column chromatography (eluent: petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 80:20) and 
preparative TLC (eluent: petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 80:20) to give 2-38 (5 mg, 4%) and 2-
1 (26 mg, 15%) as white powders. 
Molecule 2-38. mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 8.82 (dd, J = 8.0, 1.2 Hz, 2 
H), 8.50-8.41 (m, 8 H), 7.98 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 1 H), 7.84 (td, J = 8.0, 1.5 Hz, 2 H), 7.70 (t, J 
= 7.3 Hz, 2 H), 7.33-7.28 (m, 6 H), 2.21 (s, 12 H).13C{1H} NMR (125 MHz, CDCl3) : 
141.92, 141.89, 140.00, 136.86, 135.20, 134.51, 133.39, 133.16, 132.64, 127.69, 
127.58, 127.14, 126.09, 125.92, 125.56, 125.43, 123.00, 120.91, 21.39. (two peaks 
missing due to B-induced quadrupolar relaxation). 11B{1H} NMR (160 MHz, CDCl3) : 
30.96, IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3067, 2980, 2884, 1647, 1599, 1456, 1369, 816, 772, 674. EI+ 
HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C46H33B3N2O]+: 662.2872; found: 662.2891. Crystals suitable for 
X-Ray diffraction analysis were obtained from vapor diffusion of i-PrOH to a CH2Br2 
Chapter 6 
solution. CCDC: 1963745 contains the supplementary crystallographic data for 
compound 2-38. 
Molecule 2-1: white powder: 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) : 8.56 (s, 6 H), 8.50 (d, J = 
8.0 Hz, 6 H), 8.02 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 3 H), 7.35-7.27 (m, 9 H), 2.26 (s, 18 H). UV-Vis, abs: 
314 nm, 334 nm, 354 nm, 373 nm matching literature data.[31]  
Synthesis of B,B,B-Tri[2-fluorophenyl]-N,N,N-tri[2-
fluorophenyl]borazine *(2-40) 
*mixture of atropoisomers 
To a solution of freshly distilled 2-Fluoro aniline (500 mg, 4.50 mmol) in dry toluene (5.0 
mL) under N2, BCl3 (1.0 M solution in heptanes; 5.4 mL; 5.4 mmol) was added 
dropwise at 0 C and the reaction stirred at the same temperature for 10 min. The 
Schlenk flask was then equipped with a condenser connected to a CaCl2 trap and the 
suspension refluxed for 18 h. After exchanging the condenser with a septum, the 
reaction was allowed to reach r.t. and then degassed 5 times following the freeze-
pump-thaw procedure to remove residual HCl. In parallel, 1-bromo-2-fluorobenzene 
(0.54 mL, 4.95 mmol) was dissolved in 7.5 mL of anhydrous THF in a flame dried 
Schlenk flask, n-BuLi (1.6 M in hexanes, 3.7 mL, 5.9 mmol) added dropwise at -84 C 
and the suspension stirred for 10 min. at the same temperature. The chloro-borazole 
toluene suspension was then cooled to -84 C and cannulated to the THF solution at -
84 C. The resulting suspension was allowed to react at this temperature for 1 h, 
followed by 1 h at 0 C and at r.t. for 18 h. The reaction was then quenched with some 
drops of H2O, diluted with CH2Cl2 (50 mL), washed with H2O (30 mL  3), brine (50 
mL), dried on MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under vacuum. Precipitation of the 
residue in MeOH afforded the desired product 2-40 as a white powder (518 mg, 53%). 
mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 7.22-6.91 (m, 9 H), 6.84-6.62 (m, 12 H), 
6.58-6.53 (m, 3 H).13C{1H} NMR (125 MHz, THF-d8) : 165.31, 165.26, 165.24, 165.16, 
165.11, 164.77, 164.75, 164.73, 163.35, 163.29, 163.25, 163.20, 162.87, 162.86, 
162.83, 159.70, 159.65, 159.60, 159.38, 159.29, 159.24, 159.20, 157.74, 157.70, 
157.64, 157.44, 157.35, 157.30, 157.28, 137.94, 135.05, 135.03, 134.95, 134.93, 
134.91, 134.85, 134.83, 134.71, 134.62, 134.13, 134.09, 134.02, 133.89, 133.82, 
Chapter 6 
133.74, 133.66, 133.55, 133.48, 132.57, 132.50, 132.38, 132.29, 132.23, 132.16, 
132.05, 131.84, 131.78, 131.63, 131.50, 131.39, 131.28, 131.19, 131.02, 130.94, 
130.87, 130.82, 130.72, 130.69, 130.66, 130.57, 128.22, 128.16, 128.14, 128.08, 
127.93, 127.88, 127.86, 127.82, 127.80, 127.76, 127.68, 127.62, 127.56, 127.51, 
124.43, 124.39, 124.35, 124.31, 123.93, 123.80, 123.56, 123.47, 123.30, 123.23, 
116.03, 115.87, 115.70, 115.60, 115.53, 115.44, 115.36, 115.24, 114.83, 114.71, 
114.59, 114.52, 114.45, 114.41, 114.31, 114.26, 114.12. 11B{1H} NMR (160 MHz, 
CDCl3) : 34.94. 19F{1H} NMR (276 MHz, CD2Cl2) : -102.75; -103.99 (m), -121.00; -
122.23 (m). IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3075, 3028, 1612, 1589, 1572, 1499, 1439, 1379, 1260, 
1206, 1099, 1078, 941, 860, 808, 725, 480. ESI+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for 
[C36H2510B211BF6N3]+: 644.2304, found: 644.2311. (adduct with NH4+ visible as major 
peak).  
Synthesis of Hexa-peri-hexabenzoborazinocoronene (1-1) 
A solution of Triphenylmethinium-1-carba-hexachlorododecaborate (89 mg, 0.15 mmol) 
in freshly distilled PhCl (0.5 mL) under N2 was treated with a large excess of anhydrous 
triisopropylsilane (0.70 mL, 3.45 mmol) and the reaction stirred at r.t. under N2 for 3 h. 
The volume of the suspension was then reduced to 20% and the resulting pale-yellow 
solid washed with dry hexane (3 mL  4) and dried under vacuum. The resulting 2-22 
was then dissolved in anhydrous PhCl (1.0 mL), degassed 3 times following freeze-
pump-thaw procedure and cannulated under N2 to a flame dried Schlenk flask 
containing a solution of 2-19 (368 mg, 1.24 mmol) and borazine 2-40 (100 mg, 0.15 
mmol) in degassed PhCl (7.0 mL). The resulting solution (reaction turns violet) was 
stirred at 110 C under N2 for 18 h, cooled, evaporated under reduced pressure and 
suspended in CH2Cl2 under sonication. The dark suspension was transferred in a 
falcon tube and centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 5 min., the supernatant removed and the 
procedure repeated with: EtOAc, MeOH, Acetone, ODCB, hot toluene and again 
CH2Cl2 to give 1 as a pale gray solid (14 mg, 18%). mp: >300 C. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 
3032, 1628, 1566, 1508, 1383, 1339, 1146, 1101, 1009, 839, 804, 766, 752, 687, 667, 
577, 401. LD+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C36H18B3N3]+: 525.1780; found: 525.1763. Crystal 
structure obtained from X-Ray powder diffraction CCDC: 1973297 contains the 
Chapter 6 
supplementary crystallographic data for compound 1-1. Data in agreement with 
previous synthesis of the molecule by Bettinger et al.[32]  
Synthesis of B,B,B-[2,6-(Difluoro)phenyl]-N,N,N-tri[4-(tert-butyl) 
phenyl]-borazine (2-45) 
To a solution of freshly distilled 4-t-butyl aniline (600 mg, 4.00 mmol) in dry toluene (5.0 
mL) under N2, BCl3 (1.0 M solution in heptanes; 4.8 mL; 4.8 mmol) was added 
dropwise at 0 C and the resulting suspension stirred for 10 min. The Schlenk flask was 
then equipped with a condenser connected to a CaCl2 trap and the suspension 
refluxed for 18 h. After exchanging the condenser with a septum, the reaction was 
degassed 5 times following the freeze-pump-thaw procedure to remove residual HCl. In 
parallel, 2-bromo-1,3-difluorobenzene (849 mg, 4.42 mmol) was dissolved in 2.9 mL of 
anhydrous THF in a flame dried Schlenk flask and n-BuLi (1.6 M in hexanes, 3.3 mL, 
5.3 mmol) added dropwise at -84 C. The resulting suspension was stirred for 10 min. 
at the same temperature. The chloro-borazole toluene suspension was then 
cannulated to the THF solution at -84 C and allowed to react at this temperature for 3 
h, followed by 3 h at 0 C and at r.t. for 18 h. The reaction was then quenched with 
water (10 mL), diluted with CH2Cl2 (10 mL), washed with H2O (30 mL  2) and brine (50 
mL). The organic layer was dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under vacuum. 
Precipitation of the residue in MeOH afforded the desired product 2-45 as a white solid 
(707 mg, 65%). mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 6.96 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 6 H), 
6.86 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 6 H), 6.84-6.78 (m, 3 H), 6.38-6.33 (m, 6 H), 1.03 (s, 27 H). 13C{1H} 
NMR (75 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 162.99 (dd, J = 240.9, 14.8 Hz), 148.55, 143.53, 130.83 (t, J 
= 10.0 Hz) 126.78, 124.99, 110.11 (d, J = 26.9 Hz), 34.47, 31.35. One signal missing 
due to 11B quadrupolar relaxation. 11B{1H} NMR (128 MHz, CDCl3) : 34.17. 19F NMR 
(276 MHz, CD2Cl2) : -101.47. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 2963, 2870, 1624, 1578, 1508, 1452, 
1389, 1269, 1252, 1225, 1115, 1018, 982, 839, 783, 716, 567. ESI+ HRMS: [M+H]+ 
calc. for [C48H4910B11B2F6N3]+: 813.4146, found: 813.4162. Crystals suitable for X-Ray 
diffraction analysis were obtained from vapor diffusion of MeOH to a CH2Cl2 solution.  
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of B,B,B-[2,6-(Difluoro)phenyl]-N,N,N-tri[4-(dodecyl) phenyl]-
borazine (2-48) 
To a solution of 4-dodecyl aniline (300 mg, 1.15 mmol) in dry toluene (1.3 mL) under 
N2, BCl3 (1.0 M solution in heptanes; 1.4 mL; 1.4 mmol) was added dropwise at 0 C 
and the resulting solution stirred for 10 min. The Schlenk flask was then equipped with 
a condenser connected to a CaCl2 trap and the suspension refluxed for 18 h. After 
exchanging the condenser with a septum, the reaction was degassed 5 times following 
the freeze-pump-thaw procedure to remove residual HCl. In parallel, 2-bromo-1,3-
difluorobenzene (245 mg, 1.27 mmol) was dissolved in 2.0 mL of anhydrous THF in a 
flame dried Schlenk flask and n-BuLi (1.6 M in hexanes, 0.94 mL, 1.50 mmol) added 
dropwise at -84 C. The suspension was then stirred for 10 min. at the same 
temperature. The chloro-borazole toluene suspension was then cannulated to the THF 
solution at -84 C and allowed to react at this temperature for 3 h, followed by 3 h at 0 
C and at r.t. for 18 h. The reaction was quenched with H2O and diluted with CH2Cl2 (30 
mL). The organic layer was washed with H2O (30 mL  2), brine (50 mL), dried over 
MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under vacuum. Precipitation of the residue in MeOH 
afforded the desired product 2-48 as a yellowish pasty solid (143 mg, 32%). mp: 122-
124 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 6.96 (d, J = 7.8 Hz, 6 H), 6.83-6.80 (m, 3 H), 
6.67 (d, J = 7.8 Hz, 6 H), 6.36 (t, J = 7.2 Hz, 6 H), 2.29 (t, J = 7.3 Hz, 6 H), 1.33-1.25 
(m, 54 H), 0.99-0.91 (m, 6 H), 0.88 (t, J = 6.8 Hz, 9 H). 13C{1H} NMR (126 MHz, CDCl3) 
: 162.64 (dd, J = 241.5, 14.8 Hz), 143.36, 139.47, 130.17 (t, J = 10.1 Hz), 129.28, 
127.81, 126.63, 109.70 (d, J = 27.3 Hz), 35.10, 32.07, 31.06, 29.85, 29.81, 29.79, 
29.76, 29.55, 29.52, 28.71, 22.84, 14.26. 11B{1H} NMR (128 MHz, CDCl3) : 33.28, 
19F{1H} NMR (276 MHz, CDCl3) : -101.44. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3032, 2920, 2851, 1626, 
1566, 1508, 1387, 1339, 1146, 1009, 881, 839, 766, 681. ESI+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for 
[C72H9710B211BF6N3]+: 1148.7939, found: 1148.7937.  
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of (4-Bromo-3,5-difluorophenoxy)triisopropylsilane (2-56) 
In a Schlenk flask 4-bromo-3,5-difluorophenol (1.0 g, 4.8 mmol) was added together 
with imidazole (980 mg, 14.4 mmol) and DMF (8.0 mL). TIPSCl (1.4 mL, 6.3 mmol) was 
then added dropwise and the reaction stirred under N2 at 50 C for 18 h. The solution 
was then diluted with CH2Cl2 (50 mL), washed with H2O (100 mL  2), brine (100 mL), 
dried over MgSO4 and evaporated under reduced pressure. Silica column gel 
chromatography (eluent: Petroleum ether 100 %) gave 2-56 as a transparent oil (1.61 
g, 92%). 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 6.50 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H), 1.31-1.19 (m, 3 H), 
1.10 (d, J = 6.9 Hz, 18 H). 13C{1H} NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  160.24 (dd, J = 246.7, 7.3 
Hz), 156.99 (t, J = 13.5 Hz), 104.69-104.47 (m), 89.26 (t, J = 24.9 Hz), 17.92, 12.67. 
19F{1H} NMR (376 MHz, CDCl3) : -105.76. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3082, 2945, 2868, 1613, 
1584, 1472, 1369, 1165, 1030, 1009, 881, 845, 795, 569. EI+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for 
[C15H23OBrSiF2]+: 364.0670, found: 364.0670. 
Synthesis of B,B,B-[(3,5-Difluorophenoxy)triisopropylsilane]-N,N,N-
tri[4-(2,6-dimethylphenyl)phenyl]borazine (2-51) 
To a solution of aniline 2-10 (400 mg, 2.02 mmol) in dry toluene (3.0 mL) under N2, 
BCl3 (1.0 M solution in heptanes; 3.0 mL; 3.0 mmol) was added dropwise at 0 C and 
the resulting solution stirred for 10 min. The Schlenk flask was then equipped with a 
condenser connected to a CaCl2 trap and the suspension refluxed for 18 h. After 
exchanging the condenser with a septum, the reaction was degassed 5 times following 
the freeze-pump-thaw procedure to remove residual HCl. In parallel, 2-56 (850 mg, 
2.33 mmol) was dissolved in 4.4 mL of anhydrous THF in a flame dried Schlenk flask 
and n-BuLi (1.6 M in hexanes, 2.3 mL, 3.7 mmol) added dropwise at -84 C. The 
suspension was stirred for 10 min. at the same temperature. The chloro-borazole 
Chapter 6 
toluene suspension was cannulated to the THF solution at -84 C and allowed to react 
at this temperature for 3 h, followed by 3 h at 0 C and at r.t. for 18 h. The reaction was 
quenched with H2O (5 mL) and diluted with CH2Cl2 (10 mL). The organic layer was 
washed with H2O (30 mL  2), brine (50 mL), dried over MgSO4, filtered and 
evaporated under vacuum. Silica gel column chromatography (eluent: petroleum 
ether/CH2Cl2 90:10) afforded 2-51 as a white powder (181 mg, 18%) along with 2-31 
(138 mg, 26 %) mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.17-7.02 (m, 15 H), 6.75 
(d, J = 7.5 Hz, 6 H), 6.02 (d, J = 7.5 Hz, 6 H), 1.76 (s, 18 H), 1.18-1.11 (m, 9 H), 1.00 
(d, J = 6.6 Hz, 54 H). 13C{1H} NMR (126 MHz, CDCl3) : 163.24 (dd, J = 240.1, 19.2 
Hz), 158.30 (t, J = 14.6 Hz), 144.80, 141.76, 137.76, 136.20, 128.32, 127.42, 127.09, 
126.82, 102.05 (d, J = 29.1 Hz), 20.49, 17.85, 12.58. One peak missing due to 11B-
induced quadrupolar relaxation. 11B{1H} NMR (128 MHz, CDCl3) : 37.15, 19F NMR 
(376 MHz, CDCl3) : -101.29. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3030, 2945, 2866, 1628, 1566, 1508, 
1464, 1376, 1339, 1146, 1009, 881, 839, 766, 687. ESI+-HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for 
[C87H109B3F6N3O3Si3]+: 1474.7955, found: 1474.8025.  
Chapter 6 
Chapter 3 
Synthesis of 1-Methoxy-4-(phenylethynyl)benzene (3-1) 
In a Schlenk flask 4-iodoanisole (5.0 g, 21.4 mmol) was added followed by 
[Pd(PPh3)2Cl2] (155 mg, 0.21 mmol) and CuI (42 mg, 0.21 mmol). A mixture of 
diisopropylamine (25 mL) and THF (25 mL) was added and the resulting suspension 
immediately frozen in liquid N2. The mixture was degassed by three freeze-pump-thaw 
cycles and phenylacetylene (2.35 mL, 21.4 mmol) added followed by 2 more freeze-
pump-thaw cycles. The resulting black suspension was then stirred at r.t. for 4 h. The 
crude solution was diluted with EtOAc (300 mL), washed with H2O (200 mL) and brine 
(100 mL). The organic layer was dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under 
reduced pressure. The crude was purified using silica gel column chromatography 
(Eluents: petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 90:10) to give 3-1 as a white solid (4.30 g, 97%). 1H 
NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.54-7.48 (m, 4 H), 7.37-7.30 (m, 3 H), 6.89 (d, J = 8.7 Hz, 2 
H), 3.83 (s, 3 H). 13C{1H} NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  159.73, 133.18, 131.58, 128.44, 
128.07, 123.71, 115.48, 114.12, 89.50, 88.19, 55.42. ESI+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for 
[C15H12O]+: 208.0888; found: 208.0892. 
 Synthesis of 1,3,5-(4-Hydroxyphenyl)-2,4,6-phenylbenzene (3-3) 
In a Schlenk flask, 3-1 (3.0 g, 14.4 mmol) and [Co2(CO)8] (492 mg, 1.44 mmol) were 
added and dissolved in dioxane (10 mL). The solution was degassed by 3 freeze-
pump-thaw cycles and refluxed under N2 for 18 h. The crude mixture was filtered 
through a silica gel plug to give a brown solid (2.91 g). This was added to a flame dried 
Schlenk flask and dissolved in dry CH2Cl2 (45 mL). The resulting red solution was 
cooled to -84 C and BBr3 (1.0 M solution in CH2Cl2, 28 mL, 28.0 mmol) slowly added. 
The mixture was left to react at r.t. for 18 h and then quenched with a few mL of H2O, 
diluted with EtOAc (200 mL) washed with H2O (100 mL  3) and brine (100 mL). The 
yellow organic layer was dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under vacuum. 
The crude was purified using silica gel column chromatography (Eluent: petroleum 
Chapter 6 
ether/CH2Cl2, 90:10) to give 3-3 as a white solid (446 mg, 17%). 1H NMR (300 MHz, 
CD3OD) : 6.89-6.79 (m, 15 H), 6.61-6.59 (d, J = 8.7 Hz, 6 H), 6.24 (d, J = 8.7 Hz, 6 H). 
13C{1H} NMR (126 MHz, MeOD) : 155.61, 142.71, 142.10, 141.48, 133.62, 132.72, 
127.59, 125.97, 114.48. One signal not visible due to overlapping. ESI+ HRMS: [M]+ 
calc. for [C42H30O3]+: 582.2195, found: 582.2193. 
Synthesis of 1,3,5-(4-Trifluoromethansulphonylphenyl)-2,4,6-phenyl 
benzene (3-4) 
In a round bottom flask, 3-3 (300 mg, 0.52 mmol) was suspended in dry pyridine (10 
mL). The suspension was stirred at 0 C and Tf2O (0.87 mL, 5.18 mmol) slowly added. 
The mixture was stirred for 18 h under N2 and then the volatiles removed under 
reduced pressure. The product was purified by silica gel column chromatography 
(Eluents: petroleum ether/EtOAc, 80:20) affording 3-4 as a white solid (360 mg, 71%). 
1H NMR (300 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 6.91-6.86 (m, 15 H), 6.81 (d, J = 8.8 Hz, 6 H) 6.75-6.74 
(m, 6 H). 13C{1H} NMR (126 MHz, CDCl3) : 147.58, 141.04, 140.84, 139.25, 139.04, 
132.99, 131.16, 127.41, 126.28, 119.86, 118.74 (q, J = 321.3 Hz). AP+ MS: [M]+ calc. 
for [C45H27F9O9S3]+: 978.0673, found: 978.0649. 
Synthesis of 1,3,5-Tri(4-xylylphenyl)-2,4,6-triphenylbenzene (3-5) 
In Schlenk flask, 3-4 (200 mg, 0.20 mmol), 2,6-dimethylphenyl boronic acid (123 mg, 
0.82 mmol), K2CO3 (249 mg, 1.80 mmol), [Pd(OAc)2] (7 mg, 0.03 mmol), and SPhos 
(37 mg, 0.09 mmol) were added under N2 followed by 20 mL of a previously degassed 
(by N2 bubbling under sonication) dioxane/H2O (5:1) mixture. The reaction was then 
Chapter 6 
stirred at 100 C under N2 for 18 h. The resulting suspension was diluted with CH2Cl2 
(100 mL), washed with H2O (50 mL  3), brine (100 mL) and the solvents removed 
under reduced pressure. The crude was purified by silica gel column chromatography 
(Eluents: petroleum ether/CH2Cl2, 80:20) affording 3-5 as a white solid (110 mg, 65%). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.11-7.00 (m, 9 H); 6.95-6.87 (m, 21 H), 6.65 (d, J = 8.0 
Hz, 6 H) 1.82 (s, 18 H); 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 141.99, 140.79, 140.60, 
140.48, 139.37, 137.91, 136.15, 131.88, 131.74, 127.40, 127.10, 126.79, 126.66, 
125.20, 20.53. ASAP+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for [C66H55]+: 847.4304, found 847.4287. 
Synthesis of 2,8,14-Trixylyl-hexabenzocoronene (3-2) 
In a Schenk flask, a solution of FeCl3 (172 mg, 1.06 mmol) in CH3NO2 (2 mL) was 
added dropwise to a stirred solution of 3-5 (30 mg, 0.035 mmol) in anhydrous CH2Cl2 
(25 mL). The reaction mixture was stirred for 3 h at r.t. with continuous N2 bubbling 
through the reaction. The resulting mixture was poured into MeOH, diluted with CH2Cl2 
(50 mL), washed with H2O (50 mL  3) and brine (100 mL). The organic phase was 
dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under vacuum. The resulting yellow material 
was purified by silica gel column chromatography (Eluents: petroleum ether/CH2Cl2; 
80:20) and preparative TLC (Eluents: petroleum ether/CH2Cl2; 80:20). To give 3-2 as a 
yellow solid (6 mg, 20%). mp: > 300 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 9.28 (d, J = 8.0 
Hz, 6 H); 9.14 (s, 6 H); 8.25 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 3 H); 7.39-7.33 (m, 9 H); 2.29 (s, 18 H). 
13C{1H} NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) : 142.34, 140.12, 136.78, 131.19, 130.87, 127.83, 
127.28, 126.04, 124.53, 123.23, 122.59, 121.78, 121.47, 21.58. IR (ATR )  (cm-1): 
2953, 2918, 2851, 2367, 1610, 1580, 1458, 1437, 1375, 1362, 1269, 1101, 1029, 968, 
905, 878, 853, 793, 777, 721. MALDI+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C66H42]+: 834.3287, found 
834.3278. 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 2,2''-Dibromo-5'-phenyl-1,1':3',1''-terphenyl mixture (3-8, 3-8a, 
3-8b) 
Br Br
In a round bottom flask 2-bromoacetophenone (1.60 g, 8.10 mmol) and acetophenone 
(500 mg, 4.17 mmol) were mixed. TfOH (0.11 mL, 1.25 mmol) was then added 
dropwise to the mixture and the reaction stirred at 130 C for 7 h. The resulting black 
tar was allowed to cool down to r.t., diluted with CH2Cl2 (100 mL), washed with H2O 
(100 mL  2), brine (100 mL) and the resulting organic layers dried over MgSO4, 
filtered and evaporated under vacuum. The black residue was filtered on a silica plug 
(eluent: Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 80:20) to give a mixture of 3-8, 3-8a, 3-8b as a white 
spongy material (855 mg) that was directly used in the following steps. 
Synthesis of 2-(3-Methoxyphenyl)-4,4,5,5-tetramethyl-1,3,2 dioxaborolane 
(3-15) 
In a Schlenk flask, 3-bromoanisole (2.70 mL, 21.6 mmol) was added together with 
B2Pin2 (6.00 g, 23.7 mmol) and KOAc (6.30 g, 64.5 mmol). Anhydrous DMF (20 mL) 
was then added and the suspension degassed for 10 min. by bubbling N2 under 
sonication. [Pd(dppf)Cl2CH2Cl2] (878 mg, 1.08 mmol) was added under N2 and the 
reaction degassed for further 10 min. The suspension was heated at 90 C under N2 for 
16 h and then diluted with H2O (50 mL) and CH2Cl2 (100 mL). The organic phase was 
washed with H2O (100 mL  2), brine (100 mL), dried over MgSO4, filtered and 
evaporated under vacuum. The resulting black liquid was purified on a silica plug 
(eluent: Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 from 100% to 50:50) to give 3-15 as a transparent oil 
(4.1 g, 81%) 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.41 (dt, J = 7.2 Hz, 1.1 Hz, 1 H), 7.33-7.27 
(m, 2 H), 7.01 (ddd, J = 8.2 Hz, 2.8 Hz, 1.2 Hz, 1 H), 3.83 (s, 3 H), 1.35 (s, 12 H). 
13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 159.18, 129.08, 127.33, 118.83, 118.06, 83.97, 
55.39, 25.01. One peak missing due to 11B-induced quadrupolar relaxation. IR (ATR)  
(cm-1): 2993, 2977, 2933, 1576, 1490, 1420, 1352, 1313, 1270, 1143, 1045, 964, 851, 
772, 706, 422. AP+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C13H19BO3]+: 233.1464; found: 233.1463. 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 5''-Phenyl-[1,1':2',1'':3'',1''':2''',1''''-quinquephenyl]-3,3''''-diol 
(3-10) 
HO OH
Mixture of products 3-8, 3-8a, 3-8b (500 mg, 1.10 mmol*) was added in a Schlenk flask 
along with boronic ester 3-15 (557 mg, 2.40 mmol), Pd(OAc)2 (25 mg, 0.10 mmol), 
SPhos (133 mg, 0.30 mmol) and K2CO3 (896 mg, 6.50 mmol). The Schlenk flask was 
then evacuated and backfilled with N2 3 times. Dioxane (5 mL) and H2O (1 mL) were 
added to the mixture and the reaction degassed with N2 bubbling under sonication for 
20 min., followed by heating at 90 C under N2 for 18 h. The dark solution was cooled 
down to r.t., diluted with CH2Cl2 (50 mL), washed with H2O (20 mL  2), brine (30 mL), 
dried on MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure to give a yellow 
spongy solid (674 mg, 1.3 mmol*). The obtained mixture was added in a round bottom 
flask under N2 and dissolved in dry CH2Cl2 (50 mL). The solution was then cooled down 
to 0 C and BBr3 (1.0 M in CH2Cl2, 7.8 mL, 7.8 mmol) added dropwise. The reaction 
was allowed to reach r.t. and stirred at this temperature under N2 for 16 h. The resulting 
brown solution was cooled to 0 C, quenched with H2O (15 mL) and then extracted with 
CH2Cl2 (50 mL  3). The reunited organic layers were dried over MgSO4, filtered, 
evaporated under reduced pressure and the residue purified by silica gel column 
chromatography (eluent: Petroleum ether/EtOAc 80:20) to give 3-10 as a white spongy 
material (122 mg, 23%). mp: 71-73 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.43-7.39 (m, 8 
H), 7.35-7.28 (m, 4 H), 7.17 (d, J = 1.6 Hz, 2 H), 7.12-7.07 (m, 3 H), 7.03 (dd, J = 7.7 
Hz, 1.1 Hz, 2 H), 6.78-6.72 (m, 3 H), 6.38 (dd, J = 2.4 Hz, 1.5 Hz, 2 H), 5.73 (bs, 2 H). 
13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 154.39, 143.42, 141.61, 140.97, 140.45, 140.25, 
140.21, 130.64, 130.59, 130.01, 129.88, 128.66, 127.85, 127.72, 127.63, 127.25, 
127.22, 122.66, 117.68, 114.18. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3308, 3056, 2971, 2933, 2870, 
1585, 1473, 1412, 1303, 1191, 886, 788, 753, 714, 697, 615, 441, 420. AP+ HRMS: 
[M+H]+ calc. for [C36H27O2]+ 491.2011; found: 491.2011. 
*considered as composed only of dibromo derivative. 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 5''-Phenyl-[1,1':2',1'':3'',1''':2''',1''''-quinquephenyl]-3,3''''-diyl 
bis(trifluoromethanesulfonate) (3-11) 
TfO OTf
In a single necked round bottom flask, derivative 3-10 (400 mg, 0.82 mmol) was added 
and purged 3 times with N2. Anhydrous pyridine (10 mL) was added and the reaction 
cooled to 0 C, followed by dropwise addition of Tf2O (1.4 mL, 8.34 mmol). The 
reaction was then allowed to reach r.t. and stirred for 2 h under N2. The resulting dark 
solution was quenched with H2O (5 mL) and extracted with CH2Cl2 (20 mL  3). The 
organic layers were washed with HCl 10% (50 mL  2), brine (50 mL), dried over 
MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified on a 
silica plug (eluent: Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 from 80:20 to 60:40) to give 3-11 as a 
yellowish powder (405 mg, 65%). mp: 63-64 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.46-
7.27 (m, 12 H), 7.25-7.23 (m, 1 H), 7.21-7.16 (m, 4 H), 7.13 (d, J = 1.7 Hz, 2 H), 7.09 
(dt, J = 7.5 Hz, 1.3 Hz, 2 H), 7.06-7.01 (m, 3 H). 13C{1H} NMR (125 MHz, CDCl3) : 
149.66, 144.68, 141.07, 140.96, 140.50, 140.29, 138.46, 130.75, 130.46, 130.39, 
130.22, 130.10, 129.69, 128.74, 128.68, 128.05, 127.65, 127.49, 127.02, 122.78, 
119.54, 118.86 (q, J = 322.6 Hz). IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3060, 3030, 1577, 1420, 1243, 
1205, 1129, 900, 802, 755, 694, 602, 508. AP+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for 
[C38H25O6F6S2]+:755.0997; found: 755.0986. 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 5''-Phenyl-[1,1':2',1'':3'',1''':2''',1''''-quinquephenyl]-3,3''''-Xylen 
(3-12) 
In a Schlenk flask, derivative 3-11 (335 mg, 0.44 mmol) was added together with (2,6-
dimethylphenyl) boronic acid (166 mg, 1.11 mmol), Pd(OAc)2 (11 mg, 0.05 mmol), 
SPhos (62 mg, 0.15 mmol) and K2CO3 (415 mg, 3.01 mmol). The solids where purged 
3 times with N2 and then a mixture of dioxane (10 mL) and H2O (2 mL) added. The 
reaction was degassed by bubbling N2 under sonication for 20 min. then stirred at 100 
C under N2 for 18 h. The resulting suspension was cooled down to r.t., and CH2Cl2 (20 
mL) added. The organic phase was washed with H2O (20 mL  2), brine (20 mL), dried 
over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure. The resulting residue 
was purified on a silica plug (eluent: Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 80:20) to give 3-12 as a 
white powder (164 mg, 50%) mp: 109-111 C. 1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.42-7.28 
(m, 10 H), 7.25-7.19 (m, 5 H), 7.11-6.97 (m, 13 H), 6.95-6.93 (m, 2 H), 1.81 (s, 12 H). 
13C{1H} NMR (125 MHz, CDCl3) : 142.21, 141.81, 141.77, 141.06, 140.97, 140.92, 
140.58, 140.37, 136.19, 130.95, 130.70, 130.54, 128.62, 128.14, 127.65, 127.55, 
127.35, 127.31, 127.27, 127.24, 127.20, 127.13, 20.90. (two peaks not visible probably 
due to overlapping). IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3068, 3037, 2923, 2847, 1577, 1477, 1420, 
1243, 1205, 1129, 900, 837, 802, 754, 715, 694, 420. AP+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for 
[C52H43]+:667.3365; found: 667.3362. 
Chapter 6 
6,12-bis(2,6-Dimethylphenyl)dibenzo[fg,ij]phenanthro[9,10,1,2,3-
pqrst]pentaphene (3-13) 
In a flame dried Schlenk flask 3-12 (10 mg, 0.015 mmol) was added under N2 and 
dissolved in dry CH2Cl2 (3.0 mL). The solution was cooled down to 0 C and DDQ (34 
mg, 0.15 mmol) added under N2. The reaction was then degassed 3 times using 
freeze-pump-thaw procedure and then cooled to 0 C. TfOH (0.15 mL, 1.70 mmol) was 
then added dropwise and the reaction stirred at 0 C for 1 h and at r.t. for 1.5 h. The 
resulting black solution was quenched with sat. NaHCO3 (10 mL) and extracted with 
CH2Cl2 (20 mL  3). The organic layer was washed with H2O (20 mL  2), brine (20 
mL), dried over MgSO4 filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure. The resulting 
residue was purified with preparative TLC (eluent: Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 75:25) to 
give 3-13 as a yellow powder (1.4 mg, 14%). mp: >300C. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
: 10.54 (s, 1 H), 9.30 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H), 9.14 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H), 8.99 (d, J = 1.1 Hz, 
2 H), 8.89 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H), 8.86 (d, J = 1.1 Hz, 2 H), 8.14 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 1 H), 7.90 
(t, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H), 7.81 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H), 7.38-7.34 (m, 2 H), 7.32-7.30 (m, 4 H), 
2.24 (s, 12 H). 13C{1H} NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) : 142.39, 139.80, 136.73, 130.90, 
130.80, 130.78, 130.64, 130.54, 128.11, 128.05, 127.77, 127.09, 127.02, 124.22, 
124.13, 123.63, 122.94, 122.75, 122.54, 122.44, 115.46, 21.48. Three peaks not visible 
due to overlapping. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3065, 2945, 2920, 1558, 1508, 1458, 1404, 
1375, 1090, 1015, 866, 789. ASAP+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for [C52H35]+: 659.2739; found: 
659.2735.Crystals suitable for X-Ray diffraction were obtained from vapor diffusion of i-
PrOH to a CH2Br2 solution. CCDC 1963744 contains the supplementary 
crystallographic data for compound 18. 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 2-Bromo-N,N-diethylbenzamide (3-21) 
In a two necked flask, diethyl amine (1.60 mL, 15.5 mmol) and triethylamine (2.40 mL, 
17.1 mmol) were added and dissolved in CH2Cl2 (75 mL). 2-bromobenzoyl chloride 
(1.80 mL, 13.7 mmol) was then added dropwise and the solution stirred at r.t. for 30 
min. The reaction was quenched with 2M HCl (100 mL), extracted with CH2Cl2 (100 mL 
 2), washed with H2O (100 mL  3), brine (100 mL), dried on MgSO4, filtered and 
evaporated under reduced pressure to give 3-21 as a transparent oil (3.4 g, 
quantitative). 1H NMR (300 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 7.59-7.56 (m, 1 H), 7.40-7.34 (m, 1 H), 
7.28-7.22 (m, 2 H), 3.80-3.69 (m, 1 H), 3.37-3.29 (m, 1 H), 3.12 (hept, J = 7.2 Hz, 2 H), 
1.24 (t, J = 7.1 Hz, 3 H), 1.04 (t, J = 7.1 Hz, 3 H). 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 
168.60, 139.60, 133.23, 130.41, 128.14, 127.99, 119.56, 43.24, 39.45, 14.24, 12.84. IR 
(ATR)  (cm-1): 3055, 2974, 2932, 2874, 1632, 1427, 1292, 1103, 768. ESI+ HRMS: 
[M+H]+calc. for [C11H15NOBr]+: 256.0337; found: 256.0349. 
Synthesis of 3'-Bromo-2,4',6-trimethyl-1,1'-biphenyl (3-19) 
In a Schlenk flask 2-bromo-4-iodo-1-methylbenzene (1.0 g, 3.4 mmol) was added along 
with 2,6-dimethylboronic acid (556 mg, 3.71 mmol), PPh3 (100 mg, 0.40 mmol) and 
Ba(OH)28H2O (3.2 g, 10.1 mmol). The solids were purged 3 times with N2 and 
suspended in a toluene/EtOH/H2O (10:4:2 mL) mixture. The suspension was degassed 
for 10 min. with N2 bubbling under sonication and [Pd(PPh3)4] (195 mg, 0.2 mmol) 
added, followed by further 10 min. of degassing. The reaction was heated at 100 C for 
24 h under N2, then diluted with H2O (50 mL) and CH2Cl2 (100 mL). The organic layer 
was washed with H2O (100 mL  2), brine (100 mL), dried over MgSO4, filtered and 
evaporated under reduced pressure. The resulting residue was purified by 
chromatography on a short silica plug (eluent: Petroleum ether 100%) to give 3-19 as a 
transparent oil (639 mg, 69%). 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.34 (d, J = 1.5 Hz, 1 H), 
7.29 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 1 H), 7.19-7.14 (m, 1 H), 7.11-7.08 (m, 2 H), 7.00 (dd, J = 7.7 Hz, 
Chapter 6 
1.7 Hz, 1 H), 2.46 (s, 3 H), 2.04 (s, 6 H). 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 140.53, 
140.38, 136.22, 136.19, 132.84, 130.95, 128.22, 127.48, 127.45, 125.06, 22.79, 20.98. 
IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3057, 3019, 2949, 2920, 2855, 1543, 1464, 1375, 1042, 1024, 883, 
824, 768, 712, 677, 606, 434. EI+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C15H15Br]+: 274.0357; found: 
274.0363. 
Synthesis of 4,4,5,5-Tetramethyl-2-(2',4,6'-trimethyl-[1,1'-biphenyl]-3-yl)-
1,3,2-dioxaborolane (3-20) 
In a Schlenk flask 3-19 (639 mg, 2.33 mmol) was added along with B2Pin2 (650 mg, 
2.56 mmol), KOAc (686 mg, 7.00 mmol), [Pd(dppf)Cl2CH2Cl2] (98 mg, 0.12 mmol) and 
suspended in dry DMF (5 mL). The mixture was degassed for 20 min. with N2 bubbling 
under sonication and then heated at 90 C for 18 h under N2. The resulting black 
suspension was diluted with H2O (50 mL) and CH2Cl2 (100 mL). The organic layer was 
washed with H2O (50 mL  3), brine (50 mL), dried over MgSO4, filtered and 
evaporated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by chromatography on a 
short silica plug (eluent: Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 80:20) to give 3-20 as transparent 
crystals (470 mg, 63%). mp: 106-108 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.52 (d, J = 1.9 
Hz, 1 H), 7.22 (d, J = 7.7 Hz, 1 H), 7.16-7.06 (m, 4 H), 2.58 (s, 3 H), 2.03 (s, 6 H), 1.34 
(s, 12 H). 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 143.08, 141.95, 137.43, 136.47, 136.41, 
131.47, 129.99, 127.28, 126.93, 83.56, 25.06, 22.11, 21.15. One peak missing due to 
11B-induced quadrupolar relaxation. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 2974, 2928, 1408, 1389, 1373, 
1335, 1304, 1269, 1254, 1242, 1165, 1146, 1069, 964, 876, 849, 829, 779, 737, 679. 
ESI+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for [C21H28BO2]+: 323.2182; found: 323.2186. 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of N,N-Diethyl-2'',6',6''-trimethyl-[1,1':3',1''-terphenyl]-2-
carboxamide (3-22)  
In a Schlenk flask 3-21 (442 mg, 1.73 mmol) was added followed by 3-20 (465 mg, 
1.44 mmol) and K2CO3 (600 mg, 4.35 mmol). The solids were suspended in a 
dioxane/H2O (10 mL/2 mL) mixture and the suspension degassed for 10 min. with N2 
bubbling under sonication. [Pd(dppf)Cl2CH2Cl2] (60 mg, 0.07 mmol) was then added 
under N2, the reaction further degassed for 10 min. and then stirred at 95 C under N2 
for 16 h. The resulting mixture was diluted with CH2Cl2 (30 mL). The organic layer was 
washed with H2O (50 mL  3), brine (50 mL), dried on MgSO4, filtered and evaporated 
under reduced pressure. The crude product was purified by chromatography on a short 
silica plug (eluent: Petroleum ether/EtOAc 80:20) to give 3-22 as white flakes (468 mg, 
74%). mp: 148-150 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.45-7.28 (m, 5 H), 7.16-7.02 (m, 
5 H), 3.51-2.90 (bt, 4 H), 2.28 (s, 3 H), 2.08 (s, 6 H), 0.92 (t, J = 7.0 Hz, 6 H). 13C{1H} 
NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 170.24, 141.49, 139.90, 138.43, 137.79, 137.00, 136.15, 
130.49, 130.25, 128.47, 127.40, 127.31, 126.97, 126.48, 42.78, 38.35, 21.02, 20.20, 
13.84, 12.62. Three peaks not visible probably due to overlapping. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 
3044, 2965, 2918, 1616, 1595, 1431, 1375, 1267, 1080, 827, 775, 748, 625. AP+ 
HRMS: [M+H]+calc. for [C26H30NO]+: 372.2327; found: 372.2330. 
Obtained following a procedure developed by Rantanen et al.[33] 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 3-(2,6-Dimethylphenyl)phenanthren-9-ol (3-23)  
To a solution of LDA (1.0 M in THF, 3.0 mL, 3.0 mmol) in dry THF (4 mL) at 0 C under 
N2, a 0.25 M solution of 3-22 (370 mg, 1.00 mmol) in dry THF was added. The resulting 
mixture was stirred at r.t. under N2 for 30 min. and then quenched with a NH4Cl 
saturated solution. The aqueous layer was extracted with Et2O (20 mL  3) and the 
organic phase dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure to 
give pure 3-23 as a fluffy brown solid (295 mg, 99%). mp: 64-66 C.1H NMR (400 MHz, 
CDCl3) : 8.62-8.60 (m, 1 H), 8.38 (s, 1 H), 8.34-8.32 (m, 1 H), 7.77 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 1H), 
7.69-7.64 (m, 2 H), 7.34 (dd, J = 8.0 Hz, 1.5 Hz, 1 H), 7.25-7.21 (m, 1 H), 7.18-7.16 (m, 
2 H), 7.08 (s, 1H), 2.09 (s, 6 H). (1H from OH not visible). 13C{1H} NMR (125 MHz, 
CDCl3) : 149.65, 142.27, 137.18, 136.63, 131.70, 131.45, 128.41, 127.52, 127.39, 
127.30, 127.00, 126.63, 125.83, 123.02, 122.91, 122.57, 106.09, 21.19. One peak not 
visible probably due to overlapping. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3341, 3063, 3013, 2951, 1674, 
1593, 1277, 1227, 768. EI+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C22H18O]+: 298.1358; found: 
298.1360. 
Obtained following a procedure developed by Cai et al.[34]  
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 3,15-Bis(2,6-dimethylphenyl)-18-phenyl-18H-
tetrabenzo[a,c,h,j]xanthenes (3-24)  
In a single necked round bottom flask, 3-23 (299 mg, 1.00 mmol) was added with 
benzaldehyde (48 L, 0.50 mmol) and the mixture suspended in AcOH (2.0 mL). Conc. 
HCl (36 L) was then added and the reaction stirred at 100 C until a yellow precipitate 
formed. The reaction was then filtered, and the residue purified by chromatography on 
a short silica plug (eluent: Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 60:40) to give 3-24 as a faint yellow 
powder (291 mg, 87%). mp: 224-226 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 8.97 (dd, J = 
8.2 Hz, 1.1 Hz, 2 H), 8.68 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 2 H), 8.62 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 2 H), 8.52 (d, J = 1.5 
Hz, 2 H), 7.86 (t, J = 8.2 Hz, 2 H), 7.79-7.71 (m, 4 H), 7.52 (dd, J= 8.4 Hz, 1.6 Hz, 2 H), 
7.23-7.18 (m, 8 H), 7.08 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 1 H), 6.65 (s, 1 H), 2.12 (s, 6 H), 2.06 (s, 6 H). 
13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 144.77, 144.71, 141.91, 138.01, 136.66, 136.55, 
130.91, 129.07, 128.78, 128.75, 128.58, 127.58, 127.54, 127.42, 127.38, 127.25, 
126.72, 125.49, 123.74, 123.62, 122.93, 122.70, 114.82, 38.45, 21.36, 21.16. IR (ATR) 
 (cm-1): 3059, 3021, 2951, 2916, 1597, 1439, 1265, 1184, 1134, 1026, 764, 702. AP+ 
HRMS: [M+H]+calc. for [C51H39O]+: 667.3001; found: 667.2996. 
Obtained following a procedure developed by Wu et al.[35] 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 3,15-bis(2,6-dimethylphenyl)-18-phenyl-18H-
tetrabenzo[a,c,h,j]xanthen-18-ol (3-25) 
In a round bottom flask equipped with a condenser, 3-24 (50 mg, 0.08 mmol) was 
added with PbO2 (27 mg, 0.11 mmol) and suspended in AcOH (2 mL). The reaction 
was refluxed for 3 h, poured onto crushed ice, extracted with EtOAc (20 mL  3) and 
the resulting organic phase washed with brine (30 mL), dried on MgSO4, filtered and 
evaporated under reduced pressure. The resulting orange solid was purified with 
preparative TLC (eluent: Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 70:30) to give 3-25 as a white powder 
(21 mg, 41%). mp: 202-204 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 9.19 (d, J = 8.7 Hz, 2 
H), 8.98 (dd, J = 8.2 Hz, 1.1 Hz, 2 H), 8.65 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 2 H), 8.46 (d, J = 1.7 Hz, 2 
H), 7.95 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 2 H), 7.86 (t, J = 8.2, 2 H), 7.79-7.73 (m, 2 H), 7.32 (dd, J = 8.7 
Hz, 1.8 Hz, 2 H), 7.29-7.20 (m, 3 H), 7.20-7.07 (m, 6 H), 3.55 (s, 1 H), 2.09 (s, 6 H), 
2.01 (s, 6 H). 13C{1H} NMR (100 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 147.37, 142.46, 142.20, 138.25, 
136.86, 136.76, 132.07, 129.73, 128.81, 128.63, 128.57, 128.30, 127.92, 127.90, 
127.84, 127.72, 126.92, 125.13, 123.85, 123.78, 123.18, 116.13, 74.72, 21.37, 21.30. 
IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3059, 2955, 2920, 1597, 1369, 1304, 764, 721, 702, 640. ESI- 
HRMS: [M-H]- calc. for [C51H37O2]- 681.2794; found: 681.2789. 
Obtained following a procedure developed by Wu et al.[35] 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 6,12-Bis(2,6-
dimethylphenyl)dibenzo[c,h]benzo[5,6]tetraceno[1,12,11,10-
jklmna]xanthen-18-ium tetrafluoro borate (3-27BF) 
In a round bottom flask 3-25 (20 mg, 0.03 mmol) was added and suspended in 0.8 mL 
of a 1:1 mixture of Ac2O and toluene. HBF4Et2O (excess) was added dropwise at 0 C 
to give the formation of an orange precipitate. The suspension was then diluted with 
anhydrous Et2O (5 mL), transferred into a falcon tube and centrifuged (5000 rpm, 5 
min.). After removal of the supernatant, the orange solid was again suspended in Et2O 
and centrifuged. This procedure was repeated one more time for a total of 3 washings. 
The resulting orange powder was then dissolved in a 1:1 mixture of AcOH and CH2Cl2 
and irradiated for 24 h at 365 nm. The resulting deep red solution was evaporated 
under reduced pressure to give 3-27BF as a deep purple powder (18 mg, 80%). mp: 
258-260 C. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 9.64 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H), 9.39 (d, J = 8.0 
Hz, 2 H), 9.30 (s, 2 H), 9.23 (s, 2 H), 9.15 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2 H), 8.71 (t, J = 8.0 Hz, 1 H), 
8.37-8.28 (m, 4 H), 7.43-7.35 (m, 6 H), 2.22 (s, 12 H). 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, 
MeOD/CD2Cl2 1:1) : 144.97, 141.23, 136.78, 136.59, 136.27, 135.76, 131.48, 130.87, 
129.81, 129.11, 128.60, 128.14, 127.95, 126.08, 125.76, 125.42, 123.72, 119.74, 
21.43.(five peaks not visible probably due to low solubility).11B{1H} NMR (160 MHz, 
CD2Cl2) : -1.21. 19F{1H} NMR (376 MHz, CD2Cl2) : -153.14. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3063, 
3024, 2916, 2851, 1721, 1582, 1558, 1516, 1493, 1462, 1427, 1400, 1342, 1312, 1049, 
1030, 841, 768, 718, 671, 621, 521, 413. ESI+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C51H33O]+: 
661.2531; found: 661.2518. 
Obtained following a modified procedure based on the work of Wu et al.[35]  
Chapter 6 
Chapter 4 
Synthesis of Mesityl multi-borazines 1-66 and 4-3 
In a flame dried Schlenk flask, freshly distilled aniline (0.26 mL, 2.85 mmol), p-
phenylendiamine (0.15 g, 1.39 mmol) and dry toluene (6 mL), were added. The mixture 
was heated at 80 C under Argon and BCl3 (1.0 M in heptane, 6.0 mL, 6.0 mmol) 
added dropwise and the resulting suspension stirred for 10 min. at r.t. The Schlenk 
flask was then equipped with a condenser connected to a CaCl2 trap and the 
suspension refluxed for 18 h. After exchanging the condenser with a septum, the 
reaction was degassed 5 times following the freeze-pump-thaw procedure to remove 
residual HCl. In parallel, to a solution of 2-bromomesitylene (0.71 mL, 4.70 mmol) in 
dry THF (15 mL), t-BuLi (1.7 M in hexanes, 5.8 mL, 9.9 mmol) was added dropwise at -
84 C. The solution was allowed to warm at 0 C and stirred for 10 min. the degassed 
toluene suspension was thus transferred to the THF solution at 0 C and allowed to 
react for 18 h at r.t.. The final mixture was diluted with EtOAc (90 mL) and washed with 
H2O (3  100 mL) and brine (50 mL). The organic layer was dried over MgSO4, filtered 
and evaporated under reduced pressure. The products were purified by silica gel 
column chromatography (eluent: Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 80:20) affording 1-66 (36 mg, 
6%) as white powder. Additionally, a mixture of other products was obtained. These 
were separated by Rec-GPC using CHCl3 as eluent to afford 4-3 (40 mg, 5%) as white 
powder.  
1-66 (data according to literature)[36]: 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) : 6.84-6.70 (m, 15 
H), 6.33 (s, 6 H), 2.23 (s, 18 H), 1.97 (s, 9 H). 13C{1H} NMR (126 MHz, CD2Cl2)  
146.42, 137.35, 136.17, 127.12, 126.81, 126.28, 124.27, 23.12, 21.15. 11B{1H} NMR 
(128 MHz, CDCl3) : 37.02. 
4-3: mp: >300 C. 1H NMR: (400 MHz, CDCl3) : 6.69 (s, 20 H), 6.39 (s, 8 H), 6.29 (s, 4 
H), 6.12 (s, 4 H), 2.15 (s, 12 H), 2.10 (s, 12 H), 1.95 (s, 6 H), 1.89 (s, 24 H).13C{1H} 
NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) : 146.25, 141.97, 137.45, 137.33, 136.61, 136.10, 135.52, 
127.24, 126.55, 126.39, 126.20, 125.83, 124.05, 22.87, 22.58, 21.30, 21.15. ES+ 
Chapter 6 
HRMS: [M+Na]+ calc. for [C84H90B6N6Na]+ 1271.7678; found: 1271.7729. CCDC 
1873315 contains the supplementary crystallographic data for compound 4-3. 
Synthesis of Xylyl multi-borazines 4-8, 4-9, 4-10, 4-11 and 4-12* 
*mixture of isomers 
In a flame dried Schlenk flask, freshly distilled aniline (0.49 mL, 5.37 mmol), p-
phenylendiamine (0.29 g, 2.68 mmol) and dry toluene (12 mL), were added. The 
mixture was heated at 80 C under N2 and BCl3 (1.0 M in heptane, 11.5 mL, 11.5 
mmol) added dropwise. The reaction was cooled down to 0 C and stirred for 10 min. 
The Schlenk flask was then equipped with a condenser connected to a CaCl2 trap and 
the suspension refluxed for 18 h. After exchanging the condenser with a septum, the 
reaction was degassed 5 times following the freeze-pump-thaw procedure to remove 
residual HCl. In parallel, to a solution of 2-bromo-1,3-dimethylbenzene (2.16 mL, 16.08 
mmol) in dry THF (40 mL), n-BuLi (1.6 M in hexanes, 10.7 mL, 17.1 mmol) was added 
dropwise at -84 C. The solution was allowed to warm at 0 C and stirred for 10 min. 
the degassed toluene suspension was thus transferred to the THF solution at 0 C and 
allowed to react for 18 h at r.t.. The final mixture was diluted with EtOAc (150 mL) and 
washed with H2O (2  100 mL) and brine (2  100 mL). The organic layer was dried 
Chapter 6 
over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure. The solid residue was 
precipitated from cold MeOH and filtered. The resulting white solid was purified by 
silica gel column chromatography (eluent: Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 70:30) to afford 4-8 
(182 mg, 16%) and 4-9 (107 mg, 7%) as white powders. Additionally, 3 fractions 
composed by mixtures of products were obtained. The first 2 fractions were purified by 
Rec-GPC using CHCl3 as eluent. Purification of the first fraction afforded 4-10 (19 mg, 
1%) and 4-11 (22 mg, 2%) as white powders. Purification of the second fraction gave 
4-12, which was further purified with preparative TLC (eluent: Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 
60:40) to give the desired product (2 mg, 0.1%). The third fraction was analysed by 
GPC at Warwick university and resulted in a mixture of hydroxylated oligomers.  
4-8: mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 6.87-6.84 (m, 6 H), 6.80-6.70 (m, 12 
H), 6.53 (d, J = 7.5 Hz, 6 H) 2.30 (s, 18 H). 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 146.09, 
137.50, 127.14, 126.98, 126.91, 125.39, 124.62, 23.29. One carbon missing due to 11B 
induced quadrupolar relaxation. 11B NMR (160 MHz, CDCl3) : 36.43. IR (ATR)  (cm-
1): 3061, 3009, 2947, 2916, 2855, 1595, 1489, 1427, 1356, 1288, 1072, 1026, 766, 
748, 727, 696, 567, 529, 519. AP+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for [C42H43B3N3]+: 622.3736, 
found: 622.3766. Crystals suitable for X-Ray diffraction were obtained from slow 
evaporation of CHCl3.CCDC 1873312 contains the supplementary crystallographic data 
for compound 4-8. 
4-9: mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) : 6.85 (s, 4 H), 6.73 (s, 22 H), 6.59-6.51 
(m, 12 H), 6.24 (s, 4H), 2.20 (s, 12 H), 1.99 (s, 24 H). 13C{1H} NMR (125 MHz, CDCl3) 
: 145.94, 142.09, 137.57, 137.50, 127.09, 126.79, 126.65, 125.86, 125.63, 125.34, 
124.40, 23.06, 22.94. Two carbon atoms missing due to 11B induced quadrupolar 
relaxation. 11B{1H} NMR (160 MHz, CDCl3) : 37.13. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3057, 2943, 
2914, 2859, 1595, 1489, 1452, 1352, 1288, 1070, 1018, 766, 698. MALDI+ HRMS: [M]+ 
calc. for [C78H78B6N6]+: 1164.6846, found: 1164.6812. Crystals suitable for X-Ray 
diffraction were obtained from slow diffusion of pentane in CHCl3.CCDC 1873316 
contains the supplementary crystallographic data for compound 4-9. 
4-10: mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) : 6.91 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 1 H), 6.83-6.75 
(m, 7 H), 6.70-6.68 (m, 21 H), 6.61-6.60 (m, 3 H), 6.57-6.52 (m, 12 H), 6.50-6.47 (m, 8 
H), 6.13 (d, J = 8.7 Hz, 4 H), 6.04 (d, J = 8.7 Hz, 4 H), 2.16 (s, 12 H), 1.95 (s, 12 H), 
1.94 (s, 12 H), 1.80 (s, 12 H), 1.62 (s, 6 H). 13C{1H} NMR (126 MHz, CDCl3) : 145.97, 
145.94, 141.97, 141.92, 137.58, 137.55, 137.48, 127.13, 127.07, 126.76, 126.68, 
126.63, 126.51, 126.39, 126.00, 125.64, 125.60, 125.51, 125.32, 124.39, 124.20, 
23.07, 22.97, 22.95, 22.75, 22.52. 11B{1H} NMR (160 MHz, CDCl3) : 40.69. IR (ATR)  
Chapter 6 
(cm-1): 3040, 2916, 2855, 1597, 1425, 1352, 1302, 1288, 764, 698. MALDI+ HRMS: 
[M]+ calc. for [C114H114B9N9]+ 1708.0035; found: 1707.9987. Crystals suitable for X-Ray 
diffraction were obtained from slow diffusion of pentane in CHCl3. CCDC 1873317 
contains the supplementary crystallographic data for compound 4-10. 
4-11: mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.07 (t, J = 7.7 Hz, 1 H), 7.00-6.96 
(m, 2 H), 6.79-6.78 (m, 4 H), 6.76-6.64 (m, 16 H), 6.60-6.56 (m, 2 H), 6.53-6.48 (m, 10 
H), 6.43 (t, J = 8.1 Hz, 3 H), 6.33 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 1 H), 3.49-3.17 (m, 1 H), 2.23 (s, 6 H), 
2.19 (s, 9 H), 2.06 (bs, 6 H), 1.98 (s, 6 H), 1.90 (s, 3 H). 13C{1H} NMR (126 MHz, 
CDCl3) : 146.13, 146.04, 145.95, 144.32, 143.54, 142.87, 140.14, 139.55, 137.56, 
137.52, 137.41, 137.25, 127.96, 127.48, 127.45, 127.19, 127.07, 126.97, 126.91, 
126.87, 126.85, 126.80, 126.67, 125.89, 125.86, 125.56, 125.41, 125.38, 125.30, 
125.10, 124.61, 124.56, 124.38, 23.17, 23.12, 22.92, 22.83.11B{1H} NMR (160 MHz, 
CDCl3) : 36.59, 26.27. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3601, 3059, 2916, 2855, 1678, 1597, 1508, 
1491, 1452, 1425, 1354, 1308, 1213, 1163, 1123, 1074, 847, 766, 748, 729, 719, 696, 
658, 608, 575, 527. ASAP+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C70H70B6N6O]+: 1076.6169, found: 
1076.6207. Crystals suitable for X-Ray diffraction were obtained from slow evaporation 
of petroleum ether CH2Cl2 mixture. CCDC 1873314, 1873313 contain the 
supplementary crystallographic data for compound 4-11. 
4-12: mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (500 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 6.93-6.44 (m, 69 H), 6.21 (d, J = 8.7 
Hz, 1 H), 6.15-6.13 (m, 3 H), 6.06-6.03 (m, 3 H), 5.99 (d, J = 0.7 Hz, 2 H), 2.26-2.12 
(m, 18 H), 1.97-1.95 (m, 18 H), 1.81 (s, 9 H), 1.80 (s, 3 H), 1.62 (s, 6 H), 1.52 (s, 18 H). 
IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3055, 2920, 2854, 1597, 1493, 1454, 1427, 1358, 1304. MALDI+ 
HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C150H150B12N12]+ 2251.3223; found: 2251.3375. 
Oligomeric fraction: IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3613, 3057, 2945, 2916, 1597, 1491, 1356, 
1308, 766, 698. 11B{1H} NMR (160 MHz, CDCl3) : 37.53, 25.17.  
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 1,2-Di([1,1'-biphenyl]-3-yl)hydrazine (4-16) 
In a pressure vessel m-nitrobiphenyl (2.0 g, 10.0 mmol) was added followed by 
ethylenediamine (6.7 mL, 100.0 mmol). The resulting suspension was frozen with liquid 
N2 and the flask evacuated until a pressure below 1 mbar was reached. The flask was 
sealed, and the reaction heated at 150 C for 24 h. The resulting mixture was then 
allowed to cool down, diluted with EtOAc (100 mL) washed with H2O (50 mL  3) and 
brine (50 mL). The resulting organic layer was dried over MgSO4, filtered and 
evaporated. The resulting residue was then precipitated with petroleum ether affording 
compound 4-16 as a yellow powder (908 mg, 52%). mp: 130-132 C. 1H NMR (300 
MHz, CDCl3) : 7.58-7.55 (m, 4 H), 7.43-7.38 (m, 4 H), 7.35-7.27 (m, 4 H), 7.13-7.12 
(m, 2 H), 7.09 (ddd, J = 7.6 Hz, J = 1.7 Hz, J = 1.0 Hz, 2 H), 6.88 (ddd, J = 8.0 Hz, J = 
2.3 Hz, J = 1.0 Hz, 2 H) 5.75 (s, 2 H). 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 149.44, 142.68, 
141.43, 129.94, 128.80, 127.45, 127.32, 119.21, 111.49, 111.27. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 
3352, 3325, 3036, 1601, 1584, 1570, 1474, 1439, 1398, 1310, 1273, 1209, 1182, 1161, 
1076, 1049, 1026, 989, 924, 872, 856, 791, 754, 696, 640, 615, 515, 457. ES+ HRMS: 
[M+H]+ calc. for [C24H21N2]+: 337.1705, found: 337.1711. 
Synthesis of [1,1':2',1'':2'',1'''-quaterphenyl]-4'',5'-diamine (4-17) 
In a round bottom flask 4-16 (1.0 g, 3.0 mmol) was added and suspended in 34 mL of 
degassed 10% aq. HCl. The reaction was then equipped with a condenser closed with 
a rubber septum connected to a N2 filled balloon and refluxed for 3 h. The reaction was 
neutralized using a sat. K2CO3 aq. solution and the resulting aqueous layers extracted 
with EtOAc (50 mL  3). The resulting organic solution was washed with brine (50 mL), 
dried on MgSO4, evaporated and the residue purified on a silica gel plug (eluent: 
Petroleum ether/EtOAc gradient from 90:10 to 90:20) to give 4-17 as a brown solid 
(252 mg, 25%). 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.12 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2 H), 7.06-7.02 (m, 3 
Chapter 6 
H), 6.99-6.97 (m, 3 H), 6.66-6.63 (m, 6 H), 6.49 (d, J = 2.5 Hz, 2 H), 3.63 (bs, 4 H). 
13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 145.22, 142.09, 141.64, 132.96, 130.81, 129.22, 
127.49, 125.81, 116.80, 114.18. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3460, 3360, 3215, 3026, 1620, 
1568, 1477, 1452, 1389, 1315, 1265, 1225, 984, 870, 829, 816, 772, 733, 698, 623, 
569, 554, 529, 457, 447, 430, 424, 417, 403. EI+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C24H20N2]+: 
336.1626, found: 336.1633. 
Synthesis 2,6 Difluoro aryl multi-borazine (4-19) 
In a flame dried Schlenk flask, 2-10 (473 mg, 2.40 mmol), 4-17 (200 mg, 0.60 mmol) 
and dry toluene (8.0 mL) were added. The mixture was heated at 80 C under N2 and 
BCl3 (1.0 M in heptane, 3.6 mmol, 3.6 mL) added dropwise. The reaction was cooled 
down to 0 C and stirred for 10 min. The Schlenk flask was then equipped with a 
condenser connected to a CaCl2 trap and the reaction refluxed for 18 h. The condenser 
was then exchanged with a septum and the resulting white suspension degassed 5 
times following the freeze-pump-thaw procedure to remove residual HCl. In parallel, to 
a solution of 1-bromo-2,6-difluorobenzene (0.41 mL, 3.66 mmol) in dry THF (10 mL), n-
BuLi (1.6 M in hexanes, 2.3 mL, 3.7 mmol) was added dropwise at -84 C and the 
solution allowed to warm at 0 C and stirred for 10 min. The degassed toluene 
suspension was transferred to the THF solution at -84 C and allowed to react for 3 h at 
the same temperature followed by 15 h at r.t.. The final mixture was diluted with EtOAc 
(10 mL), washed with water (2  100 mL) and brine (2  100 mL). The organic layer 
was dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated under reduced pressure. The solid 
residue was purified with silica gel plug (eluent: Petroleum ether/CH2Cl2 gradient from 
90:10 to 80:20) to afford 2-27 (100 mg, 13%) and 4-19 (30 mg, 3%) as white powders  
Chapter 6 
4-19: mp: >300 C. 1H NMR (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.37-7.32 (m, 2 H), 7.15-6.93 (m, 34 
H), 6.75-6.63 (m, 12 H), 6.59-6.41 (m, 12 H), 6.20 (d, J = 7.2 Hz, 2 H) 1.63-1.59 (m, 24 
H). 13C{1H} NMR (126 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 164.31, 164.17, 164.05, 162.40, 162.26, 
162.12, 157.86, 145.35, 144.79, 141.96, 141.94, 140.84, 140.78, 138.85, 137.08, 
136.52, 136.49, 136.45, 132.04, 131.43, 131.40, 131.31, 131.22, 131.15, 131.07, 
130.99, 130.94, 130.32, 129.07, 128.99, 127.99, 127.47, 127.31, 126.02, 125.82, 
123.81, 119.39, 110.42, 110.30, 110.09, 20.50, 20.44, 20.40. 19F{1H} NMR (376 MHz, 
CDCl3) : -101.69, -101.75. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3042, 2955, 2853, 1622, 1580, 1510, 
1452, 1383, 1317, 1254, 1225, 1101, 1005, 984, 843, 787, 777, 768, 750, 716, 696, 
596, 575, 534, 525, 498, 480. AP+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for [C116H87B6N6F12]+: 
1856.7281, found: 1856.7334.  
Chapter 6 
Chapter 5 
Synthesis of B,B,B-Triethynyl-N,N,N-tri(phenyl)-borazine (5-2) 
The product is moisture sensitive and slowly degrades if exposed to water  
In a flame dried 20 mL Schlenk flask, freshly distilled aniline (0.49 mL, 5.37 mmol) and 
dry toluene (7.0 mL) were added. The solution was then cooled to 0 C, BCl3 (1.0 M in 
heptane, 6.4 mL, 6.4 mmol) added dropwise and the resulting suspension stirred for 10 
min. The Schlenk flask was then equipped with a condenser connected to a CaCl2 trap 
and the reaction refluxed for 18 h. The condenser was then exchanged with a septum 
and the white suspension degassed 5 times following the freeze-pump-thaw procedure 
to remove residual HCl. The degassed mixture was cooled to 0C and Ethynyl-MgBr 
(0.5 M in THF, 12.0 mL, 6.0 mmol) added dropwise. The resulting pale-yellow solution 
was allowed to reach r.t. and stirred for 3 h, dry CH2Cl2 (50 mL) added and the reaction 
mixture filtered on a silica plug washing thoroughly with dry CH2Cl2. Evaporation of the 
solvent gave 5-2 as a pale-yellow powder (478 mg, 70%). mp: 260-262 C. 1H NMR: 
(300 MHz, CD2Cl2) : 7.38-7.33 (m, 6 H), 7.28-7.22 (m, 9 H), 2.47 (s, 3 H). 13C{1H} 
NMR (126 MHz, CDCl3) : 147.00, 128.75, 126.26, 98.31. Signal at 128.75 consists of 
signals overlapped, 1 ethynyl signal missing due to 11B quadrupolar relaxation. 11B{1H} 
NMR (128 MHz, CDCl3) : 26.26. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3056, 3032, 2355, 1420, 1204, 
1129, 900, 754, 694, 411, 408, 404. EI+ HRMS: [M]+ calc. for [C24H18B3N3]+: 381.1780; 
found: 381.1756. Crystals suitable for X-Ray diffraction analysis were obtained from 
slow evaporation of a 5-2 solution in 1/1 petroleum ether/CH2Cl2. 
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of B,B,B-Tri(3',4'-diphenyl-1,1':2',1''-terphenyl)-N,N,N-
tri(phenyl)-borazine (5-4, cc and ct isomers). 
In a flame dried two necked flask, borazine 5-2 (50 mg, 0.13 mmol) was added along 
with 2,3,4,5-tetraphenylcyclopenta-2,4-dien-1-one (201 mg, 0.52 mmol). The solids 
were suspended in dry Ph2O (1 mL) and the resulting black suspension degassed with 
N2 bubbling under sonication for 30 min. The mixture was heated under N2 at 220 C 
for 18 h. The resulting black solution was precipitated from cold petrol and filtered to 
give a light purple solid. Silica gel column chromatography (eluent: petroleum 
ether/CH2Cl2 80:20 to 60:40) gave 5-4 as a white fluffy powder (91 mg, 47%). mp: >300 
C. 1H NMR: (500 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.17-7.05 (m, 22 H), 6.92-6.65 (m, 43 H), 6.65-5.97 
(m, 13 H). 13C{1H} NMR (126 MHz, CDCl3) : 146.18, 146.10, 145.10, 142.84, 142.65, 
142.45, 142.19, 142.11, 142.06, 141.74, 141.64, 141.54, 141.10, 140.79, 140.56, 
140.44, 140.42, 140.34, 139.51, 139.20, 138.96, 138.89, 138.59, 138.42, 138.26, 
137.46, 135.63, 135.19, 135.02, 132.01, 131.68, 131.65, 131.59, 131.47, 131.41, 
131.34, 131.14, 131.10, 130.18, 129.96, 129.87, 128.74, 128.53, 127.35, 127.31, 
127.09, 126.97, 126.77, 126.56, 126.50, 126.42, 126.34, 126.30, 126.10, 125.88, 
125.76, 125.68, 125.28, 125.23, 125.02, 124.97, 124.34, 124.04, 123.71. 11B{1H} NMR 
(160 MHz, C6D6) : 37.71. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3055, 3024, 1597, 1577, 1491, 1358, 
1321, 1072, 1027, 908, 756, 725, 694, 533, 419, 406. AP+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for 
[C108H79B3N3]+: 1450.6548; found: 1450.6578. Crystals suitable for X-Ray diffraction 
analysis were obtained from slow diffusion of MeOH in a CH2Br2 solution. Spectra in 
C6D6 are reported as well in appendix A.  
Chapter 6 
Synthesis of 4,4'-Bis(phenylethynyl)-1,1'-biphenyl (5-7) 
4,4-diiodo-1,1-biphenyl (4.00 g, 9.86 mmol) was added in a Schlenk flask along with 
[Pd(PPh3)Cl2 ] (138 mg, 0.20 mmol) and CuI (38 mg, 0.20 mmol). The solids were then 
suspended in 50 mL of a 1/1 THF/Triethylamine mixture and the resulting suspension 
degassed 3 times using freeze-pump-thaw procedure. Phenylacetylene (2.40 mL, 21.7 
mmol) was then added and the reaction stirred at r.t. for 3 h. The resulting suspension 
was filtered on a glass frit and washed with MeOH to give 5-7 as a grey powder (3.45 
g, 99 %). mp: 246-248 C. 1H NMR: (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.61 (s, 8 H), 7.58-7.54 (m, 4 
H), 7.39-7.35 (m, 6 H). 13C{1H} NMR (100 MHz, CDCl3) : 140.19, 132.27, 131.79, 
128.53, 128.50, 127.04, 123.38, 122.74, 90.53, 89.37. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3086, 3051, 
2965, 2359, 2218, 1593, 1499, 1439, 1069, 1024, 1001, 918, 822, 750, 718, 689, 538, 
515, 471. ASAP+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for [C28H19]+: 355.1487; found: 355.1481.  
Synthesis of 2,2'-([1,1'-Biphenyl]-4,4'-diyl)bis(1-phenylethane-1,2-dione) (5-
In a 500 mL round bottom flask 5-7 (1.00 g, 2.82 mmol) was added and suspended in 
an acetone/AcOH (200 mL/2 mL) mixture. KMnO4 (2.20 g, 14.12 mmol) was then 
added in one portion. The reaction was then equipped with a condenser and stirred at 
60 C for 6 h. The solvent was removed under reduced pressure and the resulting solid 
filtered on a silica plug (eluent: CH2Cl2 100%). Evaporation of the solvent gives 5-8 
(1.14 g, 97 %) as a bright yellow solid. mp: 196-198 C. 1H NMR: (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 
8.09 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 4 H), 8.02-7.99 (m, 4 H), 7.76 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 4 H), 7.68 (t, J = 7.5 
Hz, 2 H), 7.53 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 4 H). 13C{1H} NMR (75 MHz, CDCl3) : 194.37, 193.98, 
145.83, 135.18, 133.03, 132.85, 130.77, 130.12, 129.23, 128.14. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 
3084, 3067, 1661, 1593, 1553, 1447, 1400, 1317, 1300, 1209, 1169, 1001, 872, 824, 
Chapter 6 
793, 748, 719, 704, 685, 648 634, 490. ASAP+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for [C28H19O4]+: 
419.1283; found: 419.1284.  
Synthesis of 4,4'-([1,1'-Biphenyl]-4,4'-diyl)bis(2,3,5-triphenylcyclopenta-
2,4-dien-1-one) (5-10) 
In a 50 mL round bottom flask equipped with a condenser, 5-8 (1.00 g, 2.39 mmol) was 
added and dissolved in refluxing EtOH (10 mL). 1,3-Diphenylacetone (1.10 g, 5.24 
mmol) was then added portion-wise to the yellow solution at reflux. A KOH solution 
(135 mg in 2 mL of EtOH) was then added and after 10 min. a brownish suspension 
was formed. The flask was cooled to -10 C for 1 h and the reaction mixture filtered on 
a glass frit and washed with cold MeOH to give the desired product 5-10 as a brown 
solid (960 mg, 52 %). mp: >300 C. 1H NMR: (300 MHz, CDCl3) : 7.40 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 
4 H), 7.25-7.18 (m, 26 H), 6.97 (dd, J = 8.4 Hz, 1.6 Hz, 8 H). 13C{1H} NMR (126 MHz, 
CDCl3) : 200.27, 154.39, 153.98, 140.07, 133.28, 132.50, 130.94, 130.82, 130.32, 
130.29, 130.21, 129.49, 128.69, 128.26, 128.24, 128.18, 127.69, 127.65, 126.35, 
125.70, 125.67. IR (ATR)  (cm-1): 3055, 3030, 2911, 1707, 1601, 1490, 1443, 1354, 
1304, 693, 419, 412. AP+ HRMS: [M+H]+ calc. for [C58H39O2]+: 767.2950; found: 
767.2959.  
Synthesis of BN-polymer (5-1)* 
* The quality of the starting borazine and dry conditions are fundamental to form the polymeric 
material, if the borazine is partially degraded or moisture is present only soluble material is 
formed. 
In a flame dried 3 necked flask 5-2 (300 mg, 0.79 mmol) was added along with 5-10 
(905 mg, 1.18 mmol) and the flask purged 3 times with N2. Anhydrous Ph2O (12 mL) 
was then added and the resulting brown suspension degassed with N2 bubbling under 
sonication for 20 min. The reaction was then stirred under N2 at 230C (as soon as the 
reaction reaches 220C a strong evolution of CO takes place). After approximately 1 h 
the reaction turns into a red gel and is stirred for further 16 h. The gelified solution is 
then allowed to reach room temperature, dropped into cold petroleum ether and 
filtered. The resulting material was transferred to a falcon tube, suspended in CH2Cl2 
Chapter 6 
and sonicated for 10 min., followed by addition of petroleum ether and centrifugation at 
5000 rpm for 5 min. This procedure was repeated for further 2 times. The reddish 
powder (800 mg, 67%) was then added in a flame dried microwave vial and suspended 
in Ph2O (7 mL). The vial was sealed, and the solution degassed with N2 bubbling under 
sonication for 10 min. (forms a gel). Phenylacetylene (1.15 mL, 10.5 mmol) was then 
added and the reaction heated under N2 at 230 C for 4 h (red colour disappears). After 
this time, the reaction is again poured into cold petroleum ether and washed 3 times by 
centrifugation with CH2Cl2 (as reported in the previous step) and 1 time each with 
acetone, MeOH and Et2O. After drying under vacuum, 5-1 was isolated as a beige solid 
(600 mg, quantitative yield, some loss of material occurred during washings). IR (ATR) 
 (cm-1): 3211, 3051, 3022, 1597, 1489, 1356, 1319, 1155, 1109, 1072, 1026, 1007, 
910, 831, 785, 756, 694, 532, 469, 457, 447, 417, 407, 403.  
References 
[1] G. Metz, X. Wu, S. O. Smith, J. Magn. Reson. Ser. A 1994, 110, 219227. 
[2] S. P. Brown, S. J. Heyes, S. Wimperis, J. Magn. Reson. - Ser. A 1996, 119, 
280284. 
[3] Y. Millot, P. P. Man, Solid State Nucl. Magn. Reson. 2002, 21, 2143. 
[4] M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. 
Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, G. A. Petersson, et al., 
GAUSSIAN 09 (Revision D.01) 2013. 
[5] R. Herges, D. Geuenich, J. Phys. Chem. A 2001, 105, 32143220. 
[6] A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys. 1993, 98, 56485652. 
[7] W. J. Hehre, R. Ditchfield, J. A. Pople, J.Chem. Phys. 1972, 56, 22572261. 
[8] J. Tomasi, B. Mennucci, R. Cammi, Chem. Rev. 2005, 105, 29993093. 
[9] E. D. Glendening, J. K. Badenhoop, A. E. Reed, J. E. Carpenter, J. A. Bohmann, 
C. M. Morales, C. R. Landis, F. Weinhold, NBO 6.0, Theor. Chem. Institute, 
Univ. Wisconsin, Madison, 2013. 
[10] S. Meiboom, D. Gill, Rev. Sci. Instrum. 1958, 29, 688691. 
[11] R. Lapasin, S. Pricl, in Rheol. Ind. Polysaccharides Theory Appl. Springer, 
Boston, MA, 1995, pp. 250494. 
[12] M. Abrami, I. DAgostino, G. Milcovich, S. Fiorentino, R. Farra, F. Asaro, R. 
Lapasin, G. Grassi, M. Grassi, Soft Matter 2014, 10, 729737. 
[13] P. J. Flory, Principles of Polymer Chemistry, Cornell University Press, 1953. 
[14] G. Schurz, Springer, Dordrecht, 1991, pp. 391437. 
[15] V. CrysAlisPro, Agil. Technol. 2014. 
[16] G. M. Sheldrick, Acta Crystallogr. 2015, 71, 38. 
[17] A. Lausi, M. Polentarutti, S. Onesti, J. R. Plaisier, E. Busetto, G. Bais, L. Barba, 
A. Cassetta, G. Campi, D. Lamba, et al., Eur. Phys. J. Plus 2015, 130, 28. 
Chapter 6 
[18] W. Kabsch, A. T. Brnger, K. Diederichs, P. A. Karplus, K. Diederichs, S. 
McSweeney, R. B. G. Ravelli, P. Evans, S. French, K. Wilson, et al., Acta 
Crystallogr. Sect. D Biol. Crystallogr. 2010, 66, 125132. 
[19] P. R. Evans, G. N. Murshudov, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D Biol. Crystallogr. 2013, 
69, 12041214. 
[20] M. D. Winn, C. C. Ballard, K. D. Cowtan, E. J. Dodson, P. Emsley, P. R. Evans, 
R. M. Keegan, E. B. Krissinel, A. G. W. Leslie, A. McCoy, et al., Acta Crystallogr. 
Sect. D Biol. Crystallogr. 2011, 67, 235242. 
[21] P. Emsley, K. Cowtan, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. D Biol. Crystallogr. 2004, 60, 
21262132. 
[22] L. J. Farrugia, J. Appl. Crystallogr. 2012, 45, 849854. 
[23] L. L. C. Schrodinger, PyMOL Mol. Graph. Syst. Schrodinger, LLC. 2015, 
http://www.pymol.org. 
[24] A. L. Spek, Acta Crystallogr. Sect. C Struct. Chem. 2015, 71, 918. 
[25] S. J. Clark, M. D. Segall, C. J. Pickard, P. J. Hasnip, M. I. J. Probert, K. Refson, 
Z. Krist. 2005, 220, 567570. 
[26] D. Vanderbilt, Phys. Rev. B 1990, 41, 78927895. 
[27] J. P. Perdew, K. Burke, M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett. 1996, 77, 38653868. 
[28] A. Tkatchenko, M. Scheffler, Phys. Rev. Lett. 2009, 102, 14. 
[29] H. J. Monkhorst, J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B 1976, 13, 51885192. 
[30] O. Allemann, S. Duttwyler, P. Romanato, K. K. Baldridge, J. S. Siegel, Science 
2011, 332, 574577. 
[31] J. Dosso, J. Tasseroul, F. Fasano, D. Marinelli, N. Biot, A. Fermi, D. Bonifazi, 
Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 44834487. 
[32] M. Krieg, F. Reicherter, P. Haiss, M. Strbele, K. Eichele, M. J. Treanor, R. 
Schaub, H. F. Bettinger, Angew. Chemie Int. Ed. 2015, 54, 82848286. 
[33] T. Rantanen, V. Snieckus, J. Org. Chem. 2015, 94109424. 
[34] X. Cai, S. Brown, P. Hodson, V. Snieckus, Can. J. Chem. 2004, 205, 195205. 
[35] D. Wu, W. Pisula, M. C. Haberecht, X. Feng, K. Mllen, Org. Lett. 2009, 11, 
56865689. 
[36] S. Kervyn, O. Fenwick, F. Di Stasio, Y. S. Shin, J. Wouters, G. Accorsi, S. 
Osella, D. Beljonne, F. Cacialli, D. Bonifazi, Chem. Eur. J. 2013, 19, 77717779. 
Appendix A 
APPENDIX A: 1H, 13C, 11B-NMR AND HRMS SPECTRA OF 
SELECTED MOLECULES 
Chapter 2 
1) B,B-Bis(2,6-dibromophenyl)-B-hydroxy-N,N,N-triphenyl-borazine. 
(2.29) 
Figure A.1: 500 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-29 in CDCl3. Residual peaks of ethyl acetate visible (4.12, 
2.05 and 1.26 ppm). 
Figure A.2: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-29 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.3: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 2-29 in CDCl3 (probe residual signal present from 10 to -10 
ppm). 
Figure A.4: ASAP+ HR-MS of 2-29. 
Appendix A 
2) B,B-Bis(2,3,5,6-tetrachlorophenyl)-B-hydroxy-N,N,N-triphenyl-
borazine (2-25c)
Figure A.5: 500 MHz 1H NMR of 2-25c in CDCl3. 
Figure A.6: 75 MHz 13C NMR of 2-25c in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.7: 160 MHz 11B NMR of 2-25c in CDCl3. 
Figure A.8: ASAP+ HR-MS of 2-25c. 
Appendix A 
3) 2',6'-Dimethyl-[1,1'-biphenyl]-4-amine (2-10) 
Figure A.9: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-10 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.10: 75 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-10 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.11: EI+ HR-MS of 2-10. 
Appendix A 
4)B,B,B-Tri[2,6-(dichloro)phenyl]-N,N,N-tri[4-(2,6-
dimethylphenyl)phenyl]borazine (2-26) 
Figure A.12: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-26 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.13: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-26 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.14: 128 MHz 11B-NMR of 2-26 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.15: AP+ HR-MS of 2-26. 
Appendix A 
5) B,B,B-Tri n-butyl-N,N,N-tri[4-(2,6-dimethylphenyl)phenyl]borazine (2-
Figure A.16: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-31 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.17: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-31 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.18: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 2-31 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.19: AP+ HR-MS of 2-31. 
Appendix A 
6) Synthesis of B,B,B-Tri[2,6-(difluoro)phenyl]-N,N,N-tri[4-(2,6-
dimethylphenyl)phenyl]borazine (2-27) 
Figure A.20: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-27 in CD2Cl2. 
Figure A.21: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-27 in CD2Cl2. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.22: 128 MHz 11B-NMR of 2-27 in CD2Cl2. 
Figure A.23: 376 MHz 19F-NMR of 2-27 in CD2Cl2. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.24: ES+ HR-MS of 2-27. 
Appendix A 
7) 2-8-14-Trixylyl-hexaphenyl borazinocoronene (2-1) 
Figure A.25: 400 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-1 in CD2Cl2. 
Figure A.26: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-1 in CD2Cl2. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.27: 128 MHz 11B-NMR of 2-1 in CD2Cl2. 
Figure A.28: LD+ HR-MS of 2-1. 
Appendix A 
8) Aminoboraneylboranediamine phenanthro[9,10,1,2,3-pqrst]pentaphene 
(2-33) 
Figure A.29: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-33 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.30: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-33 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.31: 128 MHz 11B-NMR of 2-33 in THF-d8. 
Figure A.32: ES- HR-MS of 2-33. 
Appendix A 
9) 3-Fluoro-2',6'-dimethyl-[1,1'-biphenyl]-4-amine (2-35) 
Figure A.33: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-35 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.34: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-35 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.35: EI+ HR-MS of 2-35. 
Appendix A 
10) Synthesis of B,B,B-Tri[2-fluorophenyl]-N,N,N-tri[2-fluoro-4-(2,6-
dimethylphenyl)phenyl]borazine (2-34) 
Figure A.36: 500 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-34 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.37: 125 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-34 in CDCl3 
Appendix A 
Figure A.38: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 2-34 in CDCl3 (probe residual signal present from 10 to -10 
ppm). 
Figure A.39: 376 MHz 19F-NMR of 2-34 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.40: AP+ HR-MS of 2-34. 
Appendix A 
11) 6,12-Bis(2,6-dimethylphenyl)-18-oxa-17b1,18a1-diaza-7b2,17b,18a-
triboradibenzo[fg,ij]phenanthro[9,10,1,2,3-pqrst]pentaphene (2-38) 
Figure A.41: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-38 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.42: 500 MHz 1H-1H COSY NMR of 2-38 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.43: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-38 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.44: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 2-38 in CDCl3 (probe residual signal present from 10 to -10 
ppm). 
Appendix A 
Figure A.45: EI+ HR-MS of 2-38. 
Appendix A 
12) Synthesis of B,B,B-Tri[2-fluorophenyl]-N,N,N-tri[2-
fluorophenyl]borazine (2-40) 
Figure A.46: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-40 in CD2Cl2. 
Figure A.47: 125 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-40 in THF-d8. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.48: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 2-40 in CD2Cl2. (probe residual signal present from 10 to -10 
ppm). 
Figure A.49: 376 MHz 19F-NMR of 2-40 in CD2Cl2. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.50: AP+ HR-MS of 2-40. 
Appendix A 
13) 3a2,6b2,12b2-triaza-3b2,9b2,15b2-
triborahexabenzo[bc,ef,hi,kl,no,qr]coronene (1-1) 
Figure A.51: LD+ HR-MS of 1-1. 
Appendix A 
14) B,B,B-[2,6-(Difluoro)phenyl]-N,N,N-tri[4-(tert-butyl) phenyl]-borazine 
(2-45) 
Figure A.52: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-45 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.53: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-45 in CD2Cl2. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.54: 128 MHz 11B-NMR of 2-45 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.55: 376 MHz 19F-NMR of 2-45 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.56: ES+ HR-MS of 2-45. 
Appendix A 
15) B,B,B-[2,6-(Difluoro)phenyl]-N,N,N-tri[4-(dodecyl) phenyl]-borazine 
(2-48) 
Figure A.57: 500 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-48 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.58: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-48 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.59: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 2-48 in CDCl3. (probe residual signal present from 10 to -10 
ppm). 
Figure A.60: ES+ HR-MS of 2-48. 
Appendix A 
16) (4-Bromo-3,5-difluorophenoxy)triisopropylsilane (2-56) 
Figure A.61: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-56 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.62: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-56 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.63: 376 MHz 19F-NMR of 2-56 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.64: EI+ HR-MS of 2-56. 
Appendix A 
17) B,B,B-[(3,5-Difluorophenoxy)triisopropylsilane]-N,N,N-tri[4-(2,6-
dimethylphenyl)phenyl]borazine (2-51) 
Figure A.65: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 2-51 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.66: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 2-51 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.67: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 2-51 in CDCl3 (probe residual signal present from 10 to -10 
ppm). 
Figure A.68: 376 MHz 19F-NMR of 2-51 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.69: ES+ HR-MS of 2-51. 
Appendix A 
CHAPTER 3  
(For 3-2 intermediates only 1H and 13C-NMR reported, HR-MS can be found in 
corresponding papers) 
18) 1,3,5-(4-Hydroxyphenyl)-2,4,6-phenylbenzene (3-3) 
Figure A.70: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-3 in MeOD. 
Figure A.71: 75 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-3 in MeOD. 
19) 1,3,5-(4-Trifluoromethansulphonylphenyl)-2,4,6-phenyl benzene (3-4) 
Appendix A 
Figure A.72: 500 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-4 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.73: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-4 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
20) 1,3,5-Tri(4-xylylphenyl)-2,4,6-triphenylbenzene (3-5) 
Figure A.74: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-5 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.75: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-5 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
21) 2,8,14-Trixylyl-hexabenzocoronene (3-2) 
Figure A.76: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-2 in CD2Cl2. 
Figure A.77: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-2 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.78: LD+ HR-MS of 3-2. 
Appendix A 
22) 5''-Phenyl-[1,1':2',1'':3'',1''':2''',1''''-quinquephenyl]-3,3''''-diol (3-10) 
Figure A.79: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-10 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.80: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-10 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.81: AP+ HR-MS of 3-10. 
Appendix A 
23) 5''-Phenyl-[1,1':2',1'':3'',1''':2''',1''''-quinquephenyl]-3,3''''-diyl 
bis(trifluoromethanesulfonate) (3-11) 
Figure A.82: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-11 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.83: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-11 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.84: AP+ HR-MS of 3-11. 
Appendix A 
24) 5''-Phenyl-[1,1':2',1'':3'',1''':2''',1''''-quinquephenyl]-3,3''''-Xylen (3-12) 
Figure A.85: 500 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-12 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.86: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-12 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.87: AP+ HR-MS of 3-12. 
Appendix A 
25) 6,12-Bis(2,6-dimethylphenyl)dibenzo[fg,ij]phenanthro[9,10,1,2,3-
pqrst]pentaphene (3-13) 
Figure A.88: 400 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-13 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.89: 100 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-13 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.90: ASAP+ HR-MS of 3-13. 
Appendix A 
26) 3'-Bromo-2,4',6-trimethyl-1,1'-biphenyl (3-19) 
Figure A.91: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-19 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.92: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-19 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
27) 4,4,5,5-Tetramethyl-2-(2',4,6'-trimethyl-[1,1'-biphenyl]-3-yl)-1,3,2-
dioxaborolane (3-20) 
Figure A.93: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-20 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.94: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-20 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
28) N,N-Diethyl-2'',6',6''-trimethyl-[1,1':3',1''-terphenyl]-2-carboxamide (3-
Figure A.95: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-22 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.96: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-22 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
29) 3-(2,6-Dimethylphenyl)phenanthren-9-ol (3-23) 
Figure A.97: 400 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-23 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.98: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-23 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.99: EI+ HR-MS of 3-23. 
Appendix A 
30) 3,15-Bis(2,6-dimethylphenyl)-18-phenyl-18H-
tetrabenzo[a,c,h,j]xanthenes (3-24) 
Figure A.100: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-24 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.101: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-24 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.102: AP+ HR-MS of 3-24. 
Appendix A 
31) 3,15-Bis(2,6-dimethylphenyl)-18-phenyl-18H-
tetrabenzo[a,c,h,j]xanthen-18-ol (3-25) 
Figure A.103: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-25 in CD2Cl2. 
Figure A.104: 100 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-25 in CD2Cl2. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.105: ES- HR-MS of 3-25. 
Appendix A 
32) 6,12-Bis(2,6-
dimethylphenyl)dibenzo[c,h]benzo[5,6]tetraceno[1,12,11,10-
jklmna]xanthen-18-ium tetrafluoro borate (3-27BF) 
Figure A.106: 400 MHz 1H-NMR of 3-27BF in CD2Cl2. 
Figure A.107: 500 MHz 1H-1H COSY NMR of 3-27BF in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.108: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 3-27BF in CD2Cl2/MeOD 1/1. 
Figure A.109: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 3-27BF in CD2Cl2. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.110: 376 MHz 19F-NMR of 3-27BF in CD2Cl2. 
Figure A.111: ES+ HR-MS of 3-27BF. 
Appendix A 
Chapter 4  
33) Characterization of 4-3 
Figure A.112: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 4-3 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.113: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 4-3 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.114: ES+ HR-MS of 4-3. 
Appendix A 
34) Characterization of 4-8
Figure A.115: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 4-8 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.116: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 4-8 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.117: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 4-8 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.118: AP+ HR-MS of 4-8. 
Appendix A 
35) Characterization of 4-9 
Figure A.119: 500 MHz 1H-NMR of 4-9 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.120: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 4-9 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.121: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 4-9 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.122: MALDI+ HR-MS of 4-9. 
Appendix A 
36) Characterization of 4-10 
Figure A.123: 500 MHz 1H-NMR of 4-10 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.124: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 4-10 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.125: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 4-10 in CDCl3 (probe residual signal present from 10 to -10 
ppm). 
Figure A.126: MALDI+ HR-MS of 4-10. 
Appendix A 
37) Characterization of 4-11 
Figure A.127: 500 MHz 1H-NMR of 4-11 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.128: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 4-11 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.129: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 4-11 in CDCl3 (probe residual signal present from 10 to -10 
ppm). 
Figure A.130: ASAP+ HR-MS of 4-11. 
Appendix A 
38) Characterization of 4-12 
Figure A.131: 500 MHz 1H-NMR of 4-12 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.132: MALDI+ HR-MS of 4-12. 
Appendix A 
39) Characterization of 1,2-Di([1,1'-biphenyl]-3-yl)hydrazine (4-16) 
Figure A.133: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 4-16 in CDCl3 (residual CH2Cl2 signal visible at 5.32 ppm). 
Figure A.134: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 4-16 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.135: ES+ HR-MS of 4-12. 
Appendix A 
40) Characterization of [1,1':2',1'':2'',1'''-Quaterphenyl]-4'',5'-diamine (4-17) 
Figure A.136: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 4-17 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.137: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 4-17 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.138: EI+ HR-MS of 4-17. 
Appendix A 
41) Characterization of 4-19 
Figure A.139: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 4-19 in CD2Cl2. 
Figure A.140: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 4-19 in CD2Cl2. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.141: 376 MHz 19F-NMR of 4-19 in CD2Cl2. 
Figure A.142: AP+ HR-MS of 4-19. 
Appendix A 
Chapter 5 
42) Characterization of B,B,B-Triethynyl-N,N,N-tri(phenyl)-borazine (5-
Figure A.143: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 5-2 in CD2Cl2. 
Figure A.144: 75 MHz 13C-NMR of 5-2 in CD2Cl2. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.145: 160 MHz 11B-NMR of 5-2 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.146: EI+ HR-MS of 5-2. 
Appendix A 
43) B,B,B-Tri(3',4'-diphenyl-1,1':2',1''-terphenyl)-N,N,N-tri(phenyl)-
borazine (5-4) 
Figure A.147: 500 MHz 1H-NMR of 5-4 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.148: 126 MHz 13C-NMR of 5-4 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.149: 224 MHz 11B-NMR of 5-4 in C6D6. 
Figure A.150: AP+ HR-MS of 5-4. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.151: 700 MHz 1H-NMR of 5-4 in C6D6. 
Figure A.152: 176 MHz 13C DEPTq-NMR of 5-4 in C6D6. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.153: 1H-13C HMSC-NMR of 5-4 in C6D6. 
Figure A.154: 1H-13C HQMC-NMR of 5-4 in C6D6. 
Appendix A 
44) Characterization of 1,4-Bis(phenylethynyl)benzene (5-7) 
Figure A.155: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 5-7 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.156: 100 MHz 1H-NMR of 5-7 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.157: ASAP+ HR-MS of 5-7. 
Appendix A 
45) Characterization of 2,2'-(1,4-Phenylene)bis(1-phenylethane-1,2-dione) 
(5-8) 
Figure A.158: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 5-8 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.159: 75 MHz 1H-NMR of 5-8 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.160: ASAP+ HR-MS of 5-8. 
Appendix A 
46) Characterization of 4,4'-([1,1'-Biphenyl]-4,4'-diyl)bis(2,3,5-
triphenylcyclopenta-2,4-dien-1-one) (5-10) 
Figure A.161: 300 MHz 1H-NMR of 5-10 in CDCl3. 
Figure A.162: 126 MHz 1H-NMR of 5-10 in CDCl3. 
Appendix A 
Figure A.163: AP+ HR-MS of 5-10. 
