Microsoft Word - Thesis_File_with_corrections_20_06_2019
Tropical legume trees and their 
soil-mineral microbiome: 
biogeochemistry and routes to 
enhanced mineral access 
A thesis submitted  
by Dimitar Zdravkov Epihov 
 in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the 
Degree of Doctor of Philosophy in the  
Department of Animal and Plant Sciences,  
University of Sheffield 
October 29th, 2018 
 Copyright by Dimitar Zdravkov Epihov, 2018. 
All rights reserved. 
Acknowledgements 
First and foremost, I would like to thank my academic superivising team including 
Professor David J. Beerling and Professor Jonathan R. Leake for their guidance and 
support throughout my PhD studies as well as the European Research Council (ERC) 
for funding my project.  
Secondly, I would like to thank my girlfriend, Gabriela, my parents, Zdravko 
and Mariyana, and my grandmother Gina, for always believing in me. My biggest 
gratitude goes for my girlfriend for always putting up with working ridiculous hours 
and for helping me during field work even if it meant getting stuck in the Australian 
jungle at night and stumbling across a well-grown python.   
 I would also want to express my thanks to my first ever Biology teacher Mrs 
Moskova for inspiring and nurturing the interest that grew to be a life-lasting 
passion, curiousity and love towards all things living.  
Lastly, I would like to thank Irene Johnson, our laboratory manager and senior 
technician for always been there for advice, help and general cheering up as well as 
all other great scientists and collaborators I have had the chance to talk to and work 
with during my PhD project.  
I devote this work to a future with more green in it.  
Dimitar  
October, 2018 
Introductory notes 
The structure of this work is according to the the new alternative thesis format 
approved by the Faculty of Science at The University of Sheffield (more information 
can be found at https://www.sheffield.ac.uk/rs/code/altformat). The alternative format 
entails chapters be written as part of published or pre-published journal articles.  
The Introduction chapter includes a paper titled N2-fixing tropical legume 
evolution: a contributor to enhanced weathering through the Cenozoic? published in 
the peer-reviewed journal Proceedings of the Royal Society: Biological Sciences in 
July, 2017 (free-access to the article is available online at the Royal Society website: 
http://rspb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/284/1860/20170370). Chapters 1, 2 and 
3 as well as the Discussion & Conclusions chapter include pre-publication work 
formatted according to chosen target journals and their specific requirements. 
All the laboratory experimental and computational work within this thesis was 
carried out by myself with the exception of fieldwork which included a certain amount 
of assistance from collaborators and my partner. The draft original version of each the 
five chapters were written by me with co-authors contributing to subsequent revisions 
during the editing process.  
To summarise the contents of this thesis briefly: the introduction discusses the 
evolution of the first legume-rich tropical forests in the early Cenozoic (58-42 Mya) 
and the effect they had on biogeochemical cycles in general and silicate rock 
weathering and climate in particular. This work puts forward a hypothesis that early 
Cenozoic forests rich in N2-fixing legumes caused enhanced weathering regimes 
globally, stimulating the drawdown of atmospheric CO2.  
Chapter 1 utilises a large-scale replicated weathering field study in Neotropical 
secondary forests in Panama rich in fixing legume trees demonstrating that N2-fixers 
exerted 2-fold greater silicate rock weathering than non-fixers linked to significant 
differences in soil acidity and belowground microbial community structure and 
function. 
Chapter 2 summarises our findings from another tropical system along a 
secondary forest chronosequence in the Australian Wet Tropics, showing that N2-
fixing and ectomycorrhizal monodominant Acacia celsa drives greater P and K-
specific weathering dissolution from basalt silicate rocks throughout the 
chronosequence. Highly nodulated Acacia trees were also linked to greater total basalt 
and dunite weathering rates than non-fixers. Analyses from chapters 1 and 2 employ 
Next-Generation sequencing technology and omics-driven approach in demonstrating 
a consistent effect of N2-fixing legume trees on their belowground microbiome in 
tropical forests that is that high inputs of fixed N are a strong determinant in 
functionally entraining the microbial community to high levels of mineral weathering. 
Consequently, this work also highlighted target candidate microbial genes and 
metabolic pathways linking those differences to enhanced weathering.  
In order to test some of the highlighted candidate weathering genes in vitro, the 
next study, described in detail in Chapter 3 deployed the large transposon-mutant 
collection of the tropical soil -proteobacterium Burkholderia thailandensis E264, 
selecting 11 mutant lines for further analysis. Data from replicated in vitro weathering 
experiments implicated several genes in the process of bacteria-mediated weathering. 
Further phylogenetic and taxonomic analyses of the soil pools of these genes indicated 
many elusive and uncultured bacterial lineages as carriers of those weathering genes 
thus highlighting their potential role in soil mineral weathering. This included the 
proposition and description of a new class within the Acidobacteria phylum, Ca. 
Acidipotentia, cl. nov.  
The final Discussion and Conclusion chapter covers meta-analyses of data from 
my original datasets as well as already published literature to establish the role of N2-
fixers in ecosystem succession beyond ther ecosystem N enrichment effects. The 
results from this chapter provide evidence for enhancements in acidification, soil 
lithotrophy, microbial respiration and anaerobic metabolism in soil beneath N2-fixers 
that may all converge in a second previously unrecognised ecosystem service carried 
by N2-fixers: that of enhanced weathering and subsequent increase in available nutrient 
stocks in such early successional systems. 
Thesis Contributions Note 
All the laboratory experimental and computational work within this thesis was 
carried out by myself with the exception of fieldwork which included a certain amount 
of assistance from collaborators and my partner. The draft original version of each the 
five chapters were written by me with co-authors contributing to subsequent revisions 
during the editing process. A chapter-specific breakdown:  
Chapter 1  D.Z.E. wrote the draft, carried out the analyses and conceived the 
hypothesis; all co-authors contributed to edits and revisions of the main manuscript.  
Chapter 2  D.Z.E. carried out the field and laboratory work and wrote the first 
draft; D.Z.E., D.J.B. and J.R.L. designed the experimental design; all co-authors 
contributed to edits and revisions of the main manuscript.  
Chapter 3  D.Z.E. and A.W.C. carried out the field work; D.Z.E. carried out 
the laboratory work and wrote the first draft; D.Z.E., D.J.B., A.W.C. and J.R.L. came 
up with the experimental design; all co-authors contributed to edits and revisions of 
the main manuscript. 
Chapter 4  D.Z.E. designed the experiment and carried out the experimental 
and statistical work related to it; D.Z.E wrote the first draft and D.J.B. and J.R.L have 
contributed to it with edits and comments.  
Chapter 5  D.Z.E. wrote the first draft and carried out the meta-analyses found 
within it; all co-authors contributed with comments.  
Signatures of co-authors: 
Dimitar Z. Epihov   
David J. Beerling 
Jonathan R. Leake 
Alexander W. Cheesman 
Sarah A. Batterman 
Lars O. Hedin  
Kristin Saltonstall  
Jefferson S. Hall  
Lucas A. Cernusak  
Lisa M. Smith  
Michael I. Bird 
Susan G. W. Laurance 
Contents 
1. Introduction: N2-fixing tropical legume evolution: a contributor to enhanced weathering 
through the Cenozoic? ... 7 
(Main Text) ... 8 
(Supplementary Information and Figures) 35 
2. Chapter 1: Legume-microbial interactions unlock mineral nutrients during tropical forest 
succession. 40 
 (Main Text).. 41 
 (Figures and Figure Text). 51 
 (Supplementary Information and Figures) 56 
3. Chapter 2: Multiple symbiont recruitments and nitrogen feedbacks govern enhanced 
mineral access in monodominant Acacia of Australian tropical forests. 64 
 (Main Text). 65 
 (Figures and Figure Text)... 82 
 (Supplementary Information and Figures).. 90 
4. Chapter 3: Metabolic and genetic basis of bacteria-driven mineral weathering and its 
 (Main Text)... 98 
 (Figures and Figure Text). 118 
5. Discussion and Conclusion: The biogeochemistry and belowground metagenomics of  
N2-fixers: in search of fixer effects beyond nitrogen enrichment. 123 
 (Main Text) 124 
 (Figures and Figure Text).. 139 
 (End). 147 
Introduction 
N2-fixing tropical legume evolution: a contributor to enhanced weathering 
through the Cenozoic? 
Dimitar Z. Epihov1, Sarah A. Batterman2, Lars O. Hedin3, Jonathan R. Leake1, Lisa M. Smith1 and 
David J. Beerling1 
1Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK 
2School of Geography and Priestley International Centre for Climate, University of Leeds, Leeds 
LS2 9JT, UK 
3Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 
08544, USA 
Keywords: tropical forests, N2-fixation, legume trees, rock weathering, CO2 sequestration, 
Cenozoic 
Fossil and phylogenetic evidence indicates legume-rich modern tropical forests replaced 
Late Cretaceous palm-dominated tropical forests across four continents during the early 
Cenozoic (58-42 Myr ago).  Tropical legume trees can transform ecosystems via their 
ability to fix atmospheric N2 and higher leaf N compared to non-legumes (35-65%) but 
it is unclear how their evolutionary rise contributed to silicate weathering, the long-term 
sink for atmospheric CO2.  Here we hypothesize that the increasing abundance of N2-
fixing legumes in tropical forests amplified silicate weathering rates by increased input 
of fixed N to terrestrial ecosystems via interrelated mechanisms including increasing 
microbial respiration and soil acidification, and stimulating forest net primary 
productivity.  We suggest the high CO2 early Cenozoic atmosphere further amplified 
legume weathering.  Evolution of legumes with high weathering rates was likely driven 
by their high demand for phosphorus and micronutrients required for N2-fixation and 
nodule formation. 
1.  Introduction 
Biogeochemical weathering of silicate rocks (e.g., basalt, andesite, dunite) is a key process in 
the carbon cycle that acts as a long-term sink of atmospheric CO2 [1].  Consumption of CO2 
by weathering is small (0.10-0.12 Gt C yr-1) on an annual basis [2] compared to carbon 
transfers in photosynthesis or respiration.  However, net CO2 consumption by weathering is 
the dominant sink in the global carbon balance thus controlling atmospheric CO2 and climate 
patterns at scales of millennia or longer [2].   
Numerous field studies have shown that plants accelerate rock weathering through a suite of 
increasingly well understood processes [3] (Supplementary Figure 1).  By increasing the soil 
pools of H+ ions, carbonic (H2CO3, from plant or soil respiration) and chelating organic 
(RCOO-) acids, plants and their symbiotic partners cause the weathering release of base 
cations (Supplementary Figure 1) that ultimately lead to the formation of marine carbonates 
on the seafloor [2].  The rise of the first forests during the Devonian period (416-359 Myr 
ago) [4] likely accelerated silicate weathering, contributing to the drawdown of atmospheric 
CO2 and establishing the basic features of the modern land carbon cycle. Today, forests are 
thought to enhance rock weathering by a factor of 2-10 compared to unvegetated catchments 
During the Cenozoic (last 65 million years), the global biome transformation from palm-
dominated late Cretaceous forests to the highly productive and carbon-rich tropical forests 
that exist today, discussed in more detail in the next section, included the rise of trees in the 
ecologically important legume family (Leguminosae, or legumes). Legumes dominate large 
areas of modern tropical forests in both total number of tree species and in abundance within 
local forests [6].  
 Four lines of evidence suggest that the evolution of the N2-fixing rhizobial symbiosis 
(in which dinitrogen-fixing rhizobial bacteria are housed within specialized root nodules [7]) 
occured as legumes radiated and spread in the early Cenozoic [8]. First, a whole-genome 
duplication event in the Papilionoideae clade, molecularly dated to 58 Myr ago, likely created 
the gene copies necessary for nodulation and N2 fixation to evolve [9]. Second, many modern 
rainforest N2-fixing legume trees are nodulated by -rhizobia in the Burkholderia group [10]. 
Horizontal transfer of symbiotic nod genes between -rhizobia and South American 
Burkholderia is dated to 60-50 Myr ago [11], indicating that compatible N2-fixing host trees 
may have appeared at that time. Third, this molecular evidence is further strengthened by the 
presence of  fossil legume genera recorded in early Cenozoic deposits with present-day 
relatives that are capable of symbiotic N2 fixation (Supplementary Figure 2), with our 
synthesis indicating that the majority of fossil taxa identified at the genus level and recovered 
from the Palaeocene and Eocene belong to N2-fixing genera (25 taxa ) relative to non-fixing 
(16 taxa). Fourth, early Cenozoic sites in the Bighorn Basin show an increased proportion of 
legume fossil leaves recovered from 56 Myr old strata correlating with intensification of insect 
damage, a pattern consistent with the influx of fresh, fixed N into the ecosystem [12].  
Fossil genera, the symbiotic status of their nearest living relatives (Supplementary Figure 2), 
evidence of increased insect damage in the fossil record in likely response to high foliar N 
and molecular clock dating therefore appear to indicate that N2-fixation and diverse 
mycorrhizal symbioses have evolved in  legumes by the early Cenozoic.  
Here, we review the rise of N2-fixing legume-rich tropical forests early in the Cenozoic and 
propose a new testable hypothesis for how the evolution of this biome may have strengthened 
the long-term carbon cycle feedbacks that helped shape Earths CO2 and climate history in 
the Cenozoic and today.  
2.  Global rise of nitrogen-fixing legume-rich tropical forests 
Late Cretaceous tropical floras were dominated by widely distributed palm communities from 
Africa to South America, a floristic region known as the Palmae Province [13],[14]. 
Communities in both the Paleo- and Neotropics contained abundant palms, including those 
similar to extant Nypa palms and suggestive of coastal intertidal habitats similar to mangrove 
forests, while other areas harboured palm-dominated dry forest communities. Unlike modern 
tropical forests, both of these communities were deprived of abundant dicot arboreal flora 
[13],[14].  In Africa, leaf fossil and pollen evidence indicate that the dominant palm lineages 
began to decline around the Cretaceous-Paleogene boundary [15] and completely disappeared 
in the fossil record after the late Miocene (23 Myr ago)[14].  Similarly, palm abundance in 
Neotropical areas decreased in the early Cenozoic, although palms remain an important 
element of these forests today [16]. The Palmae Province was replaced in Africa and 
assimilated in South America by the rise of modern tropical forests during the early Cenozoic. 
The earliest record of modern Neotropical forests  found in Colombia and dated to the late 
Palaeocene (58 Myr ago)  indicates that the flora resembled the current day composition of 
plant families with abundant fossilized dicot and palm leaves, including numerous legumes 
[17]. Pollen records from Africa similarly show the rise of modern families of dicot trees 
following the Palaeocene [14],[15].  
Pollen and leaf macrofossils indicate that legume taxa have comprised a key component of 
tropical forests since the early Cenozoic (Figure 1a, Supplementary Figure 2).  While it is 
difficult to translate a taxons abundance in the fossil record to abundance in a forest, the 
persistent recovery of legume pollen, leaves, flowers, fruits and wood indicate that legume 
trees were present and widespread in the flora of the Americas and Africa. The following 
observations can be drawn from early Cenozoic records: (1) legume leaves made up 21-73% 
of all fossilized leaves in South and North American forest assemblages[18],[19]; (2) legumes 
comprised 14-33% of all recorded taxa across tropical forests (Figure 1)[20],[21],[22], (3) 
single legume tree species represented up to 7% of all fossil leaves (>200 leaves) in species-
diverse South American dry forests[23],[24]; (4) one legume tree species (the non-fixing 
Cynometra) formed a monodominant forest in Africa 46 Myr ago [21], with further 
monodominance indicated by the presence of Eocene fossils that belong to modern 
monodominant genera such as the non-fixing Brachystegia and Julbernardia (Eurasian 
deposits) and the non-fixing Peltogyne (South American formations) (Supplementary Figure 
2); (5) rainforests with abundant presence of caesalpinioid and mimosoid (many modern 
representatives of which are N2-fixing [25]) legumes were recorded in central Africa [14]; 
and, (6) tropical and temperate N2-fixing  legume trees may have coexisted during warm 
Eocene climates in higher latitude boreotropical forests (England, Hungary, North 
America)[26].   
Fossil evidence, therefore, indicates that early Cenozoic tropical forests (wet, dry and 
boreotropical) had evolved abundant legumes across continents as well as latitudes (Figure 
1a). The timing of the early Cenozoic assembly of legume-rich tropical forests (58 - 42 Myr 
ago) as documented by the fossil record is similar to the molecular clock dated 
diversification events in the legume clade (Figure 1b; for recent changes in legume 
taxonomy see [28]).Beneath these emerging tropical forests were substantial areas of 
unweathered rocks in tropical India [29], in South America, including the southeast part of 
the Amazon basin, and in the Amazon deltaic area [30] coinciding with peaks in terrestrial 
weathering (Figure 1b) as evident from the recovery of highly weathered palaeosols [31]. 
3.  Mechanisms of N2-fixing legume-driven enhanced weathering 
Here, we propose that the rise of N2-fixing legume trees enhanced weathering through a series 
of processes associated with three abilities especially well developed in this group of trees: 
(1) to fix atmospheric N2, (2) to build disproportionately N-rich leaf tissue, and (3) to stimulate 
the primary production in ecosystems by redistributing fixed nitrogen to the soil and to 
neighboring trees.  
First, nitrogen-fixing legumes have the ability to fix nitrogen at high rates in natural 
ecosystems [32].  Over time, fixers bring in substantial quantities of nitrogen and can provide 
the largest natural source of new nitrogen to ecosystems [33]. Soil nitrogen is high and nitrate 
and denitrification losses large (exceeding or rivaling many temperate forests exposed to 
nitrogen deposition) in tropical forests that harbor nitrogen fixers [32]. In a survey across 55 
tropical forests, these systems naturally sustained loss rates of 4-6 kg N/ha nitrate, 6-10 kg 
N/ha of total dissolved nitrogen, and 4-5 kg N denitrified; when corrected for low levels of 
atmospheric nitrogen deposition, these rates could only be explained by fixation [34]. 
Second, N2-fixing legumes contain substantially higher leaf nitrogen than non-fixing tree 
species [35]. We performed a meta-analysis of 31 studies encompassing 561 tropical tree 
species (n = 680 measurements) to evaluate the nitrogen content of N2-fixing and non-fixing 
trees in natural forests and plantations across 22 different tropical regions (Figure 2a,b). Our 
analysis shows that, despite considerable variation across sites, N2-fixers exhibit higher mean 
leaf N content than non-fixers (by 35% in natural tropical forests and by 65% in tropical 
forestry plantations) and non-fixing legumes (by 21%). These findings are consistent with a 
study of leaf nitrogen across Amazonian tropical forests that also reported nitrogen-fixing 
legumes had higher leaf nitrogen content than both non-fixers as a whole and non-fixing 
legumes [36]. 
Third, this nitrogen-rich leaf tissue would cause increased input of N-rich compounds 
including proteins and amino acids to soils via litterfall.  Such increased N input, in turn, 
would enrich soils in N and likely cause higher rates of productivity for non-fixing as well as 
N2-fixing trees. Evidence for such a major ecosystem impact comes from recent field studies: 
N2-fixing legumes provided ~50% of the nitrogen required for early growth of Panamanian 
secondary rainforests, supported rapid carbon accumulation in biomass of both fixers and 
non-fixers [37] and enhanced soil nitrogen [38] during periods of nitrogen limitation. Levels 
of N2-fixation in early Cenozoic fixers are hard to establish empirically but indirect evidence 
of greater insect damage from fossil leaves together with greater palatability and protein 
content of N2-fixing trees [12] support the assumption that ancient N2-fixers were capable of 
generating high N foliage. 
We suggest these three characteristics of N2-fixing legumes likely entrain a suite of direct and 
indirect mechanisms that can enhance rates of rock weathering, as discussed below. 
(a) N2-fixing legume litter decomposition and microbial respiration  
Litterfall and the decomposition of protein-enriched biomass would ultimately increase the 
flux of new fixed N into several linked soil processes (soil respiration, ammonification, 
nitrification) and pools (soil organic matter, dissolved organic nitrogen). The input of new 
nitrogen, in turn, would trigger several weathering-related mechanisms (Figure 2d).  
First, the low C/N ratio of N2-fixing  legume litter implies fast decomposition, greater 
microbial respiration, and greater CO2 production than non-legume litter [39],[40]. During 
decomposition, the majority of N-rich leaf tissue and its amino acids, amino sugars and other 
N-rich monomers will undergo ammonification and nitrification. Decomposition also 
generates organic acids and faster decomposition rates may facilitate passing the organic acid 
concentration threshold necessary to drive mineral weathering [41].  
Second, N-rich organic matter can itself stimulate soil microbial activity and respiration. 
Although C inputs would have similar effects regardless of whether derived from 
decomposition of leguminous N-rich or non-leguminous N-poor litter, the lack of sufficient 
N can ultimately downregulate microbial respiration specifically under high CO2 regimes 
[42], such as those seen during the early Cenozoic (Figure 1b). Addition of N2-fixing legume-
derived N-rich litter may therefore have a dual function. First, it will fuel microbial respiration 
with the energy stored in the C-H and C-C bonds of its carbohydrate component. Second, 
because of its abundance in N and protein, it will promote microbial respiration by alleviating 
any existing N limitation over microbial metabolism. In situ studies in tropical soils confirm 
augmented rates of microbial respiration in the combined glucose and N treatment compared 
to the glucose treatment alone [43].  
Third, the dissolved CO2 generated by microbial respiration forms carbonic acid (H2CO3) 
which, in turn, acts as a major weathering agent [44](Supplementary Figure 1). Increased 
microbial respiration also positively correlates with the production of chelating organic acids, 
e.g., gluconic acid, a secreted by-product of microbial catabolism [45]. 
(b) N2-fixing legume-driven soil acidification  
Ammonia generated by ammonification during litter decomposition can undergo nitrification. 
In the process, each molecule of ammonia converted to nitrate generates three by-product H+ 
ions. Although these H+ ions are typically counterbalanced by plant secretion of anions 
(bicarbonate or organic acids) for each acquired NO3-, nitrate leaching can uncouple this 
relationship and promote the buildup of H+ in the soil. High levels of N2-fixation can exceed 
the rates at which N is immobilized within the system, resulting in enhanced NO3- leaching 
(as discussed above) and enhanced transport of H+ to deeper soil horizons (where contents of 
unweathered minerals may be high).  Tree ring data from tropical fossil woods indicate that 
climate seasonality was largely similar between early Cenozoic and modern tropical forests 
[46] supporting the view that nitrification patterns as affected by soil moisture/dryness [47] 
likely were comparable.  
During the leaching of NO3- large amounts of counterbalancing cations (Ca2+, Mg2+, K+) 
released by cation exchange reactions with nitrification-generated H+ are leached too, 
resulting in the decline of soil cation exchange capacity and soil pH buffering capacities. This 
phenomenon has been recorded for N2-fixing forests of Alnus rubra in which large inputs of 
fixed N caused leaching, decreased cation concentration and increased soil acidification [48].  
Despite the tight N budget of most tropical forest systems, substantial levels of nitrate leaching 
still occurs [32] suggesting that similar mechanisms likely operate in tropical forests rich in 
N2-fixing legumes. In addition, because of their N2-fixation, fixers tend to acquire lower 
relative amounts of negatively charged ions such as NO3 and subsequently extrude greater 
amounts of H+ to balance increased internal relative concentration of positively charged ions 
[49].   
Consequently, pronounced soil acidification has been recorded in various N2-fixing species 
from herbs [49],[50] to trees and shrubs of temperate forest [51],[52] and tropical rainforest 
[38] areas. Recent analysis of tropical rainforests at four Neotropical locations revealed that 
forests rich in N2-fixers exhibited increased soil acidity (pH 4.1) and lower Ca2+ and Mg2+ 
concentrations than forests poor in N2-fixing  legumes (pH 5.2) [53].  N2-fixing legume-driven 
acidification can promote weathering by acid attack (acidolysis) of the mineral lattice 
(Supplementary Figure 1) but also by depleting soil cations through cation exchange, thus 
shifting the equilibrium towards further mineral dissolution.  
(c) N2-fixing legume-driven stimulation of net primary productivity (NPP)  
Ultimately, inorganic forms of fixed N are acquired from the soil solution by roots stimulating 
the N input into biomass, including that of neighboring non-fixing trees. For instance, the 
non-fixing tropical trees Peschiera, Psidium [54], Eucalyptus [55] and Terminalia [56] all 
exhibited increased foliar N levels in N2-fixing legume-rich neighbourhoods compared to 
legume-poor settings. As foliar N correlates with increased levels of crude leaf protein, 
including the photosynthetic enzyme RUBISCO [57], the photosynthetic rates of individual 
trees and the NPP of such mixed fixer/non-fixer forests may be up-regulated. Indeed, N2-
fixing legumes exhibit up to 2-fold greater photosynthetic rates than the less Nrich leaves of 
non-fixing trees in Zimbabwe [58]. Similarly, non-fertilized mixed non-fixer/N2-fixer forestry 
plantations reveal augmented NPP rates compared to non-fixing forests in Brazil and Puerto 
Rico [59],[60].  
 Fossil evidence supports N2-fixing legume-driven N-fertilization on productivity of 
tropical ecosystems.  Presumed nitrogen-fixing legume-dominated assemblages exhibited 
insect damage (linked to higher leaf nitrogen content) spread across fossil taxa relative to 
systems with fewer legumes in which foliar damage was more concentrated on legume leaves 
[12]. This observation indicates that as legume domination was established, N redistribution 
triggered by the input of N-rich litter increased N levels of neighbouring non-legumes (as 
observed in modern systems). The source of this N buffering effect is better explained by 
legumes capable of N2-fixatio n than non-fixing legumes because the patterns are consistent 
with the influx of new fixed N to the system.  
Given that some canopy photosynthate from highly productive N2-fixing legume-rich forests 
will be allocated to symbiotic mycorrhizal fungi, the mycelial networks of these fungi that 
grow in intimate contact with mineral grains, may drive enhanced rock weathering and 
inorganic nutrient release via chelation, carbonation and acidolysis (Supplementary Figure 
1)[63]. Greater gross primary production (GPP) and its related NPP rates also correlate with 
greater root respiration (with associated production of carbonic acid) and organic acid 
leaching, which promotes further weathering [63] (Supplementary Figure 1). N2-fixing 
legume-enhanced forest NPP can also increase the demand for nutrients and thus further 
necessitate more extensive soil exploration via roots and mycorrhizal fungi and eventually 
enhanced rock weathering. Therefore, increased N inputs could indirectly increase rock 
weathering via stimulation of rainforest NPP in legume-rich communities compared to Nypa 
and other late Cretaceous palm forests as well as to legume-poor early Cenozoic analogues.  
(d) Accessory mechanisms of N2-fixing legume-driven weathering  
The unique ability of legumes (including many rainforest N2-fixing  legume trees [64],[65]) 
to synthesize and exude isoflavonoids [66] may also have some impact on weathering rates.  
Isoflavonoids enhance P and Fe solubilization from the mineral vivianite by acting as soil 
chelators (Supplementary Figure 1) as well as by decreasing organic acid decomposition [67]. 
Comparison between the estimated low-molecular organic acid exudation by lowland tropical 
rainforest trees (~25 g C g-1 DW root h-1) [68] and isoflavonoid exudation of the N2-fixer 
Lupinus albus (~31 g C g-1 DW root h-1) [69] (see Supplementary Information for detailed 
calculations) suggests that isoflavonoids could contribute to the pool of plant-derived 
chelating agents in legume-rich forest soils.  
Isoflavonoids are crucial in establishing the N2-fixing  legume-rhizobial symbiosis by 
enabling both attraction and priming of rhizobial partners [70]. They attract larger soil 
rhizobial populations [71] of nodulation-competent strains of Burkholderia, Rhizobium, and 
Mesorhizobium  members of all of these genera have been shown to exert strong chelating 
activities [72]. Soil pH, C, N and C/N ratio are also important determinants of microbial 
community structure [73]. Finally, legume-mediated changes in soil chemistry may change 
microbial community of the mineralosphere selecting for nitrophilic and acidophilic 
bacterial taxa. 
4.  N2-fixing legume-rich forest responses to a CO2-rich early Cenozoic atmosphere  
The rise of N2-fixing legume-rich tropical forests during the early Cenozoic coincides with 
elevated atmospheric CO2 concentrations, with potential feedbacks on primary production 
and weathering (Figure 1b, Figure 3).  Evidence for the mechanisms that may govern this 
potential feedback comes from Free Air CO2 Enrichment (FACE) experiments. In the Oak 
Ridge, Tennessee, FACE experiment the non-fixing, AM Liquidambar styraciflua trees 
showed a 24% increase in NPP during the first 6 years of exposure to elevated CO2 [74].  
However, over the next 5 years the positive CO2 enrichment effect decreased to +9% in 11-
year old stands as ecosystem N stocks declined [74], suggesting progressive soil N-limitation 
on tree NPP in the long-term under high CO2 [74],[75]. N2-fixing legumes may mitigate this 
N-limitation mechanism under a high CO2 atmosphere because N-limitation would favour 
recruitment of N2-fixing legumes and/or upregulate their fixation rates [76],[77].  Fossil 
evidence suggests that N2-fixing legumes may increase in abundance under such conditions. 
During the transient climate warming event across the Palaeocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum 
(PETM; 55.8 Myr ago) that is linked to a rise in atmospheric CO2 and continental weathering 
regimes [78], the abundance of fossilized leguminous leaf specimens increased to 73% and 
then declined to 21% post-PETM in the Bighorn Basin, US [20].  Further evidence from 
PETM sites dominated by legumes corroborates extensive N2-fixation capacity increasing 
nitrogen availability to the system (as discussed above) [12].  
Physiologically, elevated CO2 can promote nodulation and N2-fixation [79],[80],[81], 
mycorrhization [82] and photosynthetic rates, and therefore may allow N2-fixing legume 
productivity to increase proportionally more in response to CO2 than non-legumes [79],[81].  
Furthermore, nodules represent additional sinks exchanging the increased flux of assimilates 
for fixed N thus curtailing the photosynthetic acclimation to elevated CO2 when unconstrained 
by other factors [83], allowing higher photosynthetic rates to persist. Those effects could 
promote N2-fixer recruitment, up-regulated N2-fixation rates and greater dominance at high 
CO2 concentrations [84]. A FACE experiment at Oak Ridge analyzed the CO2 response of 
over 2000 seedlings from 14 different temperate tree species.  After 5 years, the N2-fixing 
legume Robinia pseudoacacia exhibited an order of magnitude higher biomass response than 
all of the non-fixing angiosperm trees [85].  Controlled environment pot-based CO2-
enrichment experiments indicate that the photosynthesis and growth responses of nodulated 
N2-fixing Leguminosae rainforest trees were significantly greater than that of non-leguminous 
species investigated [86].  Although there are clear limitations in extrapolating from these 
studies to legumes of early Cenozoic tropical forests, the mechanistic basis of the CO2 
response  linked to alleviation of N-limitation  would still hold. 
Based on these findings, we conceptualize that different feedback loops operated between 
non-legume and N2-fixing legume forests, atmospheric CO2 and climate in the Cenozoic 
(Figure 3).  In non-fixing forests like those that existed prior to legume evolution or in legume-
poor tropical forests of the early Cenozoic, increased atmospheric CO2 would stimulate NPP 
until available soil resources  likely N and P in many locations  are exhausted (Figure 3a).  
Progressive N-limitation could therefore uncouple the standard relationship between NPP, 
CO2 and weathering [87] in non-legume forests. In contrast, however, in legume-rich forests, 
progressive N limitation would likely further promote recruitment of N2 fixers and the up-
regulation of N2 fixation rates (Figure 3a), as observed in modern N-limited rainforests [37]. 
This could allow NPP to respond to increasing CO2 and help promote continued weathering 
(Figure 3b). Additionally, biological weathering processes are strengthened by inputs of N-
rich legume litter, and associated downstream processes. Combined this evidence indicate 
that in CO2-rich conditions, the significant role of legumes in maintaining enhanced 
weathering regimes in early tropical forests may be amplified.  
5.  Evolutionary drivers of enhanced weathering by N2-fixing legumes 
Central to our feedback analyses (Figure 3) is the idea that N2-fixing  legumes are associated 
with higher weathering rates than non-legume trees. This effect, in turn, may have evolved in 
response to a disproportionately high demand for phosphorus (P), molybdenum (Mo) and iron 
(Fe) across legume taxa. P and Mo have been identified as potentially limiting factors of N2 
fixation within tropical forests [88],[89]. These limitations may occur because the most 
common type of nitrogenases involved in symbiotic N2-fixation requires a Fe/Mo complex 
acting as a cofactor [90] while high P intake accommodates for enhanced production of 
energy-rich metabolites (e.g., ATP) and membranes during nodule organogenesis [91]. 
Linked to the likely greater P demand driven by higher rates of growth, some but not all N2-
fixing legumes may have higher foliar P levels than non-fixing trees (Supplementary Table 
1). Fe is also required for production of leghaemoglobin in nodules for oxygen binding [92]. 
Fe is very abundant in tropical soils but it is highly insoluble. Most P in soils is also insoluble 
in complexes with Al- and Fe-bearing secondary minerals, and fresh Mo and P inputs 
originate from weathering of otherwise plant-unavailable mineral sources. Both the 
dissolution of insoluble P and Fe and the release of mineral-bound Mo rely upon the same 
weathering mechanisms that include chelation and acidolysis [93] (Supplementary Figure 1). 
Aluminium and iron phosphate minerals such as variscite and vivianite, respectively, dissolve 
faster at pH<6, a process exacerbated by organic acids[93],[94].  
Overall, the processes of N2 fixation and nodule formation require an array of sparingly 
soluble (P, Fe) or scarce soil minerals (Mo). This observation suggests that the mechanisms 
of enhanced weathering overlap with those driving acquisition of elements essential for N2-
fixing legumes. It provides a mechanism that would promote the evolution of adaptive 
strategies in tropical legumes leading to enhanced weathering and thereby unlocking sparingly 
soluble limiting nutrients. Our hypothesized mechanisms that relate N2-fixing  legume 
functioning to weathering rates are suitable for direct investigation in the field and lab and 
future studies will hopefully further elucidate the relative importance of each of the 
mechanisms of the hereby proposed hypothesis.  
6. Conclusions 
Fossils and molecular dating suggest that a worldwide shift from palm-dominated 
communities to modern tropical forests occurred early in the Cenozoic and involved the 
development of N2-fixing legume-rich and symbiotically diverse communities. Based on our 
analyses of potential effects on forest ecosystem biogeochemical C and N cycling, we propose 
that the increasing abundance of N2-fixing legumes in tropical forests amplified weathering 
rates through several inteconnected pathways. Firstly, N2-fixing legumes increased soil inputs 
of N-rich organic matter (by an estimated 35-65% based on modern analogues) which can 
promote microbial respiration and carbonation as well as progressive soil acidification 
resulting from leaching and compensatory H+ extrusion. Subsequently, increased N inputs 
may have fuelled greater N availability stimulating forest NPP thus driving further 
carbonation, organic acid chelation and rhizospheric weathering activities. Lastly, exudation 
of isoflavonoids unique to legumes could have provided an additional source of chelating 
activities that cause rock weathering. Together with soil acidification and decreasing C/N 
ratios these effects could have indirectly driven shifts in the weathering-potential of the soil 
microbial community.  
We suggest the global evolution of tropical forests rich in N2-fixing legumes in the early 
Cenozoic in concert with abiotic drivers, including reduced subduction of oceanic crust and 
the rise of the Himalayas/Tibetan plateau [29],[95], could have driven enhanced weathering 
regimes over large pantropical areas with consequent feedbacks on global climate 
stabilization. Furthermore, N2-fixing legumes help maintain the NPP response to atmospheric 
CO2 concentration. In an evolutionary context, tropical N2-fixing legumes appear to enhance 
rock weathering as a possible adaptation to unlock previously unavailable P, Mo and Fe 
mineral sources, thus alleviating limitations on N2 fixation processes. 
Authors contributions. D.Z.E., S.B., L.H. and D.J.B conceived the review; D.E. compiled 
the first draft; all authors contributed to revisions of the paper. 
Funding. D.Z.E. is supported by an ERC Advanced Grant awarded to D.J.B. (CDREG, 
322998). S.B. was supported by a U.K. Natural Environment Research Council (grant 
NE/M019497/1) and a Climate Mitigation Initiative Young Investigator Fellowship (with 
funding from BP). 
References 
1. Pagani, M., Caldeira, K., Berner, R. and Beerling, D.J., 2009. The role of terrestrial plants in limiting 
atmospheric CO2 decline over the past 24 million years. Nature, 460(7251), p.85.  
2. Goudie, A.S. and Viles, H.A., 2012. Weathering and the global carbon cycle: Geomorphological 
perspectives. Earth-Science Reviews, 113(1-2), pp.59-71. 
3. Taylor, L.L., Leake, J.R., Quirk, J., Hardy, K., Banwart, S.A. and Beerling, D.J., 2009. Biological 
weathering and the longterm carbon cycle: integrating mycorrhizal evolution and function into the current 
paradigm. Geobiology, 7(2), pp.171-191. 
4. Algeo, T.J. and Scheckler, S.E., 1998. Terrestrial-marine teleconnections in the Devonian: links 
between the evolution of land plants, weathering processes, and marine anoxic events. Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological Sciences, 353(1365), pp.113-130.  
5. Moulton, K.L., West, J. and Berner, R.A., 2000. Solute flux and mineral mass balance approaches to 
the quantification of plant effects on silicate weathering. American Journal of Science, 300(7), pp.539-570.  
6. Ter Steege, H., Pitman, N.C., Phillips, O.L., Chave, J., Sabatier, D., Duque, A., Molino, J.F., Prvost, 
M.F., Spichiger, R., Castellanos, H. and Von Hildebrand, P., 2006. Continental-scale patterns of canopy tree 
composition and function across Amazonia. Nature, 443(7110), p.444. 
7. Dilworth, M.J., James, E.K., Sprent, J.I. and Newton, W.E. eds., 2008. Nitrogen-fixing leguminous 
symbioses (Vol. 7). Springer Science & Business Media.  
8. Lavin, M., Herendeen, P.S. and Wojciechowski, M.F., 2005. Evolutionary rates analysis of 
Leguminosae implicates a rapid diversification of lineages during the tertiary. Systematic biology, 54(4), 
pp.575-594.  
9. Werner, G.D., Cornwell, W.K., Sprent, J.I., Kattge, J. and Kiers, E.T., 2014. A single evolutionary 
innovation drives the deep evolution of symbiotic N 2-fixation in angiosperms. Nature Communications, 5, 
p.4087. 
10. Barrett, C.F. and Parker, M.A., 2005. Prevalence of Burkholderia sp. nodule symbionts on four 
mimosoid legumes from Barro Colorado Island, Panama. Systematic and Applied Microbiology, 28(1), pp.57-
11. Walker, R., Agapakis, C.M., Watkin, E. and Hirsch, A.M., 2015. Symbiotic nitrogen fixation in 
legumes: perspectives on the diversity and evolution of nodulation by Rhizobium and Burkholderia 
species. Biological nitrogen fixation, 2, pp.913-923.  
12. Currano, E.D., Laker, R., Flynn, A.G., Fogt, K.K., Stradtman, H. and Wing, S.L., 2016. 
Consequences of elevated temperature and pCO2 on insect folivory at the ecosystem level: perspectives from 
the fossil record. Ecology and evolution, 6(13), pp.4318-4331.  
13. Vajda, V. and Bercovici, A., 2012. Palynostratigraphy of the Cretaceous-Paleogene mass-extinction 
interval of the Southern Hemisphere. Dcngxu zzh, 36(2), pp.153-164.  
14. Maley, J., 1996. The African rain forestmain characteristics of changes in vegetation and climate 
from the Upper Cretaceous to the Quaternary. Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Section B: 
Biological Sciences, 104, pp.31-73. 
15. Jacobs, B.F., 2004. Palaeobotanical studies from tropical Africa: relevance to the evolution of forest, 
woodland and savannah biomes. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: 
Biological Sciences, 359(1450), pp.1573-1583.  
16. Burnham, R.J. and Johnson, K.R., 2004. South American palaeobotany and the origins of neotropical 
rainforests. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London. Series B: Biological 
Sciences, 359(1450), pp.1595-1610. 
17. Wing, S.L., Herrera, F., Jaramillo, C.A., Gmez-Navarro, C., Wilf, P. and Labandeira, C.C., 2009. 
Late Paleocene fossils from the Cerrejn Formation, Colombia, are the earliest record of Neotropical 
rainforest. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(44), pp.18627-18632.  
18. Jaramillo, C., Ochoa, D., Contreras, L., Pagani, M., Carvajal-Ortiz, H., Pratt, L.M., Krishnan, S., 
Cardona, A., Romero, M., Quiroz, L. and Rodriguez, G., 2010. Effects of rapid global warming at the 
Paleocene-Eocene boundary on neotropical vegetation. Science, 330(6006), pp.957-961.  
19. Wing, S.L., Herrera, F., Jaramillo, C.A., Gmez-Navarro, C., Wilf, P. and Labandeira, C.C., 2009. 
Late Paleocene fossils from the Cerrejn Formation, Colombia, are the earliest record of Neotropical 
rainforest. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 106(44), pp.18627-18632.  
20. Currano, E.D., Labandeira, C.C. and Wilf, P., 2010. Fossil insect folivory tracks paleotemperature for 
six million years. Ecological Monographs, 80(4), pp.547-567.  
21. Cantrill, D.J., Bamford, M.K., Wagstaff, B.E. and Sauquet, H., 2013. Early Eocene fossil plants from 
the Mwadui kimberlite pipe, Tanzania. Review of palaeobotany and palynology, 196, pp.19-35.  
22. Ettingshausen, C.B., 1879. III. Report on Phyto-Palontological investigations of the fossil Flora of 
Sheppey. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 29(196-199), pp.388-396. 
23. Wilf, P., Johnson, K.R., Cuneo, N.R., Smith, M.E., Singer, B.S. and Gandolfo, M.A., 2005. Eocene 
plant diversity at Laguna del Hunco and Ro Pichileuf, Patagonia, Argentina. The American 
Naturalist, 165(6), pp.634-650.  
24. Barreda, V. and Palazzesi, L., 2010. Vegetation during the EoceneMiocene interval in central 
Patagonia: a context of mammal evolution. The paleontology of Gran Barranca: evolution and environmental 
change through the Middle Cenozoic of Patagonia.  
25. Sprent, J.I., 2009. Legume nodulation: a global perspective. John Wiley & Sons.  
26. Doyle, J.J. and Luckow, M.A., 2003. The rest of the iceberg. Legume diversity and evolution in a 
phylogenetic context. Plant physiology, 131(3), pp.900-910. 
27. Herendeen, P.S., 1992. The fossil history of the Leguminosae: phylogenetic and biogeographic 
implications. In Advances in Legume Systematics, Part 4. The Fossil Record (pp. 303-316). Royal Botanic 
Gardens.  
28. Azani, N., Babineau, M., Bailey, C.D., Banks, H., Barbosa, A.R., Pinto, R.B., Boatwright, J.S., 
Borges, L.M., Brown, G.K., Bruneau, A. and Candido, E., 2017. A new subfamily classification of the 
Leguminosae based on a taxonomically comprehensive phylogeny The Legume Phylogeny Working Group 
(LPWG). Taxon, 66(1), pp.44-77.  
29. Jagoutz, O., Macdonald, F.A. and Royden, L., 2016. Low-latitude arccontinent collision as a driver 
for global cooling. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(18), pp.4935-4940.  
30. Putzer, H., 1984. The geological evolution of the Amazon basin and its mineral resources. In The 
Amazon (pp. 15-46). Springer, Dordrecht.  
31. Retallack, G.J., 2010. Lateritization and bauxitization events. Economic Geology, 105(3), pp.655-667.  
32. Hedin, L.O., Brookshire, E.J., Menge, D.N. and Barron, A.R., 2009. The nitrogen paradox in tropical 
forest ecosystems. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics, 40, pp.613-635.  
33. Vitousek, P.M., Menge, D.N., Reed, S.C. and Cleveland, C.C., 2013. Biological nitrogen fixation: 
rates, patterns and ecological controls in terrestrial ecosystems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 368(1621), p.20130119.  
34. Brookshire, E.J., Hedin, L.O., Newbold, J.D., Sigman, D.M. and Jackson, J.K., 2012. Sustained losses 
of bioavailable nitrogen from montane tropical forests. Nature Geoscience, 5(2), p.123.  
35. Rascher, K.G., Hellmann, C., Mguas, C. and Werner, C., 2012. Community scale 15N isoscapes: 
tracing the spatial impact of an exotic N2fixing invader. Ecology Letters, 15(5), pp.484-491.  
36. Fyllas, N.M., Patino, S., Baker, T.R., Bielefeld Nardoto, G., Martinelli, L.A., Quesada, C.A., Paiva, 
R., Schwarz, M., Horna, V., Mercado, L.M. and Santos, A., 2009. Basin-wide variations in foliar properties of 
Amazonian forest: phylogeny, soils and climate. Biogeosciences, 6, pp.2677-2708.  
37. Batterman, S.A., Hedin, L.O., Van Breugel, M., Ransijn, J., Craven, D.J. and Hall, J.S., 2013. Key 
role of symbiotic dinitrogen fixation in tropical forest secondary succession. Nature, 502(7470), p.224.  
38. Shebitz, D.J. and Eaton, W., 2013. Forest structure, nutrients, and Pentaclethra macroloba growth 
after deforestation of Costa Rican lowland forests. ISRN Ecology, 2013.  
39. Milcu, A., Partsch, S., Scherber, C., Weisser, W.W. and Scheu, S., 2008. Earthworms and legumes 
control litter decomposition in a plant diversity gradient. Ecology, 89(7), pp.1872-1882.  
40. Schwendener, C.M., Lehmann, J., Rondon, M., Wandelli, E. and Fernandes, E., 2007. Soil mineral N 
dynamics beneath mixtures of leaves from legume and fruit trees in Central Amazonian multi-strata 
agroforests. Acta Amazonica, 37(3), pp.313-320.  
41. Jones, D.L., Dennis, P.G., Owen, A.G. and Van Hees, P.A.W., 2003. Organic acid behavior in soils
misconceptions and knowledge gaps. Plant and soil, 248(1-2), pp.31-41.  
42. Hu, S., Chapin III, F.S., Firestone, M.K., Field, C.B. and Chiariello, N.R., 2001. Nitrogen limitation 
of microbial decomposition in a grassland under elevated CO2. Nature, 409(6817), p.188.  
43. Ilstedt, U. and Singh, S., 2005. Nitrogen and phosphorus limitations of microbial respiration in a 
tropical phosphorus-fixing acrisol (ultisol) compared with organic compost. Soil Biology and 
Biochemistry, 37(7), pp.1407-1410.  
44. Taylor, L.L., Banwart, S.A., Valdes, P.J., Leake, J.R. and Beerling, D.J., 2012. Evaluating the effects 
of terrestrial ecosystems, climate and carbon dioxide on weathering over geological time: a global-scale 
process-based approach. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 367(1588), 
pp.565-582. 
45. Velizarov, S. and Beschkov, V., 1998. Biotransformation of glucose to free gluconic acid by 
Gluconobacter oxydans: substrate and product inhibition situtations. Process Biochemistry, 33(5), pp.527-534.  
46. Wheeler, E.A. and Baas, P., 1991. A survey of the fossil record for Dicotiledonous wood and its 
significance for evolutionary and ecological wood anatomy. IAWA Journal, 12(3), pp.275-318. 
47. Birch, H.F., 1960. Nitrification in soils after different periods of dryness. Plant and Soil, 12(1), pp.81-
48. Van Miegroet, H. and Cole, D.W., 1984. The Impact of Nitrification on Soil Acidification and Cation 
Leaching in a Red Alder Ecosystem 1. Journal of Environmental Quality, 13(4), pp.586-590.  
49. Raven, J.A., Franco, A.A., de JESUS, E.L. and JacobNeto, J., 1990. H+ extrusion and organicacid 
synthesis in N2fixing symbioses involving vascular plants. New Phytologist, 114(3), pp.369-389.  
50. Bolan, N.S., Hedley, M.J. and White, R.E., 1991. Processes of soil acidification during nitrogen 
cycling with emphasis on legume based pastures. Plant and soil, 134(1), pp.53-63.  
51. Leary, J.K., Hue, N.V., Singleton, P.W. and Borthakur, D., 2006. The major features of an infestation 
by the invasive weed legume gorse (Ulex europaeus) on volcanic soils in Hawaii. Biology and Fertility of 
Soils, 42(3), pp.215-223. 
52. Homann, P.S., Van Miegroet, H., Cole, D.W. and Wolfe, G.V., 1992. Cation distribution, cycling, 
and removal from mineral soil in Douglas-fir and red alder forests. Biogeochemistry, 16(2), pp.121-150.  
53. Powers, J.S., Treseder, K.K. and Lerdau, M.T., 2005. Fine roots, arbuscular mycorrhizal hyphae and 
soil nutrients in four neotropical rain forests: patterns across large geographic distances. New 
Phytologist, 165(3), pp.913-921. 
54. Laclau, J.P., Bouillet, J.P., Gonalves, J.D.M., Silva, E.V., Jourdan, C., Cunha, M.C.S., Moreira, 
M.R., Saint-Andr, L., Maqure, V., Nouvellon, Y. and Ranger, J., 2008. Mixed-species plantations of Acacia 
mangium and Eucalyptus grandis in Brazil: 1. Growth dynamics and aboveground net primary 
production. Forest Ecology and Management, 255(12), pp.3905-3917.  
55. Bini, D., Figueiredo, A.F., Silva, M.C.P.D., Vasconcellos, R.L.D.F. and Cardoso, E.J.B.N., 2013. 
Microbial biomass and activity in litter during the initial development of pure and mixed plantations of 
Eucalyptus grandis and Acacia mangium. Revista Brasileira de Cincia do Solo, 37(1), pp.76-85. 
56. Nichols, J.D. and Carpenter, F.L., 2006. Interplanting Inga edulis yields nitrogen benefits to 
Terminalia amazonia. Forest Ecology and Management, 233(2-3), pp.344-351.  
57. Evans, J.R., 1989. Photosynthesis and nitrogen relationships in leaves of C3 plants. Oecologia, 78(1), 
pp.9-19.  
58. Tuohy, J.M., Prior, J.A. and Stewart, G.R., 1991. Photosynthesis in relation to leaf nitrogen and 
phosphorus content in Zimbabwean trees. Oecologia, 88(3), pp.378-382.  
59. Parrotta, J.A., 1999. Productivity, nutrient cycling, and succession in single-and mixed-species 
plantations of Casuarina equisetifolia, Eucalyptus robusta, and Leucaena leucocephala in Puerto Rico. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 124(1), pp.45-77.  
60. Santos, F.M., de Carvalho Balieiro, F., dos Santos Atade, D.H., Diniz, A.R. and Chaer, G.M., 2016. 
Dynamics of aboveground biomass accumulation in monospecific and mixed-species plantations of Eucalyptus 
and Acacia on a Brazilian sandy soil. Forest Ecology and Management, 363, pp.86-97.  
61. McKey, Doyle., 1994. Legumes and nitrogen: the evolutionary ecology of a nitrogen-demanding 
lifestyle. Advances in legume systematics, 5, pp.211-228.  
62. Michalet, S., Rohr, J., Warshan, D., Bardon, C., Roggy, J.C., Domenach, A.M., Czarnes, S., 
Pommier, T., Combourieu, B., Guillaumaud, N. and Bellvert, F., 2013. Phytochemical analysis of mature tree 
root exudates in situ and their role in shaping soil microbial communities in relation to tree N-acquisition 
strategy. Plant physiology and biochemistry, 72, pp.169-177.  
63. Taylor, L.L., Banwart, S.A., Valdes, P.J., Leake, J.R. and Beerling, D.J., 2012. Evaluating the effects 
of terrestrial ecosystems, climate and carbon dioxide on weathering over geological time: a global-scale 
process-based approach. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 367(1588), 
pp.565-582.  
64. Kraft, C., Jenett-Siems, K., Khler, I., Siems, K., Abbiw, D., Bienzle, U. and Eicha, E., 2002. Andirol 
A and B, Two Unique 6-Hydroxymethylpterocarpenes from Andira inermis. Zeitschrift fr Naturforschung 
C, 57(9-10), pp.785-790.  
65. Leuner, O., Havlik, J., Hummelova, J., Prokudina, E., Novy, P. and Kokoska, L., 2013. Distribution 
of isoflavones and coumestrol in neglected tropical and subtropical legumes. Journal of the Science of Food 
and Agriculture, 93(3), pp.575-579.  
66. Yu, O., Jung, W., Shi, J., Croes, R.A., Fader, G.M., McGonigle, B. and Odell, J.T., 2000. Production 
of the isoflavones genistein and daidzein in non-legume dicot and monocot tissues. Plant physiology, 124(2), 
pp.781-794.  
67. Tomasi, N., Weisskopf, L., Renella, G., Landi, L., Pinton, R., Varanini, Z., Nannipieri, P., Torrent, J., 
Martinoia, E. and Cesco, S., 2008. Flavonoids of white lupin roots participate in phosphorus mobilization from 
soil. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 40(7), pp.1971-1974.  
68. Aoki, M., Fujii, K. and Kitayama, K., 2012. Environmental control of root exudation of low-
molecular weight organic acids in tropical rainforests. Ecosystems, 15(7), pp.1194-1203. 
69. Weisskopf, L., Tomasi, N., Santelia, D., Martinoia, E., Langlade, N.B., Tabacchi, R. and Abou
Mansour, E., 2006. Isoflavonoid exudation from white lupin roots is influenced by phosphate supply, root type 
and clusterroot stage. New Phytologist, 171(3), pp.657-668.  
70. Oldroyd, G.E., 2013. Speak, friend, and enter: signalling systems that promote beneficial symbiotic 
associations in plants. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 11(4), p.252.  
71. Odee, D.W., Sutherland, J.M., Kimiti, J.M. and Sprent, J.I., 1995. Natural rhizobial populations and 
nodulation status of woody legumes growing in diverse Kenyan conditions. Plant and Soil, 173(2), pp.211-
72. Uroz, S., Kelly, L.C., Turpault, M.P., Lepleux, C. and Frey-Klett, P., 2015. The mineralosphere 
concept: mineralogical control of the distribution and function of mineral-associated bacterial 
communities. Trends in microbiology, 23(12), pp.751-762.  
73. Lauber, C.L., Hamady, M., Knight, R. and Fierer, N., 2009. Pyrosequencing-based assessment of soil 
pH as a predictor of soil bacterial community structure at the continental scale. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol., 75(15), pp.5111-5120.  
74. Norby, R.J., Warren, J.M., Iversen, C.M., Medlyn, B.E. and McMurtrie, R.E., 2010. CO2 
enhancement of forest productivity constrained by limited nitrogen availability. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 107(45), pp.19368-19373. 
75. LeBauer, D.S. and Treseder, K.K., 2008. Nitrogen limitation of net primary productivity in terrestrial 
ecosystems is globally distributed. Ecology, 89(2), pp.371-379.  
76. Vitousek, P.M., Cassman, K.E.N., Cleveland, C., Crews, T., Field, C.B., Grimm, N.B., Howarth, 
R.W., Marino, R., Martinelli, L., Rastetter, E.B. and Sprent, J.I., 2002. Towards an ecological understanding of 
biological nitrogen fixation. In The nitrogen cycle at regional to global scales (pp. 1-45). Springer, Dordrecht.  
77. Van Der Heijden, M.G., De Bruin, S., Luckerhoff, L., Van Logtestijn, R.S. and Schlaeppi, K., 2016. 
A widespread plant-fungal-bacterial symbiosis promotes plant biodiversity, plant nutrition and seedling 
recruitment. The ISME journal, 10(2), p.389.  
78. Penman, D.E., 2016. Silicate weathering and North Atlantic silica burial during the Paleocene-Eocene 
thermal maximum. Geology, 44(9), pp.731-734.  
79. Polley, H.W., Johnson, H.B. and Mayeux, H.S., 1997. Leaf physiology, production, water use, and 
nitrogen dynamics of the grassland invader Acacia smallii at elevated CO2 concentrations. Tree 
Physiology, 17(2), pp.89-96.  
80. Arnone, J.A. and Gordon, J.C., 1990. Effect of nodulation, nitrogen fixation and CO2 enrichment on 
the physiology, growth and dry mass allocation of seedlings of Alnus rubra Bong. New Phytologist, 116(1), 
pp.55-66.  
81. Thomas, R.B., Bashkin, M.A. and Richter, D.D., 2000. Nitrogen inhibition of nodulation and N2 
fixation of a tropical N2-fixing tree (Gliricidia sepium) grown in elevated atmospheric CO2. The New 
Phytologist, 145(2), pp.233-243.  
82. Quirk, J., Andrews, M.Y., Leake, J.R., Banwart, S.A. and Beerling, D.J., 2014. Ectomycorrhizal fungi 
and past high CO2 atmospheres enhance mineral weathering through increased below-ground carbon-energy 
fluxes. Biology letters, 10(7), p.20140375.  
83. Irigoyen, J.J., Goicoechea, N., Antoln, M.C., Pascual, I., Snchez-Daz, M., Aguirreolea, J. and 
Morales, F., 2014. Growth, photosynthetic acclimation and yield quality in legumes under climate change 
simulations: an updated survey. Plant Science, 226, pp.22-29.  
84. Rogers, A., Ainsworth, E.A. and Leakey, A.D., 2009. Will elevated carbon dioxide concentration 
amplify the benefits of nitrogen fixation in legumes?. Plant Physiology, 151(3), pp.1009-1016. 
85. Mohan, J.E., Clark, J.S. and Schlesinger, W.H., 2007. Longterm CO2 enrichment of a forest 
ecosystem: implications for forest regeneration and succession. Ecological Applications, 17(4), pp.1198-1212.  
86. Cernusak, L.A., Winter, K., Martnez, C., Correa, E., Aranda, J., Garcia, M., Jaramillo, C. and Turner, 
B.L., 2011. Responses of legume versus nonlegume tropical tree seedlings to elevated CO2 
concentration. Plant physiology, 157(1), pp.372-385. 
87. Brantley, S.L., Megonigal, J.P., Scatena, F.N., BaloghBrunstad, Z., Barnes, R.T., Bruns, M.A., Van 
Cappellen, P., Dontsova, K., Hartnett, H.E., Hartshorn, A.S. and Heimsath, A., 2011. Twelve testable 
hypotheses on the geobiology of weathering. Geobiology, 9(2), pp.140-165. 
88. Vitousek, P.M. and Howarth, R.W., 1991. Nitrogen limitation on land and in the sea: how can it 
occur?. Biogeochemistry, 13(2), pp.87-115.  
89. Barron, A.R., 2007. Patterns and controls of nitrogen fixation in a lowland tropical forest, Panama. 
Princeton University.  
90. Wurzburger, N., Bellenger, J.P., Kraepiel, A.M. and Hedin, L.O., 2012. Molybdenum and phosphorus 
interact to constrain asymbiotic nitrogen fixation in tropical forests. PloS one, 7(3), p.e33710.  
91. Lpez-Lara, I.M., Sohlenkamp, C. and Geiger, O., 2003. Membrane lipids in plant-associated 
bacteria: their biosyntheses and possible functions. Molecular plant-microbe interactions, 16(7), pp.567-579. 
92. O'Hara, G.W., Dilworth, M.J., Boonkerd, N. and Parkpian, P., 1988. Irondeficiency specifically 
limits nodule development in peanut inoculated with Bradyrhizobium sp. New Phytologist, 108(1), pp.51-57.  
93. Gardner, W.K., Barber, D.A. and Parbery, D.G., 1983. The acquisition of phosphorus by Lupinus 
albus L. Plant and soil, 70(1), pp.107-124.  
94. Roncal-Herrero, T. and Oelkers, E.H., 2011. Does variscite control phosphate availability in acidic 
natural waters? An experimental study of variscite dissolution rates. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 75(2), 
pp.416-426.  
95. Wu, L., Huh, Y., Qin, J., Du, G. and van Der Lee, S., 2005. Chemical weathering in the Upper Huang 
He (Yellow River) draining the eastern Qinghai-Tibet Plateau. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 69(22), 
pp.5279-5294.  
Figures (Epihov et al., 2017) 
Figure 1.  Global rise of legume-rich tropical forests during the early Cenozoic (58  42 
Myr ago).  a. Global map of the major legume fossil records plotted on the Eocene continental 
configuration.  Lines and their ball ends point to approximate locations. Caesalpinioids in the 
Wilcox flora are according the old pre-molecular taxonomy with a family status. 
Abbreviations: DTF = dry tropical forest, SubTF = sub-tropical forest, TRF = tropical 
rainforest, boreotropical or BTF = a forest with mixed tropical and temperate species which 
is sometimes referred to as boreotropical. b. Summary of the notable legume-rich fossil 
assemblages and all major molecular clock-dated crown nodes in the Leguminosae marking 
the rise of the legume-rich forests in the Palaeocene-Eocene plotted against atmospheric CO2 
records (light blue dots and red Loess curve) using data from [93] and ocean bottom water 
temperature (orange semi-transparent curve) using data from [94].  Peaks in terrestrial 
weathering (WTs = 55, 48, 35 Myr ago) are estimated as levels of lateritization and 
bauxitization in [30].  
Abbreviations: Cjn = Cerrejon rainforest formation, Wlx = Wilcox boreotropical flora, Wy = 
Wyoming flora, Pat = Patagonia dry forests, Mah = Mahenge dry tropical forest, Cyn = 
Cynometra-monodominant stands in Mwadui, Cam = Cameroon tropical rainforest, Bjm = 
putative Brachystegia-Julbernardia miombo (macrofossils but not assemblage). Crown nodes 
include the divergence of L = Leguminosae, Pa = Papilionoideae, G = Genistoids, D = 
Dalbergioids, N = Senna clade, U = Umtiza clade, A = Amherstieae tribe (contains the 
majority EM taxa) after [95], S = Swartzia clade, R = Robinioids, B = Mirbelioids, I = 
Indigoferoids, Cl = Cladrastis clade, M = Millettioids, Mi = Mimosoideae, O = Peltophorum 
clade, T = Trifolium (IRLC) clade, C = Cercis clade, P = Poeppigia clade, F = Fossil-not-
supported Brachystegia clade (because fossils of Brachystegia and Julbernardia found much 
earlier and new estmates show that this divergence occurred 52.1 Myr ago  here marked as 
clade Amherstieae).  Clock data references: all clade ages unless otherwise stated are after 
[96].  
Figure 2. Foliar N ratios between N2-fixing and non-fixing non-legumes in (a) tropical 
forests and (b) tropical forestry plantations and between the three functional groups and 
(d) pathways of the nitrogen-weathering feedback hypothesis. Red typeface depicts 
factors stimulating weathering with specific weathering reactions associated to those factors 
in brackets. In tropical forests, N2-fixing legumes exhibit an average of 34.58% higher leaf 
crude protein content than non-fixing tree species. In forestry plantations, N2-fixing legume 
species reveal on average 64.50% (SEM=11.57%) higher leaf crude protein content than non-
fixing trees. Raw data and references are available in the Supplementary Information. 
Figure 3. Atmospheric CO2, NPP and weathering feedbacks.  (a) Ecosystem effects of 
elevated CO2 levels in legume-poor and rich forests; (b) differences in feedback relationships 
between rich and poor forests. In both forest types, high atmospheric CO2 levels (1) promote 
a proportional NPP increase (2) which transitions the system to low N-availability (3). 
Ultimately, in poor forests that would result in a negative feedback on NPP. In rich forests, 
however, low N availability (3) can up-regulate N2-fixation rates and recruitment of N2-fixers 
(4) thus alleviating N limitations and allowing for unchanged CO2-NPP relationship. Green 
arrows indicate positive relationships, whereas red ball-ending lines - negative relationships; 
N2F = N2-fixation. 
Figure 1 
(Epihov et al.) 
Tropical forestry
plantations
n=546 n=32 n=91
Figure 2 
(Epihov et al.) 
(b) (a)  (c) 
Figure 3  
(Epihov et al.) 
Supplementary Material for 
N2-fixing tropical legume evolution: a contributor to enhanced weathering 
through the Cenozoic? 
Dimitar Z. Epihov, Sarah A. Batterman, Lars O. Hedin, Jonathan R. Leake, Lisa M. Smith 
and David J. Beerling 
Supplementary Figure 1. Illustrated glossary of weathering reactions  
The following processes are often enhanced by biological (biotic) systems such as root exudation, microbial physiology, soil 
respiration and organic matter decomposition and leaching and therefore represent the basis of biological weathering [1].   
Chelation (acido-complexolysis; complexation)  the reaction of complexing between metal ions from minerals/rocks with 
organic molecules (chelating agents; chelators) via the formation of coordination bonds. Important in biological weathering. 
Organic acids such as citric acid, oxalic acid, tartaric acid, acetic acid, lactic acid, gluconic acid and amino acids are major 
chelating agents. Chelating organic acids may also produce protons during their dissociation which can further attack minerals 
through acidolysis which is why some sources refer to chelation also as acido-complexolysis [2].  
Suggested example: Oxalic acid + olivine  [Mg2+ : oxalate] complex + weathered olivine + 2H+ 
Carbonation  CO2 in soil produced by biological activity such as respiration often dissolves in water forming the weak carbonic 
acid (H2CO3). Carbonic acid can react with silicate minerals producing metal carbonates. The process can be sped-up by the 
presence of the enzyme carbonic anhydrase [3].  
Suggested example:  
Acidolysis (simple acidolysis, acid attack, protonation)  a process in which protons (generated biologically or by acid 
dissociation) replace the metal cations from mineral surfaces and bring the mineral metals to solution.  
Suggested example:  
  Figure I. Basalt boulders in the tropical forests of Barro Colorado Island,  
  Panama  the presence of boulders (here seen with weathered surface of  
  altered colour) may indicate that high amounts of volcanic mineral materials at  
  different stages of weathering are contained within the soil horizons where chelation, 
  acidolysis and carbonation driven by forest processes can stimulate their dissolution.  
  Photo credit: Dimitar Z. Epihov.  
Supplementary Figure 2. Functional symbiotic diversity within Leguminosae  coupling extant 
and fossil evidence  
Root microbial symbioses can be divided into 2 major groups - dipartite (that is symbioses between a plant host and a single symbiont 
group) and multipartite (that is symbioses between a plant host and two or more symbiotic partners). Plants with dipartite symbioses 
include arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) plants, ectomycorrhizal (EM), ericoid mycorrhizal (ERM) etc. Plants with multipartite symbioses 
are the group of N2-fixing and arbuscular mycorrhizal plants (NAM), N2-fixing and ectomycorrhizal plants (NEM), and N2-fixing dual 
arbuscular-ectomycorrhizal plants (NAEM).  
Leguminosae is one of the most symbiotically-rich plant families with members known to exhibit AM, EM, NAM, NEM [4],[5] or 
NAEM  [6] properties. Symbiotic assignment to fossil taxa is based upon the symbiotic characteristics of extant members of that taxon 
as found in the Supplementary curated by Werner et al. in [7] (except Xylia - [8] and Maniltoa - [9]). Lists of ectomycorrhizal legumes 
are found in [10] and [11].   
Functional type  Palaeocene/Eocene Fossil Legume Taxa 
Figure I. N2-fixing AM legumes of Neotropical 
rainforests: Inga cocleensis  an extant member of 
the ancient Inga genus with origins in the early 
Cenozoic. Shown here are flowers and leaves, 
canopy, Burkholderia root nodules and Trypan Blue-
stained intraradical AM hyphae. Photo credit: Dimitar 
Z. Epihov 
Inga [12],[13],[14], Prosopis [15],[16], 
Mimosa [15], Chamaechrista [12], Acacia 
[13],[16],[17],[18],[19], Swartzia [16],[20], 
Albizia [15],[16], Penthaclethra [15],[19], 
Adentanthera [15],[19] Ormosia [16], Sophora 
[13],[16], Robinia [16],[20], Diplotropis [16], 
Canavalia [13], Dalbergia [13],[20],  
Machaerium [16], Strongydolon [21], 
Pongamia [21], Neptunia [16], Derris [22],  
Desmodium [22] , Millettia [22], Maniltoa 
[23], Crudia [23],[24], Xylia [16] 
Aphanocalyx [17], Afzelioxylon/Afzelia 
[25],[26], Brachystegia [27],[28], 
Julbernardia [29] 
AM  Ablygonocarpus [15], Gymnocladus [20], 
Cladrastis [20], Senna [16], Calpocalyx [15], 
Cassia [30], Cynometra [31], Peltogyne [16], 
Bauhinia [20], Vouapa [21], Hymenaea [23], 
Caesalpinia [16] 
Modern analogues of Cenozoic fossil forests.  The occurrence of fossils of the above taxa at different sites suggests early Cenozoic 
forests exhibited compositional patterns analogous to major types of modern forests with Leguminosae as an important family in both 
species-rich NAM forests and monodominant forests of EM or AM legumes.  We suggest fossils of Inga, Swartzia, Machaerium and the 
AM legume taxa (Senna, Cassia) might be analogous to species-rich NAM legume tropical rainforests of modern Amazon, Panama and 
Costa Rica [32]. Fossils of Brachystegia and Julbernardia are suggestive of monodominant EM dry tropical forests like miombo 
woodlands in Africa [33]. Abundant Acacia fossil records are often interpreted as dry tropical forests analogous to savanna Acacia 
woodland communities currently found in Africa and Mexico [34].  Fossil assemblages of Cynometra- and pollen of Peltogyne-affinity 
might be analogous to the monodominant legume AM communities forming Cynometra alexandrii forests in Africa and that of 
Peltogyne gracilipes in Amazon [35].  Finally, we suggest that the presence of fossil EM Aphanocalyx and Afzelia might be indicative 
as accessory EM species found in modern monodominant EM rainforests like the EM legume Microberlinia bisulcata monodominant 
forests in Cameroon [11],[36]. 
Supplementary References 
1. Taylor, L.L., Leake, J.R., Quirk, J., Hardy, K., Banwart, S.A. and Beerling, D.J., 2009. Biological 
weathering and the longterm carbon cycle: integrating mycorrhizal evolution and function into the current 
paradigm. Geobiology, 7(2), pp.171-191.  
2. Van Rompaey, K., Van Ranst, E., Verdoodt, A. and De Coninck, F., 2007. Use of the test-mineral 
technique to distinguish simple acidolysis from acido-complexolysis in a Podzol profile. Geoderma, 137(3-4), 
pp.293-299.  
3. Li, W., Yu, L.J., He, Q.F., Wu, Y., Yuan, D.X. and Cao, J.H., 2005. Effects of microbes and their 
carbonic anhydrase on Ca2+ and Mg2+ migration in column-built leached soil-limestone karst systems. Applied 
Soil Ecology, 29(3), pp.274-281.  
4. Hogberg, P., 1986. Nitrogen-fixation and nutrient relations in savanna woodland trees 
(Tanzania). Journal of Applied Ecology, pp.675-688.  
5. Didhiou, A.G., Guye, O., Diabat, M., Prin, Y., Duponnois, R., Dreyfus, B. and B, A.M., 2005. 
Contrasting responses to ectomycorrhizal inoculation in seedlings of six tropical African tree 
species. Mycorrhiza, 16(1), pp.11-17. 
6. Hopkins, M.S., Reddell, P., Hewett, R.K. and Graham, A.W., 1996. Comparison of root and 
mycorrhizal characteristics in primary and secondary rainforest on a metamorphic soil in North Queensland, 
Australia. Journal of Tropical Ecology, 12(6), pp.871-885.  
7. Werner, G.D., Cornwell, W.K., Sprent, J.I., Kattge, J. and Kiers, E.T., 2014. A single evolutionary 
innovation drives the deep evolution of symbiotic N2-fixation in angiosperms. Nature Communications, 5, 
p.4087.  
8. Teamroong, N. and Boonkerd, N., 2006. Rhizobial production technology. In Microbial 
Biotechnology in Agriculture and Aquaculture, Vol. 2 (pp. 89-122). CRC Press.  
9. Lewin, A., Rosenberg, C., Wong, C.H., Nelson, L., Manen, J.F., Stanley, J., Dowling, D.N., Dnari, 
J. and Broughton, W.J., 1987. Multiple host-specificity loci of the broad host-range Rhizobium sp. NGR234 
selected using the widely compatible legume Vigna unguiculata. Plant molecular biology, 8(6), pp.447-459.  
10. Alexander, I.J. and Hgberg, P., 1986. Ectomycorrhizas of tropical angiospermous trees. New 
Phytologist, 102(4), pp.541-549.  
11. Newbery, D.M., Alexander, I.J., Thomas, D.W. and Gartlan, J.S., 1988. Ectomycorrhizal rainforest 
legumes and soil phosphorus in Korup National Park, Cameroon. New Phytologist, 109(4), pp.433-450.  
12. Calvillo-Canadell, L. and Cevallos-Ferriz, S.R.S., 2005. Diverse assemblage of Eocene and 
Oligocene leguminosae from Mexico. International Journal of Plant Sciences, 166(4), pp.671-692.  
13. Berry, E.W., 1930. Revision of the lower Eocene Wilcox flora of the southeastern states: with 
descriptions of new species, chiefly from Tennessee and Kentucky (Vol. 156). US Government Printing Office.  
14. Irving, R.S. and Stuessy, T.F., 1971. A New Paratropical Angiosperm Florule in the Eocene Rockdale 
Formation of Bastrop County, Texas. The Southwestern Naturalist, pp.111-116.  
15. Caccavari, M.A., 1996. Analysis of the South American fossil pollen record of Mimosoideae 
(Leguminosae). Review of Palaeobotany and Palynology, 94(1-2), pp.123-135.  
16. Herendeen, P.S., 1992. The fossil history of the Leguminosae: phylogenetic and biogeographic 
implications. In Advances in Legume Systematics, Part 4. The Fossil Record (pp. 303-316). Royal Botanic 
Gardens.  
17. Herendeen, P.S. and Jacobs, B.F., 2000. Fossil legumes from the middle Eocene (46.0 Ma) Mahenge 
flora of Singida, Tanzania. American Journal of Botany, 87(9), pp.1358-1366.  
18. Wang, Q., Ferguson, D.K., Feng, G.P., Ablaev, A.G., Wang, Y.F., Yang, J., Li, Y.L. and Li, C.S., 
2010. Climatic change during the Palaeocene to Eocene based on fossil plants from Fushun, 
China. Palaeogeography, Palaeoclimatology, Palaeoecology, 295(1-2), pp.323-331.  
19. Maley, J., 1996. The African rain forestmain characteristics of changes in vegetation and climate 
from the Upper Cretaceous to the Quaternary. Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Section B: 
Biological Sciences, 104, pp.31-73.  
20. Taylor, D.W., 1990. Paleobiogeographic relationships of angiosperms from the Cretaceous and early 
Tertiary of the North American area. The Botanical Review, 56(4), pp.279-417.  
21. MacGinitie, H.D., 1941. Middle Eocene flora from the central Sierra Nevada.  
22. Awasthi, N., 1992. Indian fossil legumes. Advances in legume Systematics, 225, p.250. 
23. Graham, A.L.A.N., 1992. The current status of the legume fossil record in the Caribbean 
region. Advances in legume systematics, part, 4, pp.161-167. 
24. Herendeen, P.S., 1992. Early caesalpinioid fruits from the Palaeogene of southern England. 
In Advances in Legume Systematics, part 4. The Fossil Record (pp. 57-68). Royal Botanic Gardens.  
25. Pan, A.D., Jacobs, B.F. and Herendeen, P.S., 2010. Detarieae sensu lato (Fabaceae) from the Late 
Oligocene (27.23 Ma) Guang River flora of north-western Ethiopia. Botanical Journal of the Linnean 
Society, 163(1), pp.44-54..  
26. In press. Afzelioxylon furoni (N inventaire 5731) 
http://albinoni.snv.jussieu.fr/DB/specimens/fiche/spe442.html.  
27. Shakryl, A.K., 1992. Leguminosae species from the Tertiary of Abkhazia. Advances in legume 
systematics, part, 4, pp.189-206.  
28. Ettingshausen, C.B., 1879. III. Report on Phyto-Palontological investigations of the fossil Flora of 
Sheppey. Proceedings of the Royal Society of London, 29(196-199), pp.388-396. 
29. Mijarra, J.M.P., Barrn, E., Manzaneque, F.G. and Morla, C., 2009. Floristic changes in the Iberian 
Peninsula and Balearic Islands (southwest Europe) during the Cenozoic. Journal of Biogeography, 36(11), 
pp.2025-2043.  
30. Wilf, P., Johnson, K.R., Cuneo, N.R., Smith, M.E., Singer, B.S. and Gandolfo, M.A., 2005. Eocene 
plant diversity at Laguna del Hunco and Ro Pichileuf, Patagonia, Argentina. The American 
Naturalist, 165(6), pp.634-650.  
31. Cantrill, D.J., Bamford, M.K., Wagstaff, B.E. and Sauquet, H., 2013. Early Eocene fossil plants from 
the Mwadui kimberlite pipe, Tanzania. Review of palaeobotany and palynology, 196, pp.19-35.  
32. Batterman, S.A., 2013. Symbiotic nitrogen fixation in tropical forests: Scaling from individuals to 
ecosystems (Doctoral dissertation, Princeton University).  
33. Malmer, A., 2007. General ecological features of miombo woodlands and considerations for 
utilization and management. In MITMIOMBOmanagement of indigenous tree species for ecosystem 
restoration and wood production in semi-arid miombo woodlands in Eastern Africa. Proceedings of the First 
MITMIOMBO Project Workshop. Morogoro, Tanzania (pp. 34-42). 
34. Greenberg, R., Bichier, P. and Sterling, J., 1997. Acacia, cattle and migratory birds in southeastern 
Mexico. Biological Conservation, 80(3), pp.235-247. 
35. Torti, S.D. and Coley, P.D., 1999. Tropical Monodominance: A Preliminary Test of the 
Ectomycorrhizal Hypothesis 1. Biotropica, 31(2), pp.220-228.  
36. Bechem, E.E.T., Chuyong, G.B. and Fon, B.T., 2014. A survey of mycorrhizal colonization in the 50-
ha Korup Forest Dynamic Plot in Cameroon. American Journal of Plant Sciences, 5(10), p.1403.  
Chapter 1 
Legume-microbial interactions unlock mineral nutrients during tropical 
forest succession 
Dimitar Z. Epihov1*, Sarah A. Batterman2, Kristin Saltonstall3, Lars O. Hedin4, Jefferson S. Hall3, 
Jonathan R. Leake1, and David J. Beerling1 
1Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK 
2School of Geography, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, UK 
3Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute, Balboa, Ancn, Panam, Panama. 
4Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 
08544, USA 
*for correspondence 
Legume trees form an abundant and functionally important component of tropical 
forests worldwide1,2,3 with many developing N2-fixing symbioses that promote higher 
growth and recruitment rates than non-fixers during early secondary succession4,5. 
However, it remains unclear how N2-fixers meet the elevated demands for inorganic 
nutrients that result from high rates of growth and biomass accumulation. Here we show 
that N2-fixing trees in secondary Neotropical forests have 2-fold higher weathering rates 
of in situ fresh silicate minerals than non-fixers. Sequencing and annotation of 12 full 
shotgun metagenomes from weathered minerals indicate distinctive mineral 
microbiomes of N-fixers that support the hypothesized roles6 of enhanced nitrogen and 
carbon cycling (carbohydrate metabolic and respiratory potential) in weathering by 
generating localized acidity. Mineral-associated metagenomes and microbial 
communities of soils beneath N2-fixers were linked to reductive conditions and 
fermentative acid products of fast-decomposing N-rich litter that favour phosphorus 
dissolution from minerals found in tropical soils. Furthermore, our analyses indicate the 
transfer of weathering benefits of N2-fixers to non-fixing neighbouring trees and 
therefore the wider biogeochemical functioning of tropical forest ecosystems.  
The legume family is the most numerous angiosperm family in Neotropics1,2. Successful 
deployment of the N2-fixing strategy of legumes in tropical forests2,3,4 depends on access to 
scarce inorganic nutrient sources, including bioavailable forms of phosphorus (P) and 
molybdenum (Mo)7, the latter being essential for synthesis of nitrogenases8.  However, P and 
Mo are often occluded in highly insoluble iron (Fe) and aluminium (Al)-bearing minerals9,10 
and thus not available for immediate biological uptake.  This situation is exemplified by the 
secondary Neotropical moist forests in Panama, where soils are P-poor oxisols, which 
developed on Mo-poor basalt bedrock containing large amounts of P-adsorbing kaolinite and 
goethite secondary minerals (Supplementary Note 1).  Soil beneath N2-fixers in the 17-year 
old Panamanian secondary forests had significantly lower pH, total P and Fe than those 
beneath non-fixers (Supplementary Table 2).  Total soil P in these forests strongly correlated 
with total soil Fe (mainly goethite) and Al (mainly kaolinite) but not total soil organic C 
(Pearson test, P<0.001 for Fe and Al and P>0.10 for C; Supplementary Figure 3), suggesting 
that decline in total P in these forests is consistent with decline in Al and Fe-bearing minerals.  
These patterns raise the biogeochemical hypothesis that N2-fixing legume trees may employ 
enhanced mineral weathering to access occluded inorganic mineral nutrients6,11 and sequester 
carbon into biomass during secondary succession.   
Here we address this hypothesis by investigating (1) whether N2-fixers exert higher silicate 
mineral weathering rates than non-fixing trees, with depletion of elements important for N2 
fixation, (2) whether enhanced weathering rates and N2-fixing status are linked to functional 
differences in the structure and function of mineral microbiomes and metagenomes and (3) 
how N2-fixers affect the biogeochemical potential of soil microbiota.  We investigated these 
questions by undertaking a field study in Panama with replicated experimental plots (0.1 ha 
each, n = 6) representing a natural gradient in N2-fixer abundance (6-27% tree basal area) in 
secondary Neotropical moist forests.  This design allowed us to test whether N2-fixing trees 
influence the soil microbiome and weathering rates in a manner that favours their rapid 
growth, and also exert community effects on weathering rates and soil microbiomes of nearby 
non-fixing trees relative to non-fixers far from fixers in legume-poor forests.  We determined 
in situ weathering rates of trees in Panama by burying >500 mesh bags containing crushed 
dunite, an olivine-rich (>90%) silicate rock (Supplementary Table 2) in the rooting zone 
(~10 cm depth) of N2-fixing (5 species, n = 51 trees), non-fixing trees far from N2-fixers in 
legume-poor forests (NF-far) (5 species, n = 36 trees) and non-fixing trees near fixers in 
legume-rich forests (NF-near) (5 species, n = 39 trees).  After 8 months, recovered samples 
(n = 126 samples) were analysed to calculate olivine weathering rates relative to fresh 
unweathered olivine samples.   
X-ray fluorescence (XRF) revealed that the soil beneath N2-fixing legumes had double the 
olivine weathering rate than soil from non-fixers (Welchs t-test, n=126, P=0.026; 
Supplementary Note 4) (Figure 1a).  Community effects of N2-fixing trees on weathering 
rates were also apparent, with non-fixing trees near N2-fixing trees having weathering rates 
intermediate between N2-fixers and non-fixing trees located far from fixers (ANOVA P < 
0.05, Fishers LSD test) (Figure 1b). High olivine weathering rates were associated to 
significant decrease in mineral Mo% content (Spearman test, P<0.05, Supplementary Figure 
5) suggesting depletion of elements important for N2-fixation. Overall, olivine weathering 
rates were linked to declines in the pH of the soil (Spearman test, P<0.01; Supplementary 
Figure 5) and reacted olivine, notably with conditions beneath N2-fixing trees being 
significantly more acidic than beneath non-fixing trees, in-line with symbiotic nitrogen 
fixation6,12,13 (two-tailed t-test, P<0.05; Figure 1c).  Further production of N2-fixing root 
nodules (hereafter nodulation) was a significant factor affecting the nickel (Ni)% content 
of olivine (two-tailed t-test, P<0.05 and ANOVA, P<0.05 in Figure 1e-f, respectively). 
Increasing Ni% content of olivine is a hallmark of intensifying weathering converting olivine 
material into secondary nickiliferous clay minerals14. Olivine Ni% content indeed negatively 
correlated with weathering rates in our experiment (Spearman test, P<0.01; Supplementary 
Figure 5) suggesting that sites of active nodulation promote regimes of enhanced weathering 
in agreement to their H+-exuding activities15. Across the natural gradient in N2-fixer 
abundance in our field experiment, soil C:N, a parameter reflective of high N inputs16, was 
lower beneath N2-fixers and NF-near compared to NF-far, indicating a second community 
effect in addition to soil pH (Figure 1d).  Soil C:N ratios also correlated with weathering rates 
(Spearman test, P<0.01; Supplementary Figure 5) highlighting the importance of C and N 
cycling to weathering. 
To analyse the role of the microbiome in mineral dissolution and establish the biogeochemical 
conditions favouring weathering, we constructed and sequenced 12 shotgun metagenome 
libraries of reacted olivine mineral samples from beneath N2-fixers (n = 6), NF-far (n = 3) and 
NF-near (n = 3). Metagenomes provided information on the abundance of gene orthologues 
representing 195 functional metabolic pathways (Level 2 in Subsystem MG-RAST 
database17) that were combined with weathering rates and analysed using hierarchical 
clustering to objectively assess which pathways were associated with weathering, as 
expressed in a correlation heat-map (Figure 2a).  Results showed a single specific well-
supported cluster linking enhanced weathering rates with coordinated increases in gene 
abundance for pathways involved in microbial respiration, carbohydrate metabolism and N 
cycling (Figure 2a).  Analysis of these metagenomes normalized using single copy marker 
gene (rpoC)18 reinforced this view, identifying significant correlations between in situ olivine 
weathering beneath N2-fixers, NF-far and NF-near and gene abundance representing lower 
level metabolic pathways for N and C cycling (Figure 2b) (for single gene correlations refer 
to Supplementary Table 7).  
Detailed analysis of the microbial N cycling pathways indicated the abundance of genes 
involved in nitrification, assimilatory and dissimilatory N reduction, denitrification and 
ammonia assimilation all correlate with weathering (Figures 2b,c). Mechanistically, this 
metabolic profile can be understood in terms of increased inputs of fixed N beneath N2-fixers 
stimulating N cycling and H+ generation promoted by nitrate leaching6,12,13 (Figure 2c).  For 
microbial C cycling, significant positive correlations occurred between weathering and gene 
abundance linked to (1) C storage pathways (glycogen and starch synthesis), (2) Krebs cycle 
enzyme-coding genes, (3) genes of the Entner-Doudoroff-type of glucose breakdown, (4) 
sugar-transporting machinery genes (Figure 2b, 2d; Supplementary Table 7) that are all 
indicative of high C availability19,20. Likely in response to high C flux to microbes, gene 
abundance in the microbial respiration (electron-transport chain) and Krebs cycle, pathways 
understood to drive respiratory CO2 fluxes and generate acidity, also correlated with 
weathering (Figure 2a,b,d). The tight coupling between N, C cycling, the availability of those 
two macroelements and weathering is revealed by genes linking the interconversion of amino 
acids to organic acid intermediates through the Krebs cycle (thus controlling N-C feedbacks 
on bacterial metabolism21), in particular their positive association with weathering rates 
(Figure 2e).  Overall, patterns of gene abundance relating to microbial N cycling, respiration 
and the Krebs cycle follow consistent trends of N2-fixers > NF-near > NF-far (Figure 2c) 
which supports N2-fixer-driven community effects on weathering rates (Figure 1b). 
A characteristic feature of the low C:N ratio of legume litter and its resulting soil organic 
matter6 (Figure 1d) is rapid decomposition and microbial activity22,23 that can result in 
localized depletion of available O2, formation of anaerobic microsites and anaerobiosis in soil 
and mineral aggregates24. Anaerobic conditions can lead to Fe reduction, generation of 
fermentative acid products and S cycle H2S corrosive species that can all contribute to 
weathering, and particularly the dissociation of P from its adsorbed sites on Fe oxides, 
particularly relevant in this P-limited soil matrix.  We therefore investigate interactions 
between weathering and gene abundance for major anaerobic processes and discovered 
correlations with marker genes for the microbial cycling of Fe and S as well as mixed acid 
fermentation (Figure 2b).  Moreover, our metagenomic analyses showed positive correlations 
between the relative abundance of genes coding for Mo-containing enzymes and olivine 
weathering (Supplementary Figure 6), indicating that weathering supplies Mo for the 
necessary co-factors to synthesize anaerobic enzymes25.  Enhanced dissolution of Mo from 
minerals may therefore stimulate symbiotic N2-fixation and augment mineral weathering via 
positive feedbacks on anaerobic metabolic processes. 
To gain insights into microbial weathering processes allowing trees to access P occluded in 
insoluble Fe and Al-bearing minerals not present in olivine, we undertook determinations of 
the microbiome structure and function in soils beneath our three categories of trees (N2-fixers, 
NF-far, NF-near; n = 21, 12 and 13 samples, respectively), using Next-Generation 16S rRNA 
sequencing. Microbial profiling data show that for N and S cycling lineages, N2-fixers exhibit 
significant community effects on near-by neighbouring trees (NF-near) but not on NF-far 
trees (Figure 3a,b).  N-cycling microbial communities in NF-near and N2-fixers were 
enriched in ammonia oxidisers, particularly the archaeal genus of Nitrososphaera, which 
converts NH3 to NO2- and generates acidity26,27. S-cycling communities were dominated by 
Thioalkalivibrio which oxidizes S to SO42- and also generates acidity (two protons per 
reaction)28. Fe cycling microorganisms appear to exhibit higher cumulative abundance in soils 
beneath N2-fixers and NF-near relative to NF-far, once again revealing apparent community 
effects (Figure 3c).  Changes in the microbial communities involved in Fe and S cycling can 
affect Fe-bound P by reducing the highly insoluble Fe(III)P to Fe (II) + P (Fe cycling)29 and 
Fe(II)S + P (S cycling)30,31.  Together, these findings indicate the rhizospheric soil 
microbiome of N2-fixers improves access to highly limiting P, a benefit that may also be 
shared with neighbouring non-fixers.  
We conclude that the functional soil microbial community of N2 fixing trees provides them 
with access to mineral resources to help meet their high demands for fast growth.  
Metagenomics indicates faster weathering of N2-fixing trees arises through upregulation of 
specific classes of metabolic pathways linking microbial energy metabolism with inorganic 
mineral nutrient cycling.  These lead to (1) acidification of the immediate matrix by CO2 
evolution and carbonic acid production, (2) the formation of anaerobic microsites conductive 
to reductive dissolution resulting from Fe and S cycling affecting the mineral lattice, (3) the 
acid attack by fermentative and Krebs cycle acid products and (4) generation of excess H+ by 
enhanced NO3- leaching as consequence of greater N inputs and nitrification.  The formation 
of anaerobic niches appears under the control of Mo supply required for nodulation in legume 
trees and mineral weathering.  Further, we have shown community effects of N2-fixers on 
weathering rates, soil physicochemical factors filtered down to community effects in 
metagenomes and soil microbiomes, highlighting previously overlooked roles (with most 
previous studies mainly focusing on rhizobia-legume interactions in microbiomes32,33) of 
these trees in tropical forest nutrient cycling and biogeochemistry.  
References 
1. Ter Steege, H., Pitman, N.C., Phillips, O.L., Chave, J., Sabatier, D., Duque, A., 
Molino, J.F., Prvost, M.F., Spichiger, R., Castellanos, H. and Von Hildebrand, P., 
2006. Continental-scale patterns of canopy tree composition and function across 
Amazonia. Nature, 443(7110), p.444. 
2. Hedin, L.O., Brookshire, E.J., Menge, D.N. and Barron, A.R., 2009. The nitrogen 
paradox in tropical forest ecosystems. Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and 
Systematics, 40, pp.613-635. 
3. Yeo, W.L.J. and Fensham, R.J., 2014. Will Acacia secondary forest become 
rainforest in the Australian Wet Tropics?. Forest ecology and management, 331, 
pp.208-217. 
4. Batterman, S.A., Hedin, L.O., Van Breugel, M., Ransijn, J., Craven, D.J. and Hall, 
J.S., 2013. Key role of symbiotic dinitrogen fixation in tropical forest secondary 
succession. Nature, 502(7470), p.224. 
5. Menge, D.N. and Chazdon, R.L., 2016. Higher survival drives the success of 
nitrogenfixing trees through succession in Costa Rican rainforests. New Phytologist, 
209(3), pp.965-977. 
6. Epihov, D.Z., Batterman, S.A., Hedin, L.O., Leake, J.R., Smith, L.M. and Beerling, 
D.J., 2017. N2-fixing tropical legume evolution: a contributor to enhanced weathering 
through the Cenozoic?. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 
284(1860), p.20170370. 
7. Wurzburger, N. and Hedin, L.O., 2016. Taxonomic identity determines N2 fixation by 
canopy trees across lowland tropical forests. Ecology letters, 19(1), pp.62-70. 
8. Barron, A.R., Wurzburger, N., Bellenger, J.P., Wright, S.J., Kraepiel, A.M. and 
Hedin, L.O., 2009. Molybdenum limitation of asymbiotic nitrogen fixation in tropical 
forest soils. Nature Geoscience, 2(1), p.42. 
9. Chacon, N., Silver, W.L., Dubinsky, E.A. and Cusack, D.F., 2006. Iron reduction and 
soil phosphorus solubilization in humid tropical forests soils: the roles of labile 
carbon pools and an electron shuttle compound. Biogeochemistry, 78(1), pp.67-84. 
10. Goldberg, S., Forster, H.S. and Godfrey, C.L., 1996. Molybdenum adsorption on 
oxides, clay minerals, and soils. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 60(2), 
pp.425-432. 
11. Nasto, M.K., AlvarezClare, S., Lekberg, Y., Sullivan, B.W., Townsend, A.R. and 
Cleveland, C.C., 2014. Interactions among nitrogen fixation and soil phosphorus 
acquisition strategies in lowland tropical rain forests. Ecology letters, 17(10), 
pp.1282-1289. 
12. Tang, C., Unkovich, M.J. and Bowden, J.W., 1999. Factors affecting soil 
acidification under legumes. III. Acid production by N2-fixing legumes as influenced 
by nitrate supply. The New Phytologist, 143(3), pp.513-521. 
13. Van Miegroet, H. and Cole, D.W., 1984. The Impact of Nitrification on Soil 
Acidification and Cation Leaching in a Red Alder Ecosystem 1. Journal of 
Environmental Quality, 13(4), pp.586-590. 
14. Nahon, D.B., Paquet, H. and Delvigne, J., 1982. Lateritic weathering of ultramafic 
rocks and the concentration of nickel in the western Ivory Coast. Economic Geology, 
77(5), pp.1159-1175. 
15. Ding, X., Sui, X., Wang, F., Gao, J., He, X., Zhang, F., Yang, J. and Feng, G., 2012. 
Synergistic interactions between Glomus mosseae and Bradyrhizobium japonicum in 
enhancing proton release from nodules and hyphae. Mycorrhiza, 22(1), pp.51-58. 
16. Cools, N., Vesterdal, L., De Vos, B., Vanguelova, E. and Hansen, K., 2014. Tree 
species is the major factor explaining C:N ratios in European forest soils. Forest 
Ecology and Management, 311, pp.3-16. 
17. Meyer, F., Paarmann, D., D'Souza, M., Olson, R., Glass, E.M., Kubal, M., Paczian, 
T., Rodriguez, A., Stevens, R., Wilke, A. and Wilkening, J., 2008. The metagenomics 
RAST servera public resource for the automatic phylogenetic and functional 
analysis of metagenomes. BMC bioinformatics, 9(1), p.386. 
18. Aserse, A. A., Rsnen, L. A., Aseffa, F., Hailemariam, A. & Lindstrm, K. Diversity 
of sporadic symbionts and nonsymbiotic endophytic bacteria isolated from nodules of 
woody, shrub, and food legumes in Ethiopia. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 97, 10117
10134 (2013). 
19. Aserse, A.A., Rsnen, L.A., Aseffa, F., Hailemariam, A. and Lindstrm, K., 2013. 
Diversity of sporadic symbionts and nonsymbiotic endophytic bacteria isolated from 
nodules of woody, shrub, and food legumes in Ethiopia. Applied microbiology and 
biotechnology, 97(23), pp.10117-10134. 
20. Preiss, J., 1984. Bacterial glycogen synthesis and its regulation. Annual review of 
microbiology, 38(1), pp.419-458. 
21. Shimizu, K., 2014. Regulation systems of bacteria such as Escherichia coli in 
response to nutrient limitation and environmental stresses. Metabolites, 4(1), pp.1-35. 
22. Milcu, A., Partsch, S., Scherber, C., Weisser, W.W. and Scheu, S., 2008. Earthworms 
and legumes control litter decomposition in a plant diversity gradient. Ecology, 89(7), 
pp.1872-1882. 
23. Schwendener, C.M., Lehmann, J., Rondon, M., Wandelli, E. and Fernandes, E., 2007. 
Soil mineral N dynamics beneath mixtures of leaves from legume and fruit trees in 
Central Amazonian multi-strata agroforests. Acta Amazonica, 37(3), pp.313-320. 
24. Young, I.M. and Crawford, J.W., 2004. Interactions and self-organization in the soil-
microbe complex. Science, 304(5677), pp.1634-1637. 
25. Hover, B.M., Tonthat, N.K., Schumacher, M.A. and Yokoyama, K., 2015. 
Mechanism of pyranopterin ring formation in molybdenum cofactor biosynthesis. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(20), pp.6347-6352. 
26. Tourna, M., Stieglmeier, M., Spang, A., Knneke, M., Schintlmeister, A., Urich, T., 
Engel, M., Schloter, M., Wagner, M., Richter, A. and Schleper, C., 2011. 
Nitrososphaera viennensis, an ammonia oxidizing archaeon from soil. Proceedings of 
the National Academy of Sciences, 108(20), pp.8420-8425. 
27. Szwerinski, H., Arvin, E. and Harremos, P., 1986. pH-decrease in nitrifying 
biofilms. Water Research, 20(8), pp.971-976. 
28. Sorokin, D.Y., Tourova, T.P., Lysenko, A.M., Mityushina, L.L. and Kuenen, J.G., 
2002. Thioalkalivibrio thiocyanoxidans sp. nov. and Thioalkalivibrio paradoxus sp. 
nov., novel alkaliphilic, obligately autotrophic, sulfur-oxidizing bacteria capable of 
growth on thiocyanate, from soda lakes. International journal of systematic and 
evolutionary microbiology, 52(2), pp.657-664. 
29. Chacon, N., Silver, W.L., Dubinsky, E.A. and Cusack, D.F., 2006. Iron reduction and 
soil phosphorus solubilization in humid tropical forests soils: the roles of labile 
carbon pools and an electron shuttle compound. Biogeochemistry, 78(1), pp.67-84. 
30. Chi, R.A., Xiao, C.Q. and Gao, H., 2006. Bioleaching of phosphorus from rock 
phosphate containing pyrites by Acidithiobacillus ferrooxidans. Minerals 
Engineering, 19(9), pp.979-981. 
31. Hamilton, W.A., 1985. Sulphate-reducing bacteria and anaerobic corrosion. Annual 
review of microbiology, 39(1), pp.195-217. 
32. Woliska, A., Kuniar, A., Zielenkiewicz, U., Banach, A., Izak, D., Stpniewska, Z. 
and Baszczyk, M., 2017. Metagenomic analysis of some potential nitrogen-fixing 
bacteria in arable soils at different formation processes. Microbial ecology, 73(1), 
pp.162-176. 
33. Dinnage, R., Simonsen, A.K., Cardillo, M., Thrall, P.H., Barrett, L.G. and Prober, 
S.M., 2018. Larger legume plants host a greater diversity of symbiotic nitrogen-fixing 
bacteria. bioRxiv, p.246611. 
34. Poorter, L., Bongers, F., Aide, T.M., Zambrano, A.M.A., Balvanera, P., Becknell, 
J.M., Boukili, V., Brancalion, P.H., Broadbent, E.N., Chazdon, R.L. and Craven, D., 
2016. Biomass resilience of Neotropical secondary forests. Nature, 530(7589), p.211. 
35. Werner, J.J., Zhou, D., Caporaso, J.G., Knight, R. and Angenent, L.T., 2012. 
Comparison of Illumina paired-end and single-direction sequencing for microbial 16S 
rRNA gene amplicon surveys. The ISME journal, 6(7), p.1273. 
Methods and Materials 
Sites and Location. The six sites used in our study are 0.1 ha transects, part of the Agua Salud 
secondary rainforest plots in the Panama Canal Area (9oN, 79oW) of Central Panama under the 
supervision of Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute (STRI). Rainforests have developed naturally 
from the existing seedbank following pasture abandonment. The region most likely consisted of 
primary rainforests prior their use for pastures. All selected transects were in 17 year old forests with 
standing biomass similar to that of other secondary forests worldwide34. The forests developed on the 
same basalt parent bedrock, exhibiting weathered P-poor oxisol soil profiles of considerable (equal to 
or greater than 15m) depth. Mineralogically, the soils are dominated by kaolinite, goethite and quartz 
but inclusions of primary minerals from the bedrock (or regolith) brought up by landslides and erosion 
were infrequently recovered (Supplementary Note 1). The six chosen sites represent a naturally 
occurring gradient in N2-fixer basal area (BA) with N2-fixing legumes occupying 6% (Sites A and B), 
9% (Site C), 18% (Site D), 23% (Site E) or 27% (Site F) of total tree BA.  
Tree Selection.  We selected commonly occurring tree species with the group of N2-fixers including 
Inga cocleensis, Inga thibaudiana, Abarema barbouriana, Swartzia simplex and Platymiscium 
dimorphandrum  all from the Fabaceae (Leguminosae).  The group of non-fixers included 
representatives of major tropical tree families including Miconia argentea (Melastomataceae), Xylopia 
frutescens (Annonaceae), Terminalia amazonia (Combretaceae), Lacistema aggregatum 
(Lacistemataceae) and the non-fixing legume Senna dariensis (Fabaceae). Each tree species was 
represented in n3 in all microbiome analyses and in n4 for pooled mineral samples (prior pooling). 
Specimens were selected by their diameter at breast height (DBH), with median DBH=61 mm and 
mean DBH=75 mm. Trees were arbitrarily classified by their vertical position as understory, mid-
canopy or canopy specimens with fixers and non-fixers having comparable canopy specimen 
proportions (32% and 35% canopy specimens, respectively).  
Soil analysis and Mineral weathering.  Four grams of crushed dunite rock (92% olivine; heim plant, 
Norway; grain diameter 250-500 m / 500-1000 m = 50 / 50%) were heat-sealed in 5x5x3 cm 
triangular mesh bags (pore diameter 30 m). Two such mesh bags were buried 10 cm away from 
opposite sides of the main trunk at 10 cm depth for a total of four bags per tree. A total of 500 olivine 
rock bags were buried beneath 125 trees. Soil (0-10 cm depth) was collected from the sites of olivine 
bag deposition using a sterile hand spade. Collected soils were stored at 4oC for a week and analysed 
using nitric acid digests, ICP-OES and C/N analyser (for total C and N) at STRI Soil Lab. Sample pH 
was measured in 0.01 M CaCl2. After 8-months incubation time, bags were recovered and the contents 
of all four bags per tree pooled into a single sample of reacted olivine per tree. After taking a subsample 
for DNA extraction (see below), pooled samples were homogenized to fine powder using an agate 
ball-mill machine. The nutrient concentrations of resulting finely homogenized powder samples were 
analysed using portable X-ray fluorescence machine (Niton XL2 GOLDD XRF analyser) set at 
mining mode. Weathering rates were calculated as the change in Mg concentrations relative to fresh 
unweathered material over time. 
DNA extraction, amplicon and shotgun metagenome sequencing.  Total DNA was extracted from 0.50 
g of each reacted olivine sample pool prior to further homogenization and from 0.25 g of rhizospheric 
topsoil using the MoBio PowerSoil DNA isolation kit, using the manufacturers protocols. Amplicon 
libraries were constructed using a two-step PCR approach where the target region was first amplified 
using locus specific primers with Illumina sequencing primer adapters incorporated into their 5 end 
(30 cycles), then a second round of PCR was done using forward and reverse primers that contain all 
Illumina sequencing primer and flow cell binding sequences as well as a unique 8 bp barcode (6 
cycles).  In the first round of PCR, all samples were amplified in triplicate using the 515F/806R primer 
set that amplifies the V4-V5 region of the 16S rRNA for bacteria35. Triplicate reactions were then 
pooled and unique combinations of barcodes and Illumina adapters added via a second round of PCR. 
PCR products were purified and normalized using SequalPrep Normalization plates (Life 
Technologies), pooled into single libraries based on sample type (e.g. soil rhizospheric 16S, soil 
mineral 16S), concentrated using Agencourt AMPure XP beads, quantified on a Qubit fluorimeter, 
and quality checked using the High Sensitivity Agilent DNA kit on an Agilent Bioanalyzer. 
Subsequently, samples were adjusted to appropriate concentrations and sequenced on a total of two 
runs on an Illumina MiSeq sequencer (2x250 bp PE runs) at the Smithsonian Tropical Research 
Institute. Shotgun metagenome libraries were constructed using a total of 15 total DNA samples (12 
from reacted mineral and 3 from rhizospheric soil) using Nextera XT DNA Library Prep Kit and 
following protocols within and sequenced at 1 run of HiSeq 4000 sequencer (2x150 bp PE runs) at the 
Edinburgh Genomics Institute, UK.  
Operational taxonomic unit (OTU) picking and shotgun metagenomic annotation.  The resulting 16S 
rRNA amplicon libraries were submitted for taxonomic analysis through the MG-RAST pipeline17 and 
blast2go and the SILVA SSU and NCBI microbial 16S databases were used for taxonomy calling. N, 
S, Fe cycling activities are assigned to OTUs based on detailed literature searches identifying a total 
of 6 and 79 genera from the SILVA SSU database with function in the N and S cycle, respectively, 
and 59 species-level OTUs from the NCBI database with function in the Fe cycle. Shotgun 
metagenomes were also submitted through the MG-RAST pipeline17 and annotated according to 
default characteristics (1e-5, 40% similarity, representative hit). Annotated metagenomes are publicly 
available on the MG-RAST server under MG-RAST ID numbers found in Supplementary Note 8. 
Annotations are based on blat hits against MG-RAST Subsystem and KO databases. Excel 
spreadsheets containing OTU tables and shotgun metagenomic hierarchies are available as on request. 
Both metagenomic and 16S RNA hits were expressed in relative abundance dividing their number of 
reads by the total number of reads. Shotgun metagenome entries were also expressed in relative 
abundance based on the DNA-directed RNA polymerase beta subunit (rpoC) gene (reads/reads 
assigned to rpoC) to account for different number of genomes per sample as each genome contains a 
single copy rpoC. Further information on methods involved in molecular analyses can be found in 
Appendices 1-3.  
Statistical analyses.  All statistical analyses were carried out in the R environment or in GraphPad 
Prism 7. Sequencing libraries were not rarefied with all libraries (regardless of their number of aligned 
hits) were included in statistical comparisons. Comparisons between tree groups (N2-fixers vs. non-
fixers) were carried out as two-tailed t-tests or Welchs t-test depending on whether the assumption 
for equal variances was met. In the case of community analyses, most species-level OTUs exhibit non-
normal distribution (Shapiro-Wilk normality tests) and as such comparisons between the microbiomes 
of N2-fixers and non-fixers were compared using Mann-Whitney t-tests. Pearson correlation tests were 
utilized for testing for co-variance between olivine weathering rates and metabolic and candidate genes 
(P<0.05). For comparisons between 3 or more groups of trees, one-way ANOVA and subsequent Post-
Hoc Fisher LSD tests were utilized. PERMANOVA analyses were carried out using the Adonis 
function in R (dissimilarity matrix method Bray-Curtis, replicates=999). Non-dimensional multiscale 
(NDMS) principal coordinates analysis (PCoA) analyses were carried out in R using the dissimilarity 
matrix method Bray. Hierarchical clustering of the correlation heat-map matrix (with each cell 
containing a Pearson r value representative of the relationship between pathways X and Y on axes x 
and y) was performed in R using Manhattan dissimilarity index and complete clustering method. 
Figures and Figure Text 
Figure 1. N2-fixers and nodulation are linked to greater mineral weathering in tropical forests 
correlated to lower soil C:N ratio and pH. a. N2-fixers reveal doubled weathering rates compared to 
non-fixers (Welchs t-test, P<0.05); b. Non-fixers near N2-fixers (NF-near) show intermediate olivine 
weathering rates between non-fixers far from fixers (NF-far) and N2-fixers (ANOVA, P<0.05); c. Soil pH 
is significantly lower beneath N2-fixers and NF-near in comparison to NF-far (ANOVA, P<0.001) with 
similar pattern observed in the pH of weathered olivine; d. Soil C:N ratio is significantly lower beneath 
N2-fixers and NF-near relative to NF-far from fixers (ANOVA, P<0.001); e. Nodulation promotes 
increasing olivine Ni%, signature to weathering of olivine into secondary clay minerals (two-tailed t-test 
P<0.05); f. Nodulation is the main effect on olivine Ni% rather than the taxonomically-defined ability to 
fix N2 (ANOVA, P<0.05). Different letters indicate statistically different means using Fishers LSD post-
hoc test. Error bars reveal SEM. 
Figure 2. Metagenomics of the microbial community associated with weathered minerals in tropical 
forests link increased respiration, nitrogen and carbohydrate metabolic potential of the microbial 
community to enhanced weathering. a. Correlation heatmap matrix of gene abundance allocated to 
MG-RAST Subsystem-Level 2 pathways for the 12 sequenced metagenomes of reacted olivine at 
different weathering rates. The heatmap is constructed using R with Manhattan dissimilarity index, 
complete clustering method and Pearson test correlations (salmon colour indicates positive correlation, 
blue  negative and white  lack of strong correlation); b. Pearson r plot of rpoC-normalised MG-RAST 
Subsystem Level 3 pathways correlating with weathering rates and anaerobic characterisation; The 
asterisk shows P<0.05; c. High level pathways encompassing Respiration, Nitrogen Metabolism and the 
Krebs cycle all reveal patterns of increase following the order NF-far<NF-near<N2-fixers; d. 
Metagenomic reconstruction of the microbial N cycle in the mineral showing positive correlations (red 
asterisks, Pearson test, *<0.05, ^<0.10) with weathering rates; glutamine synthetase gene orthologue 
marked with blue asterisk negatively correlates with weathering as it is most required at low external 
NH4+ concentrations; e. Enrichment in Krebs cycle genes correlating with weathering and links to N 
cycling revealing evidence for the combined role of high N and C availability. Error bars indicate SEM. 
Figure 3. N2-fixers impact the biogeochemical potential of soil as recorded by enrichment in N, S 
and Fe cycling lineages. a. N2-fixing legumes reveal enrichment in dominant ammonia oxidising 
archaeal lineages generating acidity through their conversion of ammonia to nitrite but not in nitrite 
oxidisers; this enrichment is also evident in NF-near neighbouring fixers relative to NF far from fixers; b. 
N2-fixers reveal greater cumulative abundance of S cycling genera in their associated soil microbiomes 
than NF-far linked to higher abundance of several phylogenetically distinct S cycling genera; we also 
observe community effects of N2-fixers on non-fixers with NF-near legumes revealing similarly enriched 
S cycling genera relative to non-fixers far from fixing legumes; c. N2-fixers and NF-near exhibit higher 
cumulative abundance of Fe(III) reducing genera. Microbial profiles in a-b. are constructed from 
taxonomy calling of the SILVA SSU database in the MG-RAST environment (with n=12, n=13, n=21 for 
NF-far, NF-near and N2-fixers, respectively). The Fe-reducing profiling is constructed using the NCBI 
16S microbial database in the Blast2GO environment as outlined in Appendix 1. Statistical tests include 
Kruskal-Wallis for community effects together with Dunns post-hoc test and Mann-Whitney test for 
differences between N2-fixers and non-fixers without community effects. Error bars show SEM.  
Figure 1. (Epihov et. al, 2018) 
Figure 2. (Epihov et. al, 2018) 
Figure 3. (Epihov et. al, 2018) 
CHANGED 
Supplementary Information  
Supplementary Note 1Soil chemistry and mineralogy in Panamanian tropical forests 
1.1 Soil mineralogy  
The average soil mineralogical composition was analysed using X-ray diffraction methods (XRD; X-ray Mineral 
Services Ltd, Colwyn Bay, UK). The report summarized in Supplementary Figure 1 shows that the main fraction 
is dominated by kaolinite (47.4%) bearing 
certain structural and chemical resemblance to 
the Mg-rich chlorite 
(Mg5Al)(AlSi3)O10(OH)8), followed by 
goethite (26.2%), quartz (24.1%), hematite 
(2.3%), and anatase (traces). The XRD data of 
our soil samples is comparable to other oxisols 
with a characteristic lack of primary minerals[1],[2]. 
However, weathered rock fragments (5-10 cm in length 
and ~5 cm in diameter) were recovered from several topsoil 
samples in plot D. Some of those were subsequently 
crushed and their elemental composition analysed using X-
ray fluorescence (XRF  Supplementary Table 1).  
Supplementary Table 1. Mean XRF oxide data (%) comparing soil rock fragments (partially weathered 
basalt) and fresh basalt rock  
Comparison SiO2 MgO Al2O3 FeO CaO TiO2 SrO P2O5 K2O CuO MoO3 MnO ZnO 
Soil rock fragments 45.30 10.26 24.12 15.91 2.70 0.65 0.11 0.01 0.10 0.02 <D 0.20 0.01 
Fresh basalt 48.01 10.39 16.75 12.03 6.90 1.79 0.47 0.91 2.08 <D* <D 0.24 0.02 
*<D  below detection limit 
 - MgO decline in partially weathered soil rock fragments relative to fresh material is probably substantially 
underestimated due to the formation of secondary minerals between weathered Mg and pedogenic Al (e.g. 
chlorite of the type clinochlore) covering the partially weathering fragments  
n=3 weathered soil fragment from site D, n=3 fresh reference basalt material (from Oregon, USA)  
1.2 Soil chemistry and differences between under-crown total soil elements in non-fixers and N2-fixers  
The soils in the Agua Salud secondary rainforests are characterised as weathered oxisols derived from pre-
Cenozoic basalt parent material[3],[4]. Nitric acid digests and subsequent ICP-OES and C-N analysis 
(Smithsonian Soil Lab, Ancn, Panama) reveal that total soil C, N and P (Supplementary Table 1) are relatively 
low compared to similar tropical forest plots in Panama[5], while Cu (particularly in non-fixers  Supplementary 
Mg-rich kaolinite (Al2Si2O5(OH)4Mgx)
Quartz (SiO2)
Goethite (FeOOH)
Hematite (Fe2O3)
Anatase (TiO2) - only traces
Soil XRD
Supplementary Figure 1. XRD mineralogical 
profile of Agua Salud rainforest oxisols  
Figure 4) is in the high end of its range[6]. Comparing the levels of Al, Fe and soil cations, we show that N2-
fixing status is a major factor determining lower concentrations of those elements (Supplementary Table 2). The 
solubilisation and translocation of clays and secondary iron minerals to lower soil horizons fits the observed 
pattern as during translocation cations also co-migrate with clay explaining the lower levels of almost all 
elements in N2-fixers (except K, Na, Mn). 
Supplementary Table 2. Differences between total soil elements in under-crown topsoil (0-10 cm) of N2-
fixers and non-fixers and fixer-poor and fixer-rich forests in 17-year old forest sites.  
Factor/Element Al B Ca Cu Fe K Mg Mn Na P Zn pH C N C/N Fe/P 
N2-fixing status ** ** * *** ** ns ** ns ns ** ** * ns ns ns ns 
Fixer richness ns ns ns ns ns ns * ns * ns ns *** ** * *** *** 
Two-way factorial ANOVA type II, ***P<0.001, **P<0.01, *P<0.01, nsP>0.05. No significant interaction 
effects were recorded.  
Red typeface indicates that the given element is significantly lower in soils of N2-fixers. Fixer richness 
differentiates between fixer- or legume-poor forest sites (n=3, fixer BA 6-9%) and legume-rich sites (n=2, fixer 
BA 23-27%). Numbers of replicates: n fixers=27, n non-fixers=27.  
 1.3. Evidence for decline in total soil P, K, Zn, Mn along the chronosequence  
The lower total P in soils of N2-fixers in 17-year old forests may indicate initial preference and competitive 
advantage under low P of that functional group during forest establishment in early secondary succession. 
Alternatively, that pattern may be caused by active decline due to higher solubilisation (release from Al- and Fe-
bearing mineral complexes) and increased P uptake and translocation to lower soil horizons. We compared total 
soil P along the forest chronosequence using site composite samples (each consisting of three pooled 10 cm soil 
cores from three random locations at sites) for 5- and 14-year old forests. Total soil P declined from 5 to 17 years 
old forests in N2-fixers but not in non-fixers 
(Supplementary Figure 2) suggesting that fixers 
may actively act to reduce P to a greater extent 
than their non-fixing counterparts. Similarly, K, 
Supplementary Figure 2. Total soil P, K, Mn and Zn 
decrease along the chronosequence with N2-fixers 
revealing the lowest levels. ANOVA test, ***P<0.001, 
**P<0.01, Benjamini-Hochberg False Discovery Rate 
(FDR) correction. Error bars indicate 95% confidence 
intervals. 
Supplementary Figure 3. Topsoil (0-10cm) total Al inversely 
correlated with fixer BA% in older forests but not in young 
forests  all suggesting increased dissolution of Al clays and 
release of P  and correlation between Fe/Al and P but not organic 
C. Pearson correlation test (see text above for P and r values). 
Mn and Zn decreased suggesting that forests development may affect nutrient dynamics. Meta-analysis of the 
RAINFOR database containing 1388 entries for non-fixers and 148 for N2-fixers from tropical forests around 
the globe shows 7.9% higher foliar P in N2-fixing trees relative to non-fixers (Mann-Whitney test, P<0.01).  
1.4. Soil Al, Fe and P and evidence for weathering of Al clays and release of P 
Total soil phosphorus strongly correlated with total soil Fe (Pearson correlation test, df=55, P<0.001, df=55, 
r=0.78) and total soil Al (Pearson correlation test, df=55, P<0.001, r=0.77) but not with total soil C% (Pearson 
correlation test, df=55, P=0.25, r=0.15; Supplementary Figure 3). That suggests that the dominant fraction of P 
in our soils is not organic but inorganic bound to Al and Fe in either amorphous or crystalline forms (such 
kaolinite and goethite)  both insoluble and recalcitrant[7]. These results are in line with previous work in 
Panamanian lowland tropical forests, in which total organic P in topsoil (0-9cm) was only 16% from total soil 
P, with inorganic phosphorus accounting for the remaining 84%[8]. Interestingly, fixer basal area (BA%) 
correlate inversely with total soil Al in older sites (14-year old forest sites; Pearson test P<0.01, r=-0.96) but not 
in young sites (5-year old sites  Supplementary Figure 3). Total soil Al is a poor predictor of available Al3+ in 
the soil solution and thus of Al3+ toxicity thus ruling out preference in N2-fixers to low Al sites due to sensitivity 
to Al3+. Alternatively, soil acidification linked to N2-fixers during succession (Supplementary Table 2), similar 
to acid rain effects[9], may cause solubilisation and leaching (translocation) of poorly crystalline Al and  
Fe clay mineral phases deeper into the soil thus releasing P.  This would help to explain the pattern of decreasing 
P along the chronosequence in N2-fixers but not in non-fixers as seen in Supplementary Figure 2. The release of 
inorganic P may help to explain the greater foliar P levels in N2-fixers relative to non-fixers observed during our 
Supplementary Figure 4. Meta-analysis of the RAINFOR 
database by paired fixer/non-fixer site comparisons shows 
significantly higher foliar P and no difference in foliar S 
(Paired two-tailed t-test). Sites containing n<3 for each of the 
two groups were excluded from the analysis. Consequently, the 
mean for N2-fixers and non-fixers for each site is based on n3. 
DM stands for dry biomass.  
Supplementary Figure 5. Olivine weathering rates correlates with declines in soil pH, soil C: N and enrichment in 
olivine Ni and depletion in olivine Mo% contents.  Spearman test **P<0.01, *P<0.05.  
meta-analysis of the RAINFOR dataset from the TRY database[10] encompassing a total of 1536 entries from 
tropical forest trees.  
Supplementary Note 2Spearman correlations between weathering rates and olivine chemistry and soil 
physicochemical factors  
Supplementary Table 3. Single gene correlations with weathering rates. The selection includes genes and pathways discussed in the Main Text.  
Supplementary Note 3Correlations between metagenome gene abundance and weathering rates 
Level 3 pathways enriched in N2-fixers  
P-value r/rho Test Normalisation Database Name 
0.041596 NA Mann-
Whitney 
rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Fructoselysine_(Amadori_product)_utilization_pathway 
0.024975 NA Mann-
Whitney 
rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Glutamate_dehydrogenases 
Gene Orthologues correlating with weathering rates 
0.020815 0.654911 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Citrate synthase (si) (EC 2.3.3.1) 
0.045561 0.585327 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Aconitate hydratase (EC 4.2.1.3) 
0.029416 0.626066 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Succinate dehydrogenase flavoprotein subunit (EC 1.3.99.1) 
0.024998 0.639983 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Pyruvate:ferredoxin oxidoreductase, gamma subunit (EC 1.2.7.1) 
0.020035 0.657933 Pearson Total MG-RAST KO E6.4.1.1B, pycB; pyruvate carboxylase subunit B [EC:6.4.1.1] 
0.001224 0.815507 Pearson Total MG-RAST KO attA2; mannopine transport system permease protein 
0.00122 0.815626 Pearson Total MG-RAST KO attC; mannopine transport system substrate-binding protein 
0.033245 0.615179 Pearson Total MG-RAST KO E2.4.1.21, glgA; starch synthase [EC:2.4.1.21] 
0.047201 0.581802 Pearson Total MG-RAST KO glgB; 1,4-alpha-glucan branching enzyme [EC:2.4.1.18] 
0.009749 0.709546 Pearson Total MG-RAST KO glgC; glucose-1-phosphate adenylyltransferase [EC:2.7.7.27] 
0.013754 0.6861 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
1,4-alpha-glucan (glycogen) branching enzyme, GH-13-type (EC 2.4.1.18) 
0.021 0.654207 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
glgP; Glycogen phosphorylase (EC 2.4.1.1) 
0.029738 0.625113 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
talA; Transaldolase (EC 2.2.1.2) 
0.020811 0.654928 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
kdgK; 2-dehydro-3-deoxygluconate kinase (EC 2.7.1.45) 
0.002729 0.780666 Pearson Total MG-RAST KO PGLS; pgl; 6-phosphogluconolactonase [EC:3.1.1.31] 
0.046936 0.582367 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
xfp; Fructose-6-phosphate phosphoketolase (EC 4.1.2.22) 
0.037444 0.604229 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
xfp; Xylulose-5-phosphate phosphoketolase (EC 4.1.2.9) 
0.046052 0.584263 Pearson Total MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
pelW; Exopolygalacturonate lyase (EC 4.2.2.9) 
0.000426 0.852589 Pearson Total MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
uxaA; Altronate hydrolase (EC 4.2.1.7) 
0.04819 0.57972 Pearson Total MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
exuR; Hexuronate utilization operon transcriptional repressor ExuR 
0.038451 0.601735 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
GltD; Glutamate synthase [NADPH] small chain (EC 1.4.1.13) 
0.016861 0.671195 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
ALT (alanine transaminase NCBI search); Uncharacterized PLP-dependent 
aminotransferase YfdZ 
0.024831 0.64054 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
AspB (closest match in nBLAST); Phosphonoalanine aminotransferase 
0.000303 0.862786 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
FdoH; Putative formate dehydrogenase iron-sulfur subunit (EC 1.2.1.2) 
0.017208 0.669661 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
FdhF; tungsten-containing formate dehydrogenase alpha subunit 
0.036184 0.607419 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
FdhO; Formate dehydrogenase-O, iron-sulfur subunit (EC 1.2.1.2) 
0.030197 0.623767 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Anaerobic dehydrogenases, typically selenocysteine-containing 
0.029025 0.627235 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Fumarate reductase subunit C 
0.014033 0.684664 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Molybdopterin oxidoreductase (EC 1.2.7.-) 
0.041476 0.594512 Pearson Total MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Glycerol dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.6) 
0.024851 0.640473 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Pyruvate formate-lyase (EC 2.3.1.54) 
0.031527 0.619947 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
quinoprotein alcohol dehydrogenase 
0.019298 0.660868 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Formate hydrogenlyase subunit 3 
0.012214 0.694424 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Formate hydrogenlyase subunit 4 
0.042004 0.593288 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Formate hydrogenlyase subunit 7 
0.044197 0.588326 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Formate hydrogenlyase transcriptional activator 
0.017293 0.669289 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
L-lactate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.27) 
0.013824 0.685735 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Phosphate butyryltransferase (EC 2.3.1.19) 
0.034844 0.610899 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
3-hydroxybutyrate dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.1.30) 
0.005391 0.745421 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
CoB--CoM heterodisulfide reductase subunit A (EC 1.8.98.1) 
0.020159 0.657447 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
CoB--CoM heterodisulfide reductase subunit B (EC 1.8.98.1) 
Supplementary Figure 6. Mo leaching from dunite 
correlates wit with several Mo-requiring Level 3 (as 
defined by the MG-RAST Subsystem database) pathways: 
those include many anaerobic pathways consisting of Mo-
containing enzyme-coding genes suggesting a tight feedback 
relationship between Mo leaching and availability resulting 
from weathering and microbiome anaerobiosis that can 
promote further weathering (see Main Text for comments).  
0.034531 0.611725 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
CoB--CoM heterodisulfide reductase subunit C (EC 1.8.98.1) 
0.001814 0.799218 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
CoB--CoM heterodisulfide reductase subunit D (EC 1.8.98.1) 
0.048978 0.57808 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Coenzyme F(420)H(2) dehydrogenase (methanophenazine) subunit FpoN 
0.007409 0.726831 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Energy-conserving hydrogenase (ferredoxin), subunit A 
0.017534 0.66824 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Energy-conserving hydrogenase (ferredoxin), subunit B 
0.003591 0.76715 Pearson rpoC MG-RAST 
Subsystem 
Energy-conserving hydrogenase (ferredoxin), subunit E 
Supplementary References  
1. Fontes, M.P.F. and Weed, S.B., 1991. Iron oxides in selected Brazilian oxisols: I. Mineralogy. Soil 
Science Society of America Journal, 55(4), pp.1143-1149. 
2. Van Wambeke, A., Eswaran, H., Herbillon, A.J. and Comerma, J., 1983. Oxisols. In Developments in 
Soil Science (Vol. 11, pp. 325-354). Elsevier.  
3. Batterman, S.A., Hedin, L.O., Van Breugel, M., Ransijn, J., Craven, D.J. and Hall, J.S., 2013. Key 
role of symbiotic dinitrogen fixation in tropical forest secondary succession. Nature, 502(7470), p.224. 
4. Neumann-Cosel, L., Zimmermann, B., Hall, J.S., van Breugel, M. and Elsenbeer, H., 2011. Soil 
carbon dynamics under young tropical secondary forests on former pasturesA case study from 
Panama. Forest ecology and management, 261(10), pp.1625-1633. 
5. Turner, B.L. and Engelbrecht, B.M., 2011. Soil organic phosphorus in lowland tropical rain 
forests. Biogeochemistry, 103(1-3), pp.297-315. 
6. Wild, A., 1988. Russets Soil Conditions and Plant Growth, ELBS.  
7. Chacon, N., Silver, W.L., Dubinsky, E.A. and Cusack, D.F., 2006. Iron reduction and soil phosphorus 
solubilization in humid tropical forests soils: the roles of labile carbon pools and an electron shuttle 
compound. Biogeochemistry, 78(1), pp.67-84. 
8. Dieter, D., Elsenbeer, H. and Turner, B.L., 2010. Phosphorus fractionation in lowland tropical 
rainforest soils in central Panama. Catena, 82(2), pp.118-125. 
9. Mulder, J., Van Grinsven, J.J.M. and Van Breemen, N., 1987. Impacts of Acid Atmospheric 
Deposition on Woodland Soils in the Netherlands: III. Aluminum Chemistry 1. Soil Science Society of 
America Journal, 51(6), pp.1640-1646. 
10. Kattge, J., Diaz, S., Lavorel, S., Prentice, I.C., Leadley, P., Bnisch, G., Garnier, E., Westoby, M., 
Reich, P.B., Wright, I.J. and Cornelissen, J.H.C., 2011. TRYa global database of plant traits. Global change 
biology, 17(9), pp.2905-2935. 
Chapter 2 
Multiple symbiont recruitments and nitrogen feedbacks govern enhanced 
mineral access in monodominant Acacia of Australian tropical forests 
Dimitar Z. Epihov1*, Alexander  W. Cheesman2, Lucas A. Cernusak2, Miriam Goosem2, Susan G. W. 
Laurance2,3, Michael I. Bird2, Jonathan R. Leake1 and David J. Beerling1 
1Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK 
2College of Science and Engineering and Centre for Tropical Environmental and Sustainability 
Science, James Cook University, Cairns, Australia 
3Wet Tropics Management Authority, PO Box 2050, Cairns 4870, Australia 
*for correspondence 
Abstract 
N2-fixing legumes are abundant and functionally important for alleviating N limitation 
during the re-growth of secondary forests1,2,3. Acacia celsa is a pioneering N2-fixing 
legume in the Australian Wet Tropics area often forming nearly monodominant forest 
stands4. However, what allows Acacia to form such communities relative to other non-
fixing pioneers as well as the exact contribution of its symbioses are unclear. Here, we 
utilize a forest chronosequence (12-48 years old Acacia stands and mature forests) and 
show that the transient peak in nodulation and symbiotic N2-fixation at 20 years of forest 
re-growth coincides with mirroring peaks in the weathering rates of basalt and dunite 
silicate rocks with Acacia exhibiting significantly higher total weathering. Next-
Generation sequencing of 34 full shotgun soil-mineral metagenomes showed significant 
increase in N cycling pathways upon high nodulation regimes. Consequently, 
correlational clustering analyses placed weathering enhancement together with multiple 
N cycling pathways linking fixer-driven changes in the N cycle to parallel increase in 
acidifying and redox dissolutive processes of the microbial carbohydrate, respiratory 
and anaerobic metabolism. Acacia rhizospheres also had the highest rate of P and K 
leaching from basalt throughout the chronosequence as well as significantly greater 
abundance of ectomycorrhizal fungi in roots and basalt communities. Our findings 
corroborate that patterns in mineral weathering in secondary succession are 
temporally-specific and that Acacia trees affect weathering both directly (through 
mycorrhizal recruitment and root activity) and indirectly (through N-driven cascading 
effects on the free-living belowground microbiome) creating an improved supply of 
essential nutrients likely contributing to their monodominance in Australian Tropics 
and implicating the use of their fast growth and their characteristic microbial ecology 
in future reforestation efforts and sustainable forestry management.  
Introduction 
Tropical forests around the world are currently experiencing great reductions in area with 
deforestation activities advancing at rates of 9-12 million hectares per annum or 0.5% total 
loss of forest cover across the tropics5,6. Rates of naturally occurring forest re-growth during 
secondary succession can compensate for and recover 20-85% of the loss rate in forest area7. 
Reforestation also acts to increase the average size of forest fragments by 40% and reduce 
fragmentation (total number of forest fragments) by 15% globally6 showing the potential of 
fragments to eventually coalesce and form clusters of continuous forest cover.  
 The role of N2-fixing legume trees during this successional process is well 
established1,2. Young recovering forests are frequently limited by N creating conditions8 
favouring the recruitment and high fixation rates of N2-fixers1. Also, N2-fixers in such young 
N-limited re-growth forests are linked to higher mineral weathering accommodating their 
higher growth rates than non-fixers. Many such legume-rich communities represent a varied 
mixture of different N2-fixing legume species1,9 with early pioneering legumes typically 
receding in abundance in older, more mature forests once P limitation takes over N limitation8. 
In Australia, however, many such young secondary forests are dominated by a single legume 
species  Acacia celsa. Acacia-dominated forests were suspected to restrict forest 
advancement into mature forests but recent investigations show that they do in fact actively 
recruit late successional species provided there is a nearby fragment of mature forest acting 
as a seedbank4. However, the longevity of Acacia trees in such tropical forests assures 
persistence well into older forests with predicted rates indicating that succession into mature 
forest may take more than 200 years4. We hypothesized that this unusual for pioneering N2-
fixing legumes persistence may be invoked by Acacia celsa ability to form multipartite 
symbioses including partnerships with rhizobial bacteria, arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) and 
ectomycorrhizal (EM) fungi10 acting to alleviate N and P limitation and allowing access to 
nutrients derived from mineral weathering boosting Acacia growth and fitness relative to 
other non-fixing AM pioneering trees.  
 Here, we test this hypothesis in a secondary forest chronosequence in the Atherton 
Tableland, Queensland, Australia by investigating the growth dynamics and weathering rates 
and preferential leaching of limiting nutrients by depositing fresh rock material in the 
rhizospheres of Acacia and non-fixing trees along the chronosequence. Subsequently, we 
investigate the drivers of changes in weathering dynamics by coordinated analysis of (1) soil 
chemistry (n=54), (2) root and rock symbiotic status (through de novo assembly of root 
transcriptomes, n=11 and rock eukaryotic large ribosomal subunit metagenomic pulling and 
taxonomy assignment, n=34), (3) the functional profile of free-living microbiota in rock (by 
shotgun metagenomics and metabolic pathway assignment, n=34).  
Results and Discussion 
A. celsa exhibits faster growth than non-fixers and persistence into older secondary forests  
We used inventory data from 26 secondary forest sites encompassing species-level identified 
counts of over 2,700 tree stems and their diameter at breast height (DBH) forming a 
chronosequence (9-69 years post-abandonment) to establish the growth dynamics of the 5 
target tree species in our study. Acacia celsa, the major N2-fixer in these forests, grew at rates 
much faster than those observed for any of the target non-fixing species and faster than that 
of all non-fixers combined (Figure 1) allowing it reach an average diameter of 45.3 cm 
compared to 12.1 cm average for non-fixers in 48-year old forests. It is this high growth rate 
that supports near monodominance with some 15-30-year old and 30-48-year old forests 
displaying up to 57% to 64% of their basal area (BA) occupied by A. celsa, respectively 
(Table 1)  a range consistent with other cases of monodominant tropical forests11. However, 
the lack of trees of small DBH in older forests suggesting apparently absent seedling 
recruitment (Figure 1a), also reported in previous work4, suggests that unlike mature 
monodominant forests11, the monodominance of A. celsa is a transient successional event12 
carrying into older secondary but not into mature forests.  
Age and tree symbiotic characteristics affect weathering patterns 
We deposited fresh samples of crushed (250-500 m grain diameter) dunite and basalt silicate 
rocks enclosed in polyethylene mesh bags in the rhizosphere (10 cm depth) of 59 trees along 
the secondary forest chronosequence and under 18 trees in mature forests. After 10 months 
including a full wet season, bags were recovered and reacted rocks analysed for weathering 
rates relative to fresh material using X-ray fluorescence. The greatest declines in dunite Mg 
content and basalt product of weathering index (PWI)13 were found in younger (12.5 and 20-
year old) forests indicating intense total weathering, with rock weathering significantly 
decreasing in older successional (48-year old) and mature (120-year old) forests for both types 
of silicate rocks (Figure 2a,b; ANOVA, P<0.001 for both rock types).  
The lack of age replication makes it difficult to exclude the role of possible site effects 
resulting from differing soil conditions and vegetation composition. We carried out soil 
analyses and non-metric multidimensional analyses using all measured total elements 
showing that soil conditions are an unlikely driver of the observed differences 
(Supplementary Figure 1). Using vegetation composition data from sites of different ages 
(12,5, 20, 48-years old and mature forests, n=3, 4, 4, 8, respectively) and Chao clustering, we 
find that our target sites conform well with successional vegetation differences between 
forests of different age (Supplementary Figure 1), suggesting that differences in weathering 
likely result from genuine age-related successional changes.  
P leaching from basalt did not correlate with overall basalt weathering rates (measured by 
PWI) revealing incongruent (independent) leaching rates that were highest in 48-year old 
forests (Figure 2c). Minerals beneath A. celsa revealed significantly greater P decline than 
non-fixers suggesting higher P leaching rates (Mann-Whitney test, P<0.05; Figure 2d). 
Similarly, reacted basalt from the rhizosphere of this legume tree species also consistently 
exhibited significantly lower K levels (Mann-Whitney, P<0.01; Figure 2d). The highest 
weathering rates recorded for both dunite and basalt were those of mineral material beneath 
N2-fixers in the 20-year old forest site (Figure 2a,b). Interestingly, they also exhibited the 
highest levels of nodulation (Figure 3a) offering an intriguing link between symbiotic N2-
fixation, N cycling and weathering dynamics.  
Symbiotic N2-fixation transitions the soil-mineral microbiome to enhanced weathering 
through cascading N input effects 
To further investigate the role of symbiotic N2-fixation on soil function and weathering, we 
extracted and sequenced 34 metagenomes from the soil-buried reacted minerals (subsequently 
referred to as soil-mineral metagenomes). Genes assigned to the N2-fixation pathways of free-
living microorganisms peaked in soil-mineral metagenomes from the 20-year old forests 
where nodulation was highest (Figure 3a,b; Supplementary Figure 2). Using root 
transcriptomics, we show that nodulated roots contained 4-fold greater abundance of 
Bradyrhizobium transcripts than non-nodulated roots (ANOVA, P<0.01; Figure 4a) 
confirming Bradyrhizobium as the main nodulating agent in Acacia celsa in agreement with 
previous nodulating reports for the closely related Acacia mangium14. Over 50% of all Fe-Mo 
nitrogenase beta subunit (nifK) gene copies in basalt were assigned to Bradyrhizobium with 
basalt beneath N2-fixers containing significantly greater bradyrhizobial nifK gene abundance 
than non-fixers (Figure 4b, two-tailed t-test, P<0.05). These findings corroborate that the 
peak in N2-fixation pathways in basalt and dunite of 20-year old forests is contributable to 
high nodulation rates and abundance of bradyrhizobia in the soil of these nodulating trees. 
Previous studies have found no relationship between Acacia tree diameter and abundance of 
unique reads assigned to the Bradyrhizobiaceae32. Our findings support this relationship by 
asserting that peak in bradyrhizobial nifK reads and N2-fixation genes occurs not in the largest 
48-year old trees but in 20-year old trees suggesting that not tree dimeter but N availability 
and tree-soil feedback relationships may control nodulation and niche construction instead. In 
the absence of compatible hosts, studies have revealed different species as dominants of free-
living N2-fixing communities including Burkholderia, Geobacter, Azotobacter, 
Rhodopseudomonas, Methylocella and Bradyrhizobium33. However, Bradyrhizobium 
dominance of free-living communities in the absence of host is associated with neutral soils33 
and not the highly acidic oxisols present at our sites suggesting that symbiotic attraction is an 
important driver of bradyrhizobial abundance at our sites.  
In addition to this symbiosis-driven effects on the microbial community, high N inputs 
resulting from legume litterfall rich in fixed N can also impact the microbiome. Nodulation 
co-occurred with mirroring increases in the abundance of ammonia monooxygenase gene in 
the soil-mineral metagenomes (Figure 3a). Ammonia monooxygenase is a key member of 
the microbial N cycle catalysing the oxidation of ammonia to nitrite, a process that generates 
acidity and responds to high N loads suggesting up-regulation of N cycling activity in this 
highly nodulating forest.  
 To further dissect the apparent relationship between N inputs, N cycling and 
weathering dynamics, we constructed detailed Spearman correlation heat-map matrices for 
dunite and basalt soil-mineral metagenomes including all of the over 1,100 lower level 
metabolic pathways and weathering rates. Using complete Manhattan clustering, we show 
that weathering rates fell into a well-defined cluster of positive correlations (Figure 3b). The 
analysis identified two clusters 1 and 2 (sensu stricto) with similarly large positive Spearman 
rho correlation values with weathering (Figure 3c). Cluster 3 pathways also exhibited positive 
albeit significantly lower rho values (sensu lato cluster). In contrast, cluster 4 pathways were 
characterised by negative correlations with weathering. To establish the shared pathways 
linked to high weathering rates in both dunite and basalt metagenomes, we selected pathways 
found in clusters 1 and 2 from both rocks (a pathway was still considered if it was present in 
cluster 3 provided it was present in cluster 1 or 2 from the other rock).  
 Our cluster analysis highlighted a total of 17 pathways involved in N transformations 
and cycling (Figure 3d) that positively linked to weathering in both dunite and basalt 
metagenomes including ammonia monooxygenase (NH3 to NO2-), denitrification (NO2-/NO3- 
to N2), dissimilatory nitrite reductase (NO3-/NO2- to NH3) and glutamate dehydrogenases 
(NH3 + -ketoglutarate to glutamate). Metagenomically, high N transforming microbial 
activity is linked to high N inputs15 often accompanied by nitrate leaching. As a consequence 
of nitrate leaching, protons generated by nitrification cannot be compensated by OH- extrusion 
coupled to microbial and plant nitrate uptake, eventually causing the build-up of acidity16 
which can stimulate weathering rates.  
 Also in the positively correlating clusters are pathways involved in carbohydrate 
metabolism. Of particular interest are the adapted to high C availability Entner-Doudoroff 
glycolytic pathway17 and those pathways converting the labile C source glucose to the 
weathering potent gluconic and 2-ketogluconic acids18,19 including genes encoding the 
enzymes pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)-dependent glucose dehydrogenase and gluconate 
2-dehydrogenase (Figure 3d). Another pathway sensitive to high C availability positively 
linked to weathering is that of glycogen synthesis and metabolism  a reserve polysaccharide 
in bacteria used to store C at high external supply20. Utilisation of maltose, a disaccharide 
resulting from decomposition of starch, was also positively linked to weathering and other 
pathways in clusters 1 and 2 (Figure 3d). Together, these results paint a picture of high labile 
C loading resulting from either enhanced forest productivity in such forests of high fixed N 
supply or from rapid decomposition of the N-rich legume litter ultimately augmenting 
microbial activity and respiration.   
Microbial respiration generates by-product CO2, increases its concentration at the soil-mineral 
interface and stimulates weathering through formation of carbonic acid (H2CO3). In support, 
the gene encoding carbonic anhydrase (catalysing the reversible conversion of CO2 to H2CO3) 
in basalt metagenomes directly correlates with pathways encoding respiratory 
dehydrogenases, PQQ-dependent glucose dehydrogenase and N conversions 
(Supplementary Table 1) highlighting the relationship between microbial N, C cycling and 
respiratory CO2 evolution. In further support of this relationship, the major respiratory 
pathway components (respiratory complex I, CO dehydrogenase, H2:CoM-S-S-HTP 
oxidoreductase, cytochrome B6-F complex, terminal cytochrome C oxidases) are also 
contained within the positively correlating clusters of basalt and dunite metagenomes 
identified previously (Figure 3d).  
 High respiration rates would ultimately drive a decline in available O2 predicted to 
create multiple anaerobic microsites. In agreement, pathways involved in anaerobic microbial 
activities including fermentative processes (lactate fermentation, pyruvate:ferredoxin 
oxidoreductase), S reduction (sulfate reduction-associated complexes), Fe respiration (Fe(III) 
respiration  Shewanella type), methanogenesis (coenzyme F420-H2 dehydrogenase 
methanophenazine, particulate methane monooxygenase pMMO, methanopterin 
biosynthesis) are also found within the sensu stricto positively correlating weathering clusters 
of both dunite and basalt metagenomes (Figure 3d). The anaerobic food chain found in such 
microsites can be conceived to generate large quantities of fermentative organic acids 
including acetic, lactic, butyric, formic acids  all sources of acidifying and complexing 
activities towards enhanced weathering. Furthermore, S reduction and Fe respiration can both 
drive the redox dissolution of basaltic and dunitic Fe(III) to Fe(II)S or Fe(II), respectively, 
thus further corroding their consisting minerals21,22,23.  
 The complex relationship between high N inputs of low C/N ratio driving faster 
decomposition, enhanced microbial respiration and carbohydrate cycling which then reduces 
available O2 favouring anaerobic metabolism can be described as cascading N input effects 
on the belowground microbiome function all separately contributing to enhanced weathering 
(Figure 3d). Interestingly, we have first hypothesized the existence of N-driven weathering 
feedback effects in regards to the impact that the evolution of legume-rich tropical forests had 
on weathering during the Cenozoic24. Then, we provided the first evidence that the 
hypothesized cascading N effects were observed in N2-fixing legume trees of Neotropical 
forests in Panama beneath which soil organic matter had lower C/N ratio, consistent with 
elevated N inputs, and weathering rates of dunite (olivine) were significantly higher than 
beneath non-fixing trees. Our combined findings from Panamanian forests reported before 
from Australian tropical forests reported here, suggest that the ability of symbiotic N2-fixing 
legume trees to impact belowground microbial communities and increase rock weathering 
through N inputs may be widespread. 
Multiple symbiotic recruitments in A. celsa provide improved access to basalt nutrients 
We assembled de novo root transcriptomes from both Acacia celsa (n=7) and Alphitonia 
petriei (n=3) using roots near the weathered rock samples (extracted within the same soil core 
as the collected weathered rock samples). In addition to the symbiotic recruitment of N2-fixing 
nodulating Bradyrhizobium spp. (Figure 4a,b; ANOVA, P<0.01 and two-tailed t-test 
P<0.05), roots and basalt communities of A. celsa also demonstrated higher recruitment of 
ectomycorrhizal fungi (Figure 4c,d; Mann-Whitney test, P<0.05). While no significant 
difference was found between fixers and non-fixers in their relative abundance of arbuscular 
mycorrhizal fungi, basalt metagenomes from Acacia contained a significantly greater 
cumulative abundance (sum) of mycorrhizal fungi (Mann-Whitney test, P>0.05; Figure 4d). 
Importantly, all 11 EM fungal genera found in the soil-mineral metagenomes of weathered 
basalt were also present in root transcriptomes supporting the existence of active physical 
mycorrhizal connections (links) between roots and rocks (Figure 4g).  
 A significantly greater abundance of ectomycorrhizal fungal LSUs was found in 
metagenomes of the P and K-containing weathered basalt (n=17) than in the P and K-lacking 
dunite samples (n=17, Wilcoxons paired ranked test, P<0.05; Figure 4e) providing a 
tantalizing link between basalt P and K leaching and ectomycorrhization, particularly in the 
light of the greater P and K leaching observed from basalt beneath Acacia trees (Figure 2d). 
Furthermore, we report that samples that had exhibited high P leaching rates were 
significantly enriched in the ectomycorrhizal Pisolithus and Hebeloma (Mann-Whitney test 
P<0.01 and P<0.05, respectively; Figure 4h), implicating these fungal genera in P leaching 
and transfer to plant roots.  
 In support, transcriptome analysis of roots extracted from rooting zones of high basalt 
P leaching exhibited an up-regulated expression of P-dependent metabolic pathways (Table 
2). Those included carbohydrate phosphorylation, protein phosphorylation, phospholipid 
translocation, phosphorelay signal transduction system, adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 
synthesis coupled electron transport (Table 2), all signifying a root response to increased 
bioavailability of phosphorus. Furthermore, we found that high P leaching also correlated with 
transcript abundance of root defence responses and responses to biotic stimuli, likely outlining 
the interactions with P-transferring mycorrhizal fungi infecting the roots. Interestingly, proton 
transmembrane transport, involved in rhizospheric acidification and improved P nutrition, 
also positively correlated with P leaching (Table 2) suggesting an active role of roots in the 
basalt weathering processes. Similarly, symbiotic N2-fixation triggered a characteristic 
transcriptional response in nodulated roots consistent with improved exchange of N 
metabolites, protein synthesis and limiting O2 concentrations (Supplementary Table 2).  
 We find evidence for temporal trade-offs in the symbiotic recruitment patterns using 
our soil-mineral metagenome libraries. The basalt metagenomes peaked in bradyrhizobial 
nifK sequences in the profusely nodulated 20-year old forest which co-occurred with the 
lowest counts of mycorrhizal fungi (Figure 4h). In contrast, soil-basalt metagenomes from 
the least nodulating 48-year old forest exhibited the highest peak in ectomycorrhizal LSUs 
accompanied by a significant drop in bradyrhizobial nifKs (Figure 4h). Although the lack of 
replication at the forest age level makes it difficult to definitively differentiate between site 
and age effects, the observation of timing and trade-offs between nodulation and 
ectomycorrhization still holds. Previous work with tropical N2-fixers shows that symbiotic 
nodulation is under the control of external N supply, increasing during N-limiting conditions 
in young secondary forests. N-limitation observed in the initial stages of secondary forest re-
growth is often then replaced by P limitation in later successional stages providing a possible 
explanation for our observed patterns in symbiont abundances. Particularly, tree C 
photosynthates are only allocated to symbionts alleviating the current nutrient limitation  be 
it N (through nodulation and diazotrophy) or P (through P-mining ectomycorrhizae). In 
further support, soil total P was the at its lowest concentration in the 48-year old forests 
(Supplementary Figure 1). 
Conclusions 
We report that Acacia celsa, a dominant legume native to secondary tropical forests in 
Australia, similar to its legume relatives of Panamanian Neotropical forests, regulates its 
nodulation in likely response to N limitation during secondary forest succession. High 
nodulation rates co-occur with higher basalt and dunite silicate weathering rates in Acacia 
celsa trees relative to non-fixing trees. We provide soil-mineral metagenomic data revealing 
that the high inputs of fixed N trigger a suite of cascading N effects resulting in enhanced N 
cycling, microbial respiration, carbohydrate metabolism and anaerobic activity, all positively 
clustering with weathering rates and stimulating various weathering mechanisms (redox 
dissolution, acidification, organic acid generation). Throughout the chronosequence, basalt 
material from beneath N2-fixing Acacia trees had significantly greater P and K leaching 
suggesting improved access to these key macronutrients. We report data revealing that in 
addition to N feedback effects, this ability of legumes may be due to their higher abundance 
of ectomycorrhizal symbioses in roots and basalt material.  
 The faster growth rates and monodominance of Acacia celsa in secondary tropical 
forests may be governed by its ability to timely recruit multiple root symbionts with 
corresponding changes in root expression patterns and microbial community function 
allowing improved access to highly insoluble mineral-derived products and atmospheric N2. 
Our findings carry implications to sustainable reforestation and agroforestry efforts 
worldwide, encouraging the use and further trials of native trees simultaneously forming N2-
fixing and multiple mycorrhizal symbioses (e.g. Acacia, Alnus, Casuarina) either on poorly 
developed soils with appreciable mineral component or on highly nutrient impoverished soils 
in combination with rock grain application. Because mineral weathering also enables C 
capture through the mineral-H2CO3 carbonation reaction, such strategic forestry practices may 
not only capture C by forest re-growth but also by the means of microbe-assisted enhanced 
weathering.  
Methods and Materials 
Study sites 
The three secondary forest sites in our weathering dynamics study were each 20x50m plots, 
located near Tarzali (-17.40, 145.61) in Queensland, Australia and their age was estimated 
using detailed aerial photography as previously described25,26. Their soils were characterised 
as deeply weathered oxisols derived from basalt bedrock. The mature forest site (20x50m) in 
our study was part of Davies Creek National Park (-17.04, 145.61), Queensland, Australia 
and was characterised by deeply weathered soils derived from granite parent material (forest 
age was estimated using the straight line equation resulting from correlating tree DBH with 
age from our inventoried secondary and mature sites near Tarzali). The DBH statistics 
outlined in Figure 1 and in the Main Text result from an inventory tree species data from 26 
secondary and 7 mature sites near Tarzali. The climatic conditions are characterised by 
seasonally wet mild tropical climate with rainfall in the range of 1100 to 2240 mm and 
temperature with a mean minimum of 10oC in winter to a mean maximum of 29oC in summer. 
Nodulation estimates 
Nodulation was estimated by the means of collecting 5 soil cores (cylinders with dimensions 
10x10 cm) for each tree extracted 1 m away from the main tree trunk. This procedure was 
replicated for 8 Acacia celsa trees in each of the three secondary forest sites of our weathering 
dynamics study to a total of 24 tested trees and 120 cores. The 5 cores collected per tree were 
subsequently pooled and their roots separated through sieving. Nodules were carefully 
detached from roots using tweezers. Both collected nodules and roots were rinsed thoroughly 
to remove any remaining soil particles and dried for 30 min in a 70oC oven. The resulting 
nodule and root samples were separately weighed and nodulation was expressed as mg fresh 
nodule per g fresh root biomass.  
Weathering dynamics 
Six tree species of different families well represented in the Australian Wet Tropics flora were 
used to compare mineral weathering rates across the 12-48-year old forest chronosequence, 
namely N2-fixing and ectomycorrhizal Acacia celsa (Leguminosae) and non-fixing 
Alphitonia petriei (Rhamnaceae), Guioa lasioneura (Sapindaceae), Glochidion hylandii 
(Phyllanthaceae), and Neolitsea dealbata (Lauraceae). A total of 4 polyethylene 30 m mesh 
bags (2 x basalt, 2 x dunite) containing 3 grams of crushed rock material with grain size of 
250-500 m were deposited in the immediate rhizosphere of each of the 59 tested trees (15 
cm away from the main stem) using a 10x10cm soil corer to a total of 236 mineral samples. 
Bags were collected after 10 months and a full wet season. The contents of each of the two 
bags of the same rock from each tree were pooled and well-mixed to a composite rock sample 
for that tree (1 basalt and 1 dunite) and were subsequently analysed through portable X-ray 
fluorescence (XRF) Olympus Vanta M series machine set at biogeochemistry mode (the 
machine was rented from Sercal Non-Destructive Test Equipment Ltd., UK). To eliminate 
any non-scanned light elements during XRF (presented by the machine as LE), the amounts 
of scanned weathered rock from pooled basalt and dunite samples were optimised and 
weighed to ~0.07 g and ~0.10 g, respectively, forming a thin layer on the top of the scanning 
screen (window). Each sample was processed three times through XRF and averaged to 
minimise machine drift with its mean used for further analyses. Weathering rates were 
estimated by Mg loss relative to fresh material for dunite (as Mg is the main principal 
component) and by the widely used Product of Weathering Index (PWI)13,27,28 for basalt due 
its more varied chemical composition. The equation for PWI is as follows:  
 = 
(2 + 2 + 23 + 23)
 100 
We used all developed weathering indices and chose to use PWI on the following criteria: (1) 
number of chemical components used for calculation, (2) significantly lower (more 
weathered) values for weathered material than fresh unweathered rock, and (3) significantly 
correlating with dunite weathering (based on Mg loss relative to fresh material) as favourable 
weathering conditions for silicates are common between different rock types. Results are 
presented in Supplementary Table 3.  
Soil analyses  
Total soil chemistry was obtained through XRF of the soiled dunite-containing polyethylene 
mesh bags after the bags have been entirely emptied from their rock material. As the bags 
have spent sufficient time (10 months) in the soil environment their outer side was entirely 
covered in soil from the immediate vicinity. They were XRF scanned using the Olympus 
Vanta Alloy analysis mode. Soil for pH measurements was collected from topsoil sites (0-
10cm depth) near the mineral samples. The soil pH was measured with a portable Hannah pH 
meter to the second decimal space directly applying the instrument to a soil paste containing 
1 g soil and 5 ml 0.1M CaCl2 after the paste was left shaking on a horizontal shaker at 250 
rpm for 1 hour. 
DNA extraction and shotgun metagenome sequencing  
DNA was extracted from 0.5 g of the pooled weathered rock samples that were stored at -
20oC after collection in the field and prior extraction. Extraction was carried out using the 
MoBio PowerSoil DNA isolation kit and protocol instructions therein with slight 
modifications. Firstly, the amount of material added was double the recommended 0.25 g. 
Secondly, samples in PowerBead tubes were shaken on a horizontal shaker at 2000 rpm for 
15 min to maximize extraction yield for any endolithic microorganisms. Following extraction, 
DNA samples were stored at -20oC before sending them for sequencing. All 34 total DNA 
extracts (n=17 dunite and n=17 basalt) were sequenced on one lane of the NovaSeq 150bp 
Paired Ends at the Edinburgh Genomics Institute, UK.  
Root RNA extraction, transcriptome sequencing and de novo transcriptome assembly 
Roots were collected in the field from the immediate vicinity of the weathered mesh bag 
samples from 10 target trees (n=8 Acacia celsa and n=3 Alphitonia petriei) using a soil corer 
(10x10cm) and were immediately flash frozen using liquid N2. Upon return from the field 
samples were stored in -80oC before further work. Frozen root samples were handled 
aseptically and weighed to 250 mg input amount in a -20oC walk-in freezer room. The 
weighed samples were then used to extract total RNA following the RNAzol protocol for field 
extraction of RNA29. The resulting total RNA extracts were sent in a dry shipper charged with 
liquid N2 to Edinburgh Genomics Institute where they were further performed quality checks 
with an Agilent Bioanalyzer RNA 6000 Pico kit. Samples had exhibited significant amount 
of degradation likely resulting from extensive transportation with average RIN value of 2.2. 
Regardless of the low RIN values, we pursued further polyA tail enrichment and library 
construction using Illumina TruSeq stranded mRNA-seq. Samples were sequenced on the 
NovaSeq 150 bp Paired Ends S2 lane together with the DNA samples which were sequenced 
on the S1 lane. The paired-end transcriptome sequences were fed into Blast2GO Premium 
software and assembled using the built-in de novo transcriptome assembly pipeline. 
Assembled transcriptomes were nBLAST-ed against the NCBI database using the Cloud 
Blast2GO feature to establish taxonomic identity using top hit matching. Subsequently, hits 
were mapped and functionally annotated using the Gene Ontology (GO) database feature 
within Blast2GO. We performed 2 post-assembly analyses to independently assess the 
integrity of the obtained data due to the low RIN values. First, we confirmed that the root 
samples from beneath Acacia celsa trees (Leguminosae) mapped to 1.5-fold more legume 
species than root samples from beneath Alphitonia petriei (Rhamnaceae) as shown in 
Supplementary Figure 3. Secondly, we compared nodulated (n=3) with non-nodulated (n=5) 
Acacia roots and found that previously characterised nodulation-specific pathways were 
significantly enriched in the nodulated roots (Supplementary Table 2) and that nodulated roots 
(definitely leguminous) contained significantly greater hits taxonomically mapping to legume 
species than non-nodulated roots (of uncertain taxonomic affinity; Supplementary Figure 3).  
Shotgun metagenome assembly and annotation  
All 34 shotgun metagenomes were processed through the MG-RAST server30 using default 
parameters and are publicly available for download and analysis (their unique MG-RAST ID 
numbers and sequencing statistics can be found in Supplementary Table 4). The average size 
significantly differed with dunite metagenomes revealing significantly lower, 8.97 Giga base 
pairs (Gbp) mean, than basalt metagenomes with a mean of 11.05 Gbp (paired two-tailed t-
test, P<0.01). Annotation used in our analyses were against the RefSeq protein database and 
hierarchical clustering was achieved via the Subsystem database classifying functional reads 
into levelled pathways (Level 3, 2, 1). Comma-delimited table files at e-5, 40% similarity for 
all levels and functional reads were downloaded for further analyses. Further information on 
sequencing statistics can be found in Appendix 2.  
Correlation clustering analyses 
Correlation clustering was performed on Level 3 pathways with weathering rates inserted into 
the input table so that they cluster with their strongly correlating pathways and with pathways 
that strongly correlate with pathways strongly correlating with weathering revealing the 
metabolic conditions favouring or co-varying with enhanced weathering. Consequently, we 
constructed Spearman correlation test correlation matrix containing rho values. The resulting 
matrix and its constituents were clustered using complete Manhattan distance and the 
heatmap.2 function in the R environment.  
CHANGED 
Bradyrhizobial nifK and fungal taxonomic analyses  
Fe-Mo nitrogenase genes can be used to dissect the diversity of both possible free-living and 
nodulating diazotrophs. Similarly, the large ribosomal subunit (LSU) genes can be used for 
taxonomic analyses of eukaryotes. We downloaded the FASTA files for all the Fe-Mo 
nitrogenase beta subunit (nifK) annotated hits and the eukaryotic and archaeal LSU gene 
(Level 3 hierarchical cluster) hits from each of our metagenomes using MG-RAST interface. 
The FASTA files were fed into Blast2GO and nBLAST was performed against the NCBI 
database using the in-built Cloud computing. Next, we used the best matching hit (according 
to its e-value) for each of the sequences to assemble a species table for all hits for each sample. 
Species were clustered into genera and samples were merged together into one taxonomic 
analysis file. To distinguish ectomycorrhizal fungi within the list of eukaryotic and archaeal 
LSU genera, we used the detailed tabulated list of documented ectomycorrhizal fungal genera 
assembled by Tedersoo and Smith31. The sum of ectomycorrhizal fungi (as a proportion of all 
eukaryotic and archaeal LSU reads) were multiplied by the abundance of the eukaryotic and 
archaeal LSU gene within each metagenome to obtain a surrogate measure for the abundance 
of ectomycorrhizal fungi within each metagenomic microbial community. Similarly, nifK 
sequences that best matched to Bradyrhizobium nifK sequences were summed and then 
multiplied by the nifK gene abundance in their representative metagenome. The abundance of 
bradyrhizobial and ectomycorrhizal fungi within the root transcriptomes were derived by a 
similar approach based on nBLAST of all transcripts in the Blast2GO environment and 
subsequent use of the best matching taxonomic hits.  
Statistical analyses 
All statistical analyses and their P value and correlation r and rho results are presented in the 
Main Text and/or in the Figures and Figure Text. Generally, normally distributed data were 
tested with parametric tests, whereas data lacking normal distribution were tested with their 
non-parametric test equivalents. Binning into low and high P leaching categories was based 
on the median P leaching rate due to significant outliers preventing reliable correlational 
analyses. Due to their highly variable yields (several hundred transcripts to several thousand 
transcripts), root transcriptomic GO pathways correlations with basalt P leaching rates were 
achieved by excluding any transcriptomes that lacked the given GO pathway due to shallow 
sequencing  as such GO pathways were correlated based on 3, 4, 5, 6 or 7 entries with 
different cut-off Pearson r values  essentially using GO term-specific rarefaction (n3). Only 
transcriptomes from roots beneath Acacia were correlated with P leaching to avoid species 
effects. One transcriptome was excluded due to a lacking P leaching rate (n=8-1=7).  
References 
1. Batterman, S.A., Hedin, L.O., Van Breugel, M., Ransijn, J., Craven, D.J. and Hall, J.S., 2013. Key 
role of symbiotic dinitrogen fixation in tropical forest secondary succession. Nature, 502(7470), p.224. 
2. Barron, A.R., Purves, D.W. and Hedin, L.O., 2011. Facultative nitrogen fixation by canopy legumes 
in a lowland tropical forest. Oecologia, 165(2), pp.511-520. 
3. Vitousek, P.M., Menge, D.N., Reed, S.C. and Cleveland, C.C., 2013. Biological nitrogen fixation: 
rates, patterns and ecological controls in terrestrial ecosystems. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal 
Society B: Biological Sciences, 368(1621), p.20130119. 
4. Yeo, W.L.J. and Fensham, R.J., 2014. Will Acacia secondary forest become rainforest in the 
Australian Wet Tropics?. Forest ecology and management, 331, pp.208-217. 
5. Houghton, R.A. and Nassikas, A.A., 2018. Negative emissions from stopping deforestation and forest 
degradation, globally. Global change biology, 24(1), pp.350-359. 
6. Taubert, F., Fischer, R., Groeneveld, J., Lehmann, S., Mller, M.S., Rdig, E., Wiegand, T. and Huth, 
A., 2018. Global patterns of tropical forest fragmentation. Nature, 554(7693), p.519. 
7. Ernst, C., Mayaux, P., Verhegghen, A., Bodart, C., Christophe, M. and Defourny, P., 2013. National 
forest cover change in Congo Basin: deforestation, reforestation, degradation and regeneration for the years 
1990, 2000 and 2005. Global change biology, 19(4), pp.1173-1187. 
8. Davidson, E.A., de Carvalho, C.J.R., Figueira, A.M., Ishida, F.Y., Ometto, J.P.H., Nardoto, G.B., 
Sab, R.T., Hayashi, S.N., Leal, E.C., Vieira, I.C.G. and Martinelli, L.A., 2007. Recuperation of nitrogen 
cycling in Amazonian forests following agricultural abandonment. Nature, 447(7147), p.995. 
9. Wurzburger, N. and Hedin, L.O., 2016. Taxonomic identity determines N2 fixation by canopy trees 
across lowland tropical forests. Ecology letters, 19(1), pp.62-70. 
10. Hopkins, M.S., Reddell, P., Hewett, R.K. and Graham, A.W., 1996. Comparison of root and 
mycorrhizal characteristics in primary and secondary rainforest on a metamorphic soil in North Queensland, 
Australia. Journal of Tropical Ecology, 12(6), pp.871-885. 
11. Newbery, D.M., Alexander, I.J. and Rother, J.A., 1997. Phosphorus dynamics in a lowland African 
rainforest: the influence of ectomycorrhizal trees. Ecological Monographs, 67(3), pp.367-409. 
12. Hart, T.B., Hart, J.A. and Murphy, P.G., 1989. Monodominant and species-rich forests of the humid 
tropics: causes for their co-occurrence. The American Naturalist, 133(5), pp.613-633. 
13. Fiantis, D., Nelson, M., Shamshuddin, J., Goh, T.B. and Van Ranst, E., 2010. Determination of the 
geochemical weathering indices and trace elements content of new volcanic ash deposits from Mt. Talang 
(West Sumatra) Indonesia. Eurasian Soil Science, 43(13), pp.1477-1485. 
14. Andrews, M. and Andrews, M.E., 2017. Specificity in legume-rhizobia symbioses. International 
Journal of Molecular Sciences, 18(4), p.705. 
15. Yeoh, Y.K., PaungfooLonhienne, C., Dennis, P.G., Robinson, N., Ragan, M.A., Schmidt, S. and 
Hugenholtz, P., 2016. The core root microbiome of sugarcanes cultivated under varying nitrogen fertilizer 
application. Environmental microbiology, 18(5), pp.1338-1351. 
16. Tang, C., Unkovich, M.J. and Bowden, J.W., 1999. Factors affecting soil acidification under legumes. 
III. Acid production by N2-fixing legumes as influenced by nitrate supply. The New Phytologist, 143(3), 
pp.513-521. 
17. Schwalbach, M.S., Tripp, H.J., Steindler, L., Smith, D.P. and Giovannoni, S.J., 2010. The presence of 
the glycolysis operon in SAR11 genomes is positively correlated with ocean productivity. Environmental 
microbiology, 12(2), pp.490-500. 
18. Lin, T.F., Huang, H.I., Shen, F.T. and Young, C.C., 2006. The protons of gluconic acid are the major 
factor responsible for the dissolution of tricalcium phosphate by Burkholderia cepacia CC-Al74. Bioresource 
Technology, 97(7), pp.957-960. 
19. Duff, R.B., Webley, D.M. and Scott, R.O., 1963. Solubilization of minerals and related materials by 
2-ketogluconic acid-producing bacteria. Soil Science, 95(2), pp.105-114. 
21. Leslie, K., Sturm, A., Stotler, R., Oates, C.J., Kyser, T.K. and Fowle, D.A., 2015. Marinobacter 
bacteria associated with a massive sulphide ore deposit affect metal mobility in the deep 
subsurface. Geochemistry: Exploration, Environment, Analysis, 15(4), pp.319-326. 
22. Bennett, P.C., Rogers, J.R., Choi, W.J. and Hiebert, F.K., 2001. Silicates, silicate weathering, and 
microbial ecology. Geomicrobiology Journal, 18(1), pp.3-19. 
23. Hamilton, W.A., 1985. Sulphate-reducing bacteria and anaerobic corrosion. Annual review of 
microbiology, 39(1), pp.195-217. 
24. Epihov, D.Z., Batterman, S.A., Hedin, L.O., Leake, J.R., Smith, L.M. and Beerling, D.J., 2017. N2-
fixing tropical legume evolution: a contributor to enhanced weathering through the Cenozoic?. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 284(1860), p.20170370. 
25. Goosem, M., Paz, C., Fensham, R., Preece, N., Goosem, S. and Laurance, S.G., 2016. Forest age and 
isolation affect the rate of recovery of plant species diversity and community composition in secondary rain 
forests in tropical Australia. Journal of Vegetation Science, 27(3), pp.504-514. 
26. Paz, C.P., Goosem, M., Bird, M., Preece, N., Goosem, S., Fensham, R. and Laurance, S., 2016. Soil 
types influence predictions of soil carbon stock recovery in tropical secondary forests. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 376, pp.74-83. 
27. Souri, B., Watanabe, M. and Sakagami, K., 2006. Contribution of Parker and Product indexes to 
evaluate weathering condition of Yellow Brown Forest soils in Japan. Geoderma, 130(3-4), pp.346-355. 
28. Reiche, P., 1950. A survey of weathering processes and products (No. 3). University of New Mexico 
Press. 
29. Breitler, J.C., Campa, C., Georget, F., Bertrand, B. and Etienne, H., 2016. A single-step method for 
RNA isolation from tropical crops in the field. Scientific reports, 6, p.38368. 
30. Meyer, F., Paarmann, D., D'Souza, M., Olson, R., Glass, E.M., Kubal, M., Paczian, T., Rodriguez, A., 
Stevens, R., Wilke, A. and Wilkening, J., 2008. The metagenomics RAST servera public resource for the 
automatic phylogenetic and functional analysis of metagenomes. BMC bioinformatics, 9(1), p.386. 
31. Tedersoo, L. and Smith, M.E., 2013. Lineages of ectomycorrhizal fungi revisited: foraging strategies 
and novel lineages revealed by sequences from belowground. Fungal biology reviews, 27(3-4), pp.83-99.  
32. Dinnage, R., Simonsen, A.K., Cardillo, M., Thrall, P.H., Barrett, L.G. and Prober, S.M., 2018. Larger 
legume plants host a greater diversity of symbiotic nitrogen-fixing bacteria. bioRxiv, p.246611. 
33. Woliska, A., Kuniar, A., Zielenkiewicz, U., Banach, A., Izak, D., Stpniewska, Z. and Baszczyk, M., 
2017. Metagenomic analysis of some potential nitrogen-fixing bacteria in arable soils at different formation 
processes. Microbial ecology, 73(1), pp.162-176. 
Figures and Figure Text 
(Epihov et al., 2018) 
Figure 1. Diameter at breast height (DBH) data from >2,700 stems from 26 Australian wet 
tropical secondary forest sites of different post-abandonment ages reveal that the early 
pioneering N2-fixing A. celsa grows faster than all non-fixers combined and our target non-fixing 
trees: a. Acacia celsa (Leguminosae); b. all non-fixers; c. Alphitonia petriei (Rhamnaceae); d. Guoia 
lasioneura (Sapindaceae); e. Glochidion hylandii (Phyllanthaceae); f. Neolitsea dealbata (Lauraceae);  
Table 1. Patterns of abundance in A. celsa suggest that monodominance (based on % stem basal 
area>30%) occurs in later stages of secondary succession; N2-fixers in mature forests are not A. 
celsa but Archidendron and Austrosteenisia spp. R2 values are results from Pearson correlation test. 
Figure 2. Dunite and basalt rock weathering rates are higher during early successional stages 
but decrease in later successional and mature forests with the successional monodominant N2-
fixer Acacia celsa exhibiting higher leaching of the macroelements P and K from basalt than 
non-fixers in secondary forests. a. Dunite Mg declines in weathered minerals with largest declines 
observed in early successional forests (ANOVA, P<0.001); b. Basalt Product of Weathering Index 
(PWI) declines relative to fresh basalt signifying greater weathering rates in young forests and lower 
ones in late successional and mature (120-year old) forests (ANOVA, P<0.001); c. P leaching patterns 
across the chronosequence shows consistently greater P leaching in the rhizosphere of A. celsa 
(Kruskal-Wallis test, P<0.05); d. A. celsa rhizospheres reveal significantly greater P and K declines 
from basalt rock material relative to non-fixing trees (Mann-Whitney test). Fishers LSD Post-Hoc 
test was applied to determine the significant differences between groups. 
Figure 3. Nitrogen-driven feedbacks resulting from increased inputs of symbiotically fixed N 
mediate metagenomic increases in acidifying and lithotrophic metabolic pathways clustering 
with enhanced weathering rates. a. The highest weathering rates observed in 20-year old forests co-
occur with peaks in symbiotic N2-fixation (nodulation) in Acacia celsa trees and the relative abundance 
of genes assigned to ammonia monooxygenase (catalysing the rate-limiting step in nitrification: NH3 
 NO2-) and N2-fixation in the rock metagenomes suggesting tight link between N cycling and 
weathering dynamics; b. Spearman correlation rho heat-map matrices for abundance of metabolic 
pathways (n=1130) in basalt and dunite metagenomes (n=17 each) input together with weathering rate 
reveal three clusters (sensu stricto  1&2 and sensu lato  3) of pathways positively associated with 
weathering rates and one (4) of pathways broadly negatively associated with weathering rates. 
Clustering is based on complete Manhattan clustering method; c. Mean Spearman rho correlation 
values for each of the four identified clusters with rock weathering rates in comparison to the overall 
average for all pathways confirming that clusters 1&2 contain metabolic pathways positively 
associated with weathering rates (ANOVA, P<0.001 for both minerals; Post-Hoc Tukey HSD test); d. 
Proposed N-driven feedbacks affecting the function of rock-associated microbial communities using 
metabolic pathways from clusters 1&2 in both rock materials and their link to enhanced weathering 
through organic acids and H+ generation (red typeface). Pathways and/or genes in bold are of key 
importance to weathering and are discussed in the Main Text.  
Figure 4. Acacia celsa recruits multiple symbionts leading to improved access to mineral 
nutrients. a. Root transcriptomics reveal that nodulated Acacia roots have significantly higher 
Bradyrhizobium transcripts (ANOVA, P<0.01, Fishers LSD Post-Hoc test) suggesting that 
Bradyrhizobium spp. are the likely nodulating agents of A. celsa; b. Basalt metagenomics show 
significantly higher bradyrhizobial nifK (Fe-Mo nitrogenase beta subunit) gene abundance in A. celsa 
relative to the pioneering non-fixer Alphitonia petriei suggesting that symbiotic attraction may affect 
the microbial community of basalt (two-tailed t-test, P<0.05); c. Root transcriptomes reveal greater 
abundance of ectomycorrhizal (EM) fungal transcripts in Acacia roots compared to the roots of non-
fixer A. petriei (Mann-Whitney test, P<0.05); d. Paired comparison of metagenomics eukaryotic and 
archaeal LSU reveals significantly higher EM fungal abundance in basalt than dunite (Wilcoxons 
paired ranked test, P<0.05); e. Analysis of the  ribosomal large subunit genes (LSUs) of eukaryotes 
and archaea in basalt metagenomes indicate significantly greater abundance of EM fungi and overall 
cumulative abundance of mycorrhizal fungi (EM + arbuscular mycorrhizal (AM) fungi) in basalt from 
A. celsa rhizosphere than that beneath the non-fixer A. petriei (two-way ANOVA, fixer/non-fixer 
P<0.05, Sidaks multiple comparison test); f. Successional dynamics in nifK, EM and AM LSUs from 
basalt reveal peaks in nifK matching that of nodulation (see Figure 3a) and peak in EM LSUs in the 
oldest 48-year forests with the highest P leaching (see Figure 2c); g. Mycorrhizal community profiling 
shows multiple EM and AM symbiotic recruits with specificities in roots, basalt and dunite rock 
material; h. Greater abundance of Pisolithus and Hebeloma symbionts within the basalt EM 
community is linked to high P leaching (Mann-Whitney test, P<0.01 and P<0.05).  
Table 2. Root transcriptomics of Acacia celsa roots elucidate strong responses to basalt P 
leaching 
Figure 1. (Epihov et al., 2018.)  
N2-fixers 
Forest age (n = number of 500 m2 plots) 
12.5 (n=3) 20 (n=4) 23-32 (n=4) 34-48 (n=10) Mature (n=7) 
Maximum BA% 1.36 12.35 57.16 64.18 2.25 
Mean BA% 0.45 3.09 30.13 16.46 0.35 
Monodominance  
(>30% BA)  
No No Yes (2/4) Yes (4/10) No 
a b c 
d e f 
Table 1. (Epihov et al., 2018.) 
A. celsa
(n=22)
Non-fixers
(n=37)
10000
15000
20000
A. celsa
(n=22)
Non-fixers
(n=37)
30000
35000
40000
45000
Figure 2. (Epihov et al., 2018.)  
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
Bradyrhizobium
5 10 -7
1 10 -6
1.5 10 -6
2 10 -6
2.5 10 -6
Basalt metagenomic Fe-Mo nitrogenase nifK
contributed by Bradyrhizobium
0 20 40 60
5 10 -7
1 10 -6
1.5 10 -6
2 10 -6
2.5 10 -6
Basalt
Forest age
Ectomycorrhizal LSUs
Bradyrhizobial nifK
Arbuscular mycorrhizal LSUs
EM fungi
AM fungi
Figure 3. (Epihov et al., 2018.) 
a b c 
d e f 
Figure 4. (Epihov et al., 2018.)  
Table 2. (Epihov et al., 2018.)  
Positive correlations between abundance of GO pathways in root transcriptomes and basalt P leaching 
GO term Pearson 
P-value 
No. of 
transcriptomes 
in which GO 
term present 
Stimulating 
P leaching 
Stimulated by 
P leaching 
Mechanism 
Proton 
transmembrane 
transport 
0.022 7 yes 
proton extrusion enables P dissolution  
Oxidation 
reduction process 
0.058 7 yes 
up-regulation of energy metabolism may 
generate more CO2, organic acids, protons 
Aerobic electron 
transport chain 
0.011 3 yes 
up-regulation of energy metabolism may 
generate more CO2, organic acids, protons 
ATP synthesis 
coupled electron 
transport 
0.0009 7 yes yes up-regulation of energy metabolism may 
generate more CO2, organic acids, protons 
Signal 
transduction by 
protein 
phosphorylation 
0.063 6 
yes high P availability may promote this P-
dependent process 
Phosphorelay 
signal 
transduction 
system 
0.034 6 
yes high P availability may promote this P-
dependent process 
Protein 
phosphorylation 
0.010 7 
yes high P availability may promote this P-
dependent process 
Carbohydrate 
phosphorylation 
0.006 5 
yes high P availability may promote this P-
dependent process 
Phospholipid 
translocation 
0.031 4 
yes high P availability may promote this P-
dependent process 
Defense response 0.011 5 
yes high P leaching may trigger competitive and 
symbiotic interactions between plant roots 
and microorganisms in the rhizosphere 
Response to 
biotic stimulus 
0.007 5 
yes high P leaching may trigger competitive and 
symbiotic interactions between plant roots 
and microorganisms in the rhizosphere 
Values excluding a single very high P leaching outlier  
.5 20 48
.5 20 48
.5 20 48
.5 20 48
.5 20 48
.5 20 48
.5 20 48
.5 20 48
.5 20 48
.5 20 48
.5 20 48
.5 20 48
Soil data
Supplementary Figures and Text 
Supplementary Figure 1. Soil chemistry data and floristic composition suggest that the latter 
(typically a product of successional dynamics) is the more likely driver of weathering 
differences than the former with sites of high weathering rates (our 12.5 site and 20-year old 
site) exhibiting overlapping floristic composition distinct from that of 48-year old forests (our 
48-year old site revealed the lowest weathering rates). These findings support the view that 
differences in weathering between the sites used in our weathering studies (marked with *) are 
more likely age/successional effects rather than isolated site effects.  
Supplementary Figure 2. Nodulation patterns in legumes of Australian tropical forests: a. 
highly nodulated roots from a 20-year old Acacia celsa tree in a secondary forest; b. nodulated aerial 
adventitious roots in a 48-year old Acacia celsa tree in a secondary forests; c. nodulation in a 
Archidendron sp. in a mature forest setting with its odd-pinnate leaf photographed in the upper right 
corner; d. nodules (not photographed) were also found on the underground roots of this legume liana 
found in mature forests. The legume liana was professionally ID-ed (Steve McKenna, botanist at 
Department of Agriculture and Water Resources, Queensland) as Austrosteenisia stipularis.  
Supplementary Table 1. Significant positive correlations between basalt metagenomic carbonic 
anhydrase gene abundance and Level 3 Subsystem pathways involved in respiration, C cycling 
and N conversions.  
Spearman correlation tests, ***P<0.001, **P<0.01, *P<0.05, ^P<0.10.  
Metagenomic pathway 
Spearman rho  
(Carbonic 
anhydrase) P-value 
Carbonic anhydrase  1.000 *** 
Respiratory_dehydrogenases_1 0.794 *** 
Pyrroloquinoline_Quinone_biosynthesis 0.691 ** 
Gluconate 2-dehydrogenase (EC 1.1.99.3), membrane-bound, 
flavoprotein 0.612 * 
Nitrogen_fixation 0.665 * 
Glutamine,_Glutamate,_Aspartate_and_Asparagine_Biosynthesis 0.591 * 
Glutamate_and_Aspartate_uptake_in_Bacteria 0.548 * 
Denitrification 0.546 * 
Aromatic_amino_acid_degradation 0.685 ** 
Tryptophan_catabolism 0.735 ** 
Nitrosative_stress 0.737 ** 
Nitrate_and_nitrite_ammonification 0.484 ^ 
Supplementary Table 2. Validation of our de novo assembled root transcriptomes of Acacia 
celsa revealing enrichment in key GO pathways with known function in rhizobial infection and 
nodulation   
Up-regulated GO pathways in nodulated roots  
GO term Mann-
Whitney 
P-value 
Non-nodulated 
roots 
Nodulated 
roots 
Role in nodulation 
Oxygen transport 0.010 0 0.0035 To limit O2 concentration allowing 
properly functioning nitrogenases1 
Spermidine 
biosynthetic process 
0.010 0 0.0032 Bioavailable form of fixed N2 
Arginine catabolic 
process 
0.010 0 0.0031 Bioavailable form of fixed N3 
Glutamine biosynthetic 
process 
0.081 0.0010 0.0034 Bioavailable form of fixed N4 
Translation 0.053 0.0253 0.0408 High protein synthesis in stage III 
and IV of the rhizobial infection5  
Translational 
elongation 
0.010 0 0.0075 High protein synthesis (as above) 
Transcription, RNA 
templated 
0.039 0.0005 0.0084 High protein synthesis (as above) 
RNA-dependent DNA 
biosynthetic process 
0.025 0.0071 0.01621 Division of cells (requiring DNA 
replication) within the symbiosomes 
or lateral meristem activity within 
the roots? 
Aerobic electron 
transport chain 
0.081 0.0014 0.0106 Up-regulated energy metabolism 
due to high N? 
Glutathione metabolic 
process 
0.010 0 0.0031 Anti-oxidant function important for 
nodulation by Bradyrhizobium6 
S-adenosylmethionine 
biosynthetic process 
0.010 0 0.0035 Metabolic product in nodules7 
Supplementary Figure 3. Validation of root transcriptome analyses revealing more nBLAST 
hits mapping to leguminous transcripts, particularly in transcriptomes of nodulated roots. 
Three of the root samples from beneath Acacia contained nodulated roots, with the remaining 5 
samples from beneath Acacia showing no nodules. The non-nodulated root group includes the latter 
5 and those from beneath A. petriei. Two-tailed t-test, *P<0.05, ns P>0.05. nBLAST hits were 
obtained against the NCBI database through Blast2GO.  
Supplementary Table 3. Basalt weathering indices and related metrics.  
$PWI was selected as the main measure of basalt weathering due to: (1) its sensitivity in comparing fresh to weathered material, (2) its 
correlation with [Mg] dunite weathering signifying its sensitivity to environmental conditions favouring silicate weathering (regardless of 
rock type), and (3) its derivation as it is based on Si, Ti, Fe and Al measurements, whereas Ruxtons index (R) is only using basalt Si and 
Al. The 
 exact equations for all weathering indices can be found summarised in 8and references therein.  
Weathering index Fresh 
basalt 
Weathered 
basalt:  
Non-fixers 
Weathered 
basalt:  
N2-fixers 
Correct 
pattern 
Test P-value Significance Fishers 
Correlation 
with [Mg] 
olivine 
Ruxton's  
index (R) 
6.735 6.114 5.967 Yes ANOVA P<0.05 Yes a/b/b Yes  
R=0.47*** 
Product of weathering  
index (PWI)$ 
81.158 79.499 79.061 Yes ANOVA P<0.01 Yes a/b/b Yes  
R=0.35** 
Weathering  
index of Parker (WIP) 
73.898 71.459 71.372 Yes ANOVA P>0.10 No NA No 
Weathering Potential 
Index (WPI) 
12.263 11.226 11.708 Yes ANOVA P>0.10 No NA No 
Vogt's Index 1.182 1.453 1.392 Yes Kruskal-
Wallis 
0.05<P<0.1 No NA No 
Chemical Index of 
Alteration (CIA) 
60.537 61.947 62.141 Yes Kruskal-
Wallis 
P>0.10 No NA No 
Chemical Index of 
Weathering (CIW) 
67.060 68.526 68.290 Yes Kruskal-
Wallis 
P>0.10 No NA No 
Plagioclase Index of 
Alteration (PIA) 
63.084 64.776 64.818 Yes Kruskal-
Wallis 
P>0.10 No NA No 
Silica-Titania Index (STI) 73.980 73.184 72.937 Yes Kruskal-
Wallis 
P>0.10 No NA No 
Supplementary Table 4. Sequencing statistics for all  
soil-mineral shotgun metagenomes 
Supplementary Figure 4. Basalt supports               
significantly higher metagenomic sizes despite 
the same extraction and prep-up procedures 
suggesting higher microbial biomass.  
Supplementary References 
1. Appleby, C.A., 1984. Leghemoglobin and Rhizobium respiration. Annual Review of Plant 
Physiology, 35(1), pp.443-478. 
2. Efrose, R.C., Flemetakis, E., Sfichi, L., Stedel, C., Kouri, E.D., Udvardi, M.K., Kotzabasis, K. and 
Katinakis, P., 2008. Characterization of spermidine and spermine synthases in Lotus japonicus: induction and 
spatial organization of polyamine biosynthesis in nitrogen fixing nodules. Planta, 228(1), p.37. 
3. Ferraioli, S., Tat, R., Caputo, E., Lamberti, A., Riccio, A. and Patriarca, E.J., 2001. The Rhizobium 
etli argC gene is essential for arginine biosynthesis and nodulation of Phaseolus vulgaris. Molecular plant-
MG-RAST ID Sample Metagenome 
size (Gbp) 
No. of 
sequences 
(x106) 
mgm4800924.3 58 8.84 57.52 basalt 
mgm4801675.3 59 13.05 84.79 basalt 
mgm4801671.3 60 14.53 94.80 basalt 
mgm4801670.3 61 12.47 81.25 basalt 
mgm4801667.3 62 10.66 69.40 basalt 
mgm4801673.3 63 11.77 76.52 basalt 
mgm4801674.3 64 13.49 88.35 basalt 
mgm4801669.3 65 10.53 68.72 basalt 
mgm4801668.3 66 9.82 63.97 basalt 
mgm4803487.3 75 9.96 65.12 basalt 
mgm4802743.3 76 13.97 91.22 basalt 
mgm4802748.3 78 7.84 50.85 basalt 
mgm4802741.3 79 9.04 58.59 basalt 
mgm4803662.3 80 10.70 68.89 basalt 
mgm4803664.3 81 12.95 83.95 basalt 
mgm4803665.3 82 9.23 59.75 basalt 
mgm4800921.3 49 9.84 64.24 dunite 
mgm4800925.3 50 9.71 63.17 dunite 
mgm4800917.3 51 7.42 48.14 dunite 
mgm4800923.3 52 11.45 74.59 dunite 
mgm4800920.3 53 10.57 68.78 dunite 
mgm4800922.3 54 8.43 55.01 dunite 
mgm4800926.3 55 8.77 57.07 dunite 
mgm4800918.3 56 10.40 67.90 dunite 
mgm4800919.3 57 11.69 76.22 dunite 
mgm4801672.3 67 7.64 49.58 dunite 
mgm4801676.3 68 8.13 52.94 dunite 
mgm4802747.3 69 8.72 56.54 dunite 
mgm4802745.3 70 7.76 50.27 dunite 
mgm4802744.3 71 9.35 60.23 dunite 
mgm4802746.3 72 7.86 51.02 dunite 
mgm4802742.3 73 7.33 47.73 dunite 
mgm4802740.3 74 7.41 48.21 dunite 
microbe interactions, 14(2), pp.250-254. 
4. Omena-Garcia, R.P., Justino, G.C., Sodek, L. and de Carvalho Gonccedil, J.F., 2011. Mineral 
nitrogen affects nodulation and amino acid xylem transport in the Amazonian legume Inga edulis 
Mart. International Journal of Plant Physiology and Biochemistry, 3(12), pp.215-218. 
5. Lohar, D.P., Sharopova, N., Endre, G., Penuela, S., Samac, D., Town, C., Silverstein, K.A. and 
VandenBosch, K.A., 2006. Transcript analysis of early nodulation events in Medicago truncatula. Plant 
Physiology, 140(1), pp.221-234. 
6. Bianucci, E., Tordable, M.D.C., Fabra, A. and Castro, S., 2008. Importance of glutathione in the 
nodulation process of peanut (Arachis hypogaea). Physiologia plantarum, 134(2), pp.342-347. 
7. Velikovi, D., Agtuca, B.J., Stopka, S.A., Vertes, A., Koppenaal, D.W., Paa-Toli, L., Stacey, G. 
and Anderton, C.R., 2018. Observed metabolic asymmetry within soybean root nodules reflects unexpected 
complexity in rhizobacteria-legume metabolite exchange. The ISME journal, 12(9), p.2335. 
8. Fiantis, D., Nelson, M., Shamshuddin, J., Goh, T.B. and Van Ranst, E., 2010. Determination of the 
geochemical weathering indices and trace elements content of new volcanic ash deposits from Mt. Talang 
(West Sumatra) Indonesia. Eurasian Soil Science, 43(13), pp.1477-1485. 
Chapter 3 
Metabolic and genetic basis of bacteria-driven mineral weathering and its 
phylogenetic diversity at the soil-mineral interface  
Dimitar Z. Epihov1*, Jonathan R. Leake1, and David J. Beerling1 
1Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK 
*for correspondence 
Abstract 
Mineral weathering in the soil environment can replenish diminishing nutrients stocks 
by unlocking highly insoluble mineral-bound elements. The role of soil bacteria as 
drivers of enhanced weathering is well-documented, but the genetic and environmental 
basis for the large variability existing in weathering potentials between different 
bacterial genera is not understood. Here, we show that several single gene mutations 
significantly impact the in vitro weathering potential of the tropical soil beta-
proteobacterium Burkholderia thailandensis. Our functional analyses identify target 
weathering genes from the Entner-Doudoroff pathway, acetate metabolism and 
siderophore biosynthesis. Phylogenetics of the soil pools of those genes provide evidence 
for the role of multiple previously undescribed and elusive bacterial lineages, including 
a new class of Acidobacteria  Ca. Acidipotentia cl. nov., in weathering dynamics. Using 
parametrisation from our in vitro results we established a model to calculate the 
estimated weathering capacity (EWC) of single bacteria and whole communities. EWC 
strongly correlated with weathering in vitro and in vivo and we demonstrate its utility 
for biome-specific analyses. Our findings provide functional genetic and metabolic basis 
of enhanced weathering in soil bacteria supplying marker genes for use in soil shotgun 
metagenomic and metatranscriptomic analyses as well as useful targets for 
biotechnological modification in industrial bioleaching of mineral ores.  
 Weathering of silicate minerals in the soil environment increases nutrient availability, 
decreases N2O emissions and increases CO2 capture by carbonation reactions1,2 forming a key 
part of biogeochemical cycling in the pedosphere. Soil bacteria are increasingly recognized 
as powerful agents of enhanced weathering3,4 unlocking minerals through several 
mechanisms. In natural systems, lithotrophic bacteria utilizing inorganic salts as source of 
electrons can exacerbate weathering by their effects on ecosystem nutrient cycling, 
specifically (1) enhanced nitrate (NO3-) leaching and acidification through the activity of 
nitrifying prokaryotic consortia5,6, (2) iron (Fe) oxidation reactions dissolving Fe(II) from 
silicate minerals through Fe cycling bacteria7,8, (3) production of corrosive sulphur (S) species 
through S oxidizing lineages9,10. However, the majority of bacteria in soil are represented by 
organotrophic genera which may affect weathering by mobilizing metals from minerals 
through the combined action of organic acids11, siderophores8 and Fe(III) reductive 
dissolution12.  
Large natural variability in bacteria-driven weathering rates exist. For example, isolation of 
bacterial strains from the granite forefront of the Damma Glacier in the Swiss Alps revealed 
very high in vitro solubilisation of Fe from granite by actinobacterial isolates (Arthrobacter, 
Leifsonia) and beta-proteobacteria (Polaromonas, Janthinobacterium)13. Interestingly, other 
Damma Glacier isolates in the same classes of actinobacteria (Frigoribacter) and beta-
proteobacteria (Oxalobacter, Paucibacter) failed to trigger significant Fe dissolution13. That 
clearly demonstrates that class-level phylogenetic clustering does not correspond to 
weathering ability despite previously observed correlation between beta-proteobacteria and 
apatite weathering from community-profiling of soil-deposited mineral bags14. In supporting 
the presence of within-class variation in weathering capacity, another study found that 
members of the actinomycete class isolated from granite and assigned to Kibdelosporangium 
and Actinopolyspora exhibited the highest Fe solubilisation rates followed by intermediate 
rates in Kitasatospora with lowest rates observed in Streptomyces isolates15. In vitro analysis 
of >400 soil isolates from along a soil profile revealed that bacteria-driven weathering rates 
varied greatly from 4 to 175  M dissolved Fe from biotite mineral16 and from 1 to 37 M Fe 
solubilised from feldspar17. Variation in weathering dynamics has even been documented in 
different species within the same genus with rock phosphate weathering rates in solid cultures 
differing substantially between 3 different species from each of the alpha-proteobacterial 
genera Rhizobium and Bradyrhizobium18.  
Currently, the genetic and metabolic basis of this variation in weathering potential in bacteria 
is not fully understood. Gluconic acid production has been highlighted in several studies as 
important driver of acidification and chelation activities fuelling weathering19,20. In two 
Pseudomonas species differing in their weathering efficiencies, high P solubilisation under P-
limiting conditions were linked to increased activity of the pyrroloquinoline quinone (PQQ)-
dependent glucose dehydrogenase (gdhPQQ) catalysing the oxidation of glucose to gluconic 
acid21. Similarly, transfer of PQQ synthase gene from the weathering efficient Erwinia 
herbicola to Pseudomonas and Burkholderia increased solubilisation haloes by 11-42%22. 
The gdhPQQ is part of the Entner-Doudoroff (ED) pathway (a metabolic alternative to the 
standard Embden-Meyerhof-Parnas/EMP glycolysis) in which glucose is oxidized to aldonic 
acids in the periplasm, subsequently transported into the cytosol and processed to 2-keto-3-
deoxy-phosphogluconate (KDPG). Ultimately, KDPG is converted into pyruvate and 
glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate which are then converted into acetyl-CoA through standard EMP 
pathway finally flowing into the Krebs cycle. These findings implicate the ED pathway as 
key in driving weathering but how the network of genes participating in this pathway as a 
whole affects weathering remains unclear.  
Microbially produced siderophores are known to provide bacteria with utilizable source of 
iron by binding to Fe(III) even at lower than yoctomolar (<10-24 M) concentrations. However, 
the binding and uptake of Fe(III) already in solution is unlikely to have any pronounced effect 
on weathering through equilibrium dynamics as bacterial uptake is relatively small compared 
to the vast quantities of Fe liberated by dissolution of Fe-rich minerals. Direct siderophore-
mineral interactions would stimulate weathering and such interactions have been recorded for 
Fe hydroxides and smectite23 but not for primary silicate rocks such as olivine/dunite, basalt 
Here, we test for the direct silicate weathering effects of genes coding for (1) ED pathway and 
related pentose phosphate pathway enzymatic machinery (n=9 genes), (2) metal transporters 
(n=3 genes) and (3) siderophore production (n=1 gene) using a reverse genetics approach, 
utilizing knock-out (KO) mutants from the transposon mutant library available for the tropical 
soil beta-proteobacterium Burkholderia thailandensis E264 strain24. Bacteria were incubated 
in vitro in specifically designed sterile minimal liquid medium containing 5.6 mM glucose, 
salts and 0.1% w/v crushed olivine with the mineral representing the only source of Fe and 
micronutrients.  
Results 
Wild type Burkholderia thailandensis cultures trigger a multi-elemental pattern of 
weathering in vitro stimulated by high N supply 
Initial screens (first experiment) with the wild-type (WT) Burkholderia thailandensis E264 
(BtE264) cultures using two different mineral grain sizes (60-90 m and 90-106 m) revealed 
that after a 10-day incubation period bacteria triggered multi-elemental weathering release 
from olivine that generated significantly larger concentrations of Fe (193-fold), cobalt (Co; 
124-fold), nickel (Ni; 26-fold), manganese (Mn; 18-fold), magnesium (Mg; 15-fold), silicon 
(Si; 10-fold) and chromium (Cr; 3-fold) in solution than the abiotic treatment, a pattern 
independent on grain size (n=6 for each grain size and treatment; two-tailed t-test, P<0.001; 
Figure 1a). In the rest of our experiments, those elements were considered the 5 principal 
components of olivine that are liberated as a result of bacterially-mediated weathering.  
We tested 3 different C:N ratios by increasing the levels of N available as ammonium sulfate 
supplied in the medium (C:N = 10,12,14). Weathering rates negatively correlated with 
medium C:N suggesting that increased N supply can stimulate weathering (Figure 1b). While 
the significantly more acidic final pH of all the BtE264 treatments at different C:N ratios 
(mean pH=3.91, n=18, SEM=0.04) may have stimulated weathering relative to their 
respective abiotic controls (mean pH=6.31, n=18, SEM=0.02), it was not responsible for the 
difference driven by decreasing C:N ratio as there was no significant pH difference between 
different C:N treatments, neither did the final pH of bacteria-inoculated samples correlate 
with their exerted weathering rates. However, bacterial culture density (absorbance at OD600nm 
or simply OD600 hereafter) revealed an opposite pattern with the greatest growth observed at 
the highest C:N ratio. Subsequently, we selected C:N = 14 and larger grain size for further 
mutant screening as to provide a more conservative view on any of the observed phenotypes.  
Transporter knock-outs do not affect weathering rates and bacterial growth  
In the second experiment, we utilized three transporter knock-out (KO) mutants including the 
magnesium transporter corA, a Fe:siderophore ABC transporter and the molybdenum/cobalt 
transporter modA. In each of the tests, the transporter mutants did not exhibit any significant 
differences from WT BtE264 in the concentration of their target elements (two-tailed t-test, 
P<0.05) suggesting that membrane transport does not significantly affect weathering 
dynamics (Figure 1c). However, none of the transporter mutants exhibited any significant 
differences in their growth (OD600) than WT BtE264 suggesting that alternative transporting 
mechanisms must exist allowing the passage of those elements into bacterial cells.  
Entner-Doudoroff (ED) and pentose-phosphate (PP) metabolism significantly affects 
weathering potential 
We used the Uniprot database and in silico sequence-based predictions to establish the 
subcellular localisation of the protein products of the target genes involved in these pathways. 
Membrane localisation was suggested for the flavin dinucleotide (FAD)-binding glucose 
dehydrogenase (gdhFAD), 2-ketogluconate reductase (trkA), gluconokinase (gntK), altronate 
hydrolase (uxaA) with the rest of the tested knock-out gene products assigned to the 
cytoplasm (Figure 2). In our third experiment, we tested how inactivation at different spots 
within the ED/PP metabolic network would affect weathering rates.  
At the surface of the bacterial cell, glucose is oxidized to gluconic acid by gdhFAD. Mutation 
in the gdhFAD gene resulted in significant multi-elemental decline in weathering with the 
following elemental patterns: -12% in mobilised Fe and approximately -5% in Mg, Si, Mn, 
Co, and Ni relative to WT BtE264 (two-tailed t-test, P<0.001 for all but Si and Ni where 
P<0.01; Figure 1c). Once oxidised, the gluconic acid in the periplasm can either enter the cell 
or be further oxidised to 2-ketogluconic acid that also remains outside the cell with the 
reaction catalysed by the 2-ketogluconate reductase/gluconate 2-dehydrogenase (trkA). 
Mutation in the trkA gene resulted in a slight but significant decline of 3-4% in weathering 
yield of Mg, Si, Mn, Co, and Ni compared to WT BtE264 (two-tailed t-test, P<0.05; Figure 
1c). Any non-oxidised gluconic acid can penetrate the cell through gluconate permease. Upon 
entry, gluconate is immediately phosphorylated by gluconokinase (gntK) to 6-
phosphogluconate. Loss-of-function mutation in the gntK gene disabling the cell to 
successfully assimilate gluconic acid significantly stunted bacterial growth by 5-fold and 
further caused multi-elemental increase in weathering yield of ~68% in Fe and 28-33% in 
Mg, Si, Mn, Co and Ni in comparison to WT BtE264 (two-tailed t-test, P<0.001; Figure 1c).  
 In the cytoplasm, the 6-phosphogluconate can either enter the classic phosphorylative 
ED pathway and form 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate (by the edd enzyme) or be re-
routed to the standard EMP glycolysis stream by conversion to 6-phosphoglucose through the                    
6-phosphoglucose dehydrogenase (zwf). KO mutation in the zwf gene causes a slight 3% 
increase in Co yield (two-tailed t-test, P<0.05) and a more pronounced 22% rise in Fe 
dissolved from olivine relative to WT BtE264 (two-tailed t-test, P<0.01; Figure 1c). Mutation 
in the gene encoding the 6-phosphofructokinase further downstream in the EMP glycolytic 
pathway caused only insignificant increases in weathered Co and Ni (two-tailed t-test, 
P<0.06).  
 The 6-phosphogluconate not re-routed to glycolysis is converted to 2-dehydro-3-
deoxy-6-phosphogluconate (KDPG; Figure 2). KDPG can also be formed as a result of 
phosphorylation of 2-dehydro-3-deoxygluconate by the kdgK enzyme. Interestingly, mutation 
in the KDPG-generating kdgK gene causes a 6-7% decline in weathered Mg, Si, Mn, Co, and 
Ni (relative to WT BtE264, two-tailed t-test, P<0.001; Figure 1c), while loss-of-function 
mutation in the eda gene responsible for the breakdown of KDPG to glycolytic pyruvate and 
glyceraldehyde-3P significantly increases weathering yields in Mg, Si, and Co by 2-6% (two-
tailed t-test, P<0.01; Figure 1c). These suggest that KDPG may act as a regulatory 
intermediate in the ED pathway indirectly affecting weathering potential. Interestingly, we 
detected that the altronate hydrolase coded for by the uxaA gene and converting altronate (a 
product of glucuronate breakdown) to 2-dehydro-3-deoxygluconate also exhibited a negative 
effect on weathering because its KO mutants revealed greater concentrations of weathered 
Mn, Co, and Ni than WT cultures (two-tailed t-test, P<0.05 for Mn, P<0.01 for Co and Ni; 
Figure 1c). 
 Acetate is transported outside the cell during high C loading resulting in acetogenesis. 
In this process, the acetate kinase encoded in B. thailandensis by the ackA gene is key by 
converting acetyl-CoA generated by glycolysis to acetate which is then excreted with a 
counterbalancing H+. KO mutation in the ackA gene triggered a significant 3% decline in the 
Mg, Mn, Co, and Ni weathered from olivine relative to WT B. thailandensis (two tailed t-test, 
P<0.01).  
Siderophore biosynthesis is involved in bacterially-mediated silicate weathering 
The genome of Burkholderia thailandensis E264 only codes for the biosynthesis of the 
pyochelin class of siderophores also containing their related Fe-chelating salicylic acid and 
dihydroaeruginoic acid. Key in this biosynthetic pathways is the pchD gene encoding a 
siderophore biosynthesis enzyme with a salicylate-AMP ligase activity25. Bt pchD mutants 
revealed a multi-elemental decrease in weathered elements including 12-17% decline in Mg, 
Si, Mn, Co, Ni as well as larger 35% reduction in dissolved Fe in comparison to wild type 
bacteria (two-tailed t-test, P<0.001; Figure 1c). Intriguingly, the pchD mutants also exhibited 
slightly yet significantly higher OD600 readings (+7%, two-tailed t-test, P<0.001) than their 
WT counterparts showing that those elemental reductions did not negatively impact growth. 
However, the mutants also generated less acidity at the end of the experiment with one-unit 
greater pH than in the media of their WT analogues after the 10-day incubation period.  
 Combined, our findings highlight the genes for siderophore biosynthesis, glucose 
dehydrogenases, 2-ketogluconate reductase/gluconate 2-dehydrogenase and acetate kinase 
(Figure 2) and their products as targets contributing to bacterial weathering potential.  
Correcting weathering effects for OD600 
Correcting weathering effects for OD600 of in vitro weathering systems involving 
bacterial cultures is not a common practice. None of 14 major scientific articles that have 
investigated the effects of different bacterial species on weathering (Supplementary Table 1) 
have compared and normalised weathering rates for growth measured by OD600. One reason 
for not doing so is that such studies are designed to test the effect each species has on rock 
weathering under the same set of conditions (medium, temperature, time, shaking rate etc.) 
despite inherent differences in growth rates and growth potential of different lineages. 
Another potential pitfall of this type of normalisation, particularly relevant to our case, is that 
mutations often carry deleterious effects causing a decline in bacterial growth compared to its 
wild type baseline. Consider this example: a bacterial mutant exhibits 2-fold decreased growth 
due to a deleterious mutation that disrupts a process with no mechanistic links to the 
weathering process (e.g. translational processing) and ion concentration in solution reveal no 
effect on weathering relative to wild type bacteria; if corrected, however, this mutant will 
reveal 2-fold greater weathering rates per unit OD600 than wild type despite its lack of effect 
prior to normalisation.  
For instance, gdhFAD mutants exhibit 38.6% significantly lower OD600 reading after 
10 days of growth compared to wild type cultures (two-tailed t-test, P<0.001) and prior to 
normalisation they reveal 12% significant decline in weathered Fe relative to wild type (two-
tailed t-test, P<0.001). Consequently, because the effect on growth dwarfs that on weathering, 
after normalisation gdhFAD KO mutants reveal 23.9% greater weathering than wild type B. 
thailandensis. This assertion is mechanistically questionable because the gdhFAD protein 
partipates in the catalysis of glucose to gluconic acid oxidation process, with many previous 
studies implicating the production of gluconic acid as a principal agent of bacterial 
weathering19. Similarly, trkA mutants exhibit 9.5% significant reduction in OD600 (two-tailed 
t-test, P<0.001) compared to WT BtE264 and a 3% decline in weathering-generated Fe 
relative to WT (two-tailed t-test, P<0.01). Consequently, after normalisation trkA KO cultures 
appear to have significantly higher weathering rates than wild type by 6.2% (two-tailed t-test, 
P<0.01). The enzyme encoded by trkA catalyses the production of 2-ketogluconic acid  
another agent of bacterial weathering45 thus making this finding illogical, too. The KO 
mutation in gntK causes the build-up of gluconic acid in the medium (Supplementary Note 2) 
which results in 68% increases in weathering-derived Fe in the medium. In terms of growth 
gntK exhibits 4.5-fold lower OD600 readings than WT bacteria and as such the increase seems 
even larger as it is spread among fewer OD units.  
Knock-out mutation in gntK significantly reduces pH relative to wild-type (down to a 
mean of pH 3.70; -0.70 units relative to WT; two-tailed t-test, P<0.001) owing the build-up 
of gluconic acid (Supplementary Note 2), whereas mutation in gdhFAD significantly 
increases pH (up to a mean of pH 4.65; +0.25 units relative to WT; two-tailed t-test, P<0.001) 
likely owing to reduced generation of gluconic acid and that of protons dissociating from it. 
These findings act to further contradict the weathering results reported after OD600 
normalisation in the case of gdhFAD. However, because the notion that the number of bacteria 
carries a quantitative effect on weathering cannot be ruled out, we compared the OD600 
readings of WT  bacteria grown over three separate times (batches) and their weathering rates 
(Supplementary Note 1) and found no statistically supported links between OD600 and 
weathering within the same genetic background (Pearson test, P>0.10) ruling out the 
possibility that the number of bacteria affects weathering rates. Nevertheless, however 
informative or disinformative, corrections of weathering to units weathering per unit OD600 
are, for those interested, can be found integrated within the main findings presented in Figure 
1 and Figure 2. Briefly, we find that after normalisation: (1) pchD, gntK, eda (no significant 
difference in OD600 between wild-type and this background; P>0.10) and zwf (no significant 
difference in OD600 between wild-type and this background; P>0.10) show no change in their 
effects on weathering from before normalisation; (2) similarly, the lack of significance 
remains unchanged in all three transporter gene knock-out backgrounds; (3) trkA and gadFDH 
exhibit shifts in their effects from decline-to-increase in weathering; (4) the effects of ackA 
(no significant difference in OD600 between wild-type and this background; P>0.10) and ddgK 
(significantly lower OD600 in this background relative to WT; P<0.01) on weathering are no 
longer supported (Figure 1). Among those, ackA is the only background where growth did not 
significantly differ from WT and yet the relationship between ackA and weathering was absent 
after normalisation making it the only case where one could be ascertained that the deleterious 
effect of the mutation was not driving the apparent pattern the mutation had on weathering 
after normalisation. As such, readers are cautioned that any further discussions on 
unnormalised rates of weathering found below, particularly in the case of the ackA 
background, may be speculative.  
Phylogenetics of target weathering genes from soil metagenomes reveals highly 
abundant elusive lineages of strong weathering potential  
 We utilized 3 shotgun soil metagenomes from Neotropical forests in Panama, each 
containing an average of 18,792,525 sequences to characterise the phylogenetics of the 
weathering community in soil samples by assigning taxonomy to the target genes (gdhFAD, 
trkA, siderophore biosynthesis genes, ackA) we have established in our in vitro weathering 
experiments with the tropical soil bacterium B. thailandensis as well as the functional 
analogue of gdhFAD-encoded FAD-dependent glucose dehydrogenase  the gdhPQQ gene 
also encoding for glucose dehydrogenase but PQQ-dependent.  
Detailed search of the published literature summarised a total of 107 bacterial genera for 
which proof for active mineral weathering in vitro was available (Supplementary Table 1). 
We used those genera to estimate what percentage of soil lineages harbouring the target 
weathering genes were previously characterised or not (with or without weathering record, 
respectively).  
 The gdhFAD gene was only present in 20-30 copies representing an average of 
0.00014% of each soil metagenome. Taxonomic breakdown of the gene (Figure 3a) revealed 
that over 60% of all hits were assigned to genera of known weathering ability with the beta-
proteobacterial (Burkholderia, Paraburkholderia, Caballeronia, Collimonas, Herbaspirillum 
and Ralstonia) and alpha-proteobacterial (Bradyrhizobium, Novosphingobium, 
Mesorhizobium, Caulobacter) contributing the highest proportion. Of those gdhFAD-
harbouring lineages of no previous weathering record, members of the hard-to-culture elusive 
Acidobacteria phylum contributed ~11% of all hits, uncultured uncharacterised groups  6% 
and delta-proteobacteria  6%.  
 A total of 4400-4900 reads from each soil metagenome library were characterised as 
gdhPQQ genes amounting to a mean of 0.025% of all metagenomic hits. Nearly 90% of all 
gdhPQQs were assigned to genera (Figure 3b) of no previous weathering record, with a major 
proportion, over a half of all sequences occupied by Acidobacteria (including the genera 
Sulfopaludibacter with 7%, Solibacter  6%, Koribacter  2%, Terriglobus  1% and another 
8 named genera). The most abundant group among the Acidobacteria were uncultured 
acidobacterial genomes assembled from metagenomic hits composing a total of 31% of all 
hits. Other notable bacterial groups contributing to the soil gdhPQQ gene pool were the 
bacteroidetes classes of Cytophagia (2.8%) and Flavobacteriia (0.8%), the elusive groups of 
Verrucomicrobia (1.3%), Gemmatimonadetes (1.3%) and alpha-proteobacteria (29% split in 
18% and 11% for genera of no weathering and published weathering record, respectively), 
beta-proteobacteria (22% split in 3% and 19% of genera of no weathering and published 
weathering record, respectively), and gamma-proteobacteria (4% - all contributed by genera 
of known weathering activity).  
 Between ~3100 and 3900 metagenomic reads (a mean of 0.019% of the whole 
metagenome) were functionally annotated as trkA (2-ketogluconate reductase) or glucose 2-
dehydrogenase genes  both catalysing the reversible reaction of gluconic acid to 2-
ketogluconic acid at the cell surface. Approximately 56% of all hits were contributed by 
genera with previously published in vitro weathering activity (Figure 3c)  mainly consisting 
of alpha-proteobacterial sequences with nearest match to Bradyrhizobium (40.7%), 
Rhizobium (3.5%), Mesorhizobium (1.9%), the beta-proteobacterial Paraburkholderia-
Burkholderia-Caballeronia close taxonomic cluster (1.2%). Among the 44% of no 
weathering record, significant trkA-contributors were Acidobacteria (15% with 14% being of 
uncultured acidobacteria) and newly characterised yet largely uncultured Rokubacteria 
(1.7%).  
 The ackA gene was present in 5900-7250 copies representing a mean of 0.036% of 
soil metagenomes. Around 74% of all of the ackA copies were assigned to genera of no 
weathering record with the Acidobacteria taking up 9%. The cluster of siderophore 
biosynthetic genes as defined by the KEGG Orthologues (KO) database amounted to 0.034% 
of all metagenomic reads in soil.  Of these 48% belonged to genera of known weathering 
record including Streptomyces (13.6%), Mycobacterium (7.3%), Bradyrhizobium (5.8%), 
Bacillus (4.6%), Burkholderia-Paraburkholderia-Caballeronia clade (2.8%), Paenibacillus 
(2.5%), Rhizobium (1.6%) and Pseudomonas (1.5%). The group of no-weathering record 
included 1.9% Acidobacterial sequences and those of dominant (>1%) genera namely the 
actinobacterial Nocardia (1.6%), Amycolatopsis (1.5%), uncultured actinobacteria (1.4%), 
Micromonospora (1.3%), the alpha-proteobacterial Rhodoplanes (2.8%), uncultured 
Rhizobiales (1.3%), and Methylobacter (1.0%), uncultured beta-proteobacteria (1.3%) and 
uncultured gamma-proteobacteria (1.1%).  
 Next, we ranked the genus-specific weathering potential using our detailed taxonomic 
breakdown of metagenomic weathering genes. We found that all weathering genes 
gdhFAD/gdhPQQ, trkA, ackA, and siderophore biosynthetic genes weathering genes were 
present in 44 genera, of which 19 were of known weathering potential (including 
Bradyrhizobium, Burkholderia-Paraburkholderia-Caballeronia, Streptomyces, Rhizobium, 
Pseudomonas, Bacillus, Collimonas, Cupriavidus, Frateuria, Dyella-like etc.). We also found 
that grouping according to number of weathering genes was significantly associated with the 
proportion of known weathering genera confirming that the more weathering genes present 
in a genus, the higher the likelihood of its being already reported as a weathering agent. 
Nevertheless, all weathering genes were also detected in uncultured and taxonomically-
undefined members of the Acidobacteria, Rhodospirillales, Rokubacteria, beta-
proteobacteria, gamma-proteobacteria, Bradyrhizobiaceae, Burkholderiales. In all of those, 
genes encoding the synthesis of the PQQ co-enzyme were also present suggesting that their 
gdhPQQ enzymes are active.  
Candidatus Acidipotentia, cl. nov.  a new class of the Acidobacteria phylum with 
pronounced acid-generating potential 
Among the abundant and uncultured species within the Acidobacteria with genomes 
assembled from soil metagenomes26, we have identified 17 putative acidobacterial species 
that can convert glucose to gluconic acid, contributing a total of 14% and 8% of the soil pools 
of gdhPQQ and gdhFAD, respectively. Of those there were 11 species that were also able to 
further oxidize their periplasmatically generated gluconic acid to 2-ketogluconic acid via the 
trkA/gluconate 2-dehydrogenase gene pool to which they contributed 5% of all reads.  Of the 
18 gluconic acid-generating species there were 8 species that also harboured siderophore 
biosynthetic genes and 6 spp. were predicted to be able to produce all three  gluconic and 2-
ketogluconic acids and siderophores.  
Next, we used the DNA-directed RNA polymerase subunit beta (rpoC) genes of six of the 
uncultured species and aligned them with rpoC sequences of known acidobacterial lineages 
 representing all currently described Acidobacterial classes. Using the multiple alignment of 
the taxonomically reliable gene marker rpoC27, we constructed a Neighbour-Joining 
phylogenetic tree which showed that three of the environmental isolates (Acidobacteria 
bacterium 13_2_20CM_2_57_6, Acidobacteria bacterium 13_2_20CM_57_17, and 
Acidobacteria bacterium 13_1_40CM_2_60_7) formed a strongly supported cluster with a 
deep divergence node and outside all known acidobacterial classes (Figure 3d). Here, we 
named this new candidate class as Ca. Acidipotentia cl. nov. (acidi  from Latin N. m. pl. 
acids, potentia  from Latin N. f. sing. ability, capacity; the etymology stems from the acid-
producing capacity of the bacteria in this class with members containing the genes to 
extracellularly generate gluconic acid, 2-ketogluconic acid, and acetic acid). In this new class 
we also describe a new genus Ca. Acidipotentia gen. nov. with two species  Ca. 
Acidipotentia major (major  from Latin f. sing. greater) with two strains G1 and G2, and 
Ca. Acidipotentia minor (minor  from Latin f. sing. lesser, smaller). Ca. A. major G1 
contains the gdhPQQ, trkA/gluconate 2-dehydrogenase and ackA genes contributing to each 
of the soil pools of those genes 1.5%, 1.1% and 0.3% of all reads, respectively. Ca. A. major 
G2 also contains the gdhPQQ, trkA/gluconate 2-dehydrogenase genes but not the ackA gene 
with 2.2% and 0.2% contributions, respectively. The genome of Ca. A. minor contains the 
gdhPQQ but not the trkA/gluconate 2-dehydrogenase and ackA genes, contributing 0.4% of 
all soil gdhPQQ copies. Both species contained the ability to synthesize the PQQ co-enzyme 
necessary for the activity of their PQQ-dependent glucose dehydrogenases with Ca. A. major 
G1, G2 and Ca. A. minor containing 0.8%, 0.6% and 0.2% of all PQQ biosynthetic genes in 
the soil metagenomes.  
Another three uncultured acidobacterial species also formed a distinct phylogenetic cluster 
that appeared as sister to the acidobacterial classes Solibacteres and Acidobacteriia but at low 
bootstrap values and more recent divergence nodes within the group. Therefore, these three 
species may also be a part of another previously undescribed class but their phylogenetic 
positioning is less clear and we did not name them, although they also contributed 
significantly to the gene pools of gdhPQQ and trkA/gluconate 2-dehydrogenase.  
Discussion 
Our experiments with Burkholderia thailandensis E264 and mutants in key genes show that 
bacteria can mediate multi-elemental incongruent solubilisation from silicates resulting from 
(1) strong chelating agents (siderophores; L1 class28) and (2) weak chelating agents (organic 
acid anions; L2 class28) and (3) H+ generation, while ruling out any significant impact on 
differences in bacterial growth as measured by OD600 (Supplementary Note 1).  
 The genes gdhFAD and trkA appear central to the ability of Bt E264 to solubilize 
olivine. The gluconic acid and 2-ketogluconic acid produced through the enzymes encoded 
by these two genes, respectively, can promote dissolution by weak chelation (complexolysis) 
and by deprotonation of their carboxylic group at pH>3.86 for gluconic and pH>2.80 for 2-
ketogluconic acid generating acidity (acidolysis)29,30. Similarly, the negatively charged 
organic acid anion acetate generated by the ackA gene product intracellularly and exported 
into the medium can provide chelating activity as well as generate acidity by co-transport with 
counter-balancing positively charged H+ allowing the cell to maintain its electron potential31.  
  The significant decline in weathering yield triggered by the loss-of-function mutations 
in gdhFAD (-5% Mg) and trkA (-3% Mg) is much lower in its absolute value than the increase 
triggered by a KO mutation in the gntK gene (+33% Mg) causing a build-up of gluconic acid32 
and probably that of 2-ketogluconic acid. The explanation behind this phenomenon may be 
the combined mode of complexolysis and acidolysis in gluconic acid building up 
extracellularly in the gntK background compared to the WT state in which most gluconate is 
acquired and metabolized by the cell with little remaining as gluconate and converted into 2-
ketogluconic acid outside the cell thus creating weathering conditions predominated by 
acidolysis.  
 Interestingly, the phenotype of gntK mutants is consistent with that of growth arrest 
typically detected in gntK mutant E. coli supplied only with gluconate as its sole C source32. 
That suggests that most of the glucose supplied in our minimal medium is converted into 
gluconate and acquired and metabolized through the semi-phosphorylative ED pathway33 
rather than being acquired through the phosphotransferase system and direct phosphorylation 
of glucose to 6-phosphoglucose in the classic ED pathway. This defines that the direction of 
reversible reactions catalysed by enzymes such as trkA will be mainly from gluconate to 2-
ketogluconic acid just like that of zwf will be mainly from 6-phosphogluconate to 6-
phosphoglucose. Interruption in the latter in the zwf mutant background will be expected to 
increase the availability of 6-phosphogluconate by preventing its re-routing to EMP 
glycolysis. 6-phosphogluconate is a key intermediate in the erythrose-generating pentose 
phosphate pathway. Erythrose is used as a precursor of aromatic amino acids which are in 
their own right precursors for chorismate in siderophore biosynthesis. Indeed, we have 
recorded that zwf mutants exhibit a modest 3% increase in Co but a much larger 22% increase 
in Fe consistent with rise in the production of siderophores.  
 Our weathering experiments revealed that accumulation of 2-dehydro-3-deoxy-6-
phosphogluconate (KDPG) in the eda mutant background and depletion in the kdgA 
background had opposite effects on weathering suggesting some regulatory function of KDPG 
within the ED pathway. Indeed, previous work indicates that KDPG positively regulates the 
ED pathway by binding to ED pathway repressor hexR and dissociating it from DNA allowing 
up-regulated expression of edd, glc and zwf34 as well as by binding and inactivating the 
pyruvate metabolism repressor RccR35.  While inactivation of the metabolic repressors hexR 
and RccR can stimulate overall bacterial metabolism and thus generate more CO2, acetate and 
Krebs cycle organic acids, it may limit the amount of 6-phosphogluconate by re-routing it to 
generation of 6-phosphoglucose metabolized in the EMP glycolytic pathway by the means of 
increasing the expression of zwf (Figure 2). Indeed, in our eda mutants accumulating higher 
levels of KDPG acting to alleviate the repression over metabolism  the Mg, Si and Co 
weathered from olivine increased 2-6% (two-tailed t-test, P<0.01) but Fe yields decreased by 
25% (two-tailed t-test, P=0.06).  
 The decrease in olivine weathering caused by knock-out of the pyochelin biosynthetic 
gene pchD is substantial. As previously highlighted siderophore biosynthesis is dependent 
upon the PPP intermediate erythrose as a precursor for aromatic amino acids. Amino acid 
biosynthesis also requires adequate N supply. Therefore, it is plausible that the weathering-
promoting effects of lower C:N ratio that we recorded are due to increasing the N availability 
to siderophore biosynthesis. In addition, greater N supply may promote the production of 
Krebs cycle organic acids by positive regulation of the Krebs cycle36. Experiments with the 
gluconic acid-producing fungus Aureobasidium pullulans also demonstrated that higher N 
supply may promote the amount of generated gluconic acid37.  
 Our analyses (Figure 1c, Figure 2) implicate pchD (KO effect: -35% Fe, -13% Mg) 
or other siderophore synthesis genes, gdhFAD (-12% Fe, -5% Mg) or its functional analogue 
gdhPQQ, trkA (-3% Mg), and ackA (-3% Mg) as target genes with direct effects on weathering 
that can be deployed for estimating the weathering ability of single bacteria as well as that of 
whole microbial communities. To validate the predicting power of these genes we utilized a 
quantitative study18 on the ability of different legume-nodulating bacteria to dissolve insoluble 
phosphate mineral sources. This study was chosen because the bacteria used in it are obtained 
from a taxonomically curated collection and identified down to the strain level with 5 out of 
the 8 bacterial strains studied having fully sequenced publicly available genomes. Using the 
number of target genes (siderophore genes are counted as binary data  0/1 for 
absence/presence) multiplied by the Mg weathering coefficients attained from our 
experimental data (0.520 for siderophores, 0.208 for gdh, 0.125 for trkA/gluconate 2-
dehydrogenase and 0.125 for ackA) we obtained estimated weathering capacity (EWC) 
values. The calculated EWC for the 5 bacteria (Figure 4a) significantly correlated with: (1) 
the recorded CaHPO4 solubilisation haloes in solid media (Pearson test, P<0.05, r=0.887), (2) 
the solubilised P weathered from CaHPO4 in liquid cultures (Pearson test, P<0.05, r=0.914) 
and with (3) the P dissolved from strengite minerals in liquid cultures  strongly insoluble 
iron phosphate minerals (FePO4.2H2O, Pearson test, P<0.01, r=0.968). EWC of whole 
microbial communities using coupled soil/mineral interfaces from our field experiments in 
Panama revealed a significant strong correlation with in vivo weathering rates (Figure 4b). 
Using publicly available metagenomes, we estimated the EWC of the soil communities of 4 
different biomes showing a descending pattern in weathering ability (Figure 4c) mirroring 
latitudinal gradients in precipitation, temperature and net productivity pumping organics to 
the communities belowground. 
Highly weathered oxisolic soils in tropical forests contain little primary minerals 
(<1%) but most of their phosphate is present in highly insoluble mineral P forms, mainly as 
Al-P and Fe-P secondary minerals (such as strengite, variscite and their amorphous 
analogues)38,39. Because net primary productivity of tropical forests is limited by P 
availability39,40, the study of the EWC of the soil microbial community in such biomes is of 
high relevance. Our phylogenetic analysis of the target weathering genes in 3 tropical forest 
soil metagenomes demonstrated large phylogenetic diversity in weathering potent groups. 
Weathering potential in soil appears to be a function of the combined action of hundreds of 
bacterial species distributed among various bacterial phyla and classes including many poorly 
studied, uncultured and elusive lineages among the Acidobacteria, Rokubacteria, 
Glassbacteria, Verrucomicrobia etc. Although a certain level of functional redundancy exists, 
specialisation was also evident. For instance, some groups exhibited high EWC potential 
based on containing and contributing a disproportionate number of genes to the soil pools of 
gdhPQQ relative to that of siderophores (gluconic acid-based weathering agents) including 
acidobacterial candidate class of Acidipotentia (62:1), other acidobacteria such as Ca. 
Solibacter (21:1), Terriglobus (273:1), Ca. Sulfopaludibacter (26:1), the alpha-proteobacterial 
Phenylobacterium (81:1), Sphingobium (85:1), and Rhodopila (8:1). In contrast, other 
lineages had EWC mainly based on contributing a disproportionate number of copies to the 
soil pool of siderophore biosynthetic genes relative to that of gdhPQQ (siderophore-based 
weathering agents) such as the actinobacterial Streptomyces (317:1), Amycolatopsis (54:1), 
Actinomadura (gdhPQQ absent), Arthrobacter (gdhPQQ absent), the firmicute genus of 
Bacillus (125:1), uncultured Rhizobiales (93:1) etc. From the metagenomic analyses also 
becomes apparent that some dominant gdhPQQ-contributing lineages can synthesize their 
own internal supply of PQQ co-enzyme to activate their gdhPQQ apoenzyme (Ca. 
Acidipotentia, Terriglobus, Rhodopila), while others can only rely on external supplies of 
PQQ co-enzyme as they lack the necessary PQQ synthesis genes (Ca. Sulfopaludibacter, Ca. 
Solibacter, Phenylobacterium). Ecologically, these data present an interesting insight into the 
ability of moderate acidophiles such as Terriglobus41, Rhodopila42 and Acidipotentia 
candidate spp. (also likely acidophilic) to lower pH favouring their acidophilic lifestyle by 
producing gluconic acids dependent on sugar supply and of other acidophiles such as Ca. 
Solibacter43 and Ca. Sulfopaludibacter44 by producing gluconic acids dependent on sugar 
supply and external PQQ co-enzymes thus enabling such moderately acidophilic lineages to 
dominate over more neutrophilic bacteria. Study on the wheat rhizosphere have concluded 
that 2-ketogluconic acid amounted for up to 22% all rhizosphere products45 suggesting that 
sugar limitation is unlikely and making N availability (as we have demonstrated) and PQQ 
synthesis and supply highly probable limiting factors.  
In conclusion, we have quantitatively characterised the effects of genetic knock-outs 
in a soil native bacterium in relation to the process of mineral weathering. Our analyses allow 
informed predictions of estimated weathering potential of single bacteria and whole microbial 
communities by using a combination of target genes and weathering coefficients. 
Consequently, this could enable the integration of the vast publicly available metagenomic 
datasets into biome-specific biogeochemical model estimates of weathering rates based on 
labile C supply. Furthermore, the large phylogenetic diversity existing in weathering potent 
microorganisms in soil can be used for targeted improvement of nutrient availability in 
agroecosystems by exploring the enormous resource of poorly characterised bacterial lineages 
and engineering improved PQQ supply. 
Methods and materials 
Handling of bacteria and generating inocula 
The tropical soil beta-proteobacterium Burkholderia thailandensis strain E264  wild type 
(WT) and its mutants were purchased from the transposon mutant collection created by the 
Manoil Lab at University of Washington, US. Upon arrival bacteria were streaked on LB 
plates and inoculated in LB broth + 10% glycerol for long-term storage at -80oC. Overnight 
cultures in 15 ml LB were brought to absorbance reading (OD600) of 0.680 and diluted or 
concentrated as necessary. Resulting 1 ml initial inocula were centrifuged at 5000 rpm for 5 
min. Subsequently, the supernatant was removed and the pellet was washed with 1ml 
nuclease-free sterile H2O and re-suspended. The procedure was repeated 2 times to remove 
any remaining LB broth. A 10 l aliquot of the resulting 1ml final fully re-suspended 
inoculum was used for inoculation in the in vitro weathering experiments.  
In vitro weathering experiments  
We created a specifically-designed minimal medium (Dunite grain rock abbreviated DGrock) 
containing 1g/L D-glucose, 0.03 g/L K2HPO4, 0.05 g/L NaCl, 0.002 g/L MgSO4.7H2O and 
0.1347 g/L (NH4)2SO4 dissolved in double-distilled water (this is the recipe for C:N=14; for 
C:N=12 and 10 the (NH4)2SO4 amount was amended to 0.1572 and 0.1885 g/L, respectively). 
The rationale behind the medium was to contain only miniscule amounts of Mg as to allow 
the initiation of growth before weathering of the Mg-rich olivine commenced (that added 
amount of Mg was deducted from the final Mg weathering rates). Also, the medium contained 
no soluble forms of Fe and micronutrients with those only available through dissolution of 
the olivine mineral. Olivine grains were through hammer-crushing of dunite silicate rock 
(92% olivine mineral) from heim, Norway. The resulting grain mixture was sieved to 
desired sizes (70-90 and 96-106 m grain diameter) and washed in 0.1N ultra-pure HCl 
(Normatom, VWR chemicals) to remove any exchangeable ions46 and dust attached to the 
surface of the grains and subsequently washed up to 10-15 times with double-distilled H2O to 
remove any remaining acid and until the solution was fully transparent with no cloudiness 
associated with dust and attached ions. The resulting grains were then fully dried for several 
hours in a 60oC oven, mixed thoroughly and used for experiments. To equalise the amounts 
of olivine added to each flask (replicate), 0.07 g of olivine was added to a 250 ml Erlenmeyer 
flask, autoclaved and then 70 ml of autoclaved medium was poured in (to a final amount of 
0.1% (w/w) olivine) using an autoclaved volumetric flask. The resulting 70 ml-filled flasks 
containing olivine were inoculated with 10 l of the final bacterial inoculum and plugged with 
pre-autoclaved lid composed of aluminium foil and non-absorbing cotton wool. Each of the 
experimental flasks (replicates) were randomly placed on a horizontal shaker and incubated 
for 10 days, at temperature of 20oC and at 130 rpm. Abiotic controls were prepared as 
described but instead of 10 l inoculum, they were mock-inoculated with 10 l double-
distilled H2O. Growth assessment at the end of the experiment was spectrophotometrically 
assessed at OD600 using 3 ml of the final culture.  
Culture filtrates for ICP-MS 
An aliquot of 13 ml from each final 10-day culture were obtained in sterile 15 ml tubes, 
centrifuged at 4200 rpm for 5 min to pellet the bacterial cells. The supernatant was transferred 
to a fresh 15 ml tube by filtering with a 20 ml syringe fitted with a sterile 0.22 m Millex-
syringe filter. 9.41 ml of the resulting cell-free filtrate was mixed with 0.59 ml 34% ultra-pure 
HCl to a final 2% HCl concentration (to prevent abiotic precipitation of Fe and Si46) and sent 
for ICP-MS analysis. The latter was carried out at the University of Nottingham, UK using 
Rh, Ge, Sc as internal standards to correct for any drift in light bivalent metals of low atomic 
weight. The remaining amount of cell-free filtrate was used for pH measurement.  
Soil metagenomes and metagenomic analysis 
Soil DNA was extracted from 0.25 g homogenized soil using MoBio PowerSoil DNA 
extraction kit and instruction therein. Soil was obtained from topsoil samples (0-10cm) 
collected in the rooting zones of young legume trees in secondary tropical forests as part of 
the Agua Salud Project managed by the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute in Coln 
Province, Panama (latitude: 9.187, longitude: -79.79). Extracted soil DNA was prepared using 
the Nextera XT kit and protocol, and sequenced on 1 lane of the Illumina HiSeq 4500 150bp 
paired-ends (together with another 12 mineral-associated DNA libraries) at the Edinburgh 
Genomics Institute, UK. Next, mate pairs FASTA files were merged and submitted for 
automated shotgun metagenomic analysis in the MG-RAST server.  
Gene searching and taxonomic breakdown  
All reads from each of the identified target weathering genes were downloaded as FASTA 
files directly from the Subsystem database-annotated metagenomes using the MG-RAST 
website interface. The downloaded FASTA files were then submitted for further taxonomic 
breakdown using the Blast2GO 5.0 Pro and their Cloud-based BLAST server. All Blast2GO 
hits were defined at the species level without any higher taxonomic ranking. That was 
obtained manually using the Taxonomy Summary facility available at 
https://www.genome.jp/tools-bin/taxsummary.  
Sub-cellular localisation  
The sub-cellular localisation of gene products (as illustrated in Figure 2) were either found in 
the Uniprot database or predicted using the Cell-PLoc 2.1 software, and particularly its sub-
domain Gneg-mPLoc designed specifically for in silico predictions in Gram negative bacteria 
such as B. thailandensis.  
Phylogenetic tree construction  
Multiple alignment of acidobacterial DNA-directed RNA polymerase beta subunit (rpoC) 
gene sequences was performed using MUSCLE in the MEGA7 software environment. The 
multiple alignments were then utilized to construct a phylogenetic tree with the following 
parameters: Neighbour-Joining method and Kimura-2-parameter distance with bootstrap 
n=5000 replicates. Taxonomic binning through the rpoC gene as a barcode has been 
previously successfully applied with the same parameters in the classification of Leuconostoc 
spp. and other related genera27 agreeing well with other popular markers such as 16S rRNA, 
gyrB, and dnaA27.   
Download of publicly available genome assemblies and EWC modelling 
Genomes required for rpoC gene phylogenetic analysis or for analysis of the estimated 
weathering capacity (EWC) were downloaded from the NCBI Genome Assembly database, 
whereas metagenomes were obtained through the MG-RAST database. EWC modelling in 
single bacteria was achieved by multiplying the number of weathering genes by their relative 
proportion of contribution to Mg weathering from olivine as shown by our in vitro 
experiments with their knock-outs relative to WT bacteria (weathering coefficient ratio was 
5:3:15:3 for the effects of gdhFAD/gdhPQQ : trkA/gluconate 2-dehydrogenase : siderophore 
genes : ackA; for single bacteria siderophore production was counted as binary data  
presence/absence; the effect of gdhFAD we report here is assumed to be the same as that of 
gdhPQQ; the same goes for trkA and gluconate 2-dehydrogenase). For modelling the EWC 
of soil metagenomes, a similar method was used in which the proportion of each of those gene 
classes (normalized by rpoC copies in each metagenome because each bacterium contains 
only one rpoC thus surrogate for normalizing for the actual number of bacterial genomes in 
each metagenome) was multiplied by the aforementioned weathering coefficients. For 
establishing the metagenomic abundance of siderophores we used the Level 2 Subsystem 
database entry under the name of Siderophores available for each metagenome in MG-
RAST, all other target genes were defined as function (Level 4) entries for each metagenome 
in the MG-RAST server.  
References 
1. Beerling, D.J., Leake, J.R., Long, S.P., Scholes, J.D., Ton, J., Nelson, P.N., Bird, M., Kantzas, E., 
Taylor, L.L., Sarkar, B. and Kelland, M., 2018. Farming with crops and rocks to address global climate, food 
and soil security. Nature plants, 4(3), p.138. 
2. Kantola, I.B., Masters, M.D., Beerling, D.J., Long, S.P. and DeLucia, E.H., 2017. Potential of global 
croplands and bioenergy crops for climate change mitigation through deployment for enhanced 
weathering. Biology letters, 13(4), p.20160714. 
3. Chen, W., Wang, Q., He, L. and Sheng, X., 2016. Changes in the weathering activity and populations 
of culturable rock-weathering bacteria from the altered purple siltstone and the adjacent soil. Geomicrobiology 
journal, 33(8), pp.724-733. 
4. Uroz, S., Calvaruso, C., Turpault, M.P. and Frey-Klett, P., 2009. Mineral weathering by bacteria: 
ecology, actors and mechanisms. Trends in microbiology, 17(8), pp.378-387. 
5. Szwerinski, H., Arvin, E. and Harremos, P., 1986. pH-decrease in nitrifying biofilms. Water 
Research, 20(8), pp.971-976. 
6. Epihov, D.Z., Batterman, S.A., Hedin, L.O., Leake, J.R., Smith, L.M. and Beerling, D.J., 2017. N2-
fixing tropical legume evolution: a contributor to enhanced weathering through the Cenozoic?. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 284(1860), p.20170370. 
7. Leslie, K., Sturm, A., Stotler, R., Oates, C.J., Kyser, T.K. and Fowle, D.A., 2015. Marinobacter 
bacteria associated with a massive sulphide ore deposit affect metal mobility in the deep 
subsurface. Geochemistry: Exploration, Environment, Analysis, 15(4), pp.319-326. 
8. Pollmann, K., Kutschke, S., Matys, S., Kostudis, S., Hopfe, S. and Raff, J., 2016. Novel 
biotechnological approaches for the recovery of metals from primary and secondary resources. Minerals, 6(2), 
p.54. 
9. Johnson, D.B., Kanao, T. and Hedrich, S., 2012. Redox transformations of iron at extremely low pH: 
fundamental and applied aspects. Frontiers in microbiology, 3, p.96. 
10. Hamilton, W.A., 1985. Sulphate-reducing bacteria and anaerobic corrosion. Annual review of 
microbiology, 39(1), pp.195-217. 
11. Varadachari, C., Barman, A.K. and Ghosh, K., 1994. Weathering of silicate minerals by organic acids 
II. Nature of residual products. Geoderma, 61(3-4), pp.251-268. 
12. Bennett, P.C., Rogers, J.R., Choi, W.J. and Hiebert, F.K., 2001. Silicates, silicate weathering, and 
microbial ecology. Geomicrobiology Journal, 18(1), pp.3-19. 
13. Frey, B., Rieder, S.R., Brunner, I., Pltze, M., Koetzsch, S., Lapanje, A., Brandl, H. and Furrer, G., 
2010. Weathering-associated bacteria from the Damma glacier forefield: physiological capabilities and impact 
on granite dissolution. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 76(14), pp.4788-4796. 
14. Lepleux, C., Turpault, M.P., Oger, P., Frey-Klett, P. and Uroz, S., 2012. Correlation of the abundance 
of betaproteobacteria on mineral surfaces with mineral weathering in forest soils. Appl. Environ. 
Microbiol., 78(19), pp.7114-7119. 
15. Abdulla, H., 2009. Bioweathering and biotransformation of granitic rock minerals by 
actinomycetes. Microbial ecology, 58(4), pp.753-761. 
16. Wang, Q., Wang, R.R., He, L.Y., Lu, J.J., Huang, Z. and Sheng, X.F., 2014. Changes in weathering 
effectiveness and community of culturable mineral-weathering bacteria along a soil profile. Biology and 
fertility of soils, 50(7), pp.1025-1034. 
17. Wang, Q., Cheng, C., He, L., Huang, Z. and Sheng, X., 2014. Characterization of depth-related 
changes in bacterial communities involved in mineral weathering along a mineral-rich soil 
profile. Geomicrobiology Journal, 31(5), pp.431-444. 
18. Marra, L.M., Oliveira, S.M.D., Soares, C.R.F.S. and Moreira, F.M.D.S., 2011. Solubilisation of 
inorganic phosphates by inoculant strains from tropical legumes. Scientia Agricola, 68(5), pp.603-609. 
19. Lin, T.F., Huang, H.I., Shen, F.T. and Young, C.C., 2006. The protons of gluconic acid are the major 
factor responsible for the dissolution of tricalcium phosphate by Burkholderia cepacia CC-Al74. Bioresource 
Technology, 97(7), pp.957-960. 
20. Chen, W., Luo, L., He, L.Y., Wang, Q. and Sheng, X.F., 2016. Distinct mineral weathering behaviors 
of the novel mineral-weathering strains Rhizobium yantingense H66 and Rhizobium etli CFN42. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol., 82(14), pp.4090-4099. 
21. Buch, A., Archana, G. and Kumar, G.N., 2008. Metabolic channeling of glucose towards gluconate in 
phosphate-solubilizing Pseudomonas aeruginosa P4 under phosphorus deficiency. Research in 
microbiology, 159(9-10), pp.635-642. 
22. Liu, S.T., Lee, L.Y., Tai, C.Y., Hung, C.H., Chang, Y.S., Wolfram, J.H., Rogers, R. and Goldstein, 
A.H., 1992. Cloning of an Erwinia herbicola gene necessary for gluconic acid production and enhanced 
mineral phosphate solubilization in Escherichia coli HB101: nucleotide sequence and probable involvement in 
biosynthesis of the coenzyme pyrroloquinoline quinone. Journal of Bacteriology, 174(18), pp.5814-5819. 
23. Ferret, C., Sterckeman, T., Cornu, J.Y., Gangloff, S., Schalk, I.J. and Geoffroy, V.A., 2014. 
Siderophorepromoted dissolution of smectite by fluorescent Pseudomonas. Environmental microbiology 
reports, 6(5), pp.459-467. 
24. Gallagher, L.A., Ramage, E., Patrapuvich, R., Weiss, E., Brittnacher, M. and Manoil, C., 2013. 
Sequence-defined transposon mutant library of Burkholderia thailandensis. MBio, 4(6), pp.e00604-13. 
25. Serino, L., Reimmann, C., Visca, P., Beyeler, M., Chiesa, V.D. and Haas, D., 1997. Biosynthesis of 
pyochelin and dihydroaeruginoic acid requires the iron-regulated pchDCBA operon in Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa. Journal of bacteriology, 179(1), pp.248-257. 
26. Butterfield, C.N., Li, Z., Andeer, P.F., Spaulding, S., Thomas, B.C., Singh, A., Hettich, R.L., Suttle, 
K.B., Probst, A.J., Tringe, S.G. and Northen, T., 2016. Proteogenomic analyses indicate bacterial 
methylotrophy and archaeal heterotrophy are prevalent below the grass root zone. PeerJ, 4, p.e2687. 
27. Chelo, I.M., Ze-Ze, L. and Tenreiro, R., 2007. Congruence of evolutionary relationships inside the 
LeuconostocOenococcusWeissella clade assessed by phylogenetic analysis of the 16S rRNA gene, dnaA, 
gyrB, rpoC and dnaK. International journal of systematic and evolutionary microbiology, 57(2), pp.276-286. 
28. Hassler, C.S., Schoemann, V., Nichols, C.M., Butler, E.C. and Boyd, P.W., 2011. Saccharides 
enhance iron bioavailability to Southern Ocean phytoplankton. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 108(3), pp.1076-1081. 
29. Duff, R.B., Webley, D.M. and Scott, R.O., 1963. Solubilization of minerals and related materials by 
2-ketogluconic acid-producing bacteria. Soil Science, 95(2), pp.105-114. 
30. Van Rompaey, K., Van Ranst, E., Verdoodt, A. and De Coninck, F., 2007. Use of the test-mineral 
technique to distinguish simple acidolysis from acido-complexolysis in a Podzol profile. Geoderma, 137(3-4), 
pp.293-299. 
31. Wolfe, A.J., 2005. The acetate switch. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev., 69(1), pp.12-50. 
32. Robin, A. and Kepes, A., 1975. Inducible gluconate permease in a gluconate kinase-deficient mutant 
of Escherichia coli. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Biomembranes, 406(1), pp.50-59. 
33. Ahmed, H., Ettema, T.J., Tjaden, B., Geerling, A.C., van der Oost, J. and Siebers, B., 2005. The semi-
phosphorylative EntnerDoudoroff pathway in hyperthermophilic archaea: a re-evaluation. Biochemical 
Journal, 390(2), pp.529-540. 
34. Daddaoua, A., Krell, T. & Ramos, J. L., 2009. Regulation of glucose metabolism in Pseudomonas. 
The phosphorylative branch and Entner-Doudoroff enzymes are regulated by a repressor containing a sugar 
isomerase domain. Journal of Biological Chemistry, 284(32), pp.21360-21368. 
35. Campilongo, R., Fung, R.K., Little, R.H., Grenga, L., Trampari, E., Pepe, S., Chandra, G., Stevenson, 
C.E., Roncarati, D. and Malone, J.G., 2017. One ligand, two regulators and three binding sites: How KDPG 
controls primary carbon metabolism in Pseudomonas. PLoS genetics, 13(6), p.e1006839. 
36. Shimizu, K., 2014. Regulation systems of bacteria such as Escherichia coli in response to nutrient 
limitation and environmental stresses. Metabolites, 4(1), pp.1-35. 
37. Anastassiadis, S., Aivasidis, A. and Wandrey, C., 2003. Continuous gluconic acid production by 
isolated yeast-like mould strains of Aureobasidium pullulans. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 61(2), 
pp.110-117. 
38. Chacon, N., Flores, S. and Gonzalez, A., 2006. Implications of iron solubilization on soil phosphorus 
release in seasonally flooded forests of the lower Orinoco River, Venezuela. Soil Biology and 
Biochemistry, 38(6), pp.1494-1499. 
39. Townsend, A.R., Cleveland, C.C., Asner, G.P. and Bustamante, M.M., 2007. Controls over foliar N: 
P ratios in tropical rain forests. Ecology, 88(1), pp.107-118. 
40. Batterman, S.A., Hedin, L.O., Van Breugel, M., Ransijn, J., Craven, D.J. and Hall, J.S., 2013. Key 
role of symbiotic dinitrogen fixation in tropical forest secondary succession. Nature, 502(7470), p.224. 
41. Eichorst, S.A., Breznak, J.A. and Schmidt, T.M., 2007. Isolation and characterization of soil bacteria 
that define Terriglobus gen. nov., in the phylum Acidobacteria. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 73(8), pp.2708-
2717. 
42. Imhoff, J.F., Rahn, T., Knzel, S. and Neulinger, S.C., 2018. New insights into the metabolic 
potential of the phototrophic purple bacterium Rhodopila globiformis DSM 161 T from its draft genome 
sequence and evidence for a vanadium-dependent nitrogenase. Archives of microbiology, 200(6), pp.847-857. 
43. Ward, N.L., Challacombe, J.F., Janssen, P.H., Henrissat, B., Coutinho, P.M., Wu, M., Xie, G., Haft, 
D.H., Sait, M., Badger, J. and Barabote, R.D., 2009. Three genomes from the phylum Acidobacteria provide 
insight into the lifestyles of these microorganisms in soils. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 75(7), pp.2046-2056. 
44. Hausmann, B., Pelikan, C., Herbold, C.W., Kstlbacher, S., Albertsen, M., Eichorst, S.A., Del Rio, 
T.G., Huemer, M., Nielsen, P.H., Rattei, T. and Stingl, U., 2018. Peatland Acidobacteria with a dissimilatory 
sulfur metabolism. The ISME journal, 12(7), p.1729. 
45. Moghimi, A., 1977. Significance of 2-ketogluconic acid in dissolution of phosphate minerals by 
rhizosphere products/by Azar Moghimi (Doctoral dissertation). 
46. Yu, Y., Sheng, X., He, L. and Huang, Z., 2016. Linkage between culturable mineral-weathering 
bacteria and their weathering effectiveness along a soil profile. Geomicrobiology Journal, 33(1), pp.10-19. 
Element-specific transporter knock-out
- If present within the bar - relationship holds even after correction for OD600
- If present outside the bar - relationship holds but in the opposite direction
(e.g. when corrected for optical density, the gdhFAD KO mutant treatment
seems to increase weathering rates per unit OD600)
- If absent - relationship does not hold when corrected for OD600
Figure 1. Reverse genetics analyses of the multi-elemental weathering potential of the soil 
bacterium Burkholderia thailandensis E264 highlights siderophores and Entner-Doudoroff 
pathway target genes. a. Establishing the in vitro BtE264 weathering potential relative to abiotic 
controls using different grain sizes; b. Weathering potential correlates with decreasing medium C:N 
ratio (increasing N supplied as ammonium sulfate) but not with pH in WT bacterial cultures; c. Positive 
effectors of weathering appear to be encoded by pchD, gdhFAD, trkA, ackA, kdgK while negative 
effectors include gntK, eda, zwf. The r values in b. are for Pearson correlation test; statistical tests in c 
(***P<0.001, **P<0.01, *P<0.05) are for two-tailed t-test comparing the mutant with its appropriate 
batch-specific wild type (WT) treatment. Abbreviations: ABctrl  abiotic control; KOs  genetic 
knock-outs from the transposon mutant library available for BtE264; gntK  gluconate kinase; eda  
2-dehydro-3-deoxy-6-phosphogluconate aldolase; zwf  6-phosphogluconate dehydrogenase; corA  
magnesium transporter; modA molybdenum/cobalt transporter; FeABC  Fe compound ATP-binding 
cassette (ABC) transporter; kdgK  2-dehydro-3-deoxygluconate kinase; trkA  2-ketogluconate 
reductase/gluconate 2-dehydrogenase; gdhFAD  FAD-dependent glucose dehydrogenase; pchD  
pyochelin siderophore biosynthetic protein D. n=6 bacterial cultures in each experiment.  
pmol solubilised Ni min-1 
Figure 2. Pathway network effects in Burkholderia thailandensis reveals direct (gdhFAD, trkA, 
ackA, pchD, gntK) and indirect (kdgK, eda, zwf) mechanisms regulating weathering with the 
former involved in generating acidifying or chelating activity outside the cell and the latter 
modulating the response of the former from inside the cell.  
a. b. 
Rhizobium leguminosarum bv. trifolii 
Figure 3. Phylogenetics of the target weathering genes (a  gdhFAD, b  gdhPQQ, c  trkA) in 
tropical soil communities indicates multiple weathering potent lineages of unstudied, 
uncultured and/or elusive bacteria including Ca. Acidipotentia  cl. nov. and Ca. Granulicella 
gluconica sp. nov. within the Acidobacterial phylum with their exact phylogenetic positioning 
(d). Weathering record or no weathering record are based on a list of genera with recorded 
weathering activity in vitro (summarised from published literature in Supplementary Table 1). The 
phylogenetic tree is constructed using MUSCLE for multiple alignment, Neighbour-Joining method 
and Kimura-2-parameter distance. The numerical figures at each node represent Bootstrap values 
(n=5000). The taxonomic breakdown of candidate genes is based on three fully sequenced shotgun 
metagenomes of tropical soils in secondary Neotropical Panamanian forests.  
a. b. 
Figure 4. Estimated weathering capacity (EWC) modelled using target weathering genes 
correlates with weathering rates (a) in vitro (by single bacterial species) and (b) in vivo (by the 
combined mineral+soil microbial communities) and can be utilised for whole-biome modelling 
of microbial weathering activity (c).  
Supplementary Table 1. Bacterial genera that have been demonstrated to enhance the process 
of rock and mineral weathering in vitro with supporting references.  
Genus References 
Arthrobacter  
Microbacterium 
Promicromonospora 
Pseudonocardia 
Nocardiopsis 
Dietzia 
Pseudomonas 
Actinopolyspora  
Actinomadura 
Kitasatospora 
Nocardioides 
Kibdelosporangium 
Streptomyces 
Cabelleronia 3 
Pseudomonas  
Novosphingobium 
Microbacterium 
Acinetobacter 
Streptomyces 
Rhizobium 
Chitinophaga 
Pantoea 
Staphylococcus 
Leclercia 
Ensifer 
Arthrobacter 
Bacillus 
Lysinibacillus 
Comamonas 
Staphylococcus 
Acinetobacter 
Planococcus 
Microbacterium 
Paenibacillus 
Paracoccus 
Sporosarcina 
Ralstonia 
Bacillus 
Burkholderia 
Erwinia 5 
Burkholderia 
Rhizobium 
Staphylococcus 
Paenibacillus 
ADDED 
 Bacillus  
Pseudomonas 
Arthrobacter 
Bacillus 
Lysinibacillus 
Rhodococcus 
Massilia 
Serratia 
Stenotrophomonas 
Curtobacterum 
Rhizobium 6 
Paenibacillus  
Bacillus 
Arthrobacter 
Curtobacterum 
Ochrobactrum 
Acinetobacter 
Pantoea 
Pseudomonas 
Flavobacterium 
Ensifer 
Rhizobium 
Pantoea 
Stenotrophomonas 
Bacillus 
Novosphingobium 
Serratia 
Pseudoxanthomonas 
Solibacillus 
Agromyces 
Caulobacter 
Achromobacter 
Enterobacter 
Microbacterium 
Sphingomonas 
Exiguobacterium 
Paenibacillus 
Brachybacterium 
Curtobacterum 
Phyllobacterium 
Massilia 
Granulicatella 
Chryseobacterium 
Vogesella 
Mitsuaria 
Agrobacterium 8 
Sinomonas 
Microbacterium 
Cupriavidus  
Sphingobium 
Flavobacterium 
Variovorax 
Ensifer 
Pseudomonas 
Brevibacillus 
Acinetobacter 
Burkholderia 
Stenotrophomonas 
Bacillus 
Arthrobacter 
Klebsiella  
Enterobacter 
Pantoea 
Agrobacterium 
Microbacterium 
Burkholderia 
Myroides 
Acidithiobacillus 10 
Acetobacter 
Burkholderia  
Bacillus 
Ralstonia 
Cupriavidus 
Lysinibacillus 
Microbacterium 
Myroides 
Ochrobactrum 
Enterobacter 
Pseudomonas 
Enhydrobacter 
Leifsonia 
Cellulomonas 
Kocuria 
Providencia 
Arthrobacter 
Curtobacterium 
Agrobacterium  
Aminobacterium 
Azospirillum 
Labrys 
Rhanella 
Rhizobium 
Sphingomonas 
Achromobacter 
Burkholderia 
Collimonas 
Janthinobacterium 
Acinetobacter  
Azotobacter 
Geobacter 
Acidithiobacillus 
Citrobacter 
Dyella 
Enterobacter 
Frateuria 
Pseudomonas 
Serratia 
Shewanella 
Arthrobacter 
Bacillus 
Mycobacterium 
Paenibacillus 
Staphylococcus 
Streptomyces 
Rhodococcus  
Janthinobacterium 
Paenibacillus 
Pseudomonas 
Collimonas 
Sphingomonas 
Bacillus  
Paenibacillus 
Vibrio 
Xanthobacter 
Enterobacter 
Kluyvera 
Pseudomonas 
Chryseomonas 
Bradyrhizobium 15
Rhizobium 
Cupriavidus 
Burkholderia 
Escherichia 16
Arthrobacter  
Janthinobacterium 
Leifsonia 
Paucibacter 
Polaromonas 
Pseudomonas 
Rhodococcus 
Supplementary references 
1. Potysz, A., Grybos, M., Kierczak, J., Guibaud, G., Lens, P.N. and van Hullebusch, E.D., 2016. 
Bacterially-mediated weathering of crystalline and amorphous Cu-slags. Applied geochemistry, 64, 
pp.92-106. 
2. Abdulla, H., 2009. Bioweathering and biotransformation of granitic rock minerals by 
actinomycetes. Microbial ecology, 58(4), pp.753-761. 
3. Uroz, S. and Oger, P., 2017. Caballeronia mineralivorans sp. nov., isolated from oak-Scleroderma 
citrinum mycorrhizosphere. Systematic and applied microbiology, 40(6), pp.345-351. 
4. Wang, Q., Wang, R.R., He, L.Y., Lu, J.J., Huang, Z. and Sheng, X.F., 2014. Changes in weathering 
effectiveness and community of culturable mineral-weathering bacteria along a soil profile. Biology 
and fertility of soils, 50(7), pp.1025-1034. 
5. Wang, Q., Cheng, C., He, L., Huang, Z. and Sheng, X., 2014. Characterization of depth-related 
changes in bacterial communities involved in mineral weathering along a mineral-rich soil 
profile. Geomicrobiology Journal, 31(5), pp.431-444. 
6. Zhao, F., Qiu, G., Huang, Z., He, L. and Sheng, X., 2013. Characterization of Rhizobium sp. Q32 
isolated from weathered rocks and its role in silicate mineral weathering. Geomicrobiology 
Journal, 30(7), pp.616-622. 
7. Huang, J., Sheng, X.F., Xi, J., He, L.Y., Huang, Z., Wang, Q. and Zhang, Z.D., 2014. Depth-related 
changes in community structure of culturable mineral weathering bacteria and in weathering patterns 
caused by them along two contrasting soil profiles. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 80(1), pp.29-42. 
8. Zhang, Z., Huang, J., He, L. and Sheng, X., 2016. Distinct weathering ability and populations of 
culturable mineral-weathering bacteria in the rhizosphere and bulk soils of Morus 
alba. Geomicrobiology Journal, 33(1), pp.39-45. 
9. Zhang, C. and Kong, F., 2014. Isolation and identification of potassium-solubilizing bacteria from 
tobacco rhizospheric soil and their effect on tobacco plants. Applied soil ecology, 82, pp.18-25. 
10. Pollmann, K., Kutschke, S., Matys, S., Kostudis, S., Hopfe, S. and Raff, J., 2016. Novel 
biotechnological approaches for the recovery of metals from primary and secondary 
resources. Minerals, 6(2), p.54. 
11. Yu, Y., Sheng, X., He, L. and Huang, Z., 2016. Linkage between culturable mineral-weathering 
bacteria and their weathering effectiveness along a soil profile. Geomicrobiology Journal, 33(1), 
pp.10-19. 
12. Uroz, S., Calvaruso, C., Turpault, M.P. and Frey-Klett, P., 2009. Mineral weathering by bacteria: 
ecology, actors and mechanisms. Trends in microbiology, 17(8), pp.378-387. 
13. Lapanje, A., Wimmersberger, C., Furrer, G., Brunner, I. and Frey, B., 2012. Pattern of elemental 
release during the granite dissolution can be changed by aerobic heterotrophic bacterial strains isolated 
from Damma glacier (Central Alps) deglaciated granite sand. Microbial ecology, 63(4), pp.865-882. 
14. Vazquez, P., Holguin, G., Puente, M.E., Lopez-Cortes, A. and Bashan, Y., 2000. Phosphate-
solubilizing microorganisms associated with the rhizosphere of mangroves in a semiarid coastal 
lagoon. Biology and Fertility of Soils, 30(5-6), pp.460-468. 
15. Marra, L.M., Oliveira, S.M.D., Soares, C.R.F.S. and Moreira, F.M.D.S., 2011. Solubilisation of 
inorganic phosphates by inoculant strains from tropical legumes. Scientia Agricola, 68(5), pp.603-609. 
16. Garcia, B., Lemelle, L., Rose-Koga, E.F., Telouk, P., Gillet, P. and Albarede, F., 2005, December. The 
Mg-isotope biosignature of Escherichia coli-mediated olivine dissolution. In AGU Fall Meeting 
Abstracts. 
17. Frey, B., Rieder, S.R., Brunner, I., Pltze, M., Koetzsch, S., Lapanje, A., Brandl, H. and Furrer, G., 
2010. Weathering-associated bacteria from the Damma glacier forefield: physiological capabilities and 
impact on granite dissolution. Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 76(14), pp.4788-4796. 
Supplementary Note 1. The effect of bacterial culture density as measured by OD600 on 
in vitro olivine weathering rate 
The optical density (OD) of a bacterial culture measured at =600 nm (hereafter 
referred to as OD600) provides a reliable estimate of bacterial growth and number of cells for 
a particular species. In our study, the number of cells in turn is expected to affect mineral 
weathering, as more cells and greater metabolic activity may translate to additional output of 
weathering agents such as organic acids and siderophores and enhancement in bacteria-to-
mineral surface interactions.  
 To test for this hypothesis, we correlated the concentration of solubilised Mg in 
cultures by the OD600 readings across all single gene KO mutants and wild type B. 
thalaindensis cultures in our experiments. KO mutants exhibited non-parametric distribution 
and Spearman correlation test was applied in place of Pearson, revealing no significant 
correlation between OD600 and solubilised Mg (Spearman test P>0.10). The three single 
gene mutant backgrounds with largest effect sizes in terms of weathering  gntK-, gdhFAD- 
and pchD- also confirmed that pattern showing that both normal and low OD600 can co-occur 
with low levels of weathering (as measured by solubilised Mg concentration in gdhFAD- 
and pchD-) and that low OD600 can co-occur with both high weathering (as in gntK-) and low 
weathering (as in gdhFAD-).  
As already outlined in the Main Text, these observations can be explained by differences in 
the metabolism of these mutants. Knock-out gdhFAD- mutants are interrupted in their ability 
to oxidise glucose to gluconic acid thus unable to undergo their preferred mode of glucose 
assimilation through the semi-phosphorylative ED pathway. This may be the cause for a lag 
ADDED 
in their exponential phase and lower OD600 readings until they shift their expression from 
the gluconic acid-producing semi-phosphorylative ED pathway to alternative routes of 
glucose catabolism such as the classic ED or EMP glycolysis. As a result, less gluconic acid 
is formed and weathering rates decline. In constrast, gntK- mutants will be able to oxidise 
the glucose (the only C source in our specially designed medium) to gluconic acid but will 
not be able to transport it inside the cytosol and metabolise it. Consequently, this causes the 
build-up of large unused and non-utilisable amounts of C substrate as gluconic acid in the 
medium stunting growth and triggerring proportional increases in olivine weathering. On the 
other hand, pchD- mutants uncapable of producing siderophores will be able to normally 
assimilate glucose and reveal normal OD600 readings. This indicates that although the lack 
of siderophores causes a substantial decline in mineral weathering, sufficient levels of Fe 
and other micronutrients must be generated by alternative weathering mechanisms (such as 
gluconic acid production) as to support bacterial growth. 
 The variation in growth in WT Bt bacteria also does not correlate with their ability to 
solubilise Mg from olivine (Pearson test, P>0.10) confirming once again that the effects of 
bacteria on weathering are due to qualitative (differences in metabolism) than purely 
quantitative (number of cells) factors.  
Supplementary Note 2. The amount of gluconic acid in culture filtrate from WT and 
gntK mutants 
gntK KO WT gdhFAD KO 
Gluconic acid* (mM) 3.02 (0.29)** not detected not detected 
pH 3.70 (0.03)*** 4.40 (0.04) 4.65 (0.02) 
*Gluconic acid was determined in syringe 0.22 m filtrates of 10-day old cultures using the Megazyme D-gluconic acid/D-
glucono--lactone kit.  
**The number in brackets represent S.E.M. n = 3 replicates in the case of both gntK, WT and gdhFAD cultures.   
***In the case of pH n = 6. 
Notes: These results support the view that gntK mutants are unable to transport gluconic acid 
inside the cell causing the build up of gluconic acid and acidity in the medium causing futile 
cycles of glucose oxidation to gluconic acid without assimilation. In cells of WT bacteria 
gluconic acid is transported inside the cell, the cell assimilates it and gluconic acid does not 
build up in the medium generating less acidity. In gdhFAD cells glucose is acquired and 
assimilated directly without prior oxidation to gluconic acid thus eliminating the H+ 
generation step of glucose oxidation resulting in higher solution pH. It is somewhat puzzling 
that WT filtrates did not contain even slight traces of gluconic acid. Previous work has 
identified that gluconic acid accumulation in the solution is temporary specific, dependent 
upon the growth stage of bacterial cultures with more gluconic acid detected in the first couple 
of days of growth1. As such, future work should use more time points to establish the gluconic 
acid accumulation in WT BtE264 bacteria.  
1. Chen, W., Luo, L., He, L.Y., Wang, Q. and Sheng, X.F., 2016. Distinct mineral weathering behaviors 
of the novel mineral-weathering strains Rhizobium yantingense H66 and Rhizobium etli CFN42. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol., 82(14), pp.4090-4099. 
Discussion and Conclusions 
Discussion and Conclusions 
The biogeochemistry and belowground metagenomics of  
N2-fixers: in search of fixer effects beyond nitrogen enrichment 
Dimitar Z. Epihov1* and David J. Beerling1 
1Department of Animal and Plant Sciences, University of Sheffield, Sheffield S10 2TN, UK 
*for correspondence 
Abstract 
 The enrichment in ecosystem N stocks caused by the presence of diverse N2-fixing 
trees in successional settings is well-documented. However, other biogeochemical effects 
brought up by N2-fixers in such systems have been largely overlooked. Here, we 
summarise data from several field studies and show that N2-fixing trees cause a 
significant 52-60% increase in rock weathering rates accompanied by a release of key 
mineral nutrients. Utilising metagenomic and belowground microbial community data 
we show that these weathering enhancements are linked to substantial enrichments in 
microbial respiration, lithotrophy and gluconic acid production beneath N2-fixers likely 
driven by high inputs of fixed N as well as symbiotic attractions. Consequently, we argue 
that the ecosystem services provided by N2-fixing trees during successional and 
agroforestry scenarios are more far-reaching than previously realised.  
Introduction 
Symbiotic N2-fixing angiosperms are members of a diverse monophyletic clade within the 
rosids known as the Nitrogen Fixing Clade (NFC)1. Within the clade, only members of the 
Leguminosae (Fabaceae) and Cannabaceae (e.g. Parasponia) form symbiotic root nodules 
harbouring rhizobia (including  and -proteobacteria), whereas N2-fixing members of the 
Betulaceae, Rosaceae, Rhamnaceae, Casuarinaceae among others are defined as actinorrhizal, 
forming root nodules sheltering members of the actinomycete bacterial genus of Frankia1,2. 
Within the NFC, the legume family is the most speciose, with very diverse geographic 
distribution. Legume trees are prominent elements of many tropical forests worldwide3. 
Legume trees are also frequently planted by man with multiple examples from agroforestry 
systems4,5,6, urban parks and green areas7, reforestation projects and disturbed and degraded 
land management8. Highly praised factors contributing to their widespread presence in such 
systems are their characteristically fast growth, capacity to obtain atmospheric N2 through 
nodulating symbiotic partners and ability to perform well under unfavourable edaphic 
conditions. The same qualities may also account for some of legumes prodigious capability 
to invade natural systems9,10,11.  
Symbiotic N2-fixers are also particularly important during ecosystem succession. Examples 
of highly abundant N2-fixers (leguminous and actinorrhizal plants) are well documented 
during both primary succession (Table 1) and secondary succession, particularly under N-
limited conditions (Table 2; Figure 1 and 2). Under these conditions, a commonly described 
phenomenon is that N2-fixers provide high amounts of fixed N enriching the soil and the 
aboveground biomass in N through redistribution of their N-rich litter (Tables 1 & 2). Here, 
we argue that N2-fixers modify ecosystem biogeochemical cycling beyond their effect on N 
stocks including weathering.  
 In our previous work, we have hypothesized that the evolution of legume-rich tropical 
forests in the early Cenozoic (58-42 Mya) triggered increases in silicate rock weathering 
(Introduction) via cascading effects of fixer-mediated increase in ecosystem N stocks. Here, 
we conclude our investigations into tropical legume trees and their soil-mineral microbiome 
in respect to biogeochemistry and routes to enhanced mineral access by comparing our 
findings to other studies and highlighting common fixer-effects in the biogeochemical cycling 
of fixer-rich ecosystems.  
1. Symbiotic N2-fixation increases weathering inputs during succession  
Our field experiments demonstrate that forest native N2-fixing legumes drive significantly 
greater silicate weathering rates in their rooting zones than non-fixing non-legume trees in 
both Panamanian (Chapter 1) and Australian (Chapter 2) post-abandonment secondary 
tropical forests (Figure 3a,b). Interestingly, this ability of legume trees coincides with 
legume-specific reduction in pH (Figure 3e,f) and peak in nodule biomass during secondary 
succession (Figure 3i,j). Although, our studies represent the only large-scale comparisons 
specifically designed to test the differences in in situ silicate weathering between early 
successional tropical N2-fixers and non-fixers, other studies investigating the effects of 
temperate N2-fixing trees on soil and nutrient stocks during successional dynamics are scarce 
but nevertheless corroborate our findings. For instance, a study of the actinorrhizal Alnus 
rubra of secondary forests in USA shows substantially higher removal rates of Ca, Mg and K 
contributed to weathering of primary minerals (weathering fluxes) beneath the early 
successional Alnus stands relative to nearby mid-successional stands of the evergreen conifer 
Pseudotsuga menziesii on the same soil (Figure 3c). The authors also showed that weathering 
fluxes beneath A. rubra were among the highest recorded relative to other stands of deciduous 
angiosperm trees as diverse as Liriodendron tulipifera, Quercus montana and a mixed 
Quercus-Carya system (Figure 3c). Similarly, another study investigating primary 
succession following glacier recession in Alaska, USA reveals the highest rates of calcium 
carbonate (calcite) mineral weathering in soil beneath the N2-fixing actinorrhizal Alnus crispa 
and Dryas spp. relative to other early successional non-fixing trees such as Populus 
trichocarpa and Salix spp. (Figure 3d). Last but not least, plant-free soil mesocosms 
containing fermentative F layer soil from either an alder or a conifer stand incubated with 
phosphate rock for 30 days revealed that alder soil mesocosms drove 1.8-fold greater 
mineralization of PO43- from phosphate rock than did the conifer F layer soil mesocosms12 
with A layer soil showing no significant difference between conifer and alder soil 
treatments12.  
 A meta-analysis of weathering rates was performed using 8 studies of field 
experiments in which N2-fixer trees and non-fixers were tested simultaneously. Three of the 
studies included basalt bags deposited in topsoil in three biomes in Australia: tropical forest 
(Chapter 2), forest-savanna transition (unpublished author data) and savanna (unpublished 
author data). Likewise, the same studies were repeated using dunite. Another study was from 
secondary tropical forests in Panama (Chapter 1) and last was the study measuring carbonate 
weathering in the tundra in Alaska beneath primary successional species. The red alder (Alnus 
rubra)-Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziessii) study was not used as it measures weathering 
fluxes rather than weathering rates. For each study, weathering rates were equilibrated to the 
mean and measured in fold relative to the mean of the study (sample/mean). Data was 
categorised in tree species for both N2-fixers and non-fixers. Data are summarised in Figure 
4. Both paired t-test and unpaired Mann-Whitney tests unanimously revealed 52-60% 
significantly greater weathering rates in N2-fixers than non-fixers (Figure 4).  
In addition, to greater weathering, another shared feature beneath successional 
leguminous and actinorrhizal N2-fixing trees is their more acidic soil (Figure 3e,f,g,h). The 
early successional peak in nodule biomass typical to pioneering legume trees (Figure 3i,j,l), 
coinciding with the highest inputs of N, also co-occurs with the highest recorded differences 
in weathering rates between N2-fixers and non-fixers (Figure 3b,f,j).   
 Fixer-mediated enhancement in weathering is likely to increase nutrient availability 
to plants and soil solution concentrations in the ecosystem. In support, we find that basalt 
from beneath Acacia celsa in Australian secondary forests sustained consistently greater P 
and K leaching rates throughout the secondary forest chronosequence (Chapter 2). 
Molybdenum (Mo) leaching from dunite was greatest in 20-year old sites where nodule 
biomass in soil and bradyrhizobial nifK (Fe-Mo containing nitrogenase) in weathered basalt 
were at their highest (Chapter 2). These observations are consistent with our hypothesis that 
high weathering traits evolved in legumes in response to the actively P and Mo demanding 
N2-fixation symbioses13. In the Alnus rubra-dominated systems that exhibited higher mineral 
weathering than Pseudotsuga menziesii, soil solution concentrations of Ca, Mg, K were also 
greater for all three soil horizons and leaf concentrations of Mg and K were significantly 
greater in Alnus than in Pseudotsuga14. Similarly, limed soils beneath Robinia pseudoacacia 
exhibited significantly greater soil solution concentrations of Ca than the limed soils beneath 
pine-hardwood mixed stands15 (Figure 3k). In another study, greater available K, Ca and P 
were observed in soil beneath Robinia pseudoacacia relative to a mixed Quercus-Pinus 
system on the same young soils with authors advocating increased primary mineral 
weathering as the likely driver16.  
On geologically young soils, apatite mineral weathering is the most important input source of 
P in the system17. Under such conditions, enhanced weathering of primary minerals by N2-
fixers may account for some boost in P availability to such fixing legume trees. Examples 
typifying this scenario would include forests on geologically young soils with high mineral 
content such as alfisols and cambisols dominating most of the forested landscapes in 
temperate areas or on soils resulting from recent volcanic activity such as the ones beneath 
some tropical forests in Hawaii18.  
However, many tropical soils, including the highly weathered oxisols from our Australian and 
Panamanian field sites are geologically old and contain little primary minerals with most P 
occluded in complexes with secondary iron and aluminium minerals19,17. Our observation that 
legume trees promote the dissolution of primary silicates in such soils is likely transferable to 
secondary minerals as dissolution of secondary minerals follows the same set of rules as that 
of primary minerals  with the concentration of H+/OH-, organic acids and CO2, as well as 
precipitation and temperature playing important roles20,21. For instance, total soil 
concentrations of Al (mainly contained within kaolinitic secondary minerals) was 
significantly lower beneath N2-fixing trees in both of our tropical forest studies in Panama 
and Australia indicating increased weathering and leaching of kaolinite similar to lower 
exchangeable Al beneath Robinia pseudoacacia in temperate successional forests16. 
Therefore, it seems likely that the link between N2-fixers and high weathering rates would be 
valuable not only on geologically young but also geologically old soils. Consequently, it is 
conceivable that N2-fixers during successional scenarios do not only facilitate ecosystem 
development through their inputs of fixed N but may also supply greater availability of K, Ca, 
Mg, P and Mo plundered from their higher weathering yields.  
2. Metagenomic and biogeochemical evidence for the role of fixed N inputs, nitrification 
and nitrate leaching in weathering through cation removal and acidification 
Increased inputs of N resulting from N2-fixers can modify the biogeochemistry of an 
ecosystem resulting in (1) decline in soil C:N ratios, (2) increases in soil ammonia/nitrate, (3) 
increased nitrification rates and (4) elevated nitrate leaching. Ultimately, these processes drive 
acidification and removal of counterbalancing cations (Mg, Ca, K) which can stimulate 
weathering through acidolysis and through shifting the equilibrium to further dissolution, 
respectively.  
In the microbial community increased inputs of fixed N can be expected to trigger: (1) rise in 
N cycling microorganisms and (2) genes involved in microbial nitrification. 
Biogeochemical evidence from tropical forest legumes in Panama indicates that soil beneath 
N2-fixers contains lower C:N ratio characteristic to high N inputs. Non-fixing trees near N2-
fixers exhibit similarly low soil C:N ratio unlike non-fixers far from fixers with significantly 
higher C:N and receiving less inputs of fixed N. Similarly, lower soil C:N ratios are also 
observed in temperate N2-fixing trees such as the legume Robinia pseudoacacia and in 
actinorrhizal trees (Figure 5a-c). In support of the role of N inputs in driving weathering, the 
soil C:N ratio significantly correlated with weathering rates (Figure 5a) in the study of 
weathering rates in Panamanian tropical forests. High N inputs increase nitrification that is 
the microbial transformation of NH3 to NO3- which generates acidity and promotes cation and 
nitrate leaching  all factors understood to positively affect rock weathering.  
Meta-analysis of community sequencing-based profiling of soil beneath N2-fixing 
plants (including Panamanian tropical legume trees, pigeon pea Cajanus cajan, Mimosa 
debilis and Alnus spp.) reveal greater relative abundance of N-cycling microorganisms in soil 
of N2-fixers than in non-fixers within the same study (Mann-Whitney test, P<0.05; Figure 
5e,f). This is consistent with higher N inputs causing enrichment in N cycling microbial taxa 
in soil (Figure 5d). Meta-analysis coupling metagenomics of the mineral-associated 
communities of soil-deposited rock material to weathering rates indicates that the abundance 
of all four major nitrification genes (ammonia monooxygenase AMO, hydroxylamine oxidase 
HAO, nitrate reductase alpha subunit narG and nitrate reductase beta subunit narH) positively 
associates with silicate weathering rates (Figure 5g). These significant correlations between 
nitrification genes and weathering rates of deposited fresh silicate rock material complements 
biogeochemical evidence of greater nitrification rates and weathering fluxes beneath N2-
fixing trees of temperate areas such as Alnus rubra and Robinia pseudoacacia.    
3. Higher microbial respiration in stands rich in N2-fixing trees and its role in weathering 
 The high N litter of many N2-fixers decomposes faster22,23. In terms of microbial 
metabolism, fast decomposition translates into high respiration rates. A field study comparing 
the effects of invasive N2-fixers revealed significantly greater basal respiration rates per unit 
soil organic matter beneath a recent invasion by N2-fixing Acacia longifolia than the native 
non-fixing vegetation in sand dune ecosystems in Portugal24. Similarly, microbial respiration 
per unit soil organic matter beneath a stand planted to the N2-fixing legume tree Robinia 
pseudoacacia was 4-fold higher than that in the native secondary oak (Quercus liaotungensis) 
forest in the Loess Plateau in China25. Secondary forests in the Czech Republic dominated by 
the actinorrhizal N2-fixing trees Alnus glutinosa and Alnus incana revealed ~3- and 11-fold 
higher basal respiration rates than Quercus rubra and Pinus sylvestris-dominated forests, 
respectively26. To cross-validate the field observations of higher respiration rates beneath 
stands dominated by N2-fixing trees of temperate and Mediterranean latitudes to our field 
trials in tropical forests, we utilized the large collection of sequenced metagenomes of soil-
mineral samples we have previously characterised and generated.  
Unfortunately, tropical forests are rarely as clear-cut as temperate forests in terms of dominant 
species and pure legume or non-legume natural stands are hard to come by. Our previous 
work clearly illustrates this problem: our community profiling in Panama revealed that non-
fixing trees neighbouring N2-fixing legumes exhibit lower soil C:N ratios and microbial 
communities more similar to those of N2-fixers than to those of non-fixers far from N2-fixers 
(Chapter 1). To circumvent this obstacle, we grouped our 46 metagenomic samples into highly 
fixing, highly nodulated forest samples in which N-rich litter is actively re-distributed 
between fixers and non-fixers and in forests of low N2-fixation and nodulation rates. The first 
group (high-fixing forest samples) contained soil-mineral metagenomic samples from 
fixers (n=6 dunite) and non-fixers near fixers (n=3 dunite) from highly nodulated 17-year old 
forests in Panama as well as soil-mineral samples from fixing (n=4 for dunite and 4 for basalt) 
and neighbouring non-fixing trees (n=2 for dunite and 2 for basalt) in the most nodulated 20-
year old forest site in Australia. In contrast, the second group (low-fixing forest samples) 
consisted of soil-mineral metagenomic samples from non-fixers far from fixers (n=3 dunite) 
from our tropical forests sites in Panama and samples from the 12.5 and 48-year old Australian 
forests where assessment of nodulation rates showed low to near-absent symbiotic N2-fixation 
(n=14 for dunite and 14 for basalt). Because all fresh mineral samples are microbially-
speaking identical prior their deposition in the 0-10cm topsoil, they represent a convenient 
method to assess the short-term effects driven by the tree and its rhizosphere during the 8-10 
months weathering period in soil.  
High-level metagenomic comparisons revealed that the abundance of genes involved in 
microbial respiration was consistently greater (Mann-Whitney test, P<0.001) in metagenomes 
from high-fixing forests (n=21) than in metagenomes from low-fixing forests (n=25)  a trend 
consistent across soil-deposited rock types (dunite and basalt) and forest locations (Panama 
and Australia; Figure 6a). The sum of microbial respiration genes also consistently positively 
correlated with silicate weathering rates (Figure 6a). Microbial respiration is a major source 
of CO2 in soil and its associated weathering-potent carbonic acid which may be one reason 
for their strong association in addition to glycolytic (gluconic, acetic) and Krebs (citric, oxalic, 
malic) organic acids which are also produced by actively respiring microorganisms. In 
addition to providing N necessary for respiration (otherwise N limitation puts a break on the 
Krebs cycle and glycolysis27), fast decomposition would also be expected to quickly release 
labile C such as starch from plant materials explaining the strong correlation between the gene 
abundance of microbial glucoamylase and weathering and its higher abundance in high-fixing 
forests (not shown).  
4. N2-fixing trees are linked to more abundant belowground lithotrophy 
In essence, microbial respiration generates energy from coupling electron transfer from a 
donor to an acceptor across a respiratory membrane chain, generating a proton motive force 
used for synthesis of ATP. Many microorganisms use organic molecules for donors of 
electrons (chemoorganotrophs) and fast-decomposing legume litter may provide large 
quantities of labile C sources quickly assimilated by microorganisms as discussed above. 
However, other microorganisms utilise inorganics as electron donors (chemolithotrophs) 
including sulphate oxidisers, ammonia oxidisers, iron oxidisers, hydrogen oxidisers and some 
sulfate reducers.  
A clearly established example for the effects of N2-fixing trees on lithotrophic 
communities is the oxidation of ammonia and nitrite during nitrification. By supplying N-rich 
litter, high loads of NH3 released through ammonification feeds into increases in nitrifying 
lithotrophic organisms and nitrification rates beneath such fixer-rich forests as we have 
already discussed. Indeed, high-fixing forest metagenomic samples were significantly 
enriched in nitrification genes showing 1.3-fold greater narG and narH, 2.2-fold greater HAO 
and 3.7-fold greater AMO gene abundances than those of low-fixing forests (Mann-Whitney 
test, P<0.01, except for HAO where P<0.001; Figure 6d). However, it is comparatively less 
understood how N2-fixers impact other lithotrophic groups in soil.  
Our soil-mineral metagenomes from high-fixing forests are significantly enriched in 
the sulfur (S) oxidation pathway relative to low-fixing metagenomes (+1.1-fold; Mann-
Whitney test, P<0.01; Figure 6b) in both Panamanian and Australian tropical forests and in 
both soil-deposited dunite and basalt rocks. Key S oxidation genes significantly enriched in 
high-fixing forests include sulfite oxidase (1.1-fold, Mann-Whitney test, P<0.05), sulfite 
dehydrogenase SoxD (1.2-fold, Mann-Whitney test, P<0.01) and sulfane dehydrogenase 
subunit SoxC cytochrome subunit (1.2-fold, Mann-Whitney test, P<0.01). Previous molecular 
studies have linked the number of Sox genes in soil communities to measured sulfur oxidation 
rates28 reaffirming that Sox gene abundance can reliably predict in situ S oxidizing activity. 
In addition, 16S rRNA-based community analyses using the SSU SILVA database revealed 
enrichment of several S oxidizing genera (Thioalkalivibrio, Allochromatium, Thiobacter, 
sulfur-oxidiser OBII5  Chapter 1: Figure 3b) in soil microbiomes beneath N2-fixers.  
The S oxidation gene enrichment in high-fixing forests (1.1-1.2-fold) is more modest than 
that of their respective lithotrophic nitrification gene analogues which exhibited 1.3-3.7-fold 
increase in high-fixing forest soil-mineral metagenomes than in those of low-fixing forests 
(Figure 6d). Meta-analysis of the RAINFOR foliar dataset available from the TRY database 
shows that N2-fixing legume trees of tropical forests do not have significantly different foliar 
S levels than non-fixing trees (Chapter 1: Supplementary Figure 4). Those findings suggest 
that unlike the direct well established link between N inputs of N2-fixers and increased 
nitrification, the link between N2-fixers and increased S oxidation may be indirect and 
unlinked to higher S inputs.  
One possible cause for increased S oxidation potential beneath actively fixing legume 
trees is the coupling between nitrate reduction and S oxidation. Previously, nitrate addition 
has been demonstrated to increase oxidation of H2S to SO42- in wetland ecosystems as various 
microorganisms can couple SO42- oxidation to denitrification (NO3- to N2) or dissimilatory 
nitrate reduction (NO3- to NH3)29. In support, dissimilatory nitrite reductases and 
denitrification, both pathways that can be physiologically coupled to S oxidation, showed 2.0-
fold and 1.2-fold higher abundance in high-fixing than low-fixing forest samples (Figure 6e; 
denitrification pathway not shown), respectively (Mann-Whitney test, P<0.01 and P<0.05). 
However, further studies are advised before any definitive mechanisms for the recorded link 
between S oxidation and high symbiotic N2-fixation are established.  
Metagenomic samples from high-fixing forests also contained significantly more 
hydrogenases than non-fixing forests (Figure 6c; Mann-Whitney test, P<0.001). We show 
that a total of 26 hydrogenase-encoding genes exhibited a range of 1.2-2.4-fold significant 
enrichment (Mann-Whitney test, 8 genes P<0.001, 7 genes P<0.01, 11 genes P<0.05) in high-
fixing relative to low-fixing forest soil-mineral metagenomes. Hydrogenases are the main 
enzymes catalysing the lithotrophic H2 oxidation reaction which generates energy by 
oxidizing H2 gas to H2O and electrons and subsequent electron transfer across the membrane 
respiratory chain. N2-fixing legume trees may drive the observed enrichment in H2 oxidizing 
metabolism by generating large quantities of H2 gas as a by-product of their nitrogen fixation 
reaction producing a molecule of H2 per molecule of N2 fixed. This phenomenon of beneficial 
effects to plant growth30 has been recorded for legume crops with studies showing greater H2 
gas concentration in legume rhizospheres30.  Interestingly, hydrogenase abundance in the 
metagenome also strongly correlated with weathering rates (Figure 6c) suggesting an 
important role for H2 oxidative metabolism in bacteria-rock interactions.  
High respiration rates beneath N2-fixers may cause the depletion of O2 locally and 
consequent formation of anaerobic microsites at certain soil loci. Such loci would be rich in 
anaerobic food chain organisms including sulfate reducers, fermenters, methylotrophs and 
methanogens31. Sulfate-reducing lineages use sulfate as their terminal electron acceptor for 
anaerobic respiration generating H2S in the process. The metagenomic pathway containing 
the genes encoding the sulfate reduction-associated complexes shows 1.5-fold significant 
enrichment in high-fixing metagenomes than low-fixing forest samples (Figure 6e; Mann-
Whitney test, P<0.05). This finding is further complemented by enrichment of sulfate 
reducing lineages in the soil microbial communities beneath N2-fixers including the genera 
Desulfococcus, Dethiosulfovibrio, Desulfobulbus-like and Alkalispirillum (Chapter 1: 
Figure 3b). The metagenomic pathway containing the genes involved in fermentation is also 
enriched in high-fixing metagenomes relative to low-fixing ones (Mann-Whitney test, 
P<0.01; Figure 6e). Indeed, the 16S rRNA-based reconstruction of the microbial community 
of N2-fixers soil is similarly enriched in anaerobic fermentative lineages including many 
clostridia (not shown). Methylotrophs utilize the gene methanol dehydrogenase to assimilate 
and convert the C1 compound methanol to formaldehyde with this gene abundance greater in 
high-fixing than low-fixing metagenomes (Mann-Whitney test, P<0.001; not shown). 
Combined these findings support the enrichment of anaerobic metabolic niches at localized 
loci beneath N2-fixers. They also paint a picture of multiple possible syntrophic (cross-
feeding) interactions.  
For instance, H2 generation by legume symbioses or by fermenting bacteria can 
provide H2 for both hydrogen-oxidizing and lithotrophic sulfate-reducers. Other sulfate-
reducers utilise organic electron donors such as acetate, propionate, butyrate and lactate which 
again may be provided by the activity of fermenting lineages. H2S produced by sulfate 
reducers can then be fuelled into sulfur oxidation either alone or coupled to dissimilatory 
nitrate reduction or denitrification.  
5. Symbiotic shaping of belowground microbiomes may stimulate weathering via 
gluconic and 2-ketogluconic acid production 
Our in vitro studies with Burkholderia thailandensis mutants revealed that gluconic and 2-
ketogluconic acids biosynthesis in the Entner-Doudoroff pathway is key in bacteria-driven 
rock weathering (Chapter 3). However, under field conditions, many other community-driven 
processes such as nitrification, sulfur oxidation, fermentation etc. occur simultaneously with 
glucose oxidation making it difficult to isolate the impact that microbial production of 
gluconic acids will have on rock weathering in the field. We find that the gene encoding the 
PQQ-dependent glucose dehydrogenase (gdhPQQ), the enzyme product of which catalyses 
the oxidation of glucose to gluconic acid, correlates positively with weathering at slightly 
lower r-value (Pearson test P<0.05, r=0.37; Figure 7a) than processes such as nitrification 
and sulfur oxidation (Figures 5 and 6). The gdhPQQ gene is also significantly more abundant 
in soil-mineral metagenomes beneath high-fixing than non-fixing forests (Mann-Whitney test, 
P<0.01; Figure 7a). It also clearly correlates with other PQQ-containing genes such as PQQ-
dependent alcohol dehydrogenase and PQQ-dependent methanol dehydrogenase (Figure 7b), 
suggesting that those enzymes are all under the control of co-enzyme PQQ bioavailability. 
Indeed, the gene abundance of the pathway encoding co-enzyme PQQ biosynthesis correlated 
positively with gdhPQQ signifying that relationship between PQQ supply and PQQ-
dependent enzymes (Figure 7b).   
Our taxonomic analysis of the gdhPQQ gene pool in soil (Chapter 3) revealed that 
Bradyrhizobium contributes 7.2% of all gdhPQQ copies in soil which is substantial but 
somewhat dwarfed by its 40.7% contribution to all gluconate 2-dehydrogenase/trkA gene 
copies in soil which converts gluconic acid to 2-ketogluconic acid, another equally potent 
weathering agent. Indeed, trkA exhibits 1.3-fold greater abundance in high-fixing 
metagenomes than low-fixing ones at astonishingly low Mann-Whitney P value of 9.06E-05 
and it also correlates with field weathering rates (Pearson test P<0.01, r=0.41; Figure 7a). 
Given that Bradyrhizobium is the likely nodulating agent of Acacia celsa and that it is 
enriched in basalt communities from beneath A. celsa (demonstrated using the nifK gene as a 
marker; see Chapter 3: Figure 4) in Australian tropical forests and in weathered soil-dunite 
(demonstrated using the 16S rRNA gene as a marker; not shown) from beneath N2-fixers in 
Panama, it is very likely that symbiotic attraction may be a driver for the observed enrichment 
of gdhPQQ and trkA genes and indeed enhanced in situ production of gluconic acids in high-
fixing soil-mineral metagenomes.    
 A second parallel mechanism explaining the observed enrichment may be the 
increased respiration rates beneath N2-fixers releasing labile C and glucose which then attracts 
more glucose-oxidizing microorganisms converting glucose to gluconic acid and 2-
ketogluconic acid through the combined action of gdhPQQ and trkA.   
6. Concluding remarks 
 Multiple lines of metagenomic and biogeochemical evidence collected in natural 
systems support substantial functional differences in the microbial community beneath forests 
containing actively N2-fixing trees when compared to non- or low-fixing ones. Meta-analysis 
show that high fixing forest stands support higher abundance of genes involved in microbial 
respiration, lithotrophic metabolism as well as an enrichment in gluconic acid-producing 
symbiotic nodulating lineages all converging in 52-60% significantly greater mineral 
weathering. Consequently, plant communities rich in N2-fixers during successional scenarios 
may benefit not only from increases in nitrogen availability but also from more dynamic 
biogeochemical cycling releasing previously unavailable mineral nutrients. As a consequence 
of enhanced weathering, the evolution of the first legume-rich tropical forests in the early 
Cenozoic are likely to have entailed a considerable impact on weathering-driven drawdown 
of CO2 and past climate history.  
References 
1. Li, H.L., Wang, W., Mortimer, P.E., Li, R.Q., Li, D.Z., Hyde, K.D., Xu, J.C., Soltis, D.E. and Chen, 
Z.D., 2015. Large-scale phylogenetic analyses reveal multiple gains of actinorhizal nitrogen-fixing symbioses 
in angiosperms associated with climate change. Scientific reports, 5, p.14023. 
2. Sprent, J.I., 2009. Legume nodulation: a global perspective. John Wiley & Sons. 
3. Ter Steege, H., Pitman, N.C., Phillips, O.L., Chave, J., Sabatier, D., Duque, A., Molino, J.F., Prvost, 
M.F., Spichiger, R., Castellanos, H. and Von Hildebrand, P., 2006. Continental-scale patterns of canopy tree 
composition and function across Amazonia. Nature, 443(7110), p.444. 
4. Nichols, J.D. and Carpenter, F.L., 2006. Interplanting Inga edulis yields nitrogen benefits to 
Terminalia amazonia. Forest Ecology and Management, 233(2-3), pp.344-351. 
5. Kumar, B.M., Kumar, S.S. and Fisher, R.F., 1998. Intercropping teak with Leucaena increases tree 
growth and modifies soil characteristics. Agroforestry Systems, 42(1), pp.81-89. 
6. Bauhus, J., Khanna, P.K. and Menden, N., 2000. Aboveground and belowground interactions in 
mixed plantations of Eucalyptus globulus and Acacia mearnsii. Canadian Journal of Forest Research, 30(12), 
pp.1886-1894. 
7. Moser, A., Rtzer, T., Pauleit, S. and Pretzsch, H., 2015. Structure and ecosystem services of small-
leaved lime (Tilia cordata Mill.) and black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia L.) in urban environments. Urban 
Forestry & Urban Greening, 14(4), pp.1110-1121. 
8. Macedo, M.O., Resende, A.S., Garcia, P.C., Boddey, R.M., Jantalia, C.P., Urquiaga, S., Campello, 
E.F.C. and Franco, A.A., 2008. Changes in soil C and N stocks and nutrient dynamics 13 years after recovery 
of degraded land using leguminous nitrogen-fixing trees. Forest Ecology and Management, 255(5-6), pp.1516-
1524. 
9. Benesperi, R., Giuliani, C., Zanetti, S., Gennai, M., Lippi, M.M., Guidi, T., Nascimbene, J. and 
Foggi, B., 2012. Forest plant diversity is threatened by Robinia pseudoacacia (black-locust) 
invasion. Biodiversity and Conservation, 21(14), pp.3555-3568. 
10. Leary, J.K., Hue, N.V., Singleton, P.W. and Borthakur, D., 2006. The major features of an infestation 
by the invasive weed legume gorse (Ulex europaeus) on volcanic soils in Hawaii. Biology and Fertility of 
Soils, 42(3), pp.215-223. 
11. Jovanovic, N.Z., Israel, S., Tredoux, G., Soltau, L., Le Maitre, D., Rusinga, F., Rozanov, A. and Van 
der Merwe, N., 2009. Nitrogen dynamics in land cleared of alien vegetation (Acacia saligna) and impacts on 
groundwater at Riverlands Nature Reserve (Western Cape, South Africa). Water SA, 35(1). 
12. Chen, C.S., 1965. Influence of interplanted and pure stands of red alder (Alnus rubra Bong.) on 
microbial and chemical characteristics of a coastal forest soil in the Douglas-fir region. 
13. Epihov, D.Z., Batterman, S.A., Hedin, L.O., Leake, J.R., Smith, L.M. and Beerling, D.J., 2017. N2-
fixing tropical legume evolution: a contributor to enhanced weathering through the Cenozoic?. Proceedings of 
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 284(1860), p.20170370. 
14. Homann, P.S., Van Miegroet, H., Cole, D.W. and Wolfe, G.V., 1992. Cation distribution, cycling, 
and removal from mineral soil in Douglas-fir and red alder forests. Biogeochemistry, 16(2), pp.121-150. 
15. Johnson, D.W., Swank, W.T. and Vose, J.M., 1995. Effects of liming on soils and streamwaters in a 
deciduous forest: Comparison of field results and simulations. Journal of environmental quality, 24(6), 
pp.1104-1117. 
16. Rice, S.K., Westerman, B. and Federici, R., 2004. Impacts of the exotic, nitrogen-fixing black locust 
(Robinia pseudoacacia) on nitrogen-cycling in a pineoak ecosystem. Plant Ecology, 174(1), pp.97-107. 
17. Turner, B.L., Lambers, H., Condron, L.M., Cramer, M.D., Leake, J.R., Richardson, A.E. and Smith, 
S.E., 2013. Soil microbial biomass and the fate of phosphorus during long-term ecosystem development. Plant 
and Soil, 367(1-2), pp.225-234. 
18. Vitousek, P.M. and Farrington, H., 1997. Nutrient limitation and soil development: experimental test 
of a biogeochemical theory. Biogeochemistry, 37(1), pp.63-75. 
19. Chacon, N., Silver, W.L., Dubinsky, E.A. and Cusack, D.F., 2006. Iron reduction and soil phosphorus 
solubilization in humid tropical forests soils: the roles of labile carbon pools and an electron shuttle 
compound. Biogeochemistry, 78(1), pp.67-84. 
20. Roncal-Herrero, T. and Oelkers, E.H., 2011. Does variscite control phosphate availability in acidic 
natural waters? An experimental study of variscite dissolution rates. Geochimica et Cosmochimica Acta, 75(2), 
pp.416-426. 
21. Gardner, W.K., Barber, D.A. and Parbery, D.G., 1983. The acquisition of phosphorus by Lupinus 
albus L. Plant and soil, 70(1), pp.107-124. 
22. Schwendener, C.M., Lehmann, J., Rondon, M., Wandelli, E. and Fernandes, E., 2007. Soil mineral N 
dynamics beneath mixtures of leaves from legume and fruit trees in Central Amazonian multi-strata 
agroforests. Acta Amazonica, 37(3), pp.313-320. 
23. Milcu, A., Partsch, S., Scherber, C., Weisser, W.W. and Scheu, S., 2008. Earthworms and legumes 
control litter decomposition in a plant diversity gradient. Ecology, 89(7), pp.1872-1882. 
24. Marchante, E., Kjller, A., Struwe, S. and Freitas, H., 2008. Short-and long-term impacts of Acacia 
longifolia invasion on the belowground processes of a Mediterranean coastal dune ecosystem. Applied Soil 
Ecology, 40(2), pp.210-217. 
25. Shi, W.Y., Tateno, R., Zhang, J.G., Wang, Y.L., Yamanaka, N. and Du, S., 2011. Response of soil 
respiration to precipitation during the dry season in two typical forest stands in the forestgrassland transition 
zone of the Loess Plateau. Agricultural and forest meteorology, 151(7), pp.854-863. 
26. ourkov, M., Frouz, J., Fettweis, U., Bens, O., Httl, R.F. and antrkov, H., 2005. Soil 
development and properties of microbial biomass succession in reclaimed post mining sites near Sokolov 
(Czech Republic) and near Cottbus (Germany). Geoderma, 129(1-2), pp.73-80. 
27. Shimizu, K., 2014. Regulation systems of bacteria such as Escherichia coli in response to nutrient 
limitation and environmental stresses. Metabolites, 4(1), pp.1-35. 
28. Tourna, M., Maclean, P., Condron, L., O'callaghan, M. and Wakelin, S.A., 2014. Links between 
sulphur oxidation and sulphur-oxidising bacteria abundance and diversity in soil microcosms based on soxB 
functional gene analysis. FEMS microbiology ecology, 88(3), pp.538-549. 
29. LeBauer, D.S. and Treseder, K.K., 2008. Nitrogen limitation of net primary productivity in terrestrial 
ecosystems is globally distributed. Ecology, 89(2), pp.371-379. 
30. Dong, Z., Wu, L., Kettlewell, B., Caldwell, C.D. and Layzell, D.B., 2003. Hydrogen fertilization of 
soilsis this a benefit of legumes in rotation?. Plant, Cell & Environment, 26(11), pp.1875-1879. 
31. Sikora, A., Detman, A., Mielecki, D., Chojnacka, A. and Baszczyk, M., 2018. Searching for 
Metabolic Pathways of Anaerobic Digestion: A Useful List of the Key Enzymes. In Biogas. IntechOpen. 
32. Crocker, R.L. and Major, J., 1955. Soil development in relation to vegetation and surface age at 
Glacier Bay, Alaska. The Journal of Ecology, pp.427-448. 
33. Bellingham, P.J., Walker, L.R. and Wardle, D.A., 2001. Differential facilitation by a nitrogenfixing 
shrub during primary succession influences relative performance of canopy tree species. Journal of 
Ecology, 89(5), pp.861-875. 
34. Menge, D.N. and Hedin, L.O., 2009. Nitrogen fixation in different biogeochemical niches along a 120 
000year chronosequence in New Zealand. Ecology, 90(8), pp.2190-2201. 
35. Blundon, D.J., MacIsaac, D.A. and Dale, M.R.T., 1993. Nucleation during primary succession in the 
Canadian Rockies. Canadian Journal of Botany, 71(8), pp.1093-1096. 
36. Dickson, B.A. and Crocker, R.L., 1953. A chronosequence of soils and vegetation near Mt. Shasta, 
California: II. The development of the forest floors and the carbon and nitrogen profiles of the soils. Journal of 
Soil Science, 4(2), pp.142-154. 
37. Batterman, S.A., Hedin, L.O., Van Breugel, M., Ransijn, J., Craven, D.J. and Hall, J.S., 2013. Key 
role of symbiotic dinitrogen fixation in tropical forest secondary succession. Nature, 502(7470), p.224. 
38. Batterman, S.A., Hedin, L.O., Van Breugel, M., Ransijn, J., Craven, D.J. and Hall, J.S., 2013. Key 
role of symbiotic dinitrogen fixation in tropical forest secondary succession. Nature, 502(7470), p.224. 
39. Romero-Duque, L.P., Jaramillo, V.J. and Prez-Jimnez, A., 2007. Structure and diversity of 
secondary tropical dry forests in Mexico, differing in their prior land-use history. Forest Ecology and 
Management, 253(1-3), pp.38-47. 
40. Boring, L.R. and Swank, W.T., 1984. The role of black locust (Robinia pseudoacacia) in forest 
succession. The Journal of Ecology, pp.749-766. 
41. Finegan, B. and Delgado, D., 2000. Structural and floristic heterogeneity in a 30yearold Costa Rican 
rain forest restored on pasture through natural secondary succession. Restoration ecology, 8(4), pp.380-393. 
42. Blanc, L., MauryLechon, G. and Pascal, J.P., 2000. Structure, floristic composition and natural 
regeneration in the forests of Cat Tien National Park, Vietnam: an analysis of the successional trends. Journal 
of biogeography, 27(1), pp.141-157. 
43. Aweto, A.O., 1981. Secondary succession and soil fertility restoration in South-Western Nigeria: III. 
Soil and vegetation interrelationships. The Journal of Ecology, pp.957-963. 
44. Aweto, A.O., 1981. Secondary succession and soil fertility restoration in south-western Nigeria: II. 
Soil fertility restoration. The Journal of Ecology, pp.609-614. 
45. Turner, J., Cole, D.W. and Gessel, S.P., 1976. Mineral nutrient accumulation and cycling in a stand of 
red alder (Alnus rubra). The Journal of Ecology, pp.965-974. 
46. Youngberg, C.T. and Wollum, A.G., 1976. Nitrogen Accretion in Developing Ceanothus Velutinus 
Stands 1. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 40(1), pp.109-112. 
47. Cole, D.W., Compton, J., Van Miegroet, H. and Homann, P., 1991. Changes in soil properties and site 
productivity caused by red alder. In Management of Nutrition in Forests under Stress (pp. 231-246). Springer, 
Dordrecht. 
48. Rhoades, C., Oskarsson, H., Binkley, D. and Stottlemyer, B., 2001. Alder (Alnus crispa) effects on 
soils in ecosystems of the Agashashok River valley, northwest Alaska. Ecoscience, 8(1), pp.89-95. 
49. Urbanov, M., najdr, J. and Baldrian, P., 2015. Composition of fungal and bacterial communities in 
forest litter and soil is largely determined by dominant trees. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 84, pp.53-64.50.
50. Sul, W.J., Asuming-Brempong, S., Wang, Q., Tourlousse, D.M., Penton, C.R., Deng, Y., Rodrigues, 
J.L., Adiku, S.G., Jones, J.W., Zhou, J. and Cole, J.R., 2013. Tropical agricultural land management influences 
on soil microbial communities through its effect on soil organic carbon. Soil Biology and Biochemistry, 65, 
pp.33-38. 
51. Lima, A.B., Cannavan, F.S., Navarrete, A.A., Teixeira, W.G., Kuramae, E.E. and Tsai, S.M., 2015. 
Amazonian Dark Earth and plant species from the Amazon region contribute to shape rhizosphere bacterial 
communities. Microbial ecology, 69(4), pp.855-866. 
Figures and Figure Text 
Table 1. Examples highlighting the important role of N2-fixers in ecosystem primary 
succession 
Table 2. Examples highlighting the important role of N2-fixers in ecosystem secondary 
succession 
Primary succession 
examples 
Family Form N2-fixer Geology  Climax 
community 
Location  Effect 
Alnus crispa 
Betulaceae 
moraines Spruce 
coniferous 
forest 
N America 
 Decline in soil pH 
 Higher carbonate weathering 
 N fertilisation Ref 32 
Carmichaelia odorata 
Leguminosae 
shrub 
schists Cool 
temperate 
montane 
rainforest 
Zealand, 
Oceania 
 N fertilisation effect on climax 
trees Ref 33 
Coriaria arborea 
Coriariaceae 
shrub 
volcanic 
rhyolite 
temperate 
montane 
rainforest 
Zealand, 
Oceania 
 N fertilisation effect on climax 
trees Ref 34  
Astracantha aitosensis 
Leguminosae 
shrub 
andesite 
basalt 
tuffs 
Mixed 
temperate 
forest 
Bulgaria, 
Europe 
 N fertilisation? 
Hedysarum boreale 
Leguminosae 
moraines 
Shrub, short 
woodland 
Canada, 
N America 
 Nucleation effects (positively 
associates with other plants) Ref 35 
Dryas spp. 
Rosaceae 
shrub 
moraines 
Shrub, short 
woodland 
Canada, 
N America 
 Nucleation effects (positively 
associates with other plants) Ref 35 
Purshia tridentata  
Rosaceae 
shrub 
moraines 
Coniferous  
temperate 
forest 
N America 
 N fertilisation? Ref 36 
Secondary successional 
species 
Family Form N2-fixers Climax 
community 
Location Effects Reference 
Inga cocleensis, Inga 
thibaudiana, Swartzia 
simplex, Abarema 
barbouriana, Platymiscium 
dimorphandrum 
Leguminosae 
trees 
Wet Tropical 
forest 
Panama, 
Mesoamerica 
 Decline in soil pH 
 Increase in ecosystem N 
stocks 
 Weathering enhancement  
 Early successional peak 
in nodulation 
Chapter 1 
and Ref 37 
Acacia celsa 
Leguminosae 
Wet Tropical 
forest 
Australia, 
Oceania 
 Decline in soil pH 
 Weathering enhancement   
 Early successional peak 
in nodulation 
Chapter 2 
Vachellia farnesiana Leguminosae tree yes Savanna 
woodland 
N America 
 Increase in ecosystem N 
stocks 
Mimosa arenosa Leguminosae tree yes Dry tropical 
forest 
Mexico,  
Mesoamerica 
Robinia pseudoacacia 
Leguminosae 
Deciduous 
temperate 
forest 
N America 
 Increase in ecosystem N 
stocks 
 Early successional peak 
in nodulation 
Inga chocoensis Leguminosae tree yes Wet Tropical 
forest 
Costa Rica,  
Mesoamerica 
Adenanthera pavonina, 
Albizia lucidior, Albizia 
vialenea, Milletia diptera, 
Afzelia xylocarpa 
Leguminosae 
trees 
Wet Tropical 
forest 
Vietnam, Asia 
Baphia nitida Leguminosae tree yes Wet Tropical 
forest 
Nigeria, Africa  Suggested increase in 
ecosystem N stocks 
43,44 
Alnus rubra 
Betulaceae 
Coniferous 
temperate 
forest 
N America 
 Increase in ecosystem N 
stocks 
Ceanothus velutinus 
Rhamnaceae 
shrub 
Coniferous 
temperate 
forest 
N America 
 Increase in ecosystem N 
stocks 
 Early successional peak 
in nodulation 
Figure 1. Early pioneering N2-fixers, such as (a) the legume shrub Astracantha aitosensis 
endemic to Bulgaria and (b) the betulaceous Alnus sp. (and its Frankia-inhabited 
nodules) illustrated here, are important for soil formation by their N2-fixing symbioses 
and active rock-root-microbe interactions. Photo credit: Dimitar Z. Epihov.  
Figure 2. Secondary successional N2-fixers, such as (a) Inga cocleensis in Panamanian 
tropical forests fix large amounts of atmospheric dinitrogen through their (b,c) 
indeterminate Burkholderia/Paraburkholderia and Bradyrhizobium-inhabited nodules 
(see Appendix 4) and (b) actively interact with soil minerals as seen by their highly 
nodulated roots surrounding a buried bag of soil minerals. Magnification in c is x10. 
Photo credit: Dimitar Z. Epihov.  
a b c 
Figure 3. Case studies revealing greater weathering rates and cation export beneath N2-
fixing trees (a-d, k) linked to soil acidification (e-h) and successionally-timed nodulation 
in legume trees (i,j,l). References are as follows: Panama and Australia  Chapters 1 and 2, 
respectively, USA 2o c,g  Homann et al.14 and references therein, USA 1o d,h  Crocker and 
Major32, USA 2o lime/no-lime watershed data from Johnson et al.15 and references therein, 
USA 2o nodulation data for Robinia pseudoacacia from Boring et al.40. Nodulation biomass 
data for Panamanian legume trees are after Batterman et al.37. Error bars indicate S.E.M. 
Statistical tests are Mann-Whitney test (P<0.05) and Two-Way ANOVA (P<0.001).  
+111%
Limed
Paired t-test of
study means
P<0.05*
n=8 n=8
+52% +60%
Figure 4. Meta-analysis of N2-fixing trees reveals that they trigger 52-60% significantly 
greater rock weathering rates in their soils than non-fixing trees.  
(gene rel. abund.)
r=0.47
P<0.01
Meta-analysis
soil C:N
Figure 5. Meta-analyses of biogeochemical and metagenomic data show that the lower 
soil C:N ratios and higher abundance of N-cycling microorganisms, all indicative of high 
N inputs by fixers, are linked to weathering rates with strong positive correlations of all 
major nitrification genes with silicate rock weathering. a. Soil C:N ratios significantly 
correlate with weathering of dunite in Panamanian tropical forests; b. summary of six studies 
comparing soil C:N in N2-fixing trees with those beneath non-fixing trees; c. meta-analysis 
using the mean for each species shown in Figure 4b reveals significantly lower C:N in soil of 
N2-fixing trees than non-fixers (two-tailed t-test, P<0.001); Studies are: circles: USA Boring 
and Swank, 1984,40, triangles: USA Rice et al., 2004,16, diamonds: USA Cole et al.,1991,47, 
polygons: USA Rhoades et al., 2001,48, squares: Czech Republic Urbanov et al., 2015,49, 
polygons with dot: Panama Epihov et al., 2018, unpublished;  d. soil N-cycling archaea 
(combined abundance of the genera Nitrososphaera and Nitrosocaldus) correlate negatively 
with soil C:N (Pearson correlation test, P<0.05, r=-0.36, n=45) in Panamanian tropical forests; 
e. summary of four studies (circles: Panama  Epihov et al., 2018, unpublished, triangles: 
Ghana  Sul et al., 2013,50, diamonds: Amazonia soil incubation experiment  Barbosa Lima 
et al., 201551, squares: Czech Republic  Urbanov et al., 201549) comparing the abundance 
of N-cycling microorganisms in N2-fixing and non-fixing trees (the abundance is the sum of 
all N-cycling genera including Nitrososphaera, Nitrosocaldus, Nitrosomonas, Nitrospira, 
Nitrosospira, Nitrobacter, Denitrobacter, Nitratiruptor, Nitrosococcus, Nitrosovibrio, 
Nitrococcus, and Denitromonas  among which Nitrospira and Nitrososphaera are dominant 
accounting for ~59% and 35% of all N-cycling bacteria, respectively, in the Panamanian study 
 labelled with circular symbols). In the case of the studies labelled with diamonds and squares 
 only data for the dominant Nitrospira was available and used; f. meta-analysis of microbial 
community data using the mean from each species or combination of species in Figure4e 
shows that N2-fixers exhibit significantly greater abundance of N-cycling microorganisms in 
soil than non-fixing trees (Mann-Whitney test, P<0.05); g. all major nitrification genes as 
identified in KEGG (including AMO, HAO, narG, and narH) exhibit significant positive 
correlations with silicate weathering rates. 
Dissimilatory nitrite reductases
(gene rel. abund.)
Figure 6. Metagenomic evidence for greater levels of respiratory, lithotrophic (sulfur 
oxidising, hydrogen oxidising, ammonia/nitrite oxidising) and anaerobic activities in 
soil-mineral samples from high-fixing forests all correlated to higher rock weathering. 
a. The high-level pathway of respiration is enriched in high-fixing relative to low-fixing 
forests consistent across soil-minerals and studies and correlating with weathering; b. The 
high-level pathway of sulfur oxidation (a type of lithotrophic metabolism) is enriched in 
high-fixing relative to low-fixing forests consistent across soil-minerals and studies and 
correlated with rock weathering; c. The sum of all hydrogenases genes in the metagenome is 
greater in high-fixing than low-fixing forests consistent across sites and soil-minerals and 
correlating with rock weathering rates; d. nitrification genes, previously shown to correlate 
with rock weathering rates (Figure 4g), are significantly more abundant in metagenomes 
from high-fixing forests relative to low-fixing ones; e. metabolic pathways from the 
anaerobic food chain including fermentation, sulfate reduction and nitrate/nitrite 
dissimilatory reduction are enriched in high-fixing metagenomes and positively correlate 
with weathering (not shown). Mann-Whitney test, ***P<0.001, **P<0.01, *P<0.05. 
Correlations are based on Pearson tests. Error bars in the first figure of each triplet in a, b, c 
show S.E.M. The whisker box plots contain error bars are based on Tukey distribution.  
Figure 7. Genes governing the microbial production of gluconic and 2-ketogluconic acid 
a. are significantly greater in high-fixing forest samples and correlate with field rock 
weathering rates and b. are dependent on PQQ supply (particularly the gdhPQQ, not 
trkA) as evident from co-variation between coenzyme PQQ synthesis pathway and PQQ-
dependent enzyme-coding genes (methanol dehydrogenase, quinoprotein alcohol 
dehydrogenase and gdhPQQ) validating the importance of adequate microbial PQQ 
supply. Statistical tests include Mann-Whitney tests, ***P<0.001, **P<0.01 and Pearson 
correlation tests. For b. all correlation tests are significant at P<0.001.  
0.5 1 1.5
Glucose dehydrogenase, PQQ-dependent
(fold-relative to study mean)
Methanol dehydrogenase
large subunit protein (EC
1.1.99.8)
quinoprotein alcohol
dehydrogenase
Coenzyme_PQQ_synthesis
Appendices 
Appendix 1 
Comparing novel and established approaches to taxonomy 
calling in amplicon libraries of microbial communities 
(Annexed to Chapter 1) 
Amplicon-based libraries can provide deep structural and functional insights into the 
microbial communities of soil. Here, we have generated a total of 46 soil rhizospheric 
libraries containing amplicon DNA sequences of the V4-V5 region of the 16S rRNA gene in 
prokaryotes. Amplicon libraries were constructed using a two-step PCR approach where the 
target region was first amplified using locus specific primers with Illumina sequencing 
primer adapters incorporated into their 5 end (30 cycles), then a second round of PCR was 
done using forward and reverse primers that contain all Illumina sequencing primer and 
flow cell binding sequences as well as a unique 8 bp barcode (6 cycles).  In the first round of 
PCR, all samples were amplified in triplicate using the 515F/806R primer set that amplifies 
the V4-V5 region of the 16S rRNA for bacteria1. Triplicate reactions were then pooled and 
unique combinations of barcodes and Illumina adapters added via a second round of PCR. 
PCR products were purified and normalized using SequalPrep Normalization plates (Life 
Technologies), pooled into single libraries based on sample type (e.g. soil rhizospheric 16S, 
soil mineral 16S), concentrated using Agencourt AMPure XP beads, quantified on a Qubit 
fluorimeter, and quality checked using the High Sensitivity Agilent DNA kit on an Agilent 
Bioanalyzer. Subsequently, samples were adjusted to appropriate concentrations and 
sequenced on a total of two runs on an Illumina MiSeq sequencer (2x250 bp paired-ends 
runs) at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute. The generated libraries were de-
multiplexed in QIIME2 and subsequently processed through 3 separate pipeline processes 
outlined below:  
1. R1 sequences were loaded onto QIIME2 closed reference OTU picking using 97% 
and 90% identity cut-offs and GreenGenes database 
(http://greengenes.lbl.gov/Download/, gg_13_05 release from May, 2013) for the 
construction of OTU tables (QIIME+GreenGenes+90%identity and 
QIIME+GreenGenes+97%identity, hereafter QIG90 and QIG97, respectively). Full 
sequences are aligned (all 250 bp).   
2. R1 and R2 sequences were merged and loaded onto the MG-RAST3 server 
(http://www.mg-rast.org) and processed according to default parameters for 
amplicon libraries. Resulting OTU tables were processed against the in-built SILVA 
SSU database. As the method of comparison in MG-RAST is blat, the alignment 
ADDED 
a. b. 
length is usually much smaller with an average of 103 bp and very high average 
identity of 98% (hereafter referred to as MGS) 
3. R1 and R2 sequences were merged and loaded onto Blast2GO 5 Pro and compared 
against the NCBI microbial 16S database (accessed in June 2018) using local blastx-
fast set at default, except the e-value that was changed from the default e-3 to e-5 
and selecting only the single best top ranking hit rather than the top 20 best ranked 
hits. There was no applied identity cut-off but the average identity was 91% with an 
average alignment length of ~253bp (hereafter referred to as BGN). Higher level of 
taxonomy of obtained species and genera OTU tables can be obtained through 
manual assignment in the Taxonomy Summary tool supported by KEGG 
(https://www.genome.jp/tools-bin/taxsummary).  
Rarefaction curves revealed satisfactory levels of sequencing depth in all 46 samples and 
no samples were excluded from further analyses.  
Comparisons of the three workflows 
Coverage of class and genus level OTUs  
BGN generated the greatest number of named + unnamed (derived from; novel) 
genera (2079) followed by QIG90 (1302), MGS (1240), and QIG97 (1127). Excluding any 
unnamed genera derived from family/order/class etc., BGN generated the same number, 
2079 genera, as it does not bin genera into derived categories, MGS  892, QIG90  732 and 
QIG97  459 (Appendix Figure 1). Such differences in the number of named genera can 
result from strict cut-offs (as in QIG97) but also from differences in size of the selected 
databases as QIG90 contained still smaller number of genera than BGN despite the average 
genus identity in BGN output of ~88% (Appendix Table 2). For instance, the NCBI 16S 
microbial database used in our BGN approach covers ~65-fold and 10-fold more genera 
than GreenGenes and SILVA SSU, respectively, with authors recommending the further use 
of the NCBI database in more sequencing microbiome studies4. 
Appendix Figure 1. Number of unique and overlapping (a) named genera only and (b) named 
and unnamed (novel; derived from) genera in 46 rhizospheric soil samples analyzed by 
the three taxonomic calling approaches. QIG90 = QIIME + GreenGenes at 90% identity cut-off, 
MGS=MG-RAST+SILVA SSU, BGN=BlastGO+NCBI. Note QIG97 not shown in this diagram.  
Despite their differing numbers of genera, the relative abundance of 11 out of the 12 
analysed major prokaryotic classes significantly correlated with BGN and QIG97 relating 
better than the abundance generated by MGS (Appendix Figure 2). The average identity of 
genera in BGN is 91% which may seem too relaxed relative to the recommended 95% genus  
Appendix Figure 2. Class-level comparisons reveal that the newly proposed BGN method 
(Blast2GO+NCBI+Taxonomy summary) agrees well the output of well-established 
analogues QIIME+GreenGenes at 97% identity cut-off (QIG97) and MG-RAST+SILVA 
SSU (MGS).   
Class-level comparisons
cut-off5 suggesting that any hits below 95% may represent (case 1) a novel closely related 
genus or perhaps (case 2) be part of the same genus if the latter is with high-intragenic 
variation. We find that the relative abundance of over 47% of all genera shared between 
QIG97 and BGN correlate significantly. More than half of those reveal average identity 
<95%. Combined these findings suggest that either these are part of the same genus (OTUX1 
is a species of genus X). An alternative explanation is that OTUX1 and X are separate genera 
that share similar physiology or niches in soil causing their apparent correlation at even 
lower identity thresholds (OTUX1 is part of a novel genus X1 that is most closely related to 
genus X). Although OTUX1 and genus X may differ in certain aspects of their physiology, 
functionally in the context of the soil community, OTUX1 and genus X can be seen as 
behaving as a single unit supported both by their correlation and sequence based 
similarity.  
Methods such as QIG bin OTUs that are below a certain cut-off in derived from 
family/order/class etc. so that OTUX1, OTUX2OTUXn revealing 93%<identity<95% 
would all be part of a derived from family cluster. Consequently, no functional 
information is known about these as they will represent a collection of sequentially distinct 
units as demonstrated in the following example below:  
Family M = {genus U, genus V, genus W, genus X, genus Y, genus Z} 
OTUX1 best hit: 94.1% identity with genus X  binned in derived from family M 
OTUX2 best hit: 94.0% identity with genus X  binned in derived from family M 
OTUX3 best hit: 93.7% identity with genus Y  binned in derived from family M 
OTUX7 best hit: 93.6% identity with genus Z  binned in derived from family M 
Although OTUX1 and OTUX2 are most closely related to each other and to X than to any 
of the other genera in family M, they are all binned together with OTUX3 and OTUX7 into 
derived from family M making their functional differentiation impossible as the resulting 
derived from family M would carry a mixture of X-like, Y-like and Z-like traits.  
However, if a database is relatively limited in their number of genera and family M is not 
fully represented by all of its constituent genera so that: 
 Family M = {genus U, genus Y, genus Z} 
OTUX1 external BLAST best hit: 94.1% identity with genus X; second best hit 
89.2% identity with genus Y  binned in derived from family M 
OTUX2 external BLAST best hit: 94.0% identity with genus X; second best hit 
88.4% identity with genus Y  binned in derived from family M 
binning OTUs in a derived from would be more appropriate than binning them in genus 
However, databases that cover more of the currently supported phylogeny (such as 
NCBI, which is the largest sequence-containing microbial taxonomy database4) would be 
less constrained and therefore should be able to place OTUX1-X7 in their respective most 
closely related genera rather than clustering them all in one or two more distantly related 
genera. Indeed, upon discovery and description of all bacterial genera, local blasts against 
such a future complete database would yield exact matches thus eliminating the need of 
derived from clusters regardless of % identity.  
Even at present, while such a database is yet to materialise, substantially large databases 
such as NCBI in combination with no imposed identity cut-offs should be able to provide an 
enhanced insight into the functional traits of the analysed 16S-based microbiomes while 
lacking information on potentially new taxa. In contrast, methods relying on strictly 
embedded identity cut-offs (98.65% for species and 95% for genus5,6) will be bound to 
present an exaggerated estimate of novel taxa. For example, some such predictions yield 
over 3600 new genera in a single soil community sample7. However, analysis of over 150 
genera reveals that 62% of these contain published species that exhibit lower than the 
accepted 95% identity with other members of the same genus. Different monophyletic 
clades vary substantially in their level of 16S rRNA gene conservation and taxonomy based 
on strict thresholds equal for all taxa may consequently be misleading5. As a result, we 
hypothesize that the BGN approach, proposed here, may be better suited to functional 
characterisation of environmental microbial communities.  
Comparison of BGN vs. QIG vs. MGS in their ability to predict function in the 
microbiome 
Linking microbial abundance to functional potential is challenging but has been 
previously attempted. One such example is the platform PICRUSt8 which can reconstruct 
abundance profiles for KEGG gene orthologues using 16S rRNA closed-reference OTU 
picking in QIIME and its resulting BIOM tables. However, one limitation of that approach 
is the large gap between number of genera in 16S databases and the number of sequenced 
genomes. Similarly, BLAST-ing annotated metagenomic sequences to establish the 
taxonomic identity of genera contributing to the pool of a particular gene of interest will 
also be hampered by the comparatively small number of sequenced genomes as well as by 
the often highly conserved sequences of such genes.  
Alternatively, another approach is to utilise detailed literature search in generating large 
lists of genera that have been documented to perform a particular function of interest  e.g. 
nitrification, sulfur reduction, iron reduction, methanogenesis etc. Consequently, manual 
extraction of genera from OTU tables and summing of their abundance should serve as a 
proxy proportional to the abundance of marker genes in the metagenome that are involved in 
the same function or process. 
Because such a methodology would ultimately rely on reports of a given phenotypic trait 
in a genus, OTU tables containing large number of genera such as BGN may be better 
equipped in linking structure to function. In support of that statement, we find that the 
summed abundance of genera in BGN could significantly link the abundance of ammonia 
oxidisers to ammonia monooxygenase (AMO) gene abundance (n = 12 16S rRNA libraries 
paired with n = 12 shotgun metagenomic libraries), nitrite oxidisers to hydroxylamine 
reductase (HAO), Fe(III) reducing genera to Fe(III) respiration - Shewanella type 
Appendix Table 1. Inferred links between structure of the microbiome (relative abundance 
of taxa) and function in the metagenome (relative abundance of marker genes or pathways 
of genes).  
AMO  ammonia monooxygenase; HAO  hydroxylamine reductase; PMO+MMO  particulate methane monooxygenase 
and methane monooxygenase. Pearson test, ***P<0.001, **P<0.01, *P<0.05, P<0.10, nsP>0.10, except where the test was 
Spearman due to lack of normal distribution (denoted with Sp). 
pathway, and sulfur cycling genera to inorganic sulfur assimilation (Appendix Table 1). In 
comparison, in QIG97 correlation was only observed between genera abundance with AMO 
and HAO; and MGS-generated abundance profiles only correlated with HAO and Fe(III) 
Sum of 16S rRNA 
relative abundance 
BGN QIG97 MGS Metagenomic 
gene markers 
Ammonia oxidising genera 
** * ns AMO 
Nitrite oxidising genera 
*** *** * HAO 
Fe(III) reducing genera ** ns  Fe(III) respiration - Shewanella type  
(all genes) 
Sulfur cycling genera   *Sp ns ns 
Inorganic sulfur assimilation  
(all genes) 
Methanogenic genera 
ns ns ns PMO/MMO 
respiration genes (the latter correlated at Pearson test P<0.10). Neither one of the three 
methods was able to link their assigned methanogen abundance to the abundance of 
methane monooxygenase genes.  
These findings suggest that taxonomy calling by BGN generates an enhanced 
approximation of soil microbiomes in relation to important functional traits. However, 
certain processes still remain elusive to such approaches (e.g. methanogenesis) indicating 
that further research in the lineages involved is required before taxonomy can reliably be 
translated into function.  
Appendix Table 2. Top 60 Blast2GO genus-level OTUs  their average e-value, mean alignment 
length (base pairs), total number of hits and mean identity % as well as the same across all 
genera and hits (at the bottom of the table) in soil microbiome samples 32-41 (n = 10). 
Genus Mean  
E-Value 
alignment 
length (bp) 
Total 
number of 
identity % 
Chthoniobacter 1.54E-44 256 39901 91.5 
Acidobacterium 5.48E-57 250 25584 91.1 
Limisphaera 6.07E-18 260 22606 89.0 
Edaphobacter 5.22E-48 250 13187 88.3 
Ktedonobacter 6.83E-55 253 12037 85.1 
Occallatibacter 2.33E-65 252 10926 89.4 
Bradyrhizobium 2.9E-80 256 10778 97.8 
Paludibaculum 1.41E-49 260 10440 89.5 
Vicinamibacter 1.06E-63 265 10079 91.6 
Rhodoplanes 4.04E-82 257 9116 96.9 
Gemmata 6.49E-58 259 8979 87.4 
Burkholderia 5.57E-63 262 6609 98.3 
Bacillus 3.09E-22 254 5338 97.7 
Acidibacter 2.98E-59 257 4889 95.5 
Pseudolabrys 7.08E-57 262 4872 96.5 
Pseudomonas 3.37E-65 255 4217 98.1 
Rhizomicrobium 4.6E-73 268 3860 93.1 
Granulicella 6.78E-16 252 3824 88.6 
Actinoallomurus 2.23E-69 253 3277 95.2 
Desulfonatronum 9.41E-45 254 3213 87.0 
Streptomyces 6.32E-71 258 3146 97.3 
Chryseolinea 1.03E-24 263 3069 91.1 
Pseudorhodoplanes 8.64E-71 259 3063 96.6 
Bryobacter 3.2E-69 264 3034 89.8 
Skermanella 4.59E-68 272 2988 91.2 
Zavarzinella 6.66E-60 269 2863 87.5 
Gaiella 3.32E-67 262 2734 92.3 
Azospirillum 7.52E-28 258 2723 92.1 
Stenotrophobacter 1.4E-62 287 2557 94.3 
Thauera 3.41E-64 280 2536 92.5 
Tepidisphaera 4.37E-51 272 2472 87.8 
Sphingomonas 2.04E-77 268 2461 97.8 
Rhizobium 3.97E-20 258 2437 98.0 
Sphingobium 4.95E-85 255 2357 96.1 
Stella 4.41E-25 256 2342 92.0 
Klebsiella 2E-99 253 2273 99.3 
Silvibacterium 7.05E-61 252 2219 94.0 
Gemmatimonas 5.86E-62 280 2195 88.9 
Thermostilla 1.33E-72 280 2136 89.6 
Fimbriiglobus 1.56E-63 268 2111 88.5 
Terrimonas 5.19E-79 267 2093 96.1 
Mucilaginibacter 1.13E-08 256 2090 98.2 
Terrimicrobium 8.88E-54 256 1904 89.0 
Nevskia 1.13E-59 290 1687 92.9 
Niastella 3.26E-79 257 1673 95.5 
Haliangium 3.97E-69 263 1644 90.5 
Parasediminibacterium 1.55E-64 257 1595 94.6 
Phenylobacterium 4.7E-65 255 1513 96.3 
Aliidongia 3.09E-77 271 1507 90.6 
Planctopirus 1.3E-59 279 1462 88.8 
Reyranella 2.19E-26 266 1432 96.2 
Paraburkholderia 1.19E-66 257 1408 97.8 
Niabella 7.66E-77 275 1318 95.0 
Geobacter 1.28E-66 259 1308 91.0 
Massilia 2.37E-63 257 1279 92.8 
Anaeromyxobacter 3.75E-67 257 1279 90.8 
Kofleria 4.03E-52 260 1265 90.1 
Brevitalea 4E-30 260 1265 92.6 
Labilithrix 5.9E-69 261 1264 92.6 
Fimbriimonas 1.77E-69 284 1226 88.4 
     
Median Average 
Average 
Across genera 1.01E-70 250 
Across all hits 1.7E-101 259 
Note that all legume nodulating genera found in top 60 are highlighted in green, with all of them exhibiting 
identity >95% consistent with the accepted genus-level cut-off5.  
Appendix 2 
Shotgun Metagenome Statistics 
(Annexed to Chapters 1 and 2) 
Appendix Table 3. Shotgun metagenome libraries from our tropical forest weathering study in 
Panama (Chapter 1) and their MG-RAST ID numbers and size 
MG-RAST ID Name Base pairs (bp) count No. of sequences 
mgm4750411.3 OL_2 2,868,154,772 17,959,686 
mgm4750538.3 OL_1 6,067,791,629 38,077,834 
mgm4750539.3 OL_7 4,935,659,002 30,420,129 
mgm4750544.3 OL_16 6,825,659,192 42,207,195 
mgm4751389.3 OL_17 5,642,423,815 35,154,753 
mgm4751392.3 OL_31 4,626,468,473 28,844,519 
mgm4751395.3 OL_29 4,501,728,547 28,118,622 
mgm4751396.3 OL_33 2,891,291,381 18,057,850 
mgm4751576.3 OL_47 3,275,979,911 20,550,000 
mgm4751577.3 OL_48_ 4,413,291,146 27,590,400 
mgm4751584.3 OL_50 4,075,326,761 25,439,339 
mgm4751599.3 OL_58 7,132,861,445 44,185,203 
mgm4751712.3 S_17_ 7,793,811,849 48,374,646 
mgm4751755.3 S_29 7,823,595,015 48,433,318 
mgm4752317.3 S_33 7,942,191,469 49,059,560 
OL  weathered soil olivine samples; S  soil rhizosphere samples. Note that the number of sequences of weathered 
soil minerals from beneath N2-fixers (OL17-OL48), non-fixers near N2-fixers (NF-near: OL1, 2, 50) and non-fixers far 
from N2-fixers (NF-far: OL7, 16, 58) do not differ significantly neither in number of sequence reads (Welchs ANOVA, 
P>0.10), nor in total number of base pairs (Welchs ANOVA, P>0.10).  
Appendix Figure 3. k-mer sequencing coverage is similar across shotgun metagenomes of weathered soil 
mineral from beneath different functional groups of trees in Panamanian tropical forest (Chapter 1) 
indicating comparable sequencing depths.  
Appendix Figure 4. k-mer sequencing coverage is similar across shotgun metagenomes of weathered soil 
olivine mineral from beneath N2-fixing Acacia celsa (Ac) and non-fixing Alphitonia petriei (Alph) trees at 
different ages of secondary forest succession (Chapter 2) indicating comparable sequencing depths.  
Appendix Figure 5. DRISEE sequencing error distribution in each of the three groups of shotgun 
metagenomes (Australian tropical forest soil basalt and soil olivine  Chapter 2 and Panamanian 
tropical forest soil olivine  Chapter 1) shows that our libraries are largely similar to other 
metagenomes hosted at the MG-RAST server (with means falling within the range defined by the mean 
and 2 x standard error) and those compiled by the original DRISEE paper9 by Keegan et al., 2012. The 
Australian shotgun metagenomes (prepared using the TruSeq Nano gel free kit and sequenced on an Illumina 
NovaSeq) reveal lower DRISEE errors than the Panamanian shotgun metagenomes (prepared using Nextera 
XT library prep-up kit and sequenced on an Illumina HiSeq machine). Note than for shotgun metagenomes of 
weathered soil olivine samples in Panama n = 4 because MG-RAST failed to generate DRISEE values for the 
remaining 8 samples. Note that analyses of DRISEE values between tree groups (non-fixers and N2-fixers) and 
between different forest ages (12.5, 20, 48 years old forests) yielded no significant differences between these 
groups neither in olivine, nor in basalt from the soil of Australian tropical forests in Chapter 2 (two-tailed t-
test, P>0.10; Welchs ANOVA, P>0.10).  
Appendix 3 
Amplicon library sequencing statistics 
(Annexed to Chapter 1) 
Appendix Table 4. The 46 soil rhizospheric samples and their sequencing statistics 
MG-RAST ID Sample 
Base pairs (bp) count Number of sequences 
mgm4756263.3 1 63,854,634 252,483 
mgm4756256.3 2 40,022,945 158,114 
mgm4756275.3 3 42,858,015 169,309 
mgm4756277.3 4 42,312,921 167,186 
mgm4756267.3 5 49,770,373 196,653 
mgm4756266.3 6 44,649,079 176,577 
mgm4756274.3 7 40,438,161 159,796 
mgm4756284.3 8 41,769,319 165,041 
mgm4756254.3 9 62,893,261 248,475 
mgm4756264.3 10 30,252,288 119,392 
mgm4756246.3 11 46,130,351 182,257 
mgm4756278.3 12 32,551,375 128,519 
mgm4756258.3 13 57,141,266 225,702 
mgm4756286.3 14 52,771,514 208,488 
mgm4756242.3 15 66,947,090 264,442 
mgm4756271.3 16 47,073,898 186,072 
mgm4756262.3 17 49,710,367 196,502 
mgm4756281.3 18 36,896,361 145,811 
mgm4756250.3 19 65,169,337 257,393 
mgm4756251.3 20 63,143,293 249,501 
mgm4756270.3 24 30,645,778 121,093 
mgm4756260.3 25 28,577,246 112,909 
mgm4756243.3 26 36,937,032 145,587 
mgm4757411.3 27 29,671,543 117,235 
mgm4756269.3 29 61,957,368 244,705 
mgm4756247.3 30 26,976,030 106,574 
mgm4756261.3 31 26,973,619 106,566 
mgm4757419.3 33 37,579,765 148,565 
mgm4757416.3 34 19,565,480 77,200 
mgm4757417.3 36 35,092,277 138,680 
mgm4756245.3 37 22,687,404 89,666 
mgm4757415.3 39 23,914,482 94,429 
mgm4757420.3 40 25,700,294 101,522 
mgm4756252.3 41 32,083,674 126,763 
mgm4756249.3 43 14,451,495 57,087 
mgm4757421.3 45 29,658,137 117,153 
mgm4756265.3 46 28,802,145 113,782 
mgm4756280.3 47 105,979,767 418,805 
mgm4756285.3 48 150,092,873 593,223 
mgm4757412.3 50 101,003,730 398,844 
mgm4757422.3 51 83,243,133 328,719 
mgm4757418.3 52 182,368,519 720,242 
mgm4756257.3 53 80,479,270 317,881 
mgm4756283.3 54 102,373,708 404,467 
mgm4757414.3 56 110,218,169 435,625 
mgm4756287.3 57 138,345,533 546,603 
Appendix Figure 6. Rarefaction curve generated in MG-RAST using the SILVA SSU database 
for the soil microbial community samples demonstrates sufficient sequencing depth with the 
majority of amplicon libraries near to or reaching a plateau.  
Appendix 4 
Symbiotic bacteria in crushed nodule and rhizosphere mixed 
samples 
(Annexed to Chapter 1 and Chapter 4) 
 Our secondary tropical forest sites represent a diverse mixture of nodulating legumes, 
but Inga trees are the most predominant in terms of numbers and basal tree area, particularly 
early-pioneering Inga cocleensis (sample 28; Appendix Figure 7) and Inga thibaudiensis 
(sample 32; samples 38  Platymiscium dimorphandrum, 44  Swartzia simplex, 49 and 55  
nodules from the rhizosphere of non-legumes with unknown legume hosts; Appendix Figure 
7). To gain insight into the nodulating bacteria of legumes in our sites,  we sequenced and 
performed taxonomy calling of 16S rRNA amplicon libraries of soil rhizosphere + crushed 
nodules (n = 6) and compared them against samples only containing soil rhizosphere 
communities (n = 46). Our analyses reveal a major  >3-fold enrichment in the atypical -
proteobacterial nodulating genera Burkholderia and Paraburkholderia as well as a more 
minor 1.5-fold enrichment of Bradyrhizobium in Inga nodules (samples 28 and 32) relative 
to soil only samples (Appendix Figure 7). While the majority of nodulating reports from Inga 
trees indicate symbiotic interactions mainly with Bradyrhizobium10,11,12, a study has also 
extracted several Burkholderia isolates from nodules of Inga vera in the Atlantic rainforest in 
Brazil13. Therefore, our preliminary findings are consistent with the published literature but 
highlight the need of further research into non-bradyrhizobial nodulating agent within this 
diverse and dominant Neotropical genus of legumes.  
Appendix Figure 7. Heatmap of the relative abundance of different nodulating genera 
in crushed nodules+rhizospheric soil versus rhizospheric soil only 16S rRNA libraries. 
Note that the colour coding is as follows: high abundance  dark red, medium abundance  
white, low abundance  blue).  
Little information exist on nodulation in Platymiscium with previous research 
indicating extraction of very slow to slow growing isolates from nodules without 
characterising their taxonomic identity14. Here, we report that in addition to enrichment in 
Burkholderia and Paraburkolderia, as well as in Mesorhizobium, Rhizobium and 
Sinorhizobium, nodules from the faboid P. dimorphandrum exhibited high abundance of 
Cupriavidus, another atypical rhizobial genus that was not enriched in any other nodule 
samples (Appendix Figure 7). As studying the detailed species-level resolution of nodulating 
agents was beyond the scope of our study, our generated V4-V5 16S rRNA sequences can 
only provide reliable differentiation at the genus level (see Appendix Table 2 and text within 
Appendix 1) but it, nevertheless, reveals that interactions between tropical forest legume trees 
and rhizobia may not be as simple as single species-single host scenario and require further 
detailed study using other more suitable marker genes as recA and nifH (currently underway; 
Brandt, P. and Hedin, L; personal communication).  
Appendices references 
1. Fierer, N., Leff, J.W., Adams, B.J., Nielsen, U.N., Bates, S.T., Lauber, C.L., Owens, S., Gilbert, J.A., 
Wall, D.H. and Caporaso, J.G., 2012. Cross-biome metagenomic analyses of soil microbial 
communities and their functional attributes. Proceedings of the National Academy of 
Sciences, 109(52), pp.21390-21395. 
2. Caporaso, J.G., Kuczynski, J., Stombaugh, J., Bittinger, K., Bushman, F.D., Costello, E.K., Fierer, N., 
Pena, A.G., Goodrich, J.K., Gordon, J.I. and Huttley, G.A., 2010. QIIME allows analysis of high-
throughput community sequencing data. Nature methods, 7(5), p.335. 
3. Meyer, F., Paarmann, D., D'Souza, M., Olson, R., Glass, E.M., Kubal, M., Paczian, T., Rodriguez, A., 
Stevens, R., Wilke, A. and Wilkening, J., 2008. The metagenomics RAST servera public resource for 
the automatic phylogenetic and functional analysis of metagenomes. BMC bioinformatics, 9(1), p.386. 
4. Balvoit, M. and Huson, D.H., 2017. SILVA, RDP, Greengenes, NCBI and OTThow do these 
taxonomies compare?. BMC genomics, 18(2), p.114. 
5. Rossi-Tamisier, M., Benamar, S., Raoult, D. and Fournier, P.E., 2015. Cautionary tale of using 16S 
rRNA gene sequence similarity values in identification of human-associated bacterial 
species. International journal of systematic and evolutionary microbiology, 65(6), pp.1929-1934. 
6. Kim, M., Oh, H.S., Park, S.C. and Chun, J., 2014. Towards a taxonomic coherence between average 
nucleotide identity and 16S rRNA gene sequence similarity for species demarcation of 
prokaryotes. International journal of systematic and evolutionary microbiology, 64(2), pp.346-351. 
7. Edgar, R.C., 2018. Accuracy of taxonomy prediction for 16S rRNA and fungal ITS 
sequences. PeerJ, 6, p.e4652. 
8. Langille, M.G., Zaneveld, J., Caporaso, J.G., McDonald, D., Knights, D., Reyes, J.A., Clemente, J.C., 
Burkepile, D.E., Thurber, R.L.V., Knight, R. and Beiko, R.G., 2013. Predictive functional profiling of 
microbial communities using 16S rRNA marker gene sequences. Nature biotechnology, 31(9), p.814. 
9. Keegan, K.P., Trimble, W.L., Wilkening, J., Wilke, A., Harrison, T., D'Souza, M. and Meyer, F., 
2012. A platform-independent method for detecting errors in metagenomic sequencing data: 
DRISEE. PLoS computational biology, 8(6), p.e1002541. 
10. Leblanc, H.A., McGraw, R.L., Nygren, P. and Le Roux, C., 2005. Neotropical legume tree Inga edulis 
forms N2-fixing symbiosis with fast-growing Bradyrhizobium strains. Plant and soil, 275(1-2), pp.123-
11. da Silva, K., De Meyer, S., Rouws, L.F., Farias, E.N., dos Santos, M.A., OHara, G., Ardley, J.K., 
Willems, A., Pitard, R.M. and Zilli, J.E., 2014. Bradyrhizobium ingae sp. nov., isolated from effective 
nodules of Inga laurina grown in Cerrado soil. International journal of systematic and evolutionary 
microbiology, 64(10), pp.3395-3401. 
12. Barrett, C.F. and Parker, M.A., 2005. Prevalence of Burkholderia sp. nodule symbionts on four 
mimosoid legumes from Barro Colorado Island, Panama. Systematic and Applied Microbiology, 28(1), 
pp.57-65. 
13. Santini, A.C., Santos, H.R., Gross, E. and Corra, R.X., 2013. Genetic diversity of Burkholderia 
(Proteobacteria) species from the Caatinga and Atlantic rainforest biomes in Bahia, Brazil. Genetics 
and Molecular Research, 12(1), pp.655-664. 
14. Moreira, F.M.S., 2006. Nitrogen-fixing Leguminosae-nodulating Bacteria. Soil biodiversity in 
Amazonian and other Brazilian ecosystems, p.237. 
