Microsoft Word - Thesis+Corrections.docx
Russian Theatre in the Age of High Putinism:  
Politics and Aesthetics 
Alexander James Thomas 
University College 
Submission for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy  
Medieval and Modern Languages 
Hilary Term, 2021
Table of Contents 
Short Abstract....3 
Long Abstract4 
Prologue...11 
 Policy in Practice:  ...43 
 Summary..46 
1) Post-Zero: Documentary Theatre after  ...49 
  ...70 
 .....76 
 ..88 
 Teatr.docs Torture Trilogy.......95 
2) Document-Based Performance: New Documentarism...109 
 112 
 YouTube/ ...126 
 Locker room talk140 
3) Body Politics:   in High Putinism...156 
   ..161 
 28 ...191 
4) Actionist Theatre: The Burden of Gruz 300..208 
  300.216 
   228238 
  20:20..260 
Conclusion..276 
Bibliography...283
Short Abstract 
Setting out from the premise that legislation is performative, this study 
initially explores the relationship between state cultural policy, censorship, and 
theatre production. The case is made that following the so-called conservative-
authoritarian turn in Russia in 2012, there has been a gradual return to an 
interventionist cultural policy qualitatively similar in some respects to that of Soviet-
era Socialist Realism. I identify and describe the period in question  which is 
characterised by intensified censorship in its numerous guises, a new highly 
prescriptive cultural policy, and arbitrary repressions of nonconformist elements in 
society  as the period of High Putinism.  
 Having established the environment in which contemporary theatre in Russia 
operated during the second decade of the twenty-first century, surveys of the field are 
combined with close analysis of a dozen productions from the period. Collectively, 
these works all demonstrate in various ways what Jacques Rancire calls dissensus, 
which is to say they resist, circumvent, and transgress the norms of the ideological 
consensus set out by the state cultural policy. What they develop instead are 
alternative ways of thinking, seeing and doing that look beyond the horizons of the 
status quo. They achieve this through a variety of means, including aesthetic 
experimentation, audience participation, digital technology, contemporary dance and 
music, as well as radical postdramatic staging devices  in short, a hybridisation of 
genres, styles, disciplines, and media. The resulting thesis is a cross-section of a vivid 
contemporary theatre scene existing largely on the margins of cultural life. From this 
position of marginality, a diverse set of emancipatory performance practices emerges.
Long Abstract 
In Russian Theatre in the Age of High Putinism: Politics and Aesthetics, I 
set out to interrogate Russian drama and text-based theatre in the second decade of the 
twenty-first century. Initially keen to explore the normative nature of dramatic 
realism, my thesis developed a more fundamental shift of focus away from dramatic 
text altogether. The resulting work is a combination of updates on the situation in 
text-based theatre on the one hand, and explorations of text-decentred performance 
theatre on the other hand. The latter represents a small but significant trend in 
contemporary Russian theatre, and is an underrepresented field of research.  
One of the biggest problems that I came up against was finding ways to write 
about performance where no text or recording was available. The challenges that this 
presented were firstly approached by turning to general theatre theory and 
contemporary performance criticism, and secondly by finding and creating alternative 
primary sources (such as by taking interviews with the creators of the works in 
question, and collating online reviews with audience responses on social media). My 
aim was to investigate what it is that theatre performances do, and to what extent they 
are reflections of and responses to the world around them. The questions that run 
through this thesis are: how do politics and aesthetics interact in contemporary 
Russian theatre, and what is the result of that interaction, where it occurs? 
As a way in to approaching these questions, I initially set about analysing the 
legislative changes that have taken place over the past decade, and particularly since 
2012, when, as various scholars have noted, something of a conservative-
authoritarian turn took place. The purpose of this was to establish the context in 
which theatre production existed over the course of the decade, so that the interaction 
of politics and aesthetics would be more visible. My conclusions from this initial 
investigation were that there was a gradual intensification of censorship  in 
numerous guises  from 2012 onwards, which combined with an increase in political 
repressions to create a hostile environment for nonconformist theatre making. This 
resulted in a situation where a number of theatre makers and managers feared for their 
safety and freedom. These are not inconsequential factors when considering the 
specific works of theatre themselves, and the locations of their occurrence. Restrictive 
legislation designed to curtail so-called non-normative or non-traditional views 
and behaviour  in favour of unquestioning support for the state and its policies  has 
resulted in the unavoidable impression that some of the basic tenets of the Soviet-era 
artistic policy Socialist Realism have been reinstated, in a new hybrid form. Given 
that Russia is now a globally-integrated capitalist country  albeit in a form that is still 
dominated by the state  I have called the new state cultural policy Capitalist 
Realism, which both establishes the historical link to Socialist Realism, whilst also 
drawing a line between them, as separate but related systems. Furthermore, to 
distinguish my usage of the term from the general Western political theory of 
capitalist realism popularised by British critic Mark Fisher, the new Russian state 
cultural policy Capitalist Realism is capitalised (following the convention of Socialist 
Realism), whereas the political theory capitalist realism is placed in inverted 
commas and is uncapitalised. 
Throughout the thesis, the post-2012 era is described as the period of High 
Putinism, to distinguish it from the more liberal politics of Putins first two terms as 
president (2000-08). I considered this a necessary distinction not only for practical 
reasons, but also for reasons that relate to the history of theatre in the twenty-first 
century. The first decade of the so-called   movement was a period of 
unprecedented prosperity, growth, freedom, and financial investment in the cultural 
sphere, which culminated in the major investment programmes of Dmitrii 
Medvedevs presidency (2008-12), dubbed a golden age for Russian theatre by one 
critic. From the vantage point of 2020, the contrast between the two periods is more 
apparent. The sharp turn away from investment in contemporary art and culture  and 
the persecution of those recipients who did not accept political loyalty as a condition 
for receiving state funds  is a completely different cultural environment to that of 
pre-2012. The era of High Putinism is therefore characterised by the exacerbation and 
intensification of the restrictive, intolerant tendencies that were occasionally glimpsed 
in the early Putin years, but have since manifested themselves to a greater degree, 
reflected in both domestic and foreign policy. Due to the anthropological nature of 
documentary theatre, which takes its source material from social reality, it has a 
tendency to address socially and politically relevant themes more than other forms of 
theatre do. This makes it a useful bellwether for the times, and as such it is a logical 
starting point for my exploration of the interaction of politics and aesthetics in 
Russian theatre in the 2010s. The majority of Western scholarship on twenty-first 
century Russian theatre has understandably focused on the two major and interrelated 
developments to have emerged in that time   , and documentary 
theatre. Addressing the existing scholarship, my first chapter provides an update on 
the situation in documentary theatre nearly one decade after the conservative-
reactionary turn that led to a new era in the history of the antagonistic relationship 
between the state and the theatre in Russia. 
In dedicating half of my thesis to an analysis of performance practices where 
no playscript is present, I have attempted to redress a current gap in the field. The 
focus on drama and text-based theatre in existing scholarship is logical and justified, 
but I considered that there was a need to look beyond these forms to some of the 
experimental, hybrid forms of text-decentred and participatory performance that have 
been taking place in recent years. The originality of the thesis lies in this attempt to 
shift the field on to new ground. For reasons that are possibly due to the ephemerality 
of these kinds of performances and the lack of text or video recording of the event, 
these works go overlooked more often than not. I hope that my documentation of a 
few of these occurrences can serve as a partial corrective to the existing deficit in the 
literature. Over the course of the thesis, I introduce a number of terms that are 
unfamiliar to the field of Russian theatre studies: new documentarism; Actionist 
theatre; High Putinism; Capitalist Realism. These phenomena are explored in detail 
and given due consideration for their novelty and contribution to our evolving 
understanding of contemporary Russian theatre as it continues to develop in the 
twenty-first century. Additionally, my chapters on documentary theatre and  
 respectively offer significant updates on the situation for text-based theatre at 
the end of the second decade of the century. 
From four major research trips over a three-year period (2017-19), it became 
clear to me that the contemporary theatre scene had changed since the heyday of 
 . Some of the reasons for this are mentioned above, but nonetheless I 
have tried in my writing to capture something of the vitality of the scene that I 
experienced during those years. I was keen to avoid the well-known names of the 
  movement, many of whom have by now become established 
mainstays on the stages of state theatres throughout the country. Instead, I sought out 
the innovations and evolutions that have taken place since the well-known 
breakthroughs of the first decade of the   movement. These occurred 
not on the main stages of the big, well-funded state theatres, but rather on the margins 
of the theatre scene, largely unnoticed or ignored by critics. That said, however, 
whilst marginality is a significant aspect of many of the works that feature in the 
thesis, it is also true that the horizons of my research did not extend much further than 
Moscow. In spite of my intentions to give due consideration to regional theatre as 
well, it proved beyond the scope of this thesis. All of my research trips combined 
were not exhaustive of the capitals theatre scene, and for this reason it was difficult 
to get beyond it. It is the case that a number of annual theatre festivals held in the 
capital bring the best of regional theatre to the city, meaning that a certain degree of 
knowledge of the theatrical landscape of the country as a whole can be gleaned from 
being based for extended periods of time in Moscow alone. This is evidenced by the 
fact that many of the plays and playwrights mentioned in the thesis hail from diverse 
cities across Russia. It is also the case that the   movement was founded 
in Moscow, and the city has continued to be its spiritual home, centred around the 
annual Liubimovka Festival of Young Dramaturgy, and its host venue Teatr.doc. 
Thus, whilst Moscow would inevitably feature prominently in any study of 
contemporary Russian theatre, I nonetheless perceive it as a weakness in my argument 
that I have little firsthand experience of theatre beyond the capital to support my 
conclusions. 
On a general level, my close readings of a dozen works of theatre from recent 
years have once again demonstrated the age-old ability of art to detect and depict 
changes in society ahead of time. Arts ability if not to see the future then to see the 
present moment before it has become visible in other spheres makes it worthwhile 
engaging in detailed study of cultural production as it takes place in the present day, 
as well as from the recent past. It became clear to me that nonconformist 
contemporary theatre makers in Russia were engaging with the political ideology of 
the state in ways both subtle and overt, developing forms of discursive resistance to 
its hegemonic norms and processes. In my attempts to understand how these works 
achieved this, something approaching a coherent set of emancipatory performance 
practices emerged.  
In giving overdue critical attention to a number of disparate works of text-
decentred performance theatre, it is hoped that this will be a starting point for 
broadening the field beyond the traditional logocentrism of theatre criticism. With a 
background more in literature than theatre, I say this out of a conviction that the value 
of contemporary theatre lies not only in what it has in common with literature, but 
also in what it alone can do that other art forms cannot. In an age of the mediatisation 
and virtualisation of public and private life, theatres unique ability to engage 
spectators with others plays an important role in facilitating unmediated interpersonal 
exchange. Theatre can create meaningful interactions between strangers, provisionally 
building community through performance in the otherwise atomising worlds of virtual 
reality, social media, and  most recently  the global pandemic. At the time of 
writing in late 2020, it is impossible to avoid the events of the past year, which have 
brought about huge changes in the ways that we interact with each other. Whilst the 
lasting consequences of these changes are not yet known, new habits and advances in 
technology make it unlikely that there will be a return to the old norms. The huge 
increase in online communication and social isolation caused by the global pandemic 
has brought short-term challenges and long-term opportunities for theatre, once it 
becomes possible to gather and interact in person again (to say nothing of the 
possibilities for digital theatre, which has flourished under lockdown conditions). 
Participatory forms of theatre will have a unique role to play in bringing people back 
together, to explore collective trauma and navigate ways through the common 
concerns of the future. This thesis shows that contemporary Russian theatre has the 
potential to take up that mantle, embracing the needs of the day as it has done 
throughout the century thus far. 
Prologue 
 On 31 May 2019, a young man stood in Red Square, the heart of the Russian 
capital and in plain view of the seat of state power, the Kremlin. He held in his hands 
a small placard with three words on it:   . His 
protest lasted for seven minutes, before he was arrested and taken to Kitai-gorod 
police station, along with the camerawoman who had been filming him. What the 
police who arrested him did not know was that this action was being livestreamed to 
an audience sitting in the Teatr na Taganke a couple of kilometres away, as part of an 
experimental theatre performance taking place there. The proceedings were captured 
on video, and later that day the story was picked up and reported on by a variety of 
media platforms.1 Whilst the incident itself is perhaps amusing, reflecting the 
absurdity of the law enforcement agencies in their zero-tolerance approach towards 
public protest, even when the cause is as esoteric as opposition to Stanislavskiis 
system of theatre, the consequences were less so  the managing director of the Teatr 
na Taganke cancelled the remainder of the project, expelled the organisers and all the 
participants from the building, and demanded a public apology from the organisers for 
the incident. They refused, instead publicly declaring their support for the arrested 
theatre makers and for the artistic merit of their work.2 The irony of this incident 
1 There were at least eighteen different news reports on the incident. See, for example, Na 
Krasnoi ploshchadi zaderzhali rukovoditelia Teatra na vynos s plakatom Protiv sistemy 
Stanislavskogo, Novaia gazeta, 31 May 2019 
<https://novayagazeta.ru/news/2019/05/31/152146-na-krasnoy-ploschadi-zaderzhali-
rukovoditelya-teatra-na-vynos-s-plakatom-protiv-sistemy-stanislavskogo> [accessed 23 
December 2020]. 
2 The action was called  , by Aleksei Ershov and Veronika Nikulshina, 
and was a part of the project , curated by Viktor Vilisov. The managing director 
of the Teatr na Taganke is Irina Apeksimova. Vilisovs comments can be found on his 
Telegram channel @apollonia, 1 June 2020, as well as in an article by Uliana Bondarenko, 
Dovolno unylyi teatr: V chem smysl spektaklia s zaderzhaniem na Krasnoi ploshchadi, The 
taking place during Russias so-called   was not lost on some 
commentators, exemplifying the atmosphere of cultural intolerance and increasing 
censorship at the end of the second decade of the twenty-first century.3 How theatre in 
Russia arrived at this point of radical artistic experimentation brushing up against 
official reactionary conservatism  and the antagonistic relationship between these 
two forces  is the subject of this study.  
 It is fair to assume that the police did not arrest the young man in Red Square 
on account of his opposition to Stanislavskii. They arrested him for the act of carrying 
out an action that drew attention to itself adjacent to the Kremlin, ostensibly on the 
charge of conducting an unsanctioned protest, even though technically speaking one-
person pickets do not require pre-approval with the authorities. However, the full 
irony of the proceedings was only appreciated by those sitting in the audience inside 
the Teatr na Taganke at the time  being arrested by the police for publicly declaring 
opposition to the hegemony of the Stanislavskiian system in Russian theatre seemed 
perfectly to demonstrate the extent of the problem faced by contemporary theatre 
makers in their battle for legitimacy against the intransigence of the theatrical 
establishment. After the participants in the project were unceremoniously escorted 
from the theatre premises along with their belongings, the antagonistic nature of this 
relationship between the traditional and the contemporary was on full display. The 
message was clear  there is no place for free experimentation in state-funded 
theatres.  
Village, 2 June 2019 <https://www.the-village.ru/city/react/352175-teatr-na-taganke> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
3 The   was critiqued, for example, by three cartoons on the contemporary theatre-
dedicated Telegram channel @NemirovichandDanchenko (14 March 2019), one of which 
depicted the masks of the Golden Mask award behind prison bars and surrounded by a wreath 
of barbed wire. 
The choice of venue  Red Square  was clearly a significant factor in the 
arrest and the ensuing scandal. After all, on the other side of the city, another 
performer was standing in a park with exactly the same placard  an action that drew 
no noteworthy attention and passed off without issue. Being the site of many of the 
most famous performance actions in post-Soviet Russian history, by the likes of E.T.I, 
Aleksandr Brener, Pussy Riot, and Petr Pavlenskii, Red Square carries a symbolic 
weight that was too much to bear for the management of the Teatr na Taganke. The 
failure of the theatre management in this case to support artistic freedom represents a 
broader ecology of intolerance and impermissibility that has gradually taken hold of 
Russia since 2012, when Vladimir Putin controversially returned to the presidency for 
a third term in office. The fact that this happened at the Taganka of all places  
which was one of the most daring and revered theatres of the late Soviet era under the 
artistic directorship of Iurii Liubimov  is indicative of this trend. Prior to any 
analysis of individual works of theatre, this new ecology must be given due 
consideration.  
Introduction 
 Although 2012 has been identified as the year of the conservative-
authoritarian turn by critics, this study starts a little earlier, in 2010, when a short 
play called   premiered at Teatr.doc in Moscow.1 This was a 
turning point in the history of contemporary Russian theatre for reasons that are 
explored in Chapter One, demonstrating the age-old ability of art to capture shifts in 
society and politics ahead of time. In this thesis, a total of twelve works will be 
considered in detail, six of which are text-based plays, and six of which are text-
decentred performances, where no script as such is readily available.2 The final work 
of the twelve occurred at the end of 2019, meaning that the temporal scope of this 
project broadly covers the whole of the second decade of the twenty-first century, 
although all the close readings of specific works are drawn from the latter half of the 
decade. There is a practical reason for this  the fact that my research trips were 
conducted over a three-year period from 2017 to 2019 brought to light the more 
1 The conservative-authoritarian turn has been noted by critics such as Lena Jonson, Nikolai 
Petrov, Paul Robinson, and Kate Langdon and Vladimir Tismaneanu. See Jonson, Art and 
Protest in Putins Russia (Abingdon: Routledge, 2016); Petrov, Putins Neo-Nomenklatura 
System and its Evolution in Stubborn Structures: Reconceptualizing Post-Communist 
Regimes, ed. by Blint Magyar (Budapest: Central European University Press, 2019), pp. 
179-215; Robinson, Russian Conservatism (Ithaca: Northern Illinois University Press, 2019); 
Langdon and Tismaneanu, Putins Totalitarian Democracy: Ideology, Myth and Violence in 
the Twenty-First Century (Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 2020). 
2 The texts for the six plays can all be found online (in order of appearance): Elena Gremina, 
Dmitrii Bel, and Mark Ravenhill, Voina blizko (Moscow: Bookmate Originals, 2020), ebook 
<https://ru.bookmate.com/books/xyiqKbIw> [accessed 20 December 2020]; Zarema 
Zaudinova, Ekaterina Kosarevskaia, and Aleksei Polikhovich, Pytki (Moscow: Bookmate 
Originals, 2020), ebook <https://ru.bookmate.com/books/TJktP5oX> [accessed 20 December 
2020]; Zarema Zaudinova, Anna Dobrovolskaia, and Elena Gremina, Oiub (Moscow: 
Bookmate Originals, 2020), ebook <https://ru.bookmate.com/books/WcgMj9re> [accessed 20 
December 2020]; Dmitrii Danilov, Chelovek iz Podolska, Novyi mir, 2 (2017) 
<https://magazines.gorky.media/novyi_mi/2017/2/chelovek-iz-podolska.html> [accessed 23 
December 2020]; Valerii Pecheikin, Filosofy, ili Velikaia orgiia (unpublished playscript, 
2016) <http://lubimovka.ru/istoriya/31-2016/285-uchastniki-lyubimovki-2016> [accessed 23 
December 2020]; Olga Shiliaeva, 28 dnei (unpublished play script, 2018) 
<http://lubimovka.ru/istoriya/42-2018/516-short-list-2018> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
recent works that were premiering and being discussed during those years. Although 
the Russian repertoire system allows works to be seen many years  and even decades 
 after they were first made, the specificity of contemporary Russian theatre (and 
contemporary theatre in general) tends towards the capturing of the present moment, 
rather than towards timeless universality.3 This means that productions of new works 
tend to age quickly, although there are of course exceptions to this. Another factor to 
consider is the tendency in contemporary theatre towards event-ness  the 
singularity of the event, and the unique experience for each spectator that arises from 
it.4 This is at odds with the nature of the traditional repertory system and the idea that 
a show can be repeated indefinitely, unchanged. Many of the works that feature in this 
study were one-off events or only had a handful of performances that varied from one 
another, and these were conscious decisions taken by the theatre makers for artistic 
reasons rather than out of necessity. Furthermore, I would argue that the emphasis on 
works produced in the latter years of the decade better captures the extent of the 
changes in the conditions for cultural production that have taken place  and the 
corresponding artistic response to those changes  as the effects of the conservative-
authoritarian turn intensified over the period in question.  
 In what was the first monograph in English to approach the theme of 
specifically twenty-first-century Russian theatre, Birgit Beumers and Mark 
Lipovetsky advanced a thesis in 2009 that the phenomenon of so-called  
3 The repertoire system means that at the Teatr na Taganke, for example, it is still possible to 
see four different works directed by the late Iurii Liubimov that premiered variously in 1964, 
1968, 1974, and 2007. 
4 Event-ness is a term used by German theatre scholar and theorist Hans-Thies Lehmann. 
See Lehmann, Postdramatic Theatre, trans. by Karen Jurs-Munby (Abingdon: Routledge, 
2006), p. 106. 
 in Russia was characterised by an overarching discourse of violence.5 
Violence, for the authors, had three functions in  : 
First, violence demonstrates the disintegration of the Soviet social order, 
indicating cultural chaos. Second, violence arises as a reflection of new, post-
Soviet social practices connected with the redistribution of authority, property, 
symbolic and economic capital. Third, violence functions as a denotation of 
the sacred, of the ritual of transgression.6 
Since its publication, this monograph has defined the field of contemporary Russian 
theatre scholarship in English, and it remains the best overview of the first two 
decades of Russian theatre after the end of the Soviet Union. However, whilst 
violence is certainly a defining trait of many works of post-Soviet Russian theatre, a 
number of people have objected to the rather structuralist attempt broadly to 
categorize a disparate group of dramatic texts under a single concept. Amongst them 
was the well-known theatre critic Kristina Matvienko, who, in an article entitled 
    , argued that the authors disproved 
their own claim, stating: 
 ,       
 , ,      
.          
 ?7 
Furthermore, Beumers and Lipovetsky came to the conclusion that the brightest 
figures of the   movement were moving into film, where the authors 
considered that their innovations were more effective, and suggested that  
5 The only major monograph in Russian to have preceded this was theatre critic Marina 
Davydovas Konets teatralnoi epokhi (Moscow: Zolotaia maska; OGI, 2005).  
6 See Birgit Beumers and Mark Lipovetsky, Performing Violence: Literary and Theatrical 
Experiments of New Russian Drama (Bristol: Intellect, 2009), p. 43. 
7 Kristina Matvienko, Putevoditel po zabluzhdeniiam i otkrytiiam, Oktiabr, 2 (2013) 
<https://magazines.gorky.media/october/2013/2/putevoditel-po-zabluzhdeniyam-i-
otkrytiyam.html> [accessed 20 December 2020]. 
 as a theatrical phenomenon might have run its course.8 The decade that 
followed their publication revealed this not to be the case, as a new generation of 
original voices emerged, such as those of Pavel Priazhko, Anna Iablonskaia, and 
Iaroslava Pulinovich, and then another generation after them, including Natalia 
Zaitseva, Polina Borodina, and Masha Kontorovich. On the one hand, the biggest 
names from the first wave of   have moved on to the larger stages of 
state theatres, somewhat bearing out the prediction by the authors that it would grind 
to a halt, [] ending in the commercial cycle.9 On the other hand, the  
 movement, centred around the Liubimovka Festival of Young Dramaturgy 
and Teatr.doc, has demonstrated its capacity for renewal, primarily through the 
discovery of new generations of playwrights.  
The second decade of   has been discussed by a range of 
scholars in New Drama in Russian: Performance, Politics and Protest in Russia, 
Ukraine and Belarus, edited by J.A.E. Curtis and published in 2020. In her 
introduction to that volume, Curtis remarks on how political developments in the 
region, including the annexation of Crimea by Russia and the subsequent war with 
Ukraine, have hastened the demise of   as a transnational project, 
which formerly encompassed Russian-speaking Ukraine and Belarus.10 In the same 
volume, Noah Birksted-Breen argues that 2014 was the birth of Ukrainian New 
Drama.11 Likewise, Tania Arcimovich cites 2018 as the year when a distinct 
playwriting culture and language emerged in Belarus, where the use of the Belarusian 
language has become a symbol of resistance to the regime of Aleksandr 
8 Beumers and Lipovetsky, pp. 304-05. 
9 Ibid., p. 305. 
10 J.A.E. Curtis, Introduction: Recent Developments in Russian, Ukrainian, and Belarusian 
Drama, in New Drama in Russian: Performance, Politics and Protest in Russia, Ukraine and 
Belarus (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2020), pp. 1-22 (p. 18). 
11 Noah Birksted-Breen, The Watershed Year of 2014: The Birth of Ukrainian New 
Drama, in Curtis (ed.), New Drama in Russian, pp. 121-40. 
Lukashenko.12 This has been intensified by the events surrounding the disputed 2020 
presidential elections there, in which the Kremlins public backing of Lukashenko  
coupled with the provision of financial and technical support, as well as rumours of a 
plan for deeper integration with Russia  have intensified questions of language and 
national identity. What is clear, though, is that in spite of many attempts to consign it 
to the past,   has had a remarkable ability to reinvent itself, changing to 
meet new needs and demands in different contexts. Indeed, given that the term was 
initially adopted as a Russian version of British new writing, it is possible  even 
probable  that in the future it will come to signify little more than new plays, 
although in one sense that is what it only ever meant in the first place.13  
 Integral to the development of the style and language of   was 
the emergence and proliferation of documentary theatre, which was at least partly 
inspired by a series of workshops run in Russia by Londons Royal Court Theatre in 
1999 and 2000. Documentary techniques, such as the verbatim method (the recording, 
transcribing, and assembling of real speech into text for performance, 
characteristically using Dictaphones or similar recording devices), fed into fictional 
dramatic writing, which sought linguistic verisimilitude and hyper-naturalism  the 
latter of which has been defined as the overidentification with a Naturalist aesthetic 
that locates the drama where the toilets are, the scum which is now the new 
sacred, the proper truth, that which explodes norms and rules.14 Documentary 
techniques undoubtedly allowed for the shattering of linguistic, cultural, and sexual 
12 See Tania Arcimovich, The Transformation of the Language of New Drama in Belarus, 
as a Reflection of a New Model of Identity, in Curtis (ed.), New Drama in Russian, pp. 213-
13 Celebrated   theatre director Kirill Serebrenikov has stated that the term 
means merely new plays. See Kirill Serebrennikov, Foreword, in Beumers and 
Lipovetsky, pp. 9-11 (p. 9). 
14 Hans-Thies Lehmann, Postdramatic Theatre, trans. by Karen Jurs-Munby (Abingdon: 
Routledge, 2006), p. 117. 
taboos on stage, in ways that were shocking at the time. Arguably, however, this 
process was just theatre catching up with the cinema, where the shattering of such 
taboos had already occurred in the 1990s with the flood of Western films into the 
country, and the emergence of Russian equivalents by directors such as Aleksei 
Balabanov. Theatre was still in need of its own separate identity in the new post-
Soviet cultural landscape, one that distinguished it from film. The emergence of 
documentary theatre as a major force in Russian culture is one of the ways that this 
was achieved. In the only work to date that exclusively addresses the history of post-
Soviet Russian documentary theatre, Molly Flynn argued in her 2020 monograph 
Witness Onstage: Documentary Theatre in Twenty-First-Century Russia that the form 
has a unique capacity to speak to a number of core cultural anxieties in contemporary 
Russia.15 For Flynn, these anxieties include the evidentiary status of documents, the 
sincerity of testimony, and the performance of justice, as well as the countrys fraught 
relationship with its Soviet past.16 These issues are explored specifically in the space 
of the theatre more than elsewhere for reasons to do with finance (the cost of making 
a film can be prohibitive) and, more recently, as a result of tightening censorship. This 
has affected film and television most of all, which as finalised products are easier to 
regulate than theatre and which, due to their wider audience reach, are more closely 
monitored. Theatre can therefore do and say things that film and TV cannot. 
However, Russian documentary theatre makers have in the second decade of the 
twenty-first century also found ways of making their work separate and distinct from 
the documentary modes typical of the screen. Flynn charts the shift in documentary 
theatre from its pursuit of objective Truth in the first decade of this century to 
15 Molly Flynn, Witness Onstage: Documentary Theatre in Twenty-First-Century Russia 
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2020), p. 2. I am thankful to the author for sharing 
the book manuscript with me prior to publication. 
16 Ibid. 
explorations of subjectivity and subjective truths in the second.17 Although her 
temporal scope spans the first two decades of the twenty-first century, Flynn 
acknowledges that her research was primarily drawn from the 2008-12 period. This 
was the period of the so-called Medvedev thaw and thus mostly predates the 
conservative-authoritarian turn. In my first chapter, close readings of three 
documentary plays from more recent years consider developments that have taken 
place aesthetically and politically in the form since then. 
 Besides the three major studies mentioned above, there is a general paucity of 
book-length works in English or Russian dedicated to contemporary Russian theatre, 
although there are a couple in French.18 Theatre critic Pavel Rudnevs monograph 
 :    , 19502010- gives 
some consideration to the twenty-first century.19 Instead of violence (Beumers and 
Lipovetsky), Rudnev employs memory as his determining conceptual framework. 
Relevant to this study are his useful essays on the work of Priazhko, Pulinovich, and 
documentary theatre. It is also worth mentioning Marina Davydova, whose essays on 
a range of topics from European, North American, and Russian theatre were recently 
gathered together in a collected volume.20 Davydova is also the editor of the theatre 
journal Teatr, which provides by far the best dedicated coverage of news and 
developments in Russian theatre and the broader performing arts. Contributors such 
as Ilmira Bolotian, Natalia Zaitseva, and Nika Parkhomovskaia ensure that good 
journalistic writing fills some of the gaps in academic research.  
17 Flynn, p. 116. 
18 See Les Nouvelles Ecritures russes, ed. by Marie-Christine Autant-Mathieu (Pzenas: 
Domens, 2010); see also Le Thtre neo-documentaire: rsurgence ou rinvention?, ed. by 
Lucie Kempf and Tania Moguilevskaia (Nancy: NLO, 2013). 
19 See Pavel Rudnev, Drama pamiati: Ocherki istorii rossiiskoi dramaturgii, 1950-2010-e 
(Moscow: Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie, 2018). 
20 See Marina Davydova, Kultura zero: Ocherki russkoi zhizni i evropeiskoi stseny (Moscow: 
Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie, 2018). 
Given that one of my chief objectives was to investigate the extent to which 
contemporary Russian theatre has moved away from the text-based drama that was 
characteristic of the   movement towards more hybrid forms, the range 
of key sources inevitably extends to various different but related fields, mainly 
performance studies and art history. Lena Jonsons 2016 work Art and Protest in 
Putins Russia, which is focused on fine art, proved informative as I developed my 
approach towards this topic.21 Furthermore, art historian Claire Bishop and theatre 
scholar Andy Lavender separately offered stimulating ways of thinking and writing 
about performance.22 On a separate note, although it has been regarded with 
scepticism and a certain degree of disdain by the Russian theatrical and academic 
community, it is worth mentioning theatre critic Viktor Vilisovs 2019 book   
:    ,     .23 This is the 
first and only book-length work by a Russian author to analyse all the biggest names 
in European and North American theatre and to try to set out what it is about 
contemporary theatre that is different from previous eras. Although Vilisov is 
dismissive of contemporary Russian theatre and makes some erroneous claims about 
British theatre that reveal a lack of knowledge, he nonetheless offers some useful  if 
regrettably brief  insights into his domestic scene. Vilisov undersells the vitality of 
the contemporary scene in his home country, not giving due credit to the small but 
noteworthy group of experimental theatre makers actively working there.  
If the first chapter explores developments in text-based documentary theatre 
over the past decade, then the second chapter looks at recent experiments in hybrid 
21 See Jonson. 
22 See Claire Bishop, Artificial Hells: Participatory Art and the Politics of Spectatorship 
(London: Verso, 2012); and Andy Lavender, Performance in the Twenty-First Century: 
Theatres of Engagement (Abingdon: Routledge, 2016). 
23 Viktor Vilisov, Nas vsekh toshnit: Kak teatr stal sovremennym, a my etogo ne zametili 
(Moscow: ACT, 2019). 
forms of text-decentred documentary performance. The third chapter considers 
  at the end of the second decade of the twenty-first century, reflecting 
on the attention paid to the body and corporeal forms of subjectivity in playwriting of 
the period. The plays examined in this chapter will perhaps shed some light on the 
status of Russian   as it reaches the two-decade mark. Continuing with 
an orientation towards the body, the fourth and final chapter of this study is dedicated 
to a novel development in contemporary Russian theatre, which is postdramatic in 
nature, and resists easy categorisation as it breaks new ground for the spectator.24 
Labelled by its creators as Actionist theatre, it fuses performance art with theatre to 
create works that reflect one of the chief preoccupations of this study  the interaction 
of politics and aesthetics in contemporary Russian theatre. 
The text-decentred works that feature in both the second and fourth chapters 
of this study are part of an emerging, rather overlooked field in Russian theatre 
studies, which has thus far predominantly focused on text-based drama. Some of these 
performances take place on stages in theatre houses, whilst others re-locate to 
temporary spaces or out on to the city streets. Without a written playscript to refer to, 
alternative approaches to their analysis are required. Whilst these works remain 
marginal, largely ignored by the theatre establishment, this study argues that in fact 
they represent the most original attempts in contemporary Russian theatre to escape 
from the shadow of film, and finally to discover new modes and forms that capture 
what it is that theatre can do that other artistic media cannot. Perhaps these works 
offer Russias answer to the questions of where theatres place is in a world 
24 Postdramatic theatre is a term coined and popularised by Hans-Thies Lehmann. It broadly 
advances a thesis that many forms of contemporary theatre since the 1970s have broken from 
the dramatic model of theatre, instead employing hybrid forms of performance and 
technology to create works that perhaps draw from the dramatic tradition but cannot be said 
to be a part of it. For Lehmann, drama is a genre of theatre, and postdramatic theatre is the 
shift to a new aesthetic paradigm that is not bound by the conventions and rules of the 
dramatic genre. See Lehmann, Prologue, in Postdramatic Theatre, pp. 16-28. 
dominated by the moving image, and what it is that is unique about the theatre in the 
first digital century. 
Capitalist Realism: The New Model of State Cultural Policy25 
 It is difficult to separate cultural production from the social, economic, and 
political environment in which it takes place. As noted by scholars, the rise in 
immersive experiences in theatre in Europe and North America is connected to the 
neoliberal economic policies that have dominated there for the past few decades or 
so.26 Writing about art and artists in a broader sense, Bojana Kunst traces how 
neoliberal capitalism has defined artistic modes of production in recent times.27 In this 
regard, contemporary Russian theatre is no exception. The patronage-based system of 
Russian state capitalism that has come to dominate the economy under Putin plays a 
defining role in theatre production, which is still highly dependent on the state for 
funding, as well as for the distribution of property (i.e. theatre houses, studios, 
facilities, etc.), and for appointments to senior managerial positions in the top state 
theatres. It is therefore important to understand what the regulatory regime is that 
determines certain factors when it comes to producing a work of theatre in Russia in 
the present circumstances. A grasp of cultural politics provides the necessary context 
25 An earlier draft of this section was previously published as an article. See Alexander 
Trustrum Thomas, From Stalinist Socialist Realism to Putinist Capitalist Realism: Tracing 
Cultural Ideology in Contemporary Russia, in Curtis (ed.), New Drama in Russian, pp. 53-
26 This has been noted separately by Adam Alston, Andy Lavender, and Jen Harvie. See 
Alston, Beyond Immersive Theatre: Aesthetics, Politics and Productive Participation 
(London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016); Harvie, Fair Play: Art, Performance and 
Neoliberalism (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013); and Lavender. 
27 Bojana Kunst, Artist At Work: Proximity of Art and Capitalism (Winchester: Zero Books, 
2015). 
for a fuller interpretation of a dramatic text or performance, one that does not isolate 
the work from the broader environment that it emerged from and with which it is 
often in dialogue. The interplay of politics and aesthetics, then, is a key concern 
throughout this study. 
 Since the inauguration of Putin for his third presidential term in 2012, at least 
a dozen different laws have been passed that can be said to directly or indirectly affect 
cultural production in Russia.28 Perhaps the three best-known of these, collectively 
dubbed the censorship laws, all appeared within a year of each other over the course 
of 2013 and 2014. They relate to language usage (the so-called   ), to 
sexual orientation (   -), and finally to religious 
feelings, or more specifically the prohibition of anything that causes offense to such 
28 In chronological order, these include:  
1) O zashchite detei ot informatsii, prichiniaiushchei vred ikh zdoroviu i razvitiiu, N 
436-F3, 29 December 2010. 
2) O vnesenii izmenenii [...] v chasti regulirovaniia deiatelnosti nekommercheskikh 
organizatsii, vypolniaiushchikh funktsii inostrannogo agenta, N 121-F3, 20 July 
2012. 
3) O vnesenii izmenenii [...] v tseliiakh zashchity detei ot informatsii, 
propagandiruiushchei otritsanie traditsionnykh semeinykh tsennostei, N 135-F3, 29 
June 2013. 
4) O vnesenii izmenenii [...] v tseliakh protivodeistviia oskorbleniiu religioznykh 
ubezhdenii i chuvstv grazhdan, N 136-F3, 29 June 2013. 
5) O vnesenii izmenenii [...] v sviazi s sovershenstvovaniem pravovogo regulirovaniia 
v sfere ispolzovaniia russkogo iazyka, N 190238-6, 5 May 2014. 
6) Ob utverzhdenii Osnov gosudarstvennoi kulturnoi politiki, N 808, 24 December 
2014. 
7) O deiatelnosti na territorii Rossiiskoi Federatsii inostrannoi ili mezhdunarodnoi 
nepravitelstvennoi organizatsii, v otnoshenii kotoroi priniato reshenie o priznanii 
nezhelatelnoi na territorii Rossiiskoi Federatsii ee deiatelnosti, N 129-F3, 23 May 
2015. 
8) O gosudarstvennoi programme Patrioticheskoe vospitanie grazhdan Rossiiskoi 
Federatsii na 2016-2020 gody, N 1493, 30 December 2015. 
9) Strategiia gosudarstvennoi kulturnoi politiki na period do 2030 goda, N 326-r, 29 
February 2016. 
10) O vnesenii izmenenii [...] dopolnitelnykh mer protivodeistviia terrorizma i 
obespecheniia obshchestvennoi bezopasnosti, N 374-F3 & N 375-F3, 6 July 2016. 
11) O vnesenii izmenenii v Kodeks Rossiiskoi Federatsii ob administrativnykh 
pravonarusheniiakh, N 28-F3, 18 March 2019. 
12) O vnesenii izmenenii v statiu 15-3 Federalnogo zakona Ob informatsii, 
informatsionnykh tekhnologiiakh, i o zashchite informatsii, N 31-F3, 18 March 
2019. 
feelings (    ).29 These laws coincided with a 
significant change in cultural policy around the same time, in line with the broader 
domestic and foreign policy shifts of Putins return to the presidency, a period which 
was characterised by the annexation of Crimea, military intervention in eastern 
Ukraine, the consolidation of power in the hands of the federal security services, an 
information war both internally and with the West, as well as a renewed hard line 
against protests and political opposition in general. Before addressing the implications 
of the conservative-authoritarian turn, it is worth considering what preceded it, which 
was an unprecedented period of financial and political investment in the cultural 
sphere, and the genuine materialisation of promises made by then President Dmitrii 
Medvedev to invest in the contemporary arts as the foundation of future social 
cohesion. 
This golden age in the history of post-Soviet Russian theatre  which was 
true not only in financial terms, but also in terms of the number of premieres, the 
number of spectators, and other indicators  ran from 2011 to 2014.30 After this, the 
three-year funding cycles ran out and, rather than being renewed or built upon, were 
replaced by a new cultural conservatism, epitomised by policy statements from the 
new Minister of Culture, Vladimir Medinskii, as well as the passing of the 
29 These names are how they are colloquially known and referred to in the media, rather than 
how they are officially worded in law. 
30 Theatre critic John Freedman wrote about the golden age of Russian contemporary theatre 
in a 2010 article, midway through the Medvedev years. See Freedman, Contemporary 
Russian Drama: The Journey from Stagnation to a Golden Age, Theatre Journal, 62, 3 
(2010), 389-420. Furthermore, the journal Teatr dedicated an entire issue to the theatre of the 
Medvedev years, and gives the following statistics:  :   2007  308 
   64300   145575000 , 
   2622325000    9307200000  ,  
  2011-    20 ,     , 
    (75100).      168394000,   
    (5109456 000).  2011      
230   , ,       180  303 
. See Nika Parkhomovskaia, 2008-2012: Teatralnye innovatsii v deistvii, Teatr, 32 
(2017), 16-20 (p. 19). 
aforementioned censorship laws.31 This culminated three years later in the scandal 
surrounding the celebrated theatre director Kirill Serebrennikov and his company 
 , which was both born out of and was a major beneficiary of the 
Medvedev cultural investment programme. In many ways, the history of  
 and the three-year legal case around it (known in the media as  
) epitomised the extent of the shift in cultural policy from Medvedev to Putin, 
and illustrates the major challenges faced by the cultural sphere in the post-2012 era. 
There are other factors that put external pressure on theatrical production 
besides overbearing state legislation, municipal-level harassment, and the use of 
financial threats and deprivation, one of these being the ever-growing and 
increasingly assertive power of the Russian Orthodox Church. This has been cited as 
the greatest problem facing the cultural sphere in the current era by Boris Mezdrich, 
the theatre manager who was fired from the Novosibirsk Opera House after Orthodox 
activists picketed a production of Tannhuser there in 2015.32 The problem, which is 
widely acknowledged by theatre professionals, is that there are no effective 
mechanisms of defence for cultural production from conservative-nationalist, and 
religious activists. Moreover, the laws that have been passed since 2012 have had the 
opposite effect, emboldening those elements of society that see so-called non-
traditional culture in purely negative terms (most unfortunately this included the 
former Minister of Culture Medinskii himself). The two crucial documents here, 
31 Vladimir Medinskii became Minister of Culture in May 2012 and was replaced by Olga 
Liubimova in January 2020. He was well-known for his outspoken statements and criticism of 
contemporary art, and for his support of a military-patriotic cultural agenda in the arts. He 
complained of a culture of   in the theatre. See Medinskii 
zhaleet khudrukov, dopuskaiushchikh netsenzurnuiu leksiku v teatralnykh postanovkakh, 
TASS, 15 November 2018 <https://tass.ru/kultura/5797454> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
32 Mezdrich was subsequently persona non grata in state theatres and it was three years 
before he was able to find a new position, at Praktika in Moscow. For the scandal, see 
Novosibirsk: Direktor uvolen iz-za Tangeizera, BBC Russian, 29 March 2015 
<https://www.bbc.com/russian/russia/2015/03/150329_russia_novosibirsk_theatre_director> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
called     (2014), and  
      2030 (2016)  are both 
legislative white papers that received official Presidential approval, but do not 
contain legally binding criteria or statutes (they will henceforth be referred to 
respectively as  and ). These documents function as instruction 
manuals for the new state ideology, indicating how cultural production should 
manifest itself, the direction it should take, and the kind of language that should be 
used in approaching the formulation and implementation of cultural policy at the 
institutional and regional level. 
Focusing on these two pieces of legislation that specifically address cultural 
policy, we can observe a clear somatic turn, or in other words there is a turn towards 
the body of the individual as the site of policymaking. This was one of the trademark 
features of Soviet-era Socialist Realism as a doctrine, shaping cultural ideology in 
similar ways through treating the body as the raw material in its processes. It is 
perhaps unsurprising to see this focus re-emerge now, given that a similar shift has 
already occurred in other areas such as education and national security, as the 
emphasis on political loyalty and the corresponding patronage network continues 
inexorably to extend into all areas of civic life. It is perhaps worth recalling that the 
former KGB officer Putin (b. 1952) and his inner circle are all people whose adult 
lives were largely shaped by the Soviet system, so a return to these kinds of top-down 
structures is both comfortable and familiar for those in power and for their chief 
support base, the older population demographic.  
The absence of real targets or policy commitments in these two documents 
should not belie their significance  they transparently reveal the desire of the 
government to bring the cultural sphere into line behind the state apparatus, as it has 
already done so successfully with the media, business, and the Church, thereby 
reinforcing its own power structures and the managed democracy of the political 
system.33 The  document sets out as its aims the regulating of  
 , in order to, amongst other things,   
  . This is with the aim of  
, ,  ,  
. In the final instance, it sees cultural policy as being   
    , which can 
achieve the    and   
     .34  
The concept of culture is defined as    
 ,   ,   , 
,      (, 
, ,   . .).35 Culture, as narrowly 
defined by this state legislature, is to be utilised to further political ideology on 
multiple fronts (domestic, foreign, social, and economic). There are strong currents of 
Russian exceptionalism running through the decree, with reference to its position  
,       . This includes Russias 
  that has defined its   and the alleged 
  .36 These vague notions, whilst often 
repeated and held up as truisms, are never defined in any concrete way, existing more 
as signifiers for how the document should be read and understood. They are indicators 
33 The managed democracy of the post-Soviet Russian political system has been described 
in detail by Andrew Wilson in Virtual Politics: Faking Democracy in the Post-Soviet World 
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 2005). 
34 Osnovy gosudarstvennoi kulturnoi politiki, pp. 1-3. 
35 Ibid., p. 4. 
36 Ibid., p. 2. 
of intended meaning, establishing a feedback loop between the state-author and the 
reader, whose responsibility it is to interpret and implement the policy, repeating the 
language that it uses. Indeed, although the  are not a legally binding 
document, it is the case that in theatres that do not have a strong, independent-minded 
leadership, the document already functions as the determiner of artistic policy.37 
Tellingly, the editor of the journal Teatr, Marina Davydova, stated that the experience 
of reading the  document felt like reading a resolution by the Central 
Committee of the Soviet-era Communist Party.38 This is the new language of the high 
period of Putinism (henceforth High Putinism), and it must be learnt, much as one had 
to learn to speak Bolshevik (partly through the interpretation of decrees) in the early 
Soviet Union.39 
Starting from the premise that legislation is performative, the passing of a new 
policy into law, which is to say the moment at which it becomes a part of the legal 
code that defines the officially-sanctioned zone of cultural permissibility, is an act of 
redrawing, a redefining of the Norm. This performative dimension of lawmaking 
extends down to the level of language usage in the text itself. A good example of this 
is the introduction and subsequent proliferation, through citation and reiteration, of a 
constructed linguistic binary traditional/non-traditional. This first appeared in 2013 
as a single-sentence addendum to the 2010 law     , 
37 This fact was told to me on separate occasions by two leading theatre managers in Moscow 
in 2018, which confirmed the prediction made at the time of the documents passing in 2014 
by director Boris Pavlovich, who said,   ,    
     . See Obsuzhdenie Osnov 
gosudarstvennoi kulturnoi politiki RF, Meyerhold Centre, Moscow, June 2014. The 
unpublished transcript of this public discussion at the Meyerhold Centre was generously 
shared with me for the purposes of this research project. 
38     ,     ,  
 ,   -   . Marina Davydova, in 
Obsuzhdenie. 
39 See Steven Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as a Civilization (Berkeley; London: 
University of California Press, 1995), pp. 191-221. 
     , but it has its origins in earlier Duma 
debates from 2003 and 2009, as a result of which it entered political and public 
discourse.40 This new clause wrote into law that material harmful to childrens health 
and development includes information   , 
      
    ()   .41 This clearly raises a 
number of serious questions, not least relating to the problematic conflation of notions 
of sexuality, family hierarchy, and values broadly conceived, but my attention here 
is on the appearance of the term non-traditional []. The immediate 
consequence of this legislative intervention is that this term becomes a real, legitimate 
language usage in political and cultural discourse, drawing an officially-sanctioned 
ontological distinction between types of sexuality  traditional and non-traditional  
a distinction that did not previously exist in law as such.42 What we see as a result of 
this is that the notion of the non-traditional, which is here applied specifically to 
sexual relations (i.e. homosexuality), then gets taken up and applied more generally to 
other spheres, and ultimately reaches as far as cultural policy. This appeared in a late 
draft of the  document seen by leading cultural figures, where in open terms 
an opposition was drawn between so-called traditional culture as being good and 
healthy, and non-traditional culture as being   by implication bad, 
not real culture, and undesirable. Although the word  does not 
40 Dan Healey claims that the traditional/non-traditional opposition had been circulating in 
media and popular sexological discourse for some twenty years before the introduction of the 
new law in 2013. See Healey, Russian Homophobia From Stalin to Sochi (London; New 
York: Bloomsbury, 2018), p. 10. For an overview of the genealogy of this new term, see 
Healey, pp. 6-13. 
41 O zashchite detei (2013 ed.), p. 4. 
42 However, a distinction between types of sexuality has existed previously, and can be traced 
back to Stalins re-introduction of the pre-revolutionary law against sodomy in 1933-34, 
which had been repealed during the wave of progressive social policies in the 1920s, and 
which was repealed again in the 1990s during Boris Eltsins liberalisations. 
appear in the final version of the document that was officially approved, it 
nonetheless speaks volumes about the policymakers view of art and culture in 
general that it was present in the text until a very late stage of the documents 
formation.43 This notion of  had been publicly echoed by the 
Minister of Culture himself in 2013, when he negatively assessed contemporary art as 
being akin to the emperors new clothes, and as such not something that the state 
should be financing.44 The abstract notion of tradition subsequently became a 
guiding principle in cultural policy, and proliferates in both the  and the later 
. This is significant because it becomes the premise for an actively 
interventionist cultural policy, especially relating to youth culture and educational 
development, and also as a more general justification for imposing upon the body of 
the individual through legislation. Given the conservative nature of Soviet-era 
Socialist Realism, which propounded neo-classicism in architecture and realism in art, 
recent state cultural policy would appear to be adopting a similar ideological 
standpoint in relation to questions around what culture is, how it should be produced, 
and what function it should play in society.  
 Another example of legal language working performatively appears in the 
, where it is stated early on that one of the main aims of the new state cultural 
policy is    .45 This phrase and its 
derivatives have a history that traces back at least as far as the 1920s, when it was 
43 This word was clearly present in the draft seen by director Kirill Serebrennikov, who 
criticised its usage and demanded its removal during the aforementioned public discussion at 
the Meyerhold Centre in 2014. See Obsuzhdenie. 
44 See Aleksei Iablokov, V 2014 gody gosudarstvo vserez vozmetsia za kulturu, 
Vedomosti, 11 October 2013 <www.vedomosti.ru/lifestyle/articles/2013/10/11/v-2014-godu-
gosudarstvo-vserez-vozmetsya-za-kulturu> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
45 Osnovy, p. 5. 
used in Proletkult theory.46 It became a central tenet of Socialist Realism, in which 
artists were expected to be   , and engage in 
     .47 Furthermore, when this new 
cultural policy aim is placed alongside the opposition of the traditional and the non-
traditional, it becomes clear that artists are essentially once again expected to be 
  , proactively taking a correct, moral, patriotic 
approach to their art in accordance with state political ideology. There is talk of the 
need for the    in order to achieve the aims of 
the new cultural policy.48 The deployment of this sort of language recalls the notion of 
the positive hero so central to Socialist Realist aesthetics.49 Once the  
 has been achieved, this idealised, renewed person would have a textbook 
knowledge of correct and pure     (which 
they would use at all times, acknowledging no other registers of language), as well as 
a commanding grasp of the moral, ethical and aesthetic principles of art and culture 
(of the purely traditional kind), grounded as these should be in the traditional family 
unit as the foundation of all social values.50 The question of language norms  and 
who defines standard and literary language  has its own history, which traces 
back to 1920s debates that informed the later development of Socialist Realist literary 
dogma.51  
46 See Konstantin Rudnitskii, Russian and Soviet Theater, 1905-1932, trans. by Roxane 
Permar (New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1988), p. 45. 
47 Andrei Zhdanov, speaking at the First All-Union Congress of Soviet Writers in 1934. 
Abridged text available on VikiChtenie <https://biography.wikireading.ru/184434> [accessed 
23 December 2020]. 
48 Osnovy, p. 3. 
49 See Rgine Robin, Socialist Realism: An Impossible Aesthetic, trans. by Catherine Porter 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1992), p. 299. See also Katerina Clark, The Soviet 
Novel: History as Ritual, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1985). 
50 Osnovy, p. 8. 
51 In 1928 Viktor Shklovskii criticised Maksim Gorkii, who played a key role in the defining 
of what became Soviet Socialist Realist literary language norms in the 1930s, stating that he 
In recent legislation, these debates resurfaced in the 2014   , 
which banned all so-called   from the public realm, printed or 
spoken (including books, cinema, theatre, music, and public performance of any 
kind).52 Like Socialist Realist doctrine, this is a fundamentally infantilising approach 
to cultural policy, as pointed out by the late Elena Gremina in her commentary on the 
 document. For Gremina, most damaging of all is that such legislation 
becomes a way of depriving nonconformist art, and work deemed to be immoral or 
even merely amoral, from receiving state subsidies, thereby functioning as another 
mechanism of censorship on cultural production (known informally as financial 
censorship).53 There are other notions in the  that feed into this, such as the 
assertion that the cultural sphere is a part of national security and that it therefore 
must be regulated and serve a military-patriotic agenda. This dogmatic, prescriptive 
view of culture was set out by Medinskii in his 2015 article     
,    .54 Gremina best captured the sense of the 
 document with her assessment:    ,  
         
.55 The metaphor of the Procrustean bed is ideal for conceptualising the 
effect of the stream of restrictive new laws and cultural policy documents that have 
takes the prose of the eighteen-nineties as his linguistic norm. He takes purely temporary 
rules, and practises [them] as literary dogma. See Robin, pp. 176-77.  
52 Work that does contain language considered obscene is strictly prohibited to minors, and 
must visibly show a warning sign on the front cover (if printed material) or at the venue 
entrance (the exception to this is film/cinema, where there is zero tolerance). Lexicon defined 
as obscene by state communications department Roskomnadzor includes all Russian words 
derived from four widely-known root words  prudishly listed as those beginning with , 
, , and . See Roskomnadzor poiasnil zhurnalistam, chto takoe mat, BBC Russian, 25 
December 2013 
<https://www.bbc.com/russian/russia/2013/12/131225_roskomnadzor_obscene_words_list> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
53 Gremina, speaking at the Meyerhold Centre in 2014. See Obsuzhdenie. 
54 Vladimir Medinskii, Kto ne kormit svoiu kulturu, budet kormit chuzhuiu armiiu, 
Izvestiia, 17 June 2015 <https://iz.ru/news/587771> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
55 Gremina, quoted in Obsuzhdenie. 
appeared over the years since 2012. With the inscription of each new law, the 
parameters of the Norm are pulled in towards the regulatory centre of power (the state 
apparatus), making legally Other that which was previously comfortably the Norm. 
According to the myth, Procrustes forced his victims to fit his iron bed by stretching 
them out or by cutting back their limbs. The one size fits all cultural policy 
contained in this document requires a similarly violent Procrustean amputation of the 
inherently heterogeneous cultural sphere in order to fit it into the rigid frame of a 
homogenous, normalising political ideology. 
 The sheer impossibility of conformity to the model of the  
  is akin to the new Soviet person trope in Socialist Realism  
both are the generic products of ideology, rather than existing in any reality. This 
unrealisability of the transition from ideology to life necessitates and generates 
transgression of its norms. As such, a legislative policy based on such an impossible 
model of homogeneity is itself entirely cynical. It demands a pathological multi-
polarity from the individual who is subjected to it, which is necessary in order for 
them to be able to perform acts of conformity whilst simultaneously not ever truly 
conforming. This is how the technical power to determine cultural ideology achieves 
its aims, through the othering of the subject, who is caught in a state of permanent 
instability. On the one hand, for Hannah Arendt a state of permanent instability is an 
inherent characteristic of totalitarianism.56 Her argument can be extended to Socialist 
Realism, as a totalitarian artistic ideology, one which Rgine Robin describes as an 
impossible aesthetic.57 On the other hand, for cultural theorist Mark Fisher, the 
contemporary condition of capitalist realism  in which it is easier to imagine the 
56 Hannah Arendt, The Origins of Totalitarianism (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1951; repr. 
Schocken Books, 2004), p. 509. 
57 See Robin. 
end of the world than it is to imagine the end of capitalism58  is likewise determined 
by capitalisms perpetual instability.59 
Given that post-Soviet Russia is a capitalist state, not a socialist one, any 
comparison between cultural policy now and Socialist Realism has definite limits. 
However, by considering the current order of things as a capitalist realist 
phenomenon, the new cultural policy developed under High Putinism can 
productively be called Capitalist Realism, which both establishes the connection to, 
and distinguishes it from its Socialist Realist predecessor. To distinguish my usage of 
the term from the general Western political theory of capitalist realism popularised 
by Fisher, the new Russian state cultural policy Capitalist Realism is capitalised 
(following the convention of Socialist Realism), whereas the political theory 
capitalist realism  when it is referred to  is placed in inverted commas and is 
uncapitalised. To my knowledge, the term capitalist realism has not been applied to 
post-Soviet Russia in a cultural context previously, although it appeared as early as 
2001 in the field of architecture, where it was used to describe the new market forces 
driving the construction sector and urban planning policies in Russian cities.60 It is 
interesting to note this previous usage; however, given the significant deviation in the 
respective applications of the term  to present-day state cultural policy on the one 
hand, and to the market conditions for the construction sector in the 1990s on the 
other  a fruitful comparison is a subject for a separate study. Whilst the degree to 
which Putins Russia is capitalist or not  and the precise form that it takes  is a 
subject for continued debate, on a basic terminological level the distinction between 
58 This phrase is attributed by Fisher to both Fredric Jameson and Slavoj iek. See Mark 
Fisher, Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative? (Winchester: Zero Books, 2009), p. 2. 
59 Fisher, p. 54. 
60 See Bart Goldhoorn, Sources and Structure of Capitalist Realism, Project Russia, 24 
(2001), 6-11. See also Bart Goldhoorn and Philipp Meuser, Capitalist Realism: New 
Architecture in Russia (Berlin: DOM Publishers, 2006). 
Socialist Realism and Capitalist Realism is a useful one to make regardless, in terms 
of thinking and writing about state cultural policy then and now. 
Comparing the cultural policies under Stalin and Putin respectively reveals the 
common generic categories that underpin Socialist Realist and Capitalist Realist 
aesthetics. An emphasis on the   , the positive hero, 
and the new person appears across both systems. Fisher diagnoses capitalist 
realism of the twenty-first century in words that could easily have been written about 
twentieth-century Socialist Realism: the effect of permanent structural instability, the 
cancellation of the long term, is invariably stagnation and conservatism, not 
innovation.61 The conservative-reactionary turn to tradition in cultural policy under 
both Stalin and Putin would seem to bear out this diagnosis. 
Alongside the introduction of the ideologically contingent concepts of 
   and   , 
the notion of history has also become no less subject to the machinations of state 
legislative power. We see in the post-2012 legislation a concerted effort to take 
history as such in hand, which is to say, to control historical narratives through the 
performative act of legislating. In the opening pages of the , it is stated that 
the purpose of the document is to create a new cultural policy in order to avert future 
social catastrophe      in Russia.62 Such a crisis 
would apparently be characterised by     
 , []     
61 Fisher, p. 76. 
62 Osnovy, p. 3. This phrase is repeated exactly in the . See Strategiia, p. 6.  
The idea of creating a new cultural policy will be later developed in the Strategy into the 
officially titled    . It is defined as, amongst other things, 
      and 
    ,   
    . See Strategiia, p. 35. 
  .63 Here are the first signals of what is later 
developed in the  into a juridico-legislative outlawing of the possibility of 
evidence-based historiography, especially if it negatively evaluates the dominant 
trope of neo-Soviet great-power triumphalism, in which positive memories of the 
Soviet era are an integral feature. History, therefore, is remembered by the ruling 
elite, who hold the technical mechanisms of power for determining and reinscribing 
national history as a singular narrative, leaving all alternative, competing narratives 
outside the parameters of the politico-judicial space. This attempt to set historical 
narratives in stone, and the total denial of their contingent nature as narrative 
constructions, does not necessarily erase the collective memory of society, although it 
does in time come to dominate it, especially given the firm state control of two other 
important societal memory transmitters  education and the media. The act of 
collective forgetting, then, becomes an important feature of this particular aspect of 
state censorship as well.64 In the context of the new Capitalist Realist cultural policy 
under Putin, however, this is perhaps unsurprising. For Fisher, the conditions of 
neoliberal capitalism generate ontological precarity, in which forgetting becomes 
an adaptive strategy.65 For Lydia Ginzburg, adaptation is the key to understanding 
how it was that people, particularly free-thinking intellectuals, lived through the social 
upheaval of the 1930s, which saw the imposition of Socialist Realist dogma in the 
realm of cultural policy, and the mass political repressions that targeted 
63 Osnovy, p. 3; Strategiia, p. 6. 
64 Yuri Lotman considers forgetting as one of three forms of collective memory in any given 
culture, which is to say that forgetting is no less active a process than remembering, and is 
just as important. See Yu. A. Lotman and B. A. Uspensky, On the Semiotic Mechanism of 
Culture, New Literary History, 9, 2 (1978), 211-32 (pp. 215-16). 
65 Fisher, p. 56. 
nonconformist artists and thinkers.66 Whilst these epochs are entirely different in 
terms of the violence of the respective regimes, it is the case nonetheless that selective 
memory and forgetting are survival strategies of adaptation in the ontologically 
unstable conditions of High Putinism, just as they were during the period of High 
Stalinism. 
It is important to view this petrification of history and the introduction of the 
notion of the traditional into political discourse as part of one and the same trend. 
History and tradition are actively employed as the conceptual weapons of the state 
in the fight against a perceived culture of    
.67 Daphne Skillen states that all-permissibility [], with 
its Dostoevskian undertones of egoism, narcissism and random acts of violence, is a 
pejorative word in Russian.68 In cultural Putinism  closely allied as it is with the 
resurgent Russian Orthodox Church  history and tradition are the forces of enclosure 
and social cohesion that protect Russian society from a harmful culture of liberal 
permissiveness associated with the godless gay West.69 
Further manifestations of a preoccupation with history appear in the 
 in relation to the fostering of the so-called   
, two key elements of which, we are told, will include  
      , and   
66 See Lydia Ginzburg, At One With the Legal Order, trans. by Alyson Tapp, in Lydia 
Ginzburgs Alternative Literary Identities: A Collection of Articles and New Translations, ed. 
by Emily Van Buskirk and Andrei Zorin (Oxford; New York: Peter Lang, 2012), pp. 383-99. 
67 Strategiia, p. 7. 
68 Daphne Skillen, Freedom of Speech in Russia: Politics and Media from Gorbachev to Putin 
(Abingdon; New York: Routledge, 2017), p. 18. In several of Fedor Dostoevskys novels, 
from    (1866) and  (1871-72) through to  
 (1879-80), the young male protagonists arrogantly and deludedly claim all-
permissibility for themselves, i.e. the right to exercise free will in an untrammelled way  
with tragic consequences. 
69 Peter Pomerantsev, Non-Linear War, LRB Blog, 28 March 2014 
<https://www.lrb.co.uk/blog/2014/march/non-linear-war> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
,     ,   
   ,   .70 Both of these 
policy initiatives involve the petrification of historical narratives in the image of the 
dominant political agenda, which, with the continual invocation of the officially-
sanctioned memory of the Great Patriotic War and the rehabilitation of the figure of 
Stalin, increasingly resembles a neo-Soviet chauvinism. 
The rehabilitation of Stalin is exemplified in the Ministry of Culture-
sponsored film,  (2018), which Medinskii described as   
.71 He said this as a rebuff to historians and journalists, some of whom had 
criticised the fabricated plotline and rewriting of history to fit the current ideological 
trends of the day. In the film, a group of tank drivers manages heroically to escape 
from Nazi pursuit on the frontline in 1940, and they end up victoriously parking their 
tanks in Red Square, where Stalin himself is there to greet them. The working title for 
the film     reveals its intention by underlining the centrality of 
the figure of Stalin as the anchoring motif of the film, and the carrier of its ideological 
message.72 There is a rich history of Stalin appearing at the end of films in the former 
Soviet Union  namely in the staliniana cult of personality classics of Socialist 
Realist cinema, where Stalin fulfilled a similar role to that seen in . In Mikhail 
Chiaurelis classic   (1949), for example, once Red Army soldiers 
have taken Berlin, Stalin arrives at the scene and delivers an impassioned victory 
speech, which then turns into a rousing glorification of Stalin himself as the great 
leader. The glaring historical inaccuracy in such films was of little concern in the 
70 Strategiia, pp. 31-32. 
71 Anton Dolin, Tanki Kima Druzhinina: nash otvet filmu Smert Stalina, Meduza, 23 
April 2018 <https://meduza.io/feature/2018/04/23/tanki-kima-druzhinina-nash-otvet-filmu-
smert-stalina> [accessed 23 December 2020].  
72 Furthermore, this film was released on Victory Day in 2018 and was seen as a patriotic 
response to the controversial British satirical comedy The Death of Stalin, which was banned 
from release in Russia at around the same time. See Dolin. 
pursuit of the higher truth-value of propagandistic-symbolic imagery. The Socialist 
Realist artistic model is echoed in Medinskiis statement on , that it is 
 , where its value as  is the justification for any 
historical inaccuracies or fabrications in the name of a higher ideological Truth. The 
re-writing of history in , the re-fetishisation of the figure of Stalin in popular 
culture, and the military-patriotic agenda being promoted by the Ministry of Culture 
are all part of the new Capitalist Realist cultural policy, which is the ideological 
successor of Socialist Realism. This is a strictly normative environment in which art 
and culture are evaluated by standards of correctness, or in other words, by the 
degree to which they conform to the political norms determined by the state.  
The questions that repeatedly arise to a critical reader of the  and 
 legislative documents are: Which memories? What history? Whose 
culture? These are questions that are left wholly unanswered in the policy documents, 
where vague generalizations and unsupported assumptions are often made 
uncritically. The lack of specificity in the definitions of key terms gives the 
policymakers, propagandists, and ideologues of the regime a free hand in their 
interpretation and implementation of cultural policy, and this has had major 
consequences for the conditions of cultural production in recent years. 
 Bound up with the notion of the    is a focus 
on youth, and on the human body in the process of development. This is one of the 
main developments in the  when compared with the earlier   a 
shift towards the body of the child as the performative site of policy inscription in the 
shaping of the next generation of citizens. Early in the , it is stated that new 
programmes directed at      will 
include     , as well as  
 .73 The patriotic development of citizens  with a particular 
focus on youth  had its own separate policy document, which covered the years 
2016-20.74 Passed into law only two months before the , its language feeds 
into the elaboration of the latter document. The emphasis in these policies, which is 
on the so-called   of young people, is placed heavily on 
the military  military history, military culture, and the effective militarisation of 
youth culture. This process of militarisation through education is nothing new in 
Russia, and in fact, as Michel Foucault convincingly demonstrated, military discipline 
is the genealogical origin of discipline in many other European social(ising) 
institutions, including the school, the hospital, and the prison, meaning that these 
seemingly disparate institutional structures have much in common.75  
Nonetheless, the evidence from these cultural policy documents shows that in 
recent years the militarisation of youth culture and education in Russia has 
accelerated and become an active government priority. The  states that this 
will be achieved through      
    to assess cultural output based on 
empirical data. One such indicator is       
  14  30 ,      
.76 There are parallels here with the Soviet Komsomol system, which 
had a similar military-patriotic function and extended its definition of youth up to 
the age of twenty eight. This imposition of the states political ideology on to young 
people as they are still developing is clearly part of one and the same trend as the 
73 Strategiia, pp. 4-5. 
74 It is entitled O gosudarstvennoi programme Patrioticheskoe vospitanie grazhdan 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii na 2016-2020 gody (N 1493, 30 December 2015). 
75 Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. by Alan Sheridan 
(London: Allan Lane, 1977; repr. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1991), p. 140. 
76 Strategiia, pp. 36-37.  
aforementioned laws on - and , which are both specifically 
directed at the control and censorship of material available to minors. Indeed, the 
debates around the introduction of these laws and other similarly restrictive measures 
are always framed in narratives of child and youth health. 
 Fisher describes capitalist realism as more like a pervasive atmosphere, 
conditioning not only the production of culture but also the regulation of work and 
education, and acting as a kind of invisible barrier constraining thought and action.77  
It is this same atmosphere that pervades High Putinist society, which in turn 
conditions theatrical production. To borrow an idea from Simone de Beauvoir, we can 
say that one is not born, but rather becomes Other.78 For Beauvoir, Only the 
mediation of another can constitute an individual as an Other.79 This is to say that the 
theatre makers associated with   and other nonconformist or non-
normative forms of contemporary theatre in Russia are not Other intrinsically, as state 
cultural policymakers and the Ministry of Culture would have people believe. Their 
art is not alien to Russian cultural values, or a foreign seed fallen on Russian soil, as it 
is often framed.80 It is Other only extrinsically, which is to say, circumstantially, due 
to the ever-narrowing paradigms of the Norm in the political, social and cultural 
realms.  
77 Fisher, p. 16. Italics in original. 
78 The original is One is not born, but rather becomes, woman. See Simone de Beauvoir, 
The Second Sex, trans. by Constance Borde and Sheila Malovany-Chevallier (London: 
Vintage, 2010), p. 293.  
79 Ibid. 
80 Theatre critic Grigorii Zaslavskii, for example, described   in 2004 as a 
foreign bottle with poisoned ink that had sailed from England. See Beumers and 
Lipovetsky, p. 36. 
Policy in Practice:   
 It is impossible to write about the past decade of theatre in Russia without 
addressing the scandal surrounding   and its internationally renowned 
director, Kirill Serebrennikov. The case, which came to be known colloquially as 
 , erupted in the spring of 2017, when a number of 
Serebrennikovs colleagues were arrested. It finally ended more than three years later 
in the summer of 2020, when the main figures in the case  including Serebrennikov  
were given varying lengths of suspended sentences and heavy fines.  
 is demonstrative of how censorship of the arts functions in contemporary 
Russia under Putin. In relation to the hardening of cultural ideology through the 
paradigm of the traditional/non-traditional binary, the scandal over Serebrennikovs 
ballet  at Moscows Bolshoi Theatre in 2017 is also revealing. The ballets 
subject matter was Rudolf Nureyev, the world-renowned Soviet ballet dancer who 
came out as gay after he defected to the West in 1961. The depiction of his sexual 
orientation in Serebrennikovs biographical ballet caused the production to be 
repeatedly delayed, before the director was conveniently arrested in August 2017 on 
unrelated and evidently spurious charges of embezzlement.81 He was placed under 
house arrest, where he remained for over a year and a half. Serebrennikovs arrest was 
the culmination of a number of years of rising tension between the director and the 
authorities, as the question of whether state funding for theatres should entail political 
loyalty to the regime or not reached a head  a battle that Serebrennikov fought hard 
but inevitably lost. The production of the ballet was completed without him and 
81 For a brief history of the troubled production, see Otmena Nureeva: tri versii 
sluchivshegosia, BBC Russian, 10 July 2017 <https://www.bbc.com/russian/features-
40372730> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
performed twice in late 2017 before an audience of the political and cultural elite. 
Despite winning the Golden Mask award for best ballet in 2019, and tickets for the 
show being in high demand,  has only been performed a handful of times in 
the three years since the premiere.82  
Although the production did not break any laws as such, the depiction of 
Nureyevs homosexuality on stage fell beyond the boundaries of the narrowing norms 
as set out in the  and . The question of history is significant here 
too, in that an attempt has been made to control the collective memory of a historical 
figure, rewritten according to the ideological norms of the present political regime. In 
the new-old conservative-reactionary paradigm, Nureyevs biography as a gay man 
must be redacted and made to fit the Procrustean bed of High Putinist ideology, 
where any figure of historical significance is either heterosexual or firmly in the 
closet. The authorities brought the meanings of this production under control through 
the crude yet typical devices of power  by removing the embodiment of the idea 
(Serebrennikov himself) from the public sphere, by regulating the abnormalities in 
the production, and finally by restricting its performance and thus tightly controlling 
the number of people who were able to see it, despite the considerable demand for 
tickets. 
Serebrennikov was no stranger to the machinations of state cultural policy 
prior to . In 2013, two of his productions for the theatre  , based 
on a novel by Zakhar Prilepin, and Martin McDonaghs The Pillowman  were the 
subject of police investigations on suspicion of breaking new so-called anti-terrorist 
82 See Golden Mask website <https://www.goldenmask.ru/fest_25_195.html> [accessed 23 
December 2020]; see Bolshoi Theatre website 
<https://www.bolshoi.ru/performances/1025/roles/#20171210190000> [accessed 23 
December 2020].  
laws.83 The pressure on theatres to conform to the new laws and to the social norms 
set out within them in turn fosters a culture of self-censorship, where the instability 
generated by apprehension and legal uncertainty performs the work of the censor. A 
number of prominent theatre makers have cited self-censorship as a real and 
significant problem, a part of the new reality for cultural production in contemporary 
Russia.84 The case of a group of actors in the provincial town of Pskov is an example 
of this: they simply refused to act in Varvara Faers verbatim drama  in the 
wake of the aforementioned scandal surrounding a production of Wagners 
Tannhuser at the Novosibirsk Opera House in 2015. he latter production had 
provoked demonstrations and threats of violence from local Orthodox Christian 
fundamentalists, and as a result the Pskov actors were not prepared to take the risk of 
being caught up in a similar scandal.85 This incident set a highly problematic 
precedent, and the fact that neither the Ministry of Culture nor the local authorities did 
anything to support or protect the actors in either case further confirmed to cultural 
figures that they were no longer safe to freely practice their profession in the current 
political climate.  
Unfortunately, with state funding making up over seventy per cent of theatre 
budgets on average, and covering as much as ninety per cent of the cost of a ticket in 
83 See Spektakl Serebrennikova Chelovek-Podushka proveriaiut sledovateli, RIA Novosti, 
3 July 2013 <https://ria.ru/culture/20130703/947409699.html> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
84 This has been stated, for example, by Marat Gatsalov of the Aleksandrinskii theatre, Mark 
Zakharov of the Lenkom theatre, and Konstantin Bogomolov of the Teatr na Maloi Bronnoi. 
See, respectively: Khudruk Novoi stseny Aleksandrinki: Samotsenzura ubet teatra kak vid 
iskusstva, Rosbalt, 13 April 2015 <https://www.rosbalt.ru/piter/2015/04/13/1388293.html>; 
Artur Solomonov, Mark Zakharov: samotsenzura igraet vse bolshuiu rol, 
Artursolomonov.ru, 24 December 2014 <https://artursolomonov.ru/mark-zaharov-
samotsenzura-igraet-vse-bolshuyu-rol/>; Shestakova, Anna, Chto takoe politicheskii teatr: 
Opros izvestnykh moskovskikh rezhisserov i khudrukov, Teatr, 8 (2012) 
<http://oteatre.info/chto-takoe-politicheskij-teatr-opros-izvestnyh-moskovskih-rezhisserov-i-
hudrukov/> [all accessed 23 December 2020]. 
85 See Pskov: teatr ne otmenit spektakl iz-za zhalob akterov, BBC Russian, 14 April 2015 
<http://www.bbc.com/russian/society/2015/04/150414_pskov_theatre_play_scandal> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
some theatres, there is little chance for the performing arts to resist such pressures on 
their work to conform, a problem that is only compounded by hardening state cultural 
policy.86 Owing to the stranglehold of financial censorship, which presents a major 
obstacle to the work of nonconformist theatre, the conservative-reactionary turn in 
cultural ideology and the accompanying wave of legislation restricting freedom of 
expression will continue to dominate and determine cultural production for the 
foreseeable future. 
Summary 
 There are three primary mechanisms of censorship upon theatre in 
contemporary Russia  legislative (the passing of restrictive laws and policy 
documents), financial (restricting funding to nonconformist theatres and tying funds 
to political loyalty), and self-censorship (where artists censor their own work to avoid 
potential problems). The very pervasiveness of these three censorship mechanisms 
working simultaneously has presented and continues to present particular difficulties 
for independent theatre making. The passing of laws concerning sexuality, language, 
religious feelings, and the interpretation of history have had the cumulative effect of 
instrumentalising culture in the service of the broader political aims of the state. This 
brought it into line with other social spheres that had been politically instrumentalised 
during Putins previous terms in office, such as the media and the Orthodox Church, 
86 See Strategiia, p. 8. See also Transparency Internationals report on the state funding of 
theatres, by Igor Sergeev and others, Kak rukovoditeli gosudarstvennykh teatrov platiat 
gonorary sami sebe, Transparency International Russia, 23 October 2017  
<https://transparency.org.ru/special/teatr/> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
as well as the education and welfare systems.87 This is expressed as such in the 
, which states that current planning policies     
    .88 One of the 
primary aims of the    , as it becomes known in 
the , is the     
, []   .89 The perception of the 
cultural sphere as a latent branch of national security, combined with the belief in the 
necessity of  as a prerequisite for its realisation, goes some way towards 
explaining the coercive means that the regime has adopted towards cultural policy 
since 2012. The eradication of the heterogeneous nature of culture, therefore, and its 
replacement with , or in other words consensus, has become  to borrow 
Robins term for Socialist Realism  the impossible aesthetic of High-Putinist 
Capitalist Realism. 
On the one hand there is Capitalist Realism  the    
  which amounts to something akin to Socialist Realism on a capitalist 
economic base. This has gradually taken shape since the conservative-authoritarian 
turn brought about by Putins return to the presidency in 2012. On the other hand 
there is the political theory of capitalist realism expounded by Mark Fisher, which 
applies broadly to all the countries where neoliberal capitalism is the prevailing 
economic model. For Fisher, capitalist realism relies on hopelessness to sustain its 
own illusion  that there is no alternative to the status quo. As he states, it is now 
impossible even to imagine a coherent alternative.90 In Russia, therefore, there is a 
doubling of the no alternative message  there is no alternative to Putin, just as there 
87 For evidence of the latter, see Eleanor Bindman, Social Rights in Russia: From Imperfect 
Past to Uncertain Future (Abingdon; New York: Routledge, 2018). 
88 Strategiia, p. 10. 
89 Strategiia, p. 35. 
90 Fisher, p. 2. Italics in original. 
is no alternative to the neoliberal economic order his regime thrives on. As a result, 
Putin and the economic order have become conflated as symbolic extensions of each 
other, and go hand-in-hand as the basis of the social contract. 
For Fredric Jameson, postmodernism is the cultural logic of late capitalism.91 
Following from this, Socialist Realism can be thought of as the cultural logic of 
Stalinism, whilst its successor Capitalist Realism is the cultural logic of High 
Putinism. In spite of the hopelessness and powerlessness that this logic engenders, 
some artists and theatre makers have gone about responding creatively in ways that 
resist and circumvent the censorship mechanisms of the political consensus, instead 
opening up alternative discourses and spaces of dissensus.92 What emerges in the 
chapters that follow is a cross section of some of these spaces of dissensus that were 
to be found in contemporary Russian theatre in the latter years of the previous decade. 
91 Fredric Jameson, Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism (London: 
Verso, 1991). 
92 Dissensus is Jacques Rancires term. In Rancires writings, dissensus is opposed to 
consensus, where consensus is the presupposition according to which every part of a 
population, along with all of its specific problems, can be incorporated into a political order 
and taken into account. Conversely dissensus is that which resists juridical litigation and 
creates a fissure in the sensible order by confronting the established framework of perception, 
thought, and action with the inadmissible. For Rancire, a consensus must be policed, and 
this policing is carried out on many levels, comprising everything that goes into the regulation 
and maintenance of the status quo. Dissensus is the site where real politics emerges, and as 
such it challenges and breaks through the consensus. See Gabriel Rockhill, Appendix I: 
Glossary of Technical Terms, in Jacques Rancire, The Politics of Aesthetics: The 
Distribution of the Sensible, ed. and trans. by Gabriel Rockhill (London: Bloomsbury 
Revelations, 2013), pp. 83-98 (pp. 87-9). 
1) Post-Zero: Documentary Theatre after   
 Such has been the leading role of Moscows Teatr.doc in the emergence and 
evolution of documentary theatre in Russia over the past two decades that it is 
difficult to separate one from the other. Whilst documentary theatre can now be found 
practised across the whole country, in terms of innovation and impact Teatr.doc 
remains at the centre of any discussion. This is perhaps unsurprising given the fact 
that it continues to be the only theatre space in the country dedicated to the 
documentary form, in all of its varieties. There have always been exceptions to this, 
however, such as the premiere of Ivan Vyrypaevs celebrated play  (2003), 
and more recently two of the works of drama from Teatr.docs repertoire that feature 
in Chapter Three, Dmitrii Danilovs    (2017) and Olga 
Shiliaevas 28  (2019). As these three fictional dramas demonstrate, the theatres 
focus on the documentary mode does not preclude non-documentary forms. Rather, 
there exists an interplay and dialogue across the spectrum of live performance. As an 
alternative to Teatr.docs brand of documentary theatre, French scholar Lucie Kempf 
has written about the documentary forms pioneered at the KnAM theatre in 
Komsomolsk-na-Amure since the 1980s.1 In addition to this, documentary plays 
sporadically appear in the repertoire of independent theatres around the country, 
alongside their usual offerings. This is true in Moscow theatres such as the Meyerhold 
Centre and Praktika, as well as in St Petersburg and in regional independent theatres.2 
1 Lucie Kempf, Giving Testimony in the Face of an Authoritarian Regime: The Evolution of 
Documentary Forms at Teatr.doc, the KnAM Theatre, and the Belarus Free Theatre, in New 
Drama in Russian: Performance, Politics and Protest in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus, ed. by 
J.A.E. Curtis (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2020), pp. 41-52. 
2 One issue of Teatr journal is dedicated to exploring the varied landscape of independent 
theatre companies throughout the country, of which there are many. It features twenty six in 
St Petersburg alone (the vast majority of these companies operate without a permanent 
performance space). See Teatr: Geografiia nezavisimosti, 35 (2018). It is worth noting that 
It remains the case, however, that there is no theatre space in Russia dedicated to the 
documentary form in the way that Teatr.doc is. This is in part due to the determining 
role that the theatre played in the emergence of the   movement after 
the turn of the century, and in part thanks to geographical factors, it being based in the 
Russian capital. Perhaps most significant of all was the leadership and driving force 
behind the theatre for the first sixteen years of its existence  the indomitable pair of 
theatre makers Elena Gremina and Mikhail Ugarov. Their sudden passing in 2018 was 
an incalculable loss, and it is difficult to overstate the importance of these two figures 
for the development of contemporary theatre in Russia since the turn of the century. 
The work that Gremina and Ugarov did in Moscow with the most famous 
basement theatre in Russia, Teatr.doc, did not start out as a political project, although 
it appeared to become more so in its latter years, as the realities of the authoritarian 
slide of Putins third term began to affect the freedom of the cultural sphere in ways 
outlined above. The theatre, however, always rejected any claims that it had become 
more political  as Gremina stated in 2018 during what turned out to be one of her last 
interviews,   . .doc       
 .     .3 It seems reasonable to state 
that no Moscow-based theatre has responded more actively to the challenges of the 
new paradigm for artistic production in Russia than has Teatr.doc. Taking a long view 
of the theatres history, Mark Lipovetsky claims in his foreword to the collected 
works of Gremina and Ugarov that from the very beginning of its existence it was 
the situation has changed since the publication of the journal. For example, a significant 
regional player, Teatr 18+ in Rostov-on-Don closed in 2020 due to financial difficulties as a 
result of COVID-19, as has the Kvartira project in St Petersburg. 
3 Elena Gremina, quoted in Elena Racheva, Issledovanie ada v golove sovremennogo 
cheloveka, Novaia gazeta, 15 March 2018 
<https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2018/03/16/75819-issledovanie-ada-v-golove-
sovremennogo-cheloveka> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
impossible to separate Teatr.docs art from politics, however much the theatre makers 
themselves denied it: 
  .doc     
 (, , , , -
  ..),  .  ,  , 
   ,  ,   
          
   , ,  
.4 
What Lipovetsky terms the    can also be 
viewed in another way: the specificities of the conditions for cultural production in 
Russia are such, with censorship in all its guises and corresponding political pressure 
from all sides, that social theatre  and indeed socially engaged art in general  is 
conflated with politics and political activism to a significant degree, both by the 
authorities and by the viewing public.  
Kempf claims that part of the resistance to the political label by theatre makers 
in Russia is situated in the Soviet experience, where political theatre was used by the 
state for propaganda purposes from the early revolutionary period onwards, rather 
than being a tool of protest as it historically has been in the West. This much is 
seemingly affirmed in Ugarovs words from 2012 when he was speaking on the radio 
about his theatres newest work,  : 
,   ,  , ,   ,   
  .    ,     -
  .5  
4 Mark Lipovetsky, Predislovie, in Elena Gremina, Mikhail Ugarov: Pesy i teksty, ed. by 
Elena Kovalskaia (Moscow: Novoe Literaturnoe Obozrenie, 2019), pp. 5-26 (p. 19). 
5 Mikhail Ugarov, in Istoriia Sergeia Magnitskogo na stsene teatra v spektakle Chas 
vosemnadtsat, Radio Ekho Moskvy, 5 June 2010 
<https://echo.msk.ru/programs/kulshok/684833-echo/> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
Ugarovs aversion to the word political is for reasons specific to Russian theatre 
history, more precisely to the culture and teachings of the Soviet-era theatre 
establishment, which promoted the  in state theatres. It was 
this system and culture of theatre that  , spearheaded by Teatr.doc, had 
rejected and set out to overcome in the early 2000s. Regarding political theatre in 
Russia, Kempf writes: 
It becomes possible to understand these artists visceral suspicion of political 
theatre, even when their artistic practice positions them de facto in an attitude 
of protest, whether direct or indirect, in relation to the state ideologies.6 
A further issue lies in the low opinion of politics held by Russians in the post-Soviet 
period, to the extent that the word is often used pejoratively, with a corresponding 
desire to avoid being tainted by the political brush. Additionally, the past decade has 
seen opposition to the Putin regime become a genuinely life-threatening activity, as 
witnessed most recently by the poisoning of opposition figure Aleksei Navalnyi, so 
there is possibly also an element of shrewd judgement and adaptation at play in the 
refusal of the political label. It is worth noting that a rejection of politics is hardly a 
Russian phenomenon  indeed, for Fisher it is one of the defining traits of capitalist 
realism, which is a global phenomenon. Postmodernism in art was also characterised 
by political apathy, as the commitment of High Modernism went out of fashion. 
This is not the case with Teatr.doc, however, whose practice is unequivocally one of 
social commitment whilst they disavow the political label, preferring instead to call 
their work civic theatre [ ]. This is more than mere wordplay  
civic theatre is capable of encompassing a broader range of socially engaged topics, 
such as gay subjectivity (  , 2016) and teenage experience 
6 Kempf, p. 45. 
(.doc, 2018), than political theatre can. In this respect, Gremina is justified 
in saying that her theatre has not changed, but rather the world around it has changed. 
Teatr.doc makes theatre that engages with pressing social issues, and it is for others to 
label their work political, perceiving in it something other than the paralysing 
apoliticality of mainstream art and culture funded by the state budget.  
 Hand in hand with civic theatre goes another key term in the evolution of the 
aesthetics and discourse of Teatr.doc in its mature period  so-called witness theatre 
[ ]. This was described by Ugarov in 2012 as follows:  
     .  
,      ,   
    ,    .   
 ,    -.7 
This form of theatre, which is also a staging technique, marks part of the general shift 
away from the zero position [-]  meaning a neutral, non-judgemental 
stance  promoted by Teatr.doc for the first eight years of its existence.8 As Molly 
Flynn observes in her pioneering study of documentary theatre in Russia, the zero 
position was spectacularly broken by Gremina in 2010 with her work  
, which was the first production in which the artists at Teatr.doc 
consciously abandoned their attempts at a zero position.9 For Flynn, the shift away 
7 Mikhail Ugarov, in Anastasiia Lisitsina, Veriu Stanislavskogo peremestilos v 
grazhdanskuiu ploskost: Interviu Mikhaila Ugarova, Gazeta.ru, 24 July 2012 
<https://www.gazeta.ru/culture/2012/07/24/a_4691369.shtml> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
8 The zero position itself derives from Roland Barthes theories of writing degree zero. 
Barthes essays were translated into Russian and became influential in the early 1990s. See 
Elena Kovalskaia, Zhivoi zhurnal Mikhaila Ugarova: I tak, i tak, Teatr. Mikhail 
Ugarov: Teoriia, praktika, politika, pedagogika, 34 (2018), 144-91 (p. 145). Writing Degree 
Zero was first published in French as Le degr zro de lcriture in 1953, and in English in 
1967. See Barthes, Writing Degree Zero, trans. by Annette Lavers and Colin Smith (London: 
Cape, 1967). 
9 Molly Flynn, Witness Onstage: Documentary Theatre in Twenty-First-Century Russia 
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2020), p. 48. It is no coincidence that Flynn called 
her book Witness Onstage, which is the translation of one of Ugarovs important concepts  
from attempts at a zero position has, in part, allowed Russias documentary theatre 
artists to interrogate the limitations of their own artistic practice.10 This has had the 
effect of releasing themselves from an unattainable goal of objectivity.11  
The treatment of Magnitskiis death on stage serves as the marker of a 
transitional phase for Teatr.doc ahead of the conservative-reactionary turn that came 
with Putins return to the presidency in 2012, which ushered in an era of active 
persecution and the blacklisting of the theatre by the authorities. This chapter 
considers the period from 2010 to 2019, which has seen Teatr.doc move in directions 
that can in some respects be labelled as postdramatic and post-documentary.12 The 
latter relates to the hybridisation of fact and fiction in contemporary art and culture, 
blurring the boundaries between documentary and other genres, as seen for example 
in Greminas  , which drew from documentary materials to create 
fictionally reconstructed scenes. Carol Martin calls this the theatre of the real, which 
encompasses both theatre about real events and the way real events are 
conceptualised using diverse means, including fiction clearly identified as such, in the 
service of nonfiction.13 
The history of Teatr.doc can be separated into three phases: the first, from 
2002 to 2010, was the period of the so-called zero position; the second, from 2010 
to 2018, was the partial break with the zero position and the aforementioned shift to 
    and was the name of two symposiums on documentary theatre held at 
Teatr.doc in Moscow in the 2010s. However, Flynn does not directly address the emergence 
and development of witness theatre as a staging technique in her study, using it more to 
refer to her personal involvement in some of the productions she discusses. 
10 Ibid. 
11 Ibid. 
12 See Marie-Christine Autant-Mathieu, The Story of Russian-Language Drama Since 2000: 
PostDoc, the Postdramatic and Teatr Post, in Curtis (ed.), New Drama in Russian, pp. 23-40. 
13 Carol Martin, History and Politics on Stage: The Theatre of the Real, in Not Just a 
Mirror: Looking For the Political Theatre of Today, ed. by Florian Malzacher (Berlin: 
Alexander Verlag Berlin, 2015), pp. 32-43 (p. 42). See also Martin, Theatre of the Real 
(Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013). 
civic and witness forms of theatre; the third phase is the post-Ugarov/Gremina 
period from 2018 to the present, in which the theatres remaining directors have each 
taken their own path and the theatre has devolved to a collective structure without 
overall artistic direction. This has included, for example, the writer and director 
Zarema Zaudinova creating her own theatre company under the Teatr.doc umbrella, 
called   .doc. It should be said that although this chapter is 
interested in post-zero position plays, such works are by no means the new norm in 
documentary theatre making. On the contrary, post-zero position works remain 
marginal and few in number. As Kempf points out, plays reflecting a traditional zero 
position continue to be made at Teatr.doc, such as Nana Grinshteins   
 (2016), directed by Anastasiia Patlai.14 
This chapter analyses three plays, separately at first and then in parallel. he 
first is one of Greminas last productions for Teatr.doc,  , which deals 
with the highly taboo subjects of the wars in eastern Ukraine and Syria and of 
Russias annexation of Crimea. he other two are from the post-Ugarov/Gremina 
period, although both had significant involvement from Gremina before her passing in 
May 2018: , about the  , a scandal around torture in Russian 
prisons; and , about the trial of Oiub Titiev, the Chechen human rights activist. 
What these three documentary plays demonstrate is an affinity with the theatre of the 
real (Carol Martin) and an aesthetic of startling (Hans-Thies Lehmann) that places 
them firmly in the current of global trends in contemporary socially-engaged theatre 
practice. Together these plays reflect the ways that documentary theatre has adapted 
14 Kempf, p. 47. Anastasiia Patlai is undoubtedly the torchbearer for the tradition of the zero 
position in documentary theatre making in the present day. In addition to   , 
two of her other recent works   (2016), and  (2018)  also 
unwaveringly maintain this position. 
and responded to the challenges for theatre making in Russia under the conditions of 
High Putinism. 
How Teatr.doc Became Political 
 The evolution of Teatr.docs new genre of civic theatre started with the 
abandoning of the zero position in Greminas play,   (2010), 
about the torture and death of Russian lawyer Sergei Magnitskii in police custody in 
2009. Gremina explained this shift some years later: 
       ,  
  ,    .  ,   
,      , 
    ..    
 ,  -  ,    
   ,    .15 
Greminas sense that the zero position let her down [] when approaching 
this topic, and that it was inappropriate for the task because of the difficulty of 
associating with a person who   , is an issue that will resurface 
throughout this chapter and the next, as the limits and corresponding evolution of the 
documentary genre in Russia are explored in the shifting landscape of the 2010s. The 
dropping of the zero position in   and the emergence of civic 
theatre in its place  which openly took an active stance on issues  continued with 
landmarks such as the experimental tribunal performance :  
(2012), and Polina Borodinas verbatim work,   (2015).  was a 
one-off event that simultaneously represented a significant milestone in the 
15 Gremina, quoted in Racheva, Issledovanie ada. 
emergence of the genre of witness theatre being developed by Teatr.doc during that 
period. It brought lawyers and journalists connected with the Pussy Riot scandal 
together onstage and was a moderated discussion in real time. Those on stage 
represented only themselves and spoke for themselves, rather than standing in for an 
absent other. In so doing, Teatr.doc demonstrated to its critics that the documentary 
genre had the capacity to evolve and respond to the challenges of the times. 
Accusations of appropriation, objectification, and othering  all criticisms of 
traditional verbatim-style documentary theatre in recent years  could not so easily be 
levelled at : , or indeed at later manifestations of witness 
theatre such as Zaudinovas   (2019), an event held in support of the 
Khachaturian sisters in their ongoing trial for the murder of their father after many 
years of abuse.16 Witness theatre is clearly not a representational mode of art  there 
are no stage sets, props, costumes, actors, or make-believe of any kind  and in this 
regard it fits the trends identified in contemporary theatre by Lehmann (postdramatic 
theatre) and Martin (theatre of the real). :  became a scandal 
when Orthodox Church activists, accompanied by a state-media camera crew from 
NTV, entered the auditorium and tried to break off the discussion.17  , 
on the other hand, caught the attention of the authorities due to its treatment of the 
(evidently taboo) topic of the infamous 2012 protest on Bolotnaia Square in Moscow. 
Police attended the premiere of the play (where Gremina allegedly managed to put an 
officer to work distributing programmes), and it was not long before the theatre had 
16   is available to view on YouTube. See Novaia gazeta, (18+) Teatr.doc  TRI 
SESTRY. Aktsiia v podderzhku sester Khachaturian, online video recording, YouTube, 2 July 
2019, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uOMYr7-6Lbw> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
17 This event has been well covered by Maksim Hanukai in his article After the Riot: 
Teatr.doc and the Performance of Witness, TDR: The Drama Review, 61, 1 (2017), 4355. 
been evicted from its premises for the second time in as many years, leaving it in a 
state of limbo with which it is by now all too familiar.18  
 In contrast to the Anglo-American tradition of documentary theatre, which is 
historically representational, Russian documentary theatre has often sought other 
modes of transmitting the text to the audience, which do not involve actors getting 
into character and acting out the lines of a script. Derek Paget, in his most recent work 
on documentary theatre in the UK, analyses the phenomenon of the rehearsed reading 
 he describes how the actors rehearsed the parts by getting into character.19 Russian 
documentary theatre, on the other hand, has a varied relationship with the kind of 
representative mode that sees performers acting the people whose words are being 
used. After all, one translation of Teatr.docs motto is The theatre in which no one 
acts [,    ]. Instead, what was developed by documentary 
theatre makers over the course of the first decade of this century in Russia was a 
postdramatic approach to text; one which negated the representational mode of 
acting that is traditional of drama, in favour of an aesthetics of the real.20 In her 
monograph on the subject, Flynn calls this a non-illusory acting style.21 The 
difference between the British and Russian approaches to documentary text is 
commented upon by Flynn in her experience observing a rehearsal for a reading of a 
Natalia Vorozhbit play in London by artists from the Royal Court, where she recalls:  
18 For an overview of Teatr.docs history up to 2018, see Chapter Six of Flynn, Witness 
Onstage, pp. 141-63.  
19 Derek Paget, Acts of Commitment: Activist Arts, the Rehearsed Reading, and 
Documentary Theatre, New Theatre Quarterly, 26, 2 (2010), 173193 (pp. 182-84). 
20 On the close connection between Lehmanns conception of the postdramatic and that of 
the real, he states, Postdramatic theatre means: theatre of the real. See Hans-Thies 
Lehmann, Postdramatic Theatre, trans. by Karen Jurs-Munby (Abingdon: Routledge, 2006), 
p. 103. 
21 Flynn, Witness Onstage, p. 17. 
I was struck by the conversation between performer and director in which they 
imagined what the speaker of the monologue might have felt at certain 
moments in the story and discussed how best to portray the character. This 
conversation appeared to me particularly paradoxical in part because I had 
become so accustomed to the non-illusory approaches used at Teatr.doc and 
other Russian documentary theatre venues, but also because the original 
speaker who in this case happened to be the playwright was also seated in the 
rehearsal room.22 
Flynn points out here the paradox of the representational mode of theatre, in which 
the actor must always get into character in order to create the reality effect of the 
plays fictional world.23 The Russian documentary mode, on the other hand, 
developed techniques in the late 2000s that sought to neutralise the verbal 
transmission of the verbatim document in its journey from performer to spectator. It 
did this as an ethical act of responsibility to the unknowable  and thus 
unrepresentable  experience of the real people whose words made up the text. In 
other words, this was an early attempt at overcoming the problems of appropriation 
and objectification  perhaps even fetishization  of these real people, who were often 
drawn from marginal or precarious socio-economic groups, and whose experiences 
then somewhat problematically provided the material for the documentary play. The 
ethics of representation are key to the subsequent evolution of witness theatre at 
Teatr.doc in the 2010s.  
In  , which was a fictionalized reconstruction of events 
based on documentary materials, the text was acted out by actors, but certain devices 
were employed by Gremina to avoid the representational fallacy of attempting 
literally to depict Magnitskiis suffering on stage. Instead, the unfathomable 
magnitude of Magnitskiis pain is indicated  symbolically gestured towards  by the 
22 Ibid., p. 19. 
23 The reality effect is Roland Barthes term, introduced in his 1968 essay of the same name. 
See Barthes, The Reality Effect, in The Rustle of Language, trans. by Richard Howard 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989), pp. 141-48. 
act of pouring boiling water over the hands of the judge who condemned him to 
suffer. Mark Lipovetsky commented on this moment in the play as follows: 
          .   
     ,    
 ,  ,        
   ,   ?      
.      ,    
.24 
The spectators reaction, triggered by the anticipated pain of the judge, functions as an 
indicator towards the unknowable and unrepresentable experience of Magnitskiis 
painful and protracted death in custody, which is, in Lipovetskys words,  
  . Gremina therefore finds effective theatrical solutions to 
this problem of representation, which does some measure of justice to the person 
whose suffering is being represented  namely, by finding a different form of 
theatrical language, one that is not representational but symbolically indicative.  
 The production of   has been extensively covered by Flynn, 
much of which informed my understanding of this older work and its significance as a 
predecessor of the more recent documentary plays considered in depth later in this 
chapter.25 In her analysis, Flynn argues that this work was a turning point for 
Teatr.doc because it reflected a new concern for the active pursuit of justice by its 
theatre makers, in place of their prior concern for a more balanced depiction of the 
different sides to a story.26 However, she stresses that this pursuit of justice in the 
space of the theatre is not straightforward: 
24 Lipovetsky, Predislovie, p. 23. 
25 See Chapter Three of Flynn, Witness Onstage, pp. 74-96. See also Flynn, The Trial That 
Never Was: Russian Documentary Theatre and the Pursuit of Justice, New Theatre 
Quarterly, 30, 4 (2014), 307317. 
26 Flynn, Witness Onstage, p. 94. 
By pulling texts from various published and unpublished sources, using those 
sources to compose monologues that blend fact and fiction, and then 
proceeding to present these texts as evidence, the creators of One Hour 
Eighteen Minutes exploit the suspect nature of documentation in contemporary 
Russian culture and confront the complexities of theatrical testimony as an 
instrument of justice.27 
Exploration of the suspect nature of documentation and documents in general is 
undoubtedly a core contemporary concern the world over, in the age of the extensive 
mediatisation and virtualisation of reality by commercially- and politically-driven 
technology. Flynns description conforms to Martins definition of the theatre of the 
real, which is only the latest attempt by theatre makers to try to make sense of the 
world around themselves and their place within it. Martin cites a number of 
contemporary works of theatre from around the world that reflect this same concern 
and use similar techniques of blending fact and fiction in their production of 
authenticity, demonstrating that this is not an exclusively Russian phenomenon.28 
Flynn concludes that   shows how Russian theatre artists use 
documentary forms to explore the intricacies of injustice, and that ultimately 
through their shared experience of both speaking and hearing the testimonies 
provided, the participants [] negotiate collaboratively a renewed conception of 
justice.29 Broadly speaking, it would appear that the pursuit of justice identified by 
Flynn forms part of what Curtis sees as a wider shift in Russian documentary theatre 
over the past decade towards human rights activism, whether it is explicitly political 
or not.30 
In 2016, Mikhail Ugarov expressed an idea that sought to respond to the 
growing political persecution of Teatr.doc  the appeal to the norm [  
27 Ibid., pp. 83-84. 
28 See Martin, History and Politics On Stage, pp. 35-41. 
29 Flynn, Witness Onstage, pp. 94-95. 
30 J.A.E. Curtis, Conclusion: Summer of 2019, in New Drama in Russian, pp. 259-66 (p. 
261). 
]. The phrase first appeared in a Facebook post, and is a useful paradigm for 
making sense of why the theatre appeared to have become more political whilst its 
artists continued to disavow politics and claimed to be solely theatre makers. For 
Ugarov, it seems, art is political only contextually, and it is only in a context of 
extreme deviation from the norm that any appeal to alternative normative codes can 
appear revolutionary or extremist, as he wrote on Facebook: 
  ,    ,     , 
        .31 
To speak about the norm is simultaneously to reveal the presence of previously 
invisible yet nonetheless existing normative paradigms. In this regard, the act of 
unveiling the contingent nature of High Putinist ideological norms becomes of crucial 
importance in Teatr.docs civic theatre. There is a line at the end of , in which 
Titiev condemns the absurdity of the fabricated case against him by saying that such a 
case can only occur in todays Russia:      , he says.32 
He then appeals to European colleagues outside of Russia to seek  
  to counteract the failure of the Russian judicial 
system.33 Titiev is pointing out the divergent normative codes that exist inside and 
outside of Russia, which is itself an act of unveiling. As outlined earlier, law and 
order are performative acts, and are without essential origin, yet they rely on claims of 
universality and consensus to sustain their status as norms. The systemic structures 
that these codes rely on for their production and maintenance  the political, 
legislative, judicial, and penal systems  are the structures that must remain 
unchallenged if dominant ideological norms are to stay invisible and yet firmly in 
31 Mikhail Ugarov, Facebook post, 18 March 2016. 
32 Oiub. 
33 Ibid. 
place. Such acts of unveiling the contingent nature of these structures and the 
ideological consensus they police clearly come with risks for the unveiler. In the same 
Facebook post as above, Ugarov continued:     .  
,    , . Echoing Greminas view mentioned 
previously, Ugarov always maintained the position that he and his theatre had not 
changed and that if they appeared to have become more political then this was only a 
result of the radicalisation of the political class and its organs of power. 
 As is well-known, charges of extremism became widespread over the course 
of the Putin third term and carried potentially serious consequences, including years 
of real time in prison. Even more serious are charges of terrorism, of which the 
figures at the centre of   and  were accused and convicted. This 
saw them kept in pre-trial detention centres for years before their court verdicts, after 
which they were transferred to prisons to serve long sentences, where many of them 
remain at the time of writing and will for a long time to come. Extremism and 
terrorism are accusations that appear in all three of the plays in this chapter, and in 
one way these are the leitmotifs of the High Putinist period. There are already signs 
that the regime has overused the charge of extremism during the repressions of the 
Putin third term. Pavel Chikov, head of the human rights organization Agora, has 
spoken about the devaluation of extremism in the sheer quantity of charges brought 
against internet users for likes and reposts on social media, and even against 
videogame players.34 Once charges of extremism reach a certain critical mass and 
become the object of public derision, they undermine confidence in the rule of law (if 
34 Sergei Smirnov, Vlast ozabochena seichas, chem zaniat silovikov. Liuboi otvet na etot 
vopros  plokhaia novost: Pavel Chikov predchuvstvuet novuiu realnost, Mediazona, 21 
May 2019 <https://zona.media/article/2019/05/21/pchikov> [accessed 23 December 2020]; 
Lovtsa Pokemonov vnesli v spisok ekstremistov i zablokirovali ego scheta, RIA Novosti, 
14 June 2017 <https://ria.ru/20170714/1498494928.html> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
it had not already been sufficiently undermined) and, no less significantly, cease to be 
something that only happens to other people.  
The so-called  , which is the subject of , 
demonstrates how a group of young men who played airsoft together became accused 
of training for terrorist activities and were subsequently tortured into giving false 
confessions of guilt. The   was just one of a number of fabricated 
extremist networks allegedly discovered by the security services in the run-up to the 
2018 presidential elections and the football World Cup held in Russia that year. This 
renewed wave of repressions primarily targeted marginal social groups, in this case a 
group of anarchists. It was enough merely to possess anarchist literature to be labelled 
as such. Viktor Filinkov, a computer programmer from St Petersburg, was unknown 
to anarchist collectives in Russia until he was announced on state media as the leader 
of an international network of anarchists with intentions to commit acts of terrorism. 
Filinkov, who was in reality little more than a programmer who supported open 
source coding, exemplifies this devaluation of extremism and terrorism in the latter 
half of the previous decade due to the arbitrary application of the terms and their 
overuse by the state security services. More public examples of this include variously 
the scandals around TV channel Dozhd for its counterfactual poll regarding the siege 
of Leningrad in 2014, Maria Motuznaias trial for reposting an allegedly blasphemous 
meme on social media site Vkontakte, and the persecution of Jehovahs Witnesses as 
members of an extremist organisation.35 In the year 2018 alone, more than 75 per 
35 Prokuratura ishchet ekstremizm v oprose pro blokadu, Dozhd, 30 January 2014 
<https://tvrain.ru/teleshow/novosti_sajta/prokuratura_ischet_ekstremizm_v_oprose_pro_blok
adu-361646/> [accessed 23 December 2020]; 
V Barnaule nachalsia sud nad Mariei Motuznoi. Ee obviniaiut v ekstremizme iz-za kartinok 
VKontakte, BBC Russian, 6 August 2018 <https://www.bbc.com/russian/news-45082507> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]; 
cent of cases relating to Criminal Code Article 282 on extremism were connected to 
the use of Vkontakte.36 In the same year, according to the Russian human rights group 
Agora, more than four hundred people were charged for publications on the internet, 
forty three of whom received real time behind bars.37 Clearly, in a context where 
internet users can be sentenced to time in prison for likes and reposts on social 
media on charges of extremism, the word itself rapidly loses its intended meaning, as 
people realise that a so-called extremist can in the new paradigm be anyone, and if it 
can be anyone then the semantic power of the word has been broken, even if its legal 
power has not been. Assessing the situation in 2019, Chikov stated:  
        - , 
,  .   
. -      
  .       
     ,       
 .38  
As the word  loses its connotations of marginality and abnormality, it 
shifts from the periphery to the centre, and opens up the ground for contestation of the 
norm. It is on this ground opened up by the general devaluation of extremism and 
terrorism as a result of the indiscriminate repression of ordinary citizens during the 
High Putinist period that Teatr.docs civic plays operate.  
 Another popular concept circulating in contemporary Russian cultural 
discourse is that of the dichotomy of horizontality and verticality. In the theatre, 
Petr Kozlov, Chto meshaet iskliuchit Svidetelei Iegovy iz rossiiskogo spiska 
ekstremistov?, BBC Russian, 12 February 2019 <https://www.bbc.com/russian/news-
47216797> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
36 Bolshinstvo ekstremistskikh del v 2018 godu byli sviazany s Vkontakte, Radio 
Svoboda, 9 April 2019 <https://www.svoboda.org/a/29871214.html> [accessed 23 December 
2020]. 
37 Ibid. 
38 Pavel Chikov, in Smirnov. 
this relates on the practical level to staging, the gaze, atmosphere, and mood, as well 
as on the more general level where it is an artistic philosophy by which theatre makers 
approach their practice. Horizontality fundamentally relates to de-hierarchization, and 
opposes the traditional verticality of art and culture in modernity. As Ugarov said in 
this regard: 
         
: ,    .     ,   
,          
  .39 
In contrast to vertical art, horizontality tends to privilege the particular over the 
universal, in line with poststructuralism and postcolonialism. Ironically, however, it is 
non-particularity that Teatr.doc is accused of by some critics, who claim that 
documentary theatre reduces the singularity of individual experience to the general 
level of representation, where the person speaking is framed as the representative of a 
broader social group. In other words, it is accused of appropriation and objectification 
of the subjective experience of the social other. Writing in 2009, Beumers and 
Lipovetsky stated that documentary theatre remains focused on group identity (with a 
limited number of social groups available).40 They go on to conclude that this 
explains in part why the documentary trend has shifted largely into cinema, where 
according to the authors there is a recognition of individuality, and with it a possible 
dialogue rather than the series of monologues typical of New Drama.41  
It is worth considering more closely these assertions regarding firstly group 
identity versus individuality, and secondly monologues versus dialogues. Whilst it is 
39 Mikhail Ugarov, speaking in St Petersburg in 2010. Quoted in Ilmira Bolotian, 
Antislovar Mikhaila Ugarova, Teatr, 34 (2018), 122-30 (p. 124). 
40 Birgit Beumers and Mark Lipovetsky, Performing Violence: Literary and Theatrical 
Experiments of New Russian Drama (Bristol: Intellect, 2009), p. 235. 
41 Ibid., p. 236. 
true that absent presence is always a defining feature of theatre, especially in the 
representational genres, there are various ways in which documentary practitioners of 
  have approached this problem  the zero position being one, and the 
concept of witnessing being another. Beumers and Lipovetsky rightly point out the 
artistic fallacy of any claims to objective truth or reality, because these are concepts 
that only exist in culture, defined by the epistemological horizons of the time.42 
Whilst this may have been the case for Russian documentary theatre in the early years 
of the twenty-first century, when it perhaps demonstrated something of the naivety of 
what Ellen Rutten calls the new sincerity of millennial culture in the post-Soviet 
space, this was clearly in retreat by the end of the decade.43 Beumers and 
Lipovetskys publication narrowly preceded Greminas  , which 
made the decisive break in this regard  Teatr.doc was definitively no longer 
attempting to represent reality as it really is. There is no sense in which the figure of 
Magnitskii is reduced in the play to a representative of a social group or to any other 
generalised form. The particularity of the suffering of Magnitskii is witnessed by the 
audience precisely as an absent presence, and it is the awareness of the particularity of 
the absent other that emerges in the performance. 
The particularity of the individuals who are the focus of the three texts in 
question here (Oleg Sentsov, Oiub Titiev, Viktor Filinkov and many others) becomes 
an ethical priority for the theatre makers. It is the documentary device of the 
monologue, in contrast to dialogue, that actively works against the representational 
forms inherent to drama. It is the monologue that emphasises particularity, as 
characters do not purely serve the expositional purposes of author or plot, but rather 
42 Ibid., p. 214. 
43 Ellen Rutten, Sincerity After Communism: A Cultural History (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 2017). 
are given the space and time to speak and be heard in their own words. Derek Paget 
terms this speaking for, instead of standing for.44 If dramatic dialogue is a 
communication process between two performers on stage, which the spectator 
observes and in the act of observance becomes a third party in the interaction, then the 
monologue short-circuits the dialogic model of communication, directly confronting 
the spectator with the address aimed at them. When the performers speak to the 
audience rather than to each other, the dialogue is between the performer and the 
spectator. The spectator silently engages in this dialogue through the act of listening, 
as a witness to the act of the word being said. In this regard, the act of spectating is 
not a passive process, but an active one, as Rancire points out: 
Being a spectator is not some passive condition that we should transform into 
activity. It is our normal situation. We also learn and teach, act and know, as 
spectators who all the time link what we see to what we have seen and said, 
done and dreamed.45  
A monologue is really nothing of the kind  where there is a performer and a 
spectator, there is always dialogue. In theatre, therefore, the monologue is a form of 
unmediated dialogue between performer and spectator. This is not the aside or 
soliloquy of pre-modern and early modern drama, where there is a knowing pretence 
of artistic unity on stage. In the postdramatic monologue found in Russian 
documentary theatre, there is a direct communication between the performer  
speaking for the absent other  and the spectator, who is confronted with the ethical 
challenge of accepting responsibility for the absent other from the performer. The 
direct mode of address implicates the spectator in the performance, and the spectator 
must choose whether or not to actively create dialogue for themselves in the absence 
44 Paget, p. 181. 
45 Jacques Rancire, The Emancipated Spectator, trans. by Gregory Elliott (London: Verso, 
2009), p. 17. 
of dialogue on stage, and thus whether or not to become a co-creator of the works 
meaning. 
The documentary mode described here is positioned firmly in the theatre of 
the real, in which the boundaries between reality and performance become blurred. 
The direct monologue is a postdramatic device that activates this uncertainty in 
performance. In this sense, to criticise documentary theatre, and indeed theatre in 
general, in terms of the cinematic medium is to deny the very different realms of 
discourse in which they operate. Cinema cannot break beyond the limits of the 
projector screen without becoming performance and no longer being strictly cinema, 
whereas theatre can incorporate film and projectors or do away with everything 
entirely besides one performer and one spectator and still remain theatre. There are 
evidently things that theatre can do that cinema cannot, and vice versa. A 
documentary film about Magnitskiis death in custody would be very different to 
Greminas play, for example. Neither is it the case that any of the three documentary 
plays under consideration in this chapter are about group identity or social groups. 
These are plays about concrete individuals who each maintain their subjectivity whilst 
secondarily generating discourses around broader social phenomena that the theatre 
makers feel a responsibility to address, such as the problem of systemic torture in 
Russian jails and prisons. 
At the rehearsed reading of  at the Liubimovka Festival in 2018, one 
audience members scathing assessment of the work during the post-performance 
discussion was:   .46 This is a familiar refrain for 
documentary theatre makers in Russia and indeed it has been heard throughout the 
46 The performance and discussion of  is available to view on YouTube. See Festival 
Liubimovka, Pytki: Obsuzhdenie pesy Ekateriny Kosarevskoi, Alekseia Polikhovicha, 
Zaremy Zaudinovoi, online video recording, YouTube, 25 September 2018 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b9WhaomchwM> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
history of Teatr.docs existence. A similar view is apparent in Beumers and 
Lipovetskys criticism of Russian documentary theatre. However, it is precisely in the 
fragmentary nature of the series of monologues typical of Russian documentary 
theatre that a discursive resistance to the normalising and coercive mechanisms of 
censorship in its many guises can be located. This will be considered more closely 
later in regards to . In general terms, however, it is the monologue structure of 
these plays  which is the opposite of monologic  that is of crucial importance in any 
interpretation of their tactics of resistance and of the alternative narratives about 
important events inside the country that they are able to tell us. 
  
Elena Greminas anti-war project   premiered on the stage of 
Teatr.doc in August 2016 when the theatre was still in its third incarnation on Malyi 
Kazennyi pereulok. After the latest eviction in September 2018, the theatre 
euphemistically went on tour whilst it searched for a new home (its fourth in as 
many years).   was performed in a number of temporary locations whilst 
the theatre was homeless, before eventually transferring to the new premises on 
Sadovnicheskaia naberezhnaia  named DOC na ostrove, in reference to its position 
on Bolotnyi Island. It played in the repertoire there until the freeing of Oleg Sentsov, 
in a prisoner exchange between Russia and Ukraine in September 2019.  
The play is comprised of a triptych of texts: the first is a war diary from the 
besieged city of Luhansk sent to Teatr.doc by local resident Dmitrii Bel; the second 
text is a short specially-commissioned piece called Your Voices by British playwright 
Mark Ravenhill that starkly reflects on the information war in the Syrian conflict; and 
the final part is a documentary text assembled by Gremina, based on the court 
materials from the trial of Sentsov in Rostov-on-Don in 2015. The latter text 
originally appeared as a standalone play called  but was included in its 
entirety in  , so it is the full stage production of the triptych that is 
considered here.47  , broaching as it does multiple taboo topics at once  
the war in eastern Ukraine, the use of chemical weapons in Syria by the Russian-
backed Assad regime, the legitimacy of the annexation of Crimea, and the torture of 
pre-trial detainees by the security services  takes on radical overtones contextually. 
Only in an environment where it is forbidden to discuss these matters, and where 
severe legislative measures are in place to prevent or discourage people from doing 
so, does a moderate anti-war play become radical and dangerous. Indeed, in 
November 2019, some three years after its premiere, and when the theatre had already 
performed the show for the last time, it was announced that the police were 
investigating Teatr.doc for possible propaganda of terrorism in connection with the 
play, charges of which were fortunately dropped the following January.48  
  is to my knowledge the only example of a Russian play about 
the Ukrainian conflict that has managed to cross the border and be performed in 
Ukraine itself, although it has to be said that there are very few plays about the 
conflict to be found in Russia anyway, as the official Kremlin narrative continues to 
be that the country is not at war with its neighbour. The play was read outside the 
Russian Embassy in Kyiv in an abridged version by Ukrainian playwrights and 
founders of the   movement Natalia Vorozhbit and Maksim 
47 The script for  can be found in Kovalskaia (ed.), Elena Gremina, Mikhail 
Ugarov, pp. 699-716. 
48 Politsiia ne nashla propagandy terrorizma i narkomanii v spektakliakh Teatra.doc, TASS, 
14 January 2020 <https://tass.ru/obschestvo/7518057> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
Kurochkin, along with other Ukrainian cultural figures. This was done both in 
memory of Gremina and as an act of protest against the continued imprisonment of 
Oleg Sentsov in Russia, who at the time was on hunger strike. The abridged play was 
subsequently read many times at various different actions throughout Ukraine in 
support of Sentsov and other Ukrainian political prisoners being held in Russia. In an 
article for Novaia gazeta, Vorozhbit wrote about the play: 
       ,   , 
,  , ,    
  ,  ,   .   
    ,      ,  
 .49 
The fact that the play had the power to unite people on both sides of the protracted, 
bloody conflict, through its performances in both Russia and subsequently on the 
streets of Ukraine, is testimony to Greminas sensitivity in handling the material and, 
as Vorozhbit makes clear, to the universality of the plays themes that emerges out of 
the particular stories that it tells.  
Whilst the death toll of Russian soldiers in Ukraine and Syria mounted, and 
repressions of Tatars and other dissenters in Crimea continued, a state of war became 
politically normalised inside the country. If, on the one hand, the state lost control of 
the meaning of certain words such as extremism as a result of overexploitation, 
other words such as patriotism were more successfully co-opted and brought into 
the arsenal of wordplay that it used to dominate public discourse in the political and 
cultural realms. Speaking in 2015, film director Pavel Lungin made this clear: 
49 Natalia Vorozhbit, in Gremina  tak emko pishut tolko o smerti: Teatr.doc vypuskaet 
sbornik pes, postavlennykh za 18 let, Novaia gazeta, 22 May 2020 
<https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2020/05/22/85489-gremina-tak-emko-pishut-tolko-o-
smerti> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
      - ,     
,       ,      
 .    .50 
The concept of patriotism arises in the contestation of the norm in Teatr.docs work, 
and in the subsequent reaction to this act of contestation by the authorities and the 
public alike. Indeed,  (officers from the state counter-extremism department, 
 ) attended the premiere of  , and later that year Gremina was 
informed by a police officer that the theatre was being investigated on account of 
anti-Russian plays in the repertoire:    , -  
, she was told.51  
The day that the theatre world learned of the sudden passing of Mikhail 
Ugarov in April 2018, a block of ten tickets was bought for a performance of  
, and in place of a name on the online order form was written:  
  [sic]  .52 The idea of Russianness and patriotism are 
closely entwined and both are tightly controlled and dominated by Putinist ideologues 
working through state media. If, as Lungin claims, the regime took patriotism away 
from the individual and claimed exclusive rights over its definition, then Teatr.doc 
sets out to reclaim patriotism and open up its semantic possibilities. In the context of 
 , the dominant normative paradigm would have us believe that it is 
simultaneously anti-Russian and unpatriotic to contest the state-sponsored 
50 Pavel Lungin, speaking on TV channel Dozhd. See Tikhon Dziadko, Pavel Lungin o tom, 
pochemu 84% - eto ne liubov, i zachem on podpisal pismo po Krymu, Dozhd, 13 March 
<https://tvrain.ru/teleshow/harddaysnight/rezhisser_pavel_lungin_o_svoem_seriale_rodina_p
atriotizme_ljubvi_i_proshlogodnem_pisme_v_podderzhku_pozitsii_putina_po_ukraine_i_kry
mu-383818/> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
51 Anastasiia Medvedeva, Pokhorony i menty, menty i pokhorony: kak vlasti neskolko let 
pytaiutsia zakryt Teatr.doc, OVD-Info, 10 April 2019 
<https://ovdinfo.org/articles/2019/04/10/pohorony-i-menty-menty-i-pohorony-kak-vlasti-
neskolko-let-pytayutsya-zakryt> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
52 Ibid. 
valorisation of the separatist cause in eastern Ukraine, in addition to the cover-up of 
the scale of lives of Russian soldiers lost in the conflict, and the normalisation of 
violence that comes with the political justification and promotion of foreign war. In 
contrast to the perception held by state-backed nationalist groups such as SERB (who 
targeted and disrupted the final performance of   in November 2019), 
theatre critic Pavel Rudnev describes documentary theatre as  
   .53 Greminas appeal to the norm in 
her play, then, is the challenge to the positive validation of the Russian states recent 
foreign interventions and land grabs, as well as the reclaiming of patriotism through 
anti-war discourse.  
 The production aesthetics of   are typical of Teatr.doc, playing 
with a minimalist, non-realist style that works within its modest means efficiently and 
powerfully to generate discursive meaning. Examples of this include the dozen or so 
chairs that are gradually piled high in the centre of the stage as the description of the 
descent into war and destruction in Luhansk plays out, symbolically indicating 
something akin to the barricades and rubble of the destroyed buildings. The pile of 
chairs is then dismantled and neatly rearranged over the course of the final section, 
, as the stage transforms into a court room for the Sentsov trial. Another 
example of effective symbolic staging is the presence of red-and-white striped police 
tape across the front of the stage at the start of the performance, which acts as a 
visible physical barrier between performers and spectators. The spectators attention 
is particularly drawn to this tape in a moment during Ravenhills bleak yet lyrical 
Syria monologue: 
53 Pavel Rudnev, Drama pamiati: Ocherki istorii rossiiskoi dramaturgii, 1950-2010-e 
(Moscow: Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie, 2018), p. 474.  
                
[...]                
                   
  54 
These words appear to refer to the much-derided red line repeatedly cited by 
Western leaders during the Syrian conflict. They are then repeated later in the play by 
one of the performers in , as he cuts the tape with scissors in preparation for 
the torturing and extraction of false testimony from one of the figures in the trial, 
Genadii Afanasev  because there is no red line for the FSB. In this way, Gremina 
subtly wove together the different texts in the triptych to create moments of continuity 
between them and to bring out their similarities.  
In the process of Afanasev and one other figure, Aleksei Chirnii, being 
tortured by the FSB into giving evidence against Sentsov, both men are forcibly 
dressed in t-shirts with the slogan   branded in bold red letters across the 
front. When Afanasev later stands up in court and renounces his testimony as given 
under duress, this t-shirt is symbolically cut up and ripped from his torso in shreds. He 
then proceeds to tear down the war decorations, which amount to white tape in 
various lengths and forms that have been assembled on the back wall of the stage over 
the course of the performance, in a symbolic dismantling of not only the stage set but 
also of the fabric and fabrication of war as an aesthetic experience. Greminas modest 
staging brought out the power of the text, whilst doing justice to the absent others 
being represented  Oleg Sentsov, Aleksandr Kolchenko, Genadii Afanasev, and 
Aleksei Chirnii  who were the victims of torture at the hands of the FSB and of false 
convictions of terrorism by a Russian court.   challenges the spectator to 
54 Voina blizko. 
reject the aestheticisation of violence by the state-controlled media, and to re-evaluate 
the states ideological monopoly of patriotism in its official promotion of war. 
 
Rarely does a production of Teatr.docs civic theatre go by without a media 
controversy or a reaction of some kind from the authorities, and  was no 
exception to this. It was due to premiere in St Petersburg on 27 May 2018 (which is 
the citys  ), the city being one of the places from which some of the 
anarchists in the   were quite literally abducted from the street and 
transported to Penza in unmarked minivans, to bolster the numbers of those involved 
in the alleged terrorist network. However, the day before the play was due to be 
performed, the venue where it was to be staged received a call from the FSB and was 
threatened with closure if they allowed the event to go ahead.55 In this instance, 
Teatr.doc was able to use its contacts and goodwill to find an alternative venue at the 
last minute and the rehearsed reading went ahead. Nonetheless, the message was clear 
 such topics are taboo and performances of Teatr.docs repertoire of civic theatre 
will not be tolerated on platforms in receipt of state funding.  
Whilst it can be argued that the format of the rehearsed reading is so popular 
in Russia out of necessity  a result of lack of resources, lack of access to fully-
equipped stages, routine harassment and difficulties with local authorities (for the 
more political plays)  there is more to it than pure necessity. As the format has 
55 Iulia Reprintseva, V Peterburge zapretili Pytki, Novaia gazeta, 26 May 2018 
<https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2018/05/26/76610-v-peterburge-zapretili-pytki> [accessed 
23 December 2020]. 
evolved and become a part of the theatrical landscape of the country, so has its 
aesthetics, and the more progressive theatre makers are able to work within the 
limitations of the form to generate new kinds of aesthetic experiences and discursive 
meanings that are worthy alternatives to full-stage productions, rather than inferior 
works-in-progress as they are often considered to be. When staged as an end 
product, the rehearsed reading can seize on the power of the event, often by 
occurring as a one-off performance, or being held sporadically, in different locations, 
each time in a different way, often not in theatre houses as such but in make-shift or 
multipurpose spaces, and spontaneously, with little forewarning. They can take on 
qualities of unique events that are unrepeatable, and this only enhances both the sense 
of ones individual presence in attendance, and thus in attendance to, which is the 
responsibility implicit on the spectator as one who is present  to witness, to 
remember, to be changed by the event, and to make its ephemerality a part of oneself, 
as the carrier of its meaning. The horizontality of the rehearsed reading as a form 
exposes and resists the verticality of the institutional theatre hierarchy, demonstrating 
the possibilities for a different kind of politics in theatre aesthetics. Whilst useful 
comparisons can be made between this aesthetic and, for example, Jerzy Grotowskis 
pioneering of poor theatre in the 1960s, the key difference here is that there is an 
attempt to move beyond not only mise-en-scne, but also beyond acting and 
representation. For the creator and director of , Zarema Zaudinova, the 
rehearsed reading has broken away from traditional theatre and become an 
independent genre.56 
In terms of production history, the first version of  as a text appeared 
in response to the Russian presidential elections held in March 2018. Teatr.doc 
56        . Zarema Zaudinova, 
Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, September 2019. 
protested the elections with the slogan  ,  .57 This first 
version of the play  which is known as the April version and was the one that was 
read in St Petersburg and then at the Liubimovka in September later that year  was a 
verbatim text, using interviews, statements, and the information that was available at 
that point about the  . Between the reading in St Petersburg in May 
and in Moscow in September, Zaudinova developed the idea of using a calendar 
projection of the innumerable military and police festivals that occur throughout the 
year in Russia, as a backdrop for the performers whilst they are reading the text. This 
staging device was used at the Liubimovka reading. Subsequently, Zaudinova 
recruited Mediazona journalist Egor Skovoroda to write a series of monologues based 
on the first-hand accounts, as if from the perspective of the FSB agents who carried 
out the torture procedures. These fictional monologues were combined with the 
verbatim accounts by the victims in the   and resulted in a new play 
called  /, which premiered at the Sakharov Centre in Moscow 
a few months later, in December of that year.58 This version succeeded the original, 
purely verbatim text and is the one that has been performed ever since, including at 
the Royal Court in London, as well as in Prague, Berlin, Tel Aviv, and in a few other 
cities inside Russia.  
Charting the rapid development of this work, we see that it went through three 
iterations in less than a year, before settling into a more or less consistent form. 
However, Zaudinova does not believe in playing shows often or for a long period, so 
once a settled form was reached, it was not long before performances naturally dried 
up. On the question of whether the rehearsed reading can be a completed work, she 
57 Zarema Zaudinova, Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, April 2019. 
58 The unpublished working script for  / was kindly shared with the 
author by Zaudinova for the purposes of this research project. 
stated:  , .      . [...]   
    .   .59 This approach to 
theatrical performance as a unique event, and the short lifespan of witness theatre in 
Zaudinovas view, means that these occurrences are easy to miss. This adds to their 
ephemerality, whilst also detracting from the visibility that they are able to achieve. 
Developments in technology mean that nowadays there is a reliance on video 
recordings published online to reach a greater audience than otherwise would be 
possible with low-publicity one-off events in small-capacity venues. However, for all 
its artistic virtues as a singular event, the fact that it is difficult to perform witness 
theatre more than once, and a few times at most, is also a serious drawback because 
it can never become repertoire, which an independent theatre like Teatr.doc crucially 
relies on for revenue.  / lost impetus after the sad conclusion of 
the court trials of the young men in the   in early 2020, when most 
of them received long prison sentences ranging from six to eighteen years. The show 
received a further setback later that year when one of the performers, the well-known 
antifascist and former political prisoner Aleksei Sutuga unexpectedly died at the age 
of thirty four, after receiving fatal wounds in a fight in Moscow.60 
The premiere of  / involved a cello player and a 
projector, in addition to four performers who spoke the text from memory. Although 
this means that it was not simply a rehearsed reading, none of the performers were 
professional actors. Instead, the performers are all related to the text in some way  
either through personal connection to the figures involved, or through their 
professional activities. This included: Aleksei Polikhovich  an anarchist and social 
59 Zaudinova, Unpublished interview, September 2019. 
60 Amaliia Zatari, Posledniaia draka Sokrata. Kak zhil i umer Aleksei Sutuga, odin iz samykh 
izvestnykh rossiiskikh antifashistov, BBC Russian, 3 September 2020 
<https://www.bbc.com/russian/features-54003900> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
activist who was a victim of the Bolotnaia Square case that saw him serve more than 
three years of incarceration, and who now works for OVD-Info, a human rights 
organization that monitors arrests and detentions of citizens; the aforementioned 
Aleksei Sutuga, who served two prison sentences in the decade before his death on 
fabricated charges of extremism; and Egor Skovoroda, whose work for independent 
media platform Mediazona included covering the  . The fourth and 
final performer was Zaudinova herself. Using non-professional actors who have a 
direct connection to the material at hand is one of the devices of witness theatre 
developed by Teatr.doc in recent years. It represents a reconfiguration of the 
relationship of text-performer-spectator, whereby the personal connection of the 
performer to the material generates a different kind of communication to that of the 
traditional dynamic of actor-text. If an actor does not know personally or have direct 
connections with the subject matter, then the distance between the actor and the text 
necessitates acting the text as the primary means of accessing its performative 
potential. By contrast, the proximity of the non-professional performer  who is 
implicated by personal association to the text  necessitates a non-actorly approach to 
its articulation. It is again a question of responsibility to the absent other. Where the 
actor acts in order to do justice to the one who is absent, the non-professional 
performer must actively do the opposite  not act  because to do otherwise would be 
a disservice to the absent other (not least of all because they are not trained actors). 
The non-professional performers responsibility to the absent other  which is a 
personal one more than an artistic one  is to stand in for the one who is absent, whilst 
allowing the absent presence to manifest itself onstage separately from them.  
It is the case that non-professional actors were used at Teatr.doc and in 
documentary theatre in Russia more broadly from the very beginning of its emergence 
in the early 2000s. The difference between witness theatre and simply using non-
professional actors is firstly the relationship to the text, which in witness theatre is a 
personal one, and secondly the mode of speech, which in witness theatre is in the 
first person, with performers speaking for themselves and as themselves. For 
Zaudinova, placing non-professional actors who have a personal connection to the 
text on stage has the effect of creating a historical document: 
       
,     .   - 
     ,        
.61 
Her words here also reflect the centrality of the other in this form of theatre, who is 
given a platform to speak and be heard, in attendance to the particular subjectivity of 
both the one who is present and the one who is absent. In this regard, witness theatre 
overcomes the accusations of appropriation levelled at documentary theatre by a 
younger generation of theatre makers and critics.62 Witness theatre requires that the 
spectator know the relevant biographical details of the performers and how they link 
to the text in advance of the performance for it to work to full effect, although this 
knowledge is not itself a prerequisite of spectating; the play will still perform without 
this prior knowledge, but the ethical demand that it makes upon the spectator is 
enhanced by full awareness of the reconfigured dynamic of performer to text. 
To try to prevent the performers from acting the text, another device that 
Zaudinova employed in the staging of  / was to swap around 
the distribution of the monologues for each performance. The need to learn anew and 
recite the monologues for the first time in each performance maintains the event-
61 Zaudinova, Unpublished interview, September 2019. 
62 See Elena Kovalskaia, Krutye pandusy, Teatr, 38 (2019), 52-59 (pp. 56-57). 
ness of the event for performer and spectator alike. It is a set-up that Zaudinova 
claims creates removed distance [] between the performer and the text, 
and is therefore an artistic device of estrangement [] for the spectator. 
Her words regarding the exchange relationship between text, performer and spectator 
in this regard are revealing: 
[]      ,     , 
   ,  ,  .  ,  , 
   .   , ,  
.    -  ,    
  .      ,   
,     .  ,    
,  ,      .63 
Whilst Zaudinova emphasises the practical side of negating the instinct to act and 
creating distance between performer and text, this is also an effective device for 
upholding the responsibility to the particular subjectivity of the absent other. In this 
way, the distancing of the performers from the delivery of the text, coupled with their 
personal proximity to its subject matter, generates for the spectator a complex form of 
estrangement, akin to a discursive dolly zoom effect. The spectator is required 
actively to participate in making sense of this relationship of performer and text if the 
performance is to generate meaning. They must also respond to the challenge that it 
makes on the experience of spectating. When presented, for example, with 
testimonials of torture carried out by the security services, read by people who have 
been in a similar situation themselves, the dividing line between the suspended (or 
ahistorical) time of the performance and the real time of before and after the event 
becomes harder to distinguish. Estrangement, therefore, not only from the text and the 
performer-text dynamic, but estrangement from the act of spectating itself, becomes 
63 Zaudinova, Unpublished interview, April 2019. 
part of the power of these works, both in their resistance to normative cultural 
processes and in the challenge that they are able to make upon those processes. 
Estrangement is a well-established tactic used by political activists to challenge the 
claims of universality made by those in power for its ideological norms, and to reveal 
them as contingent, so it is perhaps unsurprising that this appears as a key artistic 
device in challenging the norms of the Putinist consensus by Teatr.docs civic 
theatre. 
 The recruiting of experimental cellist Alina nufrienko to provide a live 
soundtrack to the performance of  / in the Sakharov Centre 
altered the structure of the play in significant ways. Firstly, the calendar of military 
and police festivals became much more of a focal point, projected on to the bare brick 
wall of the space whilst Anufrienkos music gradually shifted from deep, mournful 
classical melodies to excruciating screeches and harrowingly drawn-out dissonant 
notes, as she tapped into the well of verbally inexpressible emotions associated with 
brutal torture. The accused figures in the   were tortured by FSB 
agents using a number of physical and psychological means, the most notorious of 
which was the widespread usage of electric current.64 If Gremina indicated the 
unrepresentable in   with the boiling kettle image, then Zaudinova 
finds an alternative route to the same realm of inarticulable suffering for which there 
are no words. The director herself commented in this regard,     
, ,     .65 In other 
words, it is not the performers who cry out in pain or express emotion, it is the cello 
that does this. In the score, the contrasting passages of segments of classical music 
64 See, for example, Delo seti: Kto eti liudi i za chto ikh sudiat, OVD-Info, 13 May 2019 
<https://ovdinfo.org/articles/2019/05/13/delo-seti-kto-eti-lyudi-i-za-chto-ih-sudyat-gid-ovd-
info> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
65 Zaudinova, Private correspondence with author, 20 May 2019 (used with permission). 
alternating, in Zaudinovas words,    , creates an 
affective environment in which the spoken text can be articulated.66 As a consequence 
of the emotional expression in the play being shifted entirely to the music, the 
monologues recited by the performers can be delivered in an emotionless, deadpan 
manner, which is tailored to suit the non-professional actors performing the text from 
memory for the first time in public. 
In  /, Skovoroda created fictional testimonies that 
appear to be first-hand accounts by FSB officers of the practices of torture that they 
find most effective in extracting confessions and denunciations. Despite this 
fictionalisation of the documents, Zaudinova does not hesitate to call this a 
documentary play. In her opening remarks at the premiere in the Sakharov Centre, she 
declared,   .67 For the makers of  
/, just as was the case for Gremina in  , there is 
no contradiction between the concept of documentary and the fictional 
reconstruction of text from a certain point of view, based on existing documents. This 
hybridisation of documents and fictional reconstruction is what has elsewhere been 
called theatre of the real, and post-documentary.68 In a world of political post-
truth, documentary theatre makers employ similar techniques, where truth and fact 
are subordinated to affect, and where it is instead possible to talk about affective 
truth. When Skovoroda used the testimonies of the victims of torture to write the 
speech of the torturers, the everyday ordinariness of the language and the delivery 
style is in stark contrast with the extraordinariness of the content. The effect is coldly 
66 Zaudinova, Unpublished interview, April 2019. 
67 Zaudinova, in Tvoi kalendar/Pytki, unpublished recording of performance by Maria 
Boteva, 20 December 2018, Moscow. This was kindly shared with the author for the purposes 
of this research project. 
68 See Martin, Theatre of the Real. See also Zara Abdullaeva, Postdok: Igrovoe/neigrovoe 
(Moscow: Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie, 2011). 
inhuman, akin to something like the phenomenon described by Hannah Arendt as the 
banality of evil  the automated routineness of human brutality towards other 
humans when following orders from above.69  
This concept can also be applied to another of Skovorodas collaborations 
with Zaudinova,    a verbatim play performed as a rehearsed reading 
in front of studio cameras for the independent TV channel Dozhd in January 2019.70 
This verbatim work charts eleven days of mundane conversations between two 
neofascists prior to their arrest for the murder of lawyer Stanislav Markelov and 
journalist Anastasia Baburova in Moscow a decade ago.71 Staged by Zaudinova in the 
form of witness theatre, the text was read by three journalists who were close to the 
pair, which included Skovoroda himself. In , however, the banality of evil 
applies to the federal security services  people directly employed by the state, rather 
than fringe right-wing extremists  who unashamedly justify the torture of citizens 
(which is forbidden by the Russian Constitution) as legitimate use of force.72 In 
, the response from the Investigative Committee to requests to open a case 
regarding the reports of the torture of detainees is described: 
        
  ,      
       
    .      
         
69 Hannah Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil (London: Faber 
and Faber, 1963). 
70 Chitka pesy Dialogi ubiits. V osnove  proslushka razgovorov ubiits Markelova i 
Baburovoi, Dozhd, 19 January 2019 
<https://tvrain.ru/lite/teleshow/experiment/dialogi_ubijts-478993/> [accessed 23 December 
2020].  
71 This play was based on the book of the same name, which is a transcript of the 
conversations recorded by the FSB between the two right-wing extremists convicted of the 
murders. See Dialogi ubiits, ed. by Egor Skovoroda (Moscow: Common place, 2019). 
72 Article 21.2 of the Constitution of the Russian Federation 
<http://www.constitution.ru/10003000/10003000-4.htm> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
        
  .73  
In addition to this willful juridical banality, the St Petersburg FSB even publicly 
confirmed the use of torture, and the city court in turn acknowledged it as a working 
necessity [ ].74 It is here that the normalisation of state 
violence towards its own citizens takes on an ideological dimension. Referring back 
to Ugarovs words, it is only when the authorities themselves have become radicalised 
       that normalisation of violence can occur to such 
a degree whereby the torture of citizens is acknowledged by the courts as a working 
necessity, and where subsequent appeals to the norm draw accusations of 
extremism.  
 In the live performance of the text, the torture methods described in 
Skovorodas monologues are acted out alternately by the four speakers upon one 
another, in a dispassionate, matter-of-fact delivery style. The spectator is taught the 
difference between some of these methods:   ,  
 ,    .75 Far from 
downplaying the content, the cool style adopted by the performers in demonstrating 
these brutal torture methods for the spectator powerfully generates the same 
contradictory dissonance as heard in Anufrienkos harrowing sounds  the creeping 
horror of the banality of evil. The effect is tangible, as evidenced by a standing 
member of the audience at the Royal Court in London needing to sit down during the 
performance as they became overwhelmed. The performance at the Royal Court was 
exemplary of the dynamic, mobile nature of this production and the genre of 
73 Pytki. 
74 This was reported on by Mikhail Ugarov in a Facebook post on 21 March 2018. 
75 Egor Skovoroda and Zarema Zaudinova, Tvoi kalendar/Pytki (unpublished manuscript, 
2018). 
documentary theatre of which it is representative.76 The staging advantage of the 
calendar projection also became apparent, as rather than needing potentially 
cumbersome surtitles, the calendar and a rolling translation of the monologues were 
combined into one seamless whole.77 Here the adaptability that Teatr.doc has 
developed out of necessity over the course of its existence worked to minimise one of 
the common disadvantages of text-based theatre  the language barrier. According to 
one spectator in London, the presence of the text projected large behind the 
performers worked to increase the overall effect, as the visual power of the written 
word reinforced the action, in an assault on the senses. 
The fact that this play has never been performed in the same place twice is 
reflective of its event-ness  the spectator becomes a participant in a unique 
occurrence, with a responsibility to attend to the content of the work as a result. The 
practical adaptability of the production means that it can be shown to a larger number 
and wider range of people than would be possible were it tied to the small-capacity 
fixed space of Teatr.doc. Whilst it is true that elaborate full-stage productions can and 
do tour around the world, the difference is that Teatr.doc has no state funding that it 
can use to finance such tours, and any touring production must operate within severe 
financial constraints. However, this limitation is generative in its own way, 
manufacturing an affective experience for the spectator, who becomes a participant in 
the event and consequently a co-producer of its meaning.  
76 The Royal Court performance took place on 28 March 2019. See theatre website for details: 
<https://royalcourttheatre.com/whats-on/torture/> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
77 Tvoi kalendar/Pytki, video recording (short fragment), Royal Court, 28 March 2019. 
Authors personal archive. 
 Oiub Titiev is a human rights activist who became the head of the Chechen 
branch of the NGO Memorial in Grozny after the previous head, Natalia Estemirova, 
was murdered in 2009.78 Memorial is an organisation that was originally conceived in 
1989 to investigate political repressions in the Soviet Union, an activity which it 
continues to do to this day in conjunction with pursuing more recent and present-day 
cases of human rights violations. The activities of the regional Chechen branch of the 
organisation were naturally focused on the two Russo-Chechen wars (1994-96; 1999-
2009), and on the repressions and disappearances of people under the current regime 
of Ramzan Kadyrov. Titiev was arrested in January 2018, held in police custody for 
over a year at the age of sixty years old, and sentenced in March 2019 on charges of 
intention to sell narcotics on a large scale under the notorious article 228 of the 
criminal code.79 The case was clearly fabricated and Amnesty International classified 
Titiev as a prisoner of conscience, silenced by the authorities for his human rights 
activism in his native Chechnya. Titiev was conditionally released in June 2019 
having served out two and a half years cumulatively in custody, but restrictions 
remain on what he can do (he must register regularly and cannot leave the country, for 
example) and his conviction remains on the record.80 The materials from the trial 
were collated by Zaudinova, in collaboration with Anna Dobrovolskaia of Memorial 
in Moscow. These materials were combined with verbatim interviews, quotes from 
78 Desiat let bez pravosudiia: V etot den v 2009 godu byla ubita chechenskaia 
pravozashchitnitsa Natalia Estemirova, Amnesty International, 15 July 2019 
<https://eurasia.amnesty.org/2019/07/15/desyat-let-bez-pravosudiya-v-etot-den-v/> [accessed 
23 December 2020]. 
79 Article 228 is covered in more detail in Chapter Four. 
80 Amnesty: Reshenie po UDO Oiuba Titieva  dolgozhdannyi shag, no ne torzhestvo 
spravedlivosti, Amnesty International, 10 June 2019 
<https://eurasia.amnesty.org/2019/07/01/amnesty-reshenie-po-udo-oyuba-titieva-dolgozh/> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
the Quran and Hadith, Chechen cooking recipes, historical narratives, and news 
reports to create a documentary play.81  
The first and only performance of  to date was in an early version of the 
text at the Memorial head offices in Moscow in June 2018.82 It was directed by film 
and stage actor Iuliia Aug, who also performed one of the parts. As has become 
standard for Teatr.docs civic theatre, the premiere was marked by a heavy-handed 
police visit. On this occasion, the police arrived at the theatres then premises on 
Malyi Kazennyi pereulok, announcing that there was a bomb scare and that the 
building needed to be evacuated. Upon eventually realizing that it was not  but in 
fact an uncontroversial play from the repertoire that they had interrupted, the officers 
promptly raced over to Memorial and announced that there was  by extraordinary 
coincidence  a bomb scare in that building that evening as well. However, by the 
time they got there, the performance of  was over and everyone had dispersed, 
besides a few employees, journalists, and artists. In spite of the alleged bomb scare, 
the police did not attempt to evacuate any of the floors of the residential building 
above the Memorial offices.83  
The difference between the first version and the second version of the 
playscript is that when the first version was created and performed at the Memorial 
offices, Titievs trial was still ongoing, which meant that the play ended on a 
somewhat inconclusive note. The second version updated the ending, inserting two 
81 The play script was published online as a free ebook by Bookmate Originals. This was 
ahead of the publication of an anthology of Teatr.docs documentary plays, called 
Antologiia.doc, edited by Zarema Zaudinova. See Zaudinova, Dobrovolskaia, and Gremina, 
Oiub. 
82 The performance is available to view on Youube. See MBKh media, Teatr.doc: Zapis 
premery spektaklia Oiub, online video recording, Youube, 13 June 2018 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2a9GLr6yCH8> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
83 See Elena Racheva, O liudiakh, gotovykh k vzletu, Novaia gazeta, 14 June 2018 
<https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2018/06/14/76800-o-lyudyah-gotovyh-k-vzletu> [accessed 
23 December 2020]. 
long verbatim monologues  one by Titievs lawyer, Ilia Novikov, and one by Titiev 
himself. These were abridged versions of the real testimonies given by the pair 
directly prior to the handing down of the sentence in court. They bring an emotional 
vitality and affective power to the climax of the play that can only be achieved by the 
hyperrealism of documentary forms. Unfortunately, although this updated version of 
the text superseded the first version and is the one that has been published, it has 
never been performed on stage.84 This is perhaps due to Zaudinovas view that civic 
theatre has a short lifespan, and perhaps the play lost some of its urgency after 
Titievs early release from prison some three months after the end of the trial. 
Nonetheless, given that the events in the play are still so recent, it remains relevant, as 
a documentation of and artistic response to the realities of High Putinism. Moreover, 
life in Kadyrovs Chechnya has not changed since its publication. If anything, as 
Zaudinova points out, things have got worse in the republic, since now there is no 
branch of Memorial to monitor human rights violations there. In this regard, the play 
is both informative and emotionally-charged for the reader now as much as ever.  
The harrowing portrayal of the state-sponsored persecution of the gay 
community in the critically-acclaimed documentary Welcome to Chechnya: The Gay 
Purge (HBO, 2020) by US filmmaker David France demonstrated that Chechnya is a 
part of the world that needs global attention. The case of Titiev is demonstrative of 
the systematic repression and expulsion of human rights activists from the republic 
over the past decade or so that has led to the dire situation there highlighted by 
France, in which there is no accountability or transparency for the regimes crimes 
against its own people. It is hoped that artistic works such as these in theatre and film 
84 However, the updated version has been translated and produced in the UK as an English-
language radio play by this author, and is available on YouTube. See TORCH, OYUB Radio 
Play, online video recording, YouTube, 18 June 2020, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KFrY5_ZJEus> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
can bring much-needed international attention to the region and ultimately put 
pressure on the central Russian government to insist on the adherence to federal laws 
inside the republic, even though it enjoys a large degree of autonomy. Unfortunately, 
the laws and constitutional changes coming from the centre that demonise sexual 
minorities do nothing to quell homophobic violence in the peripheries. 
The one-off event that took place at Memorial is a good example of the 
rehearsed reading as a developed genre of theatre in twenty-first-century Russia. It 
was staged in a makeshift performance space, with only stools and a projector for 
props. All the performers sat directly facing the audience and read from scripts. They 
were dressed in plain black clothing. The female characters wore black headscarves in 
addition to long black skirts. In terms of production, at one point, a video clip of a 
Chechen womens fashion show played silently in the background whilst the 
performers read from the script. Later on, a traditional song of Chechen women, 
 , is played during a scene transition. During the final section of the 
play, a still image of Titiev himself behind bars is shown until the end. The 
performance was then followed by a thirty-minute discussion, involving one of 
Titievs lawyers, Ilia Novikov (the same lawyer whose courtroom defence speech 
was included in the later version of the script). Far from detracting from the 
theatricality of the live theatre performance, the rehearsed reading  a format often 
employed in Teatr.docs civic theatre  can enhance the experience of the event and 
the feeling of presence for the spectator in ways that are qualitatively different to full 
stage productions of dramatic works. The unassuming performance of  is the 
epitome of this alternative theatrical genre and the devices that have been developed 
by Russian documentary theatre makers to generate discourses of a different kind to 
those of the dominant theatrical establishment, ones that challenge existing discursive 
norms and present the spectator with complex ethical demands.  
During the sections of text that describe cooking recipes for traditional 
Chechen dishes, the female performers stand up, take off their headscarves, and then 
throughout the reciting of the recipes they proceed to fold, unfold, and re-fold the 
pieces of black fabric over and over again, in a ritual act of domesticity. What clearly 
emerges from  is an opposition between on the one hand the feminine space, 
associated with affirmative cultural values and peaceful interiority, and on the other 
hand the masculine space, characterised by war, aggression, violence, and a generally 
negative culture of destruction. If the cooking scenes provide respite from the 
relentless horror of the Titiev case and the realities of Kadyrov-era Chechnya, then 
they also function as an important reference point for what could be. The peaceful, 
affirmative culture of Chechen women puts into stark relief the bleak destruction of 
the exterior world, ruled by men in a rigidly patriarchal society. The feminine interior 
space thus becomes loaded with the potentiality of the conditional what if  an 
otherworldly affirmative alternative to the hopeless violence of the masculine 
exterior. In this regard, it has something in common with another Teatr.doc play from 
recent years that will be examined in Chapter Three  Olga Shiliaevas 28 , 
which also invokes an otherworldly feminine utopia, free from patriarchical 
oppression. 
The attention to detail in the two cooking recipes that feature in , 
especially in the second of the two, which appears at the midway point of the text, 
becomes a painfully dissonant experience for the spectator, in large part due to the 
fact that on either side of it lie descriptions of the first and second Chechen wars, and 
the ravaging toll that these wars took on the region. A description of  is a 
striking moment of this emotional disjuncture in the text: 
.  (   ;   ,  
         1   
,   ) ,  ,     
   (  ,   ).85 
In this seemingly trivial attention to detail, the spectator can observe the juxtaposition 
between the masculine and feminine spatio-temporal realms in Chechen cultural life. 
The tempo of the play is drastically reduced by detailed descriptions such as these, 
which has the effect of bringing the intensity of the narrative as a whole into focus. In 
the context of the two Chechen wars either side of this recipe, the lingering pleasure 
expressed by the speaker in the description of the traditional dish   
  becomes almost perverse, as the dichotomy of feminine and masculine 
increases: 
.       
  ,   .86 
The very presence of sheer pleasure [ ] in the nightmarish world 
of  is surprising and seemingly out of place, but the startling effect that it has, 
alongside effects of distancing and estrangement common to Teatr.docs civic 
theatre, is a key component of the ethical challenge that this work is able to make 
upon the spectator. The fact of the existence of the feminine as the primary carrier of 
human dignity in the context of a history of continuous war and violence in modern 
times perhaps provides a space, however small, for the emergence of hope for the 
85 Oiub. 
86 Ibid. 
future. The presence of culinary and aesthetic pleasure in the interior feminine world 
of the play functions as a startling reminder to the spectator of the abnormality of the 
exterior masculine world they are observing in the Titiev trial. In this, the domestic 
scenes in  serve to prevent the spectator from allowing the violence of Titievs 
world to become normalised during the performance. Furthermore, they offer a 
fleeting glimpse of an alternate reality for the region that is not dominated by war, 
torture, and oppression, but by the affirmative values of (feminine) cultural richness. 
In relation to the performance history of , it is worth noting that Aug 
chose to use actors in her staging of the text. Zaudinova, on the other hand, still thinks 
there is scope to perform the play as witness theatre, read by human rights activists 
rather than by professional actors, and in an even more stripped-back form: 
  []   .     
 ;   . []     ,  , 
 ,  ; .    -  
 ,   ,    ,   
  ,   ,    .87 
Zaudinovas use of the phrase    here is not accidental, as this 
was the definition used by her mentor Mikhail Ugarov for formulating the 
reconfigured relationship of performer to text in Teatr.docs pioneering of witness 
theatre earlier in the decade. The possibilities for staging  differently suggest 
that even though there are no new performances of the play planned in the immediate 
future, there is the potential for other versions that could open up different elements of 
the text and offer productive material for further analysis. 
87 Zaudinova, Unpublished interview, September 2019. 
Teatr.docs Torture Trilogy 
 Placing the three plays mentioned above alongside one another, one of the 
many running themes that emerges is that of torture. We see violence committed by 
the state and its organs of power against its own citizens and even some foreign 
citizens as well (Ukrainian nationals in the Sentsov case). Although these three works 
exist independently of each other, they have a great deal in common, as mature 
examples of Teatr.docs pioneering genres of civic and witness theatre. This 
torture trilogy, as I will call it, reflects the shifting realities of High Putinism and the 
adaptive strategies that socially engaged documentary theatre has developed in 
response to these changes. Besides thematic similarities across the three texts, there 
are also formal elements that unite them. This is perhaps unsurprising given that they 
were all created within a three-year period of each other and each had the hand of 
Gremina behind them, even if the latter two were only completed after her passing by 
her protge and close collaborator Zaudinova.  
On the formal level, there are clear structural qualities that these works have in 
common, the most obvious one being the way that all three texts have a crescendo 
structure and hang on the final word, which functions as the climax of each play. In 
 , this is the final word of Oleg Sentsov in the Russian court where he 
was tried. In , where the case had not been resolved at the time of creation, in 
place of a court testimony the final word is given to Mikhail Ugarov, taken from a 
Facebook post written shortly before his passing.88 In , the closing monologue is 
Titievs final testimony from Shali Town Court in Chechnya. In locating the climax, 
88 Ugarov was well known for his active online presence and commentary, firstly on 
LiveJournal and subsequently on Facebook. Some highlights of his LiveJournal presence are 
collected in the special edition of Teatr journal dedicated to Ugarov. See Kovalskaia, 
Zhivoi zhurnal Mikhaila Ugarova. 
which is the apex of the rising dramatic tension, at the very end of the work, and thus 
depriving it of a denouement, the ending is preliminary rather than resolved. The 
general philosophy of Teatr.docs brand of documentary theatre is that the 
performance itself is only the start of the conversation, not its end point. For a 
documentary play to be effective, it must continue beyond the end of the show in a 
second act of sorts, multiplying and carried out into the real world beyond the 
theatre by each spectator individually. Ugarov said in this regard,    
,    ,  .    
 []  .     .89 The crescendo structure is one 
device that is employed by dramatists for leaving the ending hanging over, with a 
sense of incompletion for the spectator. In this structure, the lack of denouement after 
the climax means that there is the space for the spectator to create their own 
denouement after the end of the performance. In Russian documentary theatre, this is 
often in the form of a post-show discussion, which becomes an essential component 
of the event and its production of meaning. The familiarity of this kind of dramatic 
structure  which is common in modern drama since at least Chekhov  means that 
this is not an alienating theatrical experience. The conventional structure of these 
documentary plays in this key respect acts as a point of reference and provides a 
supportive framework for spectators who are being challenged to respond to specific 
demands. It is the conventional aspect of these plays that makes them succeed as 
works of theatre as much as the radically challenging aspect, and indeed one without 
the other would likely render them less successful. 
89 Mikhail Ugarov, speaking in Kazan in 2015 at the contemporary arts centre Smena. See 
BIZNES Online, Khudruk Teatra.doc Mikhail Ugarov vystupil s lektsiei v Smene, online 
video recording, YouTube, 29 January 2015, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oxgZ3DTzCgY> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
 What also emerge over the course of all three plays are images of heroes. 
This is achieved by withholding information until the end and then revealing it in the 
form of a dramatic turning point. As a device these turning points increase dramatic 
tension and satisfy the spectators desire for intrigue and pathos, regardless of the 
topic. The devices of surprise and intrigue are important in this regard as much for 
socially-engaged documentary theatre as for other genres. Clearly channelling Walter 
Benjamin, Hans-Thies Lehmann states in his formulation of postdramatic theatre, an 
aesthetic of startling in theatre would be another name for an aesthetic of 
responsibility.90 In  , this startling effect is achieved by a turning point 
that emerges from a running theme of manliness [], or more 
precisely a question over what manliness is. This manifesttion of male insecurity 
and the associated crisis of masculinity first appears in the diary from Donetsk, when 
questions over bravery, responsibility, and duty in conditions of war come to the fore. 
It then gets picked up on by a direct audience address in the transition to the third 
section of the triptych about Sentsov: 
(   ): 
,    ?  .      ? 
   ?                  
   ,   ,    
?91 
The actors then raise their own hands and count the hands raised in the audience. This 
question addressed to the audience, which is also a moment of the irruption of the real 
on stage, is a running motif across all three plays in this trilogy  who amongst you, 
spectators, believes you can withstand what the real people who figure in these plays 
90 Lehmann, p. 143. Italics in original. 
91 Voina blizko. 
went through? What are your ethical responsibilities in response to the act of 
spectating? The irruption of the real, the direct audience address, the demand made by 
the singularity of the event and the corresponding responsibility for the absent other: 
all these components refer back to the question posed to the audience at this moment 
 who considers themselves a man, and who is certain they would remain so in a 
moment of extreme trial, pain, loss, and with the weight of the state apparatus against 
them (all of which is laconically expressed in the singular profanity )?  
This same question is repeated near the end, shortly before the astonishing 
moment when Gennadii Afanasev, one of the figures heavily tortured into giving 
evidence against Sentsov, stands up in the courtroom and denounces his own 
testimony, as having been given under duress. In this moment of high drama, it 
becomes clear that the questions addressed to the audience regarding manliness are 
not in relation to the ability to withstand war or torture as initially supposed, because 
in fact the answer is that no one can. The real question is whether the spectator would 
be able to stand up in court after experiencing those things and do what Afanasev did 
 to withdraw his own evidence, with the threats of the FSB and the entire state 
apparatus bearing down on him. In this moment, Afanasev emerges as the unlikely 
hero of the play, and the only person worthy of raising their hand to the question 
posed earlier to the audience. Sentsov says as much in his final word, when he refers 
to Afanasevs manly deed [ ].92 With this device, Gremina 
reveals the hero to the spectator as the play reaches its dramatic climax.  
 Before his emergence as the hero, Afanasev in   initially lies to 
the audience by giving false testimony in court against Sentsov. Similarly, in  
one of the main figures of the  , Viktor Filinkov, lies by repeatedly 
92 Ibid. 
denying in public that he has been tortured. However, he later declares that he has 
indeed been tortured and that his confessions of guilt were extracted under duress. As 
punishment for this, Filinkov was turned by the prosecution from a minor witness in 
the case into the head of an international terrorist network, unimaginatively called 
The Network []. Filinkovs crime was his willingness to speak out about his 
experiences:         
.93 Through his actions, Filinkov is elevated at the plays climax to the level 
of a tragic hero, who sacrifices himself in the name of truth against the age-old 
oppressor, the state. This has a rich history in Russian culture, stretching back through 
the Soviet period to Imperial times. As the last piece of information that is shared 
with the audience before Ugarovs brief final word, a great deal of emphasis is placed 
on it. This reflects how significant it is for the creators as a moment of discursive 
meaning, upon which the plays structure hangs  the act of speaking out about state-
level abuses of power and paying the price for it. This is one of the running themes in 
the torture trilogy  the individual coming up against and being crushed by the 
power of the state, or in other words, the eternal trope of the   of 
Russian literature and culture. 
 In , the revealing of the hero manifests itself slightly differently because 
Titiev is a hero from the start, so the process is more about establishing the kind of 
hero that he is. At regular intervals throughout the play, we are told of Titievs 
positive characteristics  he respects all people equally, and everyone respects him in 
return. Particular emphasis is placed on his respect for women and children:  
    .    ,  ,   
93 Pytki. 
 ,    .94 Alongside the positive testimonials for Titiev 
from colleagues, there are quotations from and references to the Quran, as well as 
Islamic guidelines on how to live in truth. One of the recurring motifs is that of 
mercy, which appears on numerous occasions and is defined early on in the text: 
   ,     ,    
.95 Additionally, Allah is quoted as saying,    
 .96 Due to the layout of these passages of scripture, which have been 
cut and pasted in montage fashion in and amongst the court testimonial documents 
and information about the court proceedings, it appears as if the court and judge, and 
by extension the Chechen and Russian states, are being asked to demonstrate mercy in 
relation to Titiev, as that would be the correct path of action to take. Equally, it 
appears as if the spectator is being asked to demonstrate mercy in relation to those 
that do injustice and harm to Titiev. It is also the seeming total absence of mercy in 
the play that becomes its pervading atmosphere. The question apparently being asked 
of the spectator here is whether or not they feel the capacity for mercy that is so 
absent in the world of the text. However, much as in  , in the end the 
spectator is wrongfooted as it transpires that mercy is not being asked of the spectator 
or of those who persecute the worthy hero of the play. Rather it is everyone else who 
is unworthy of Titiev, and mercy is something that only he is worthy of granting. In 
this way his heroic qualities are amplified. At the conclusion of the play, his verdict 
on those who took part in his arrest and trial is damning:    
, ,   ,   .97 In asserting his 
94 Oiub. 
95 Ibid. 
96 Ibid. 
97 Ibid. 
shame for those involved in his persecution, Titievs moral and spiritual superiority 
over his persecutors emerges, in addition to his status as a tragic hero. 
 If all the heroes who emerge over the course of the plays demonstrate courage 
and manliness in one way or another, there is also a running theme of cowardice. 
In his final word in court, Sentsov proclaims,       
.98 He attributes these words to Mikhail Bulgakov, although in actual fact he 
appears to be paraphrasing the character of Pilat in Bulgakovs famous Stalin-era 
novel,   , who thinks to himself whilst recalling a conversation 
with Ieshua Ga-Notsri:  
   ,  ,    
  ,  , ,     
.    -. , ,   
:    99  
Sentsovs choice of Kyiv-born, Russian-speaking Bulgakov is apt  it refers both to 
the shared cultural history of Russia and Ukraine, and to the Stalinist repressions with 
which this writer and this novel are strongly associated, when the Soviet show trials 
were at their zenith. In , one of the female characters in the play makes exactly 
this comparison between the Stalinist terror and Kadyrovs Chechnya:    
 ,   ,     ,    
  ,          .100 
The motif of cowardice reappears later, in the lawyers monologue, where he passes 
his own judgement on the court proceedings:  ,     
  ,    ,   
98 Voina blizko. 
99 Mikhail Bulgakov, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii v vosmi tomakh, vol. 4, ed. by V.I. Losev 
(St Petersburg: Azbuka, 2013), p. 456. 
100 Oiub. 
  .    .101 Elsewhere in his defence speech, 
the lawyer refers to the  , which was the generation of Chechens 
who grew up or were born in Siberia and Central Asia after the mass deportations of 
the Chechen people during Operation Chechevitsa in 1944.102 This included Titiev 
himself, who was born in Soviet Kyrgyzstan. Titiev uses the history of the Stalinist 
terror in Chechnya to demonstrate the tragifarcical nature of the case against him, and 
to locate it in a broader historical perspective: 
    ,   ,   
,  31  1937         
 14  .       18 
,        
 .103 
Titiev powerfully transposes the tragic history of his people on to the present, where 
the fear to speak out has returned and where show trials are once more an evident 
reality. Indeed, the spectator bears witness to exactly such a trial unfolding before 
their eyes, making this work (and also, to a lesser degree,  ) a hybridized 
form of the British documentary genre of the tribunal play.104 In a Russian context, 
there are also historical links to the postrevolutionary agitprop trials (although these 
were not documentary as such), as well as to the late Soviet glasnost plays of 
Mikhail Shatrov, such as ... ...  (1988).  
The unrelenting descriptions of the violence of the Chechen security forces, 
the torture procedures in , and the physical and psychological violence 
inflicted upon the figures in   all work to reinforce the atmosphere of 
101 Ibid. 
102 Ibid. 
103 Ibid. 
104 This was pioneered by Londons Tricycle Theatre under the stewardship of Nick Kent in 
the 1990s and 2000s. See Victoria Brittain and others, The Tricycle: Collected Tribunal 
Plays, 1994-2012 (London: Oberon Books, 2014). 
terror that pervades the worlds of these plays. The disappearances in the night of the 
figures in the  , the fabrication of the cases against Sentsov and 
Titiev, and the sheer absurdity of the inconsistencies in the court proceedings against 
them  when placed in a historical context  inevitably summon up the ghosts of the 
Stalinist show trials. 
Both Sentsov and Titiev refuse to acknowledge the legitimacy of their 
respective court trials, believing them to be unlawful. Sentsov explains this, saying, 
       .105 For Titiev, 
on the other hand, it is more a question of morals and faith: in testifying against him, 
more than sixty police officers have lied in court, which is forbidden by Islam, and all 
have done so in the interests of personal gain or out of fear, reasons which he does not 
consider justified: 
  ,   .      
   .  ,    
.       .106 
He describes the materials of the case against him as .107 In condemning 
the legitimacy of the legal documents in the case, Titievs words remind the spectator 
that it is also documents which lie at the foundation of the play. It is the truth-value of 
these documents over others that the documentary text relies on for its production of 
authenticity. It is equally documents  and their manipulation  that are the basis of 
Titievs fabricated conviction, and that underpin the creation and enforcement of state 
ideological normative codes, as seen in the wave of legislation documents analysed in 
the introduction. In trying to make sense of High Putinist ideology, and of the 
105 Voina blizko. 
106 Oiub. 
107 Ibid. 
conditions that allow for the systemic abuses of power and human rights seen in the 
torture trilogy, Titievs words on the state prosecutor in his trial are to the point: 
   ,   .    
   .108 
Tellingly, Titiev is not surprised by the prosecutors hypocrisy. Indeed, by this late 
stage in the play, given everything we have already heard about the case, it is very 
much in the order of things. Such is the political reality of Kadyrovs Chechnya, 
where fabrication on all institutional levels has been normalised to such a degree that 
it is the norm. According to Titiev, everyone involved in the prosecution knows that it 
is a fabrication and yet they all cynically continue to go along with it anyway. To 
quote philosopher Slavoj iek on the ideology of cynicism, they know very well 
what they are doing, but still, they are doing it.109 Cynicism is a defining 
characteristic of the worlds that all three of these plays inhabit. Reflecting on the 
performative nature of the Stalinist show trials, Elizabeth Wood has argued that they 
emerged out of the agitprop trials staged by Bolshevik artist-activists in the early 
postrevolutionary years.110 In the light of these performative and historical 
connotations, the image of the show trial that persistently emerges from the works in 
the torture trilogy becomes one of the leitmotifs of High Putinism, as it was of High 
Stalinism before it. 
 In  , Sentsov has the final word, and indeed these were his final 
words in court prior to the verdict in his case in 2015. Given the emphasis that is 
placed on them by locating them at the very end, they are perhaps revealing of 
108 Ibid. 
109 Slavoj iek, The Sublime Object of Ideology (London: Verso, 1989; repr. 2008), p. 25. 
110 See Elizabeth Wood, Fiction becomes indistinguishable from reality, 1928-33, in 
Performing Justice (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2005), pp. 193-207. 
something of the intended message behind the play. In words that could have come 
from Gremina herself, Sentsov damningly declares: 
  , ,    .    
 ?       .111 
By concluding the play in such a way, it is difficult to claim that there is any attempt 
to observe the zero position in the construction of this text. Indeed, all three plays in 
the torture trilogy reflect a post-zero position in the treatment of their respective 
topics. The theme of the justification of immoral or illegal actions is a recurring one 
in all three plays, as are the themes of fear and the consequences for future 
generations of what is taking place in the here and now (and being documented in 
these plays). The damning criticism of self-serving self-justification made by Sentsov 
above is similarly articulated in Titievs final word speech in court in Chechnya 
where he condemns the complicity of those involved in the fabrication of the case 
against him: 
,    , ,        
. [...]      .   
  .112 
The question of obligation versus non-obligation to carry out an immoral or illegal act 
if commanded to do so by superiors goes to the core not only of universal religious 
doctrine, but also to that of modern jurisprudence and what constitutes law as such. 
There are complex ethical questions here to do with complicity and responsibility for 
ones actions within systemic structures of power much bigger than the individual. On 
the one hand, Titiev is right that it is always possible to refuse to comply, but on the 
111 Voina blizko 
112 Oiub. 
other hand, given the reality of modern-day Chechnya and the normalised violence of 
the regime, one can understand the positions of the rank-and-file police officers and 
court judges who merely followed their orders through. According to Arendt, it is the 
cumulative process of all these banal acts of merely following orders that ultimately 
allows regimes of terror such as that which exists in Kadyrovs Chechnya to occur.113  
 The final word from Ugarov that brings  to a close is of a somewhat 
different kind and tone to those in the other two plays. First and foremost, it is not 
testimony taken from a trial. Instead, it is his reaction on social media to the news of 
the systematic torturing of pre-trial detainees in the  .114 
Nonetheless, it reflects the similar concerns of the theatre makers in the creation of 
this work. After a short passage describing the best ways to torture a person using 
electrocution without killing them, Ugarov concludes: 
     (),  
    .115 
Where Sentsov and Titiev were delivering speeches in a courtroom in which their 
freedom was at stake, Ugarov in his Facebook post was attempting to speak with the 
cool everyday language of a person who is dryly describing their daily routine, which 
in this case just so happens to be an FSB officer whose job it is to torture people in 
custody. The everyday-ness of the words uttered intensifies the horror for the 
spectator that they are witnessing the banality of evil, in which institutional violence 
and abuse of power by state employees, protected and legitimized by the law, is 
normalised to such an extent that it becomes quotidian to those who carry out these 
actions. For the spectator, the ordinary manner of speech masks the extraordinary 
113 Arendt, Eichmann in Jerusalem. 
114 His reaction appeared in a Facebook post on 18 March 2018. 
115 Pytki. 
content of what is being said, which is the opposite of banal  this is an aesthetic of 
startling that carries with it the burden of responsibility for the victim, who is the 
absent other. 
 The devices of shock, estrangement, distancing, alienation, montage, 
crescendo, and wrongfooting all contribute to the aesthetic of startling that generates 
the ethical challenge contained in these three works of documentary theatre. The 
challenge is contained in the demand to accept responsibility for the absent other. 
This responsibility is to make the particularity of the absent other into a part of 
oneself, to allow oneself to be changed by the experience of being present, as a 
witness to the event at which the other is spoken for in their absence. None of these 
texts are pure verbatim in the conventional sense, but they all contain verbatim and 
there is no question over their status as documentary plays that generate affective 
truths. Consideration of the evolution of the documentary form of theatre making 
beyond strict adherence to verbatim methods and concepts of authenticity, reality, and 
objective truth will be continued in the succeeding chapters. The three plays included 
here, grouped together as a torture trilogy, are characterised by discourses of 
violence  of the physical, psychological and symbolic kind  as well as by complex 
forms of power and dominance in the cultural, social, and linguistic realms. In 
challenging dominant norms and generating alternative discourses that reject the 
Putinist consensus as promoted and policed by the political establishment in tandem 
with the legal justice system, these plays forcefully open up sites of resistance and 
dissensus, places where real politics can spontaneously, fleetingly emerge. 
In her influential psychoanalytical theory of abjection, Julia Kristeva 
describes the abject as follows:  
It lies outside, beyond the set, and does not seem to agree to the latters rules 
of the game. And yet, from its place of banishment, the abject does not cease 
challenging its master.116  
Adapting this idea, we can cast Teatr.doc as the abject and the Russian state as the 
master  Teatr.doc does not agree to the rules of the game laid down by the state, does 
not accept its normative regime in the form of the police consensus, and from its place 
of banishment, Teatr.doc does not cease challenging the state. In this it shares a 
common cause with another theatre, the Belarus Free Theatre, which has existed in 
exile from its native Belarus since 2011, and has increasingly taken up the causes of 
human rights and anti-authoritarianism in its work. Its 2016 production Burning 
Doors, starring Maria Alekhina of Pussy Riot fame, appeared in the same year as 
Teatr.docs   and partly addressed the same theme of the Sentsov case.  
There is perhaps no better definition for the relationship of Teatr.doc and the 
Russian state in the era of High Putinism than Kristevas notion of the abject. The 
abject may be banished from inside the set but it continues to exist outside of it, 
from where it returns to challenge the master. As abjected others, located outside of 
the High Putinist police consensus and resistant to its mechanisms of co-option, the 
texts in the torture trilogy do not agree to the rules of the game laid out by the state 
and enforced through censorship in all its guises. Instead, these texts collectively hold 
a mirror to the state, the reflection from which is a hard diagnosis of actually existing 
High Putinism. 
116 Julia Kristeva, Powers of Horror: An Essay on Abjection, trans. by Leon S. Roudiez (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1982), p. 2. 
2) Document-Based Performance: New Documentarism 
 In the wake of the deaths of Mikhail Ugarov and Elena Gremina in the spring 
of 2018, the executive director of the Meyerhold Centre, Elena Kovalskaia, dedicated 
that years Blackbox laboratory programme for up-and-coming theatre makers to the 
search for a new documentarism [ ] in the theatre.1 
Kovalskaia, who was a close ally of Gremina and Ugarov, believed that nearly 
twenty years after its emergence as a force in Russian theatre, it was time to re-
imagine [] the forms and practices of documentary theatre on the 
Russian stage.2 This chapter considers three productions from two theatres that, in one 
way or another, and in very different ways from each other, answer Kovalskaias 
call. 
Like the documentary plays that featured in the previous chapter, the three 
works here also contain documents at their foundation, but that is as far as the 
comparison goes. These three performance pieces are exactly that  performances. No 
productive textual analysis is possible, because although there may be documents 
present, these only serve as the points of departure for the works. The document here 
is often fragmented or its origin concealed. However, the document is always still 
present in its disfigurement, and this fact is testament to its generative power  
whether as recorded interview, court testimonial, archival record, legal code, social 
media, or verbatim text. This is perhaps reflective of the importance still placed on the 
concrete by contemporary Russian theatre makers in a world of post-truth, 
disinformation, troll factories, and state-controlled media, set against a global 
1 This was stated by one of the participants in the programme, theatre maker Ada Mukhina, in 
an interview. See Mukhina, Unpublished interview with author, online, 2019. 
2 Ibid. 
background of acceleration in technological developments towards total surveillance, 
mediatisation, and virtual reality. This chapter aims to trace the emergence of a new 
documentarism in Russia, which draws on contemporary performance theory and 
practice, as well as developments in technology and digital culture. This can best be 
described as document-based performance, and can be viewed as a complementary 
aesthetic to the more familiar documentary modes of Teatr.doc discussed in the 
previous chapter. The emergence of document-based performance as a visible 
phenomenon in recent years is perhaps a continuation of what Molly Flynn has 
identified as certain cultural anxieties towards the evidentiary status of documents 
and forms of truth-telling in twenty-first-century Russia.3 Similar processes of 
divergence from traditional documentary techniques have elsewhere been described 
as post-documentary or even post/documentary.4 I avoid using such terms here for 
the reason that it is unclear what more they tell us, if anything, about these works, 
other than that a hybridization of documentary and non-documentary forms has 
occurred. Carol Martins preferred term theatre of the real seems a more inclusive, 
less loaded way of conceiving of these diverse performances. 
 The first work to be considered is a collaborative experimental performance 
called , created by director Sergei Morozov, choreographer Alena 
Papina, and composer Dmitrii Mazurov. Marking the twenty-fifth anniversary of the 
Russian Constitution, it is a highly original embodying of the text of the foundational 
legal document of the modern Russian state, which incorporates the spectator into the 
heart of the performance. Presence and event-ness are central to the discursive 
3 See Molly Flynn, Witness Onstage: Documentary Theatre in Twenty-First-Century Russia 
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2020), p. 2. 
4 Post/documentary is the preferred term used by Jan-Nol Thon in his article, in order to 
emphasise that it is not a break with, but a continuation of the documentary genre. See Thon, 
Post/Documentary: Referential Multimodality in Animated Documentaries and 
Documentary Games, Poetics Today, 40 (2019), 269-97. 
power of this work, but nonetheless, as is apparent from the title, the foundational 
material for the emergence of the event and the spectator experience is the 
Constitution as a document.  
 Second will be an analysis of a comparatively more orthodox work, but one 
which is still experimental by nature and far from conventional if viewed from a 
script-based drama perspective. YouTube/  was directed by Grigorii 
Dobrygin, although devised by might be a better description for Dobrygins role, 
considering that this was a collaborative work using ensemble methods, the creation 
of which cannot be attributed to the director alone. In the form of a song-and-dance-
based scenic montage drawn from material collected on social media platform 
YouTube, this work exists firmly on the intersection between documentary drama and 
postdramatic performance. As a work of document-based performance, it reflects an 
emerging, alternative documentary trend in contemporary Russian theatre. 
 Finally, I will examine a performance that brings together the qualities of the 
first two works into a politically-charged feminist critique, effectively utilising the 
power of both documents and postdramatic performance techniques in order to 
address the problems of systemic patriarchy and toxic masculinity. This work keeps 
the name of the original play that it takes as its point of departure  Scottish dramatist 
Gary McNairs Locker Room Talk. Created by Ada Mukhina, Daria Iuriichuk, and 
Olga Tarakanova, it unusually featured an all-female cast and crew. This work 
demonstrates a document-based-performance aesthetic that captures the potential for 
radical theatre making in the contemporary era, and harnesses the power of the 
document at the core of formal experimentation.  
 All three of these works are documentary in essence, but do not fit the 
conventional paradigms of the genre. As such, they reflect an expanded field of 
documentary practice. This expanded field is grounded in performance aesthetics and 
signifies a shift towards a new documentarism. 
  
  was a product of the Meyerhold Centres highly successful 
annual Blackbox laboratory programme, which has been running since 2013 and in 
that time has become a major force in the creation of innovative and original stage 
works in the Russian capital (including Andrei Stadnikovs 2019 Golden Mask-
winning Rodina, amongst others). Premiering on the main stage of the Meyerhold 
Centre in September 2018,  was conceived to mark the twenty-fifth 
anniversary of the creation and establishment of the Constitution of the Russian 
Federation as the foundational document of the state, which had occurred exactly two 
years to the day (12 December) after the ratification of the Belavezha Accords that 
brought about the end of the Soviet Union in all but name. The Russian Constitution, 
which existed unchanged for twenty seven years until the 2020 reforms, has its own 
peculiar back-story, having been written and passed into law during the political crisis 
of 1993. This is a year best remembered for the extraordinary images of the building 
of the Russian parliament, the so-called White House, charred and damaged by tank 
fire after the standoff between the executive and the legislature turned violent (187 
people were killed in the conflict). The Constitution was thus specifically identified 
with President Boris Eltsin, in that it concentrated an unusual amount of power in the 
hands of the executive, to be used as a way out of the political deadlock at the time, 
whilst also shoring up the unpopular neoliberal reform programme of the government. 
As history has shown, these powers then became the tool of Eltsins successor, 
Vladimir Putin, in establishing the patronage network pyramidal system of vertical 
power that we see in place today.5  
Besides this, there are a number of more general humanitarian points in the 
Constitution that make it an important document for recalling the political ideals of 
the time and the extent to which the ruling elite have deviated from them over the 
ensuing quarter-century. These refer to things such as the freedom for all citizens 
from torture, freedom of public assembly, freedom of speech and religion  all things 
that have been increasingly curtailed and violated in recent years. The need to reform 
the Constitution to rebalance the separation of powers is real and has not been 
addressed by the pseudo-reforms carried out in 2020, which only served to reinforce 
the conservative-reactionary agenda of the Putin regime and acted as a cover for the 
real motive behind the reforms, which was the annulment of Putins previous 
presidential terms, allowing him to stay in power until 2036. Of much greater need, 
and unfortunately of much lower priority to the current regime, was respect for and 
upholding of the Constitutions original content relating to civil liberties. The quarter-
century anniversary of the Constitution in 2018, like the centenary of the October 
Revolution in the previous year, was passed over in silence by the authorities. Indeed, 
in another example of financial censorship, approaches made by the Meyerhold 
Centre to the Moscow City Department of Culture regarding monetary support in the 
form of a public grant for the project were roundly ignored. In the light of the 2020 
reforms, it became clear why  the Constitution was a taboo topic and attention to its 
content was considered undesirable, perhaps in anticipation of the political stunt to 
5 See, for example, Nikolai Petrov, Putins Neo-Nomenklatura System and its Evolution in 
Stubborn Structures: Reconceptualizing Post-Communist Regimes, ed. by Blint Magyar 
(Budapest: Central European University Press, 2019), pp. 179-215. 
come less than two years later. There is a point to be made here about the marking of 
an important political event through the simple act of drawing attention to its 
existence in a theatrical performance, when otherwise no official attempts on the state 
or local level were initiated. 
 As with all the works in this chapter, there is no text as such to draw from, so I 
will give a brief overview of the performance and describe its key features.6 Of value 
here is the description of the production offered to spectators on the Meyerhold 
Centre website, which gives important indicators as to the creators intentions, as well 
as to the way that they wished it to be perceived by prospective spectators. It also 
gives us some idea of the expectations that spectators would have had prior to the 
performance, having only read the description online and in the absence of other 
information (the production was not widely reviewed or reported on): 
       ,     
   .      
      
      .  
          
    .   
 ,     ,   .  
         :   
       .7 
This description was also included in the programme (a single folded A4 sheet of 
paper, as is customary at the Meyerhold Centre), which was available in the foyer and 
distributed to ticket holders before admittance to the performance space. The choice 
6 This is based on my own experience of viewing the performance at the Meyerhold Centre in 
Moscow on a research trip in the spring of 2019. It also draws from an interview I conducted 
with the choreographer, Alena Papina, as well as additional materials available online. 
7 See Meyerhold Centre website, <http://meyerhold.ru/konstituciya-work-in-progress/> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. The work-in-progress that appears in the url address seems 
to be a leftover from the Blackbox laboratory performance, after which the website page was 
not updated, rather than indicating that the work was never considered completed. 
of the words performance space here, rather than auditorium or stage, is 
intentional, because although the performance ostensibly took place on the theatres 
Main Stage, the space was stripped out and reconfigured to such an extent that it 
became a vast empty black-box chamber, no longer resembling a conventional theatre 
interior with clear-cut division between performer and spectator. The Russian 
language has an advantage in this respect of calling a theatres various stages , 
which creates no issue with applicability in a contemporary performance context as 
exists in the English language with the word stage. There was no stage as such, no 
raised levels, and no designated auditorium for the audience. Instead, the audience sat 
on the floor around the edge of the space, on bean bags and cushions. A few chairs 
were scattered along three walls of the quadrangular space for those that needed them. 
The fourth wall was occupied by an almost floor-to-ceiling projector screen. By 
utilising every inch of available floor space, up to the toes of the spectators lining the 
perimeter of the room, the performance acquired an expansiveness that could only be 
surpassed by open-air or site-specific work. This sense of scale seemed to reflect the 
challenge of not only representing, but embodying the foundational document of the 
modern-day Russian state. In terms of props, the space that the performers inhabited 
(which was the entire space besides the one metre or so around the perimeter where 
the spectators sat) contained a few lecterns scattered around, with microphone stands 
and loudspeakers accompanying them, and nothing more. The only other notable 
feature in the room was a drum kit and music equipment located up on the balcony 
that runs around the upper level of the space of the Main Stage at the Meyerhold 
Centre. This, as would become clear, was for the musicians who provided a live 
accompaniment to each performance.  
From the description on the website quoted above, the spectator knows in 
advance to expect a reading of the Constitution as a text, which is to say, a reading 
that draws attention to its textual qualities as well as to its content and form. They are 
further led to believe that this reading will carried out in a postdramatic, documentary 
style      and as such we can expect 
something like a neutral transmission of the text, perhaps akin to the aforementioned 
zero position pioneered at Teatr.doc. We are also told that the  of the 
Constitution will utilise sign language and an accelerometer to generate a graphic 
score, which will be reinterpreted by the performers through their voices and bodies. 
The final piece of information that the prospective spectator receives is that there will 
be an immersive element to the show, with their involvement in a  (the 
use of the cyrillicised Anglo-American term happening grounds the production in 
international theatre and performance discourse). In this way, the spectator is 
forewarned and thus forearmed that this is a participatory performance and that they 
will be encouraged to take part in some way, not only to spectate from the sidelines 
(although they can always decline to participate). 
The performance was comprised of three distinct phases, and the transitions 
from one to the next were evolutionary, seamless progressions, rather than being 
broken up by scene changes or intervals, as is the convention in dramatic theatre. The 
only discernible break markers in the otherwise continuous gradual swelling of the 
affective intensity of the performance came from the chapter headings in the text of 
the Constitution itself. The presence of these breaks created micro-pauses for the 
audiences senses to process and catch up with the information being presented. With 
a running time of two and a half hours, and in the absence of an interval, these 
moments did not go unappreciated. The first phase of the performance dealt with 
approximately the first third of the Constitution, which is the most general part, 
relating to fundamental federal-wide laws and rights such as the aforementioned 
freedoms of assembly, speech, and religion, as well as freedom from torture. This 
phase was perhaps the most striking in its sheer novelty. As referred to in the 
productions description but without being elaborated on, the makers of 
 employed an accelerometer, which is a device for measuring and 
recording movement and is now commonly used in smartphones and games consoles 
for this purpose. This device was strapped to the arm of a sign-language interpreter, 
who was translating the text of the Constitution in real time into Russian sign 
language whilst it was being read out initially by the performers, and later on by 
spectators as well. The subtle changes in motion of the interpreters movements were 
thus translated into live-feed velocity charts and projected on to the large screen 
covering the rear wall of the space. The translation appeared as graphs with sharp 
peaks and troughs, and this livestream of simple data was then simultaneously 
watched and re-translated in real time into a somatic-kinetic language of gesture and 
movement by the eighteen performers. All the performers wore identical black outfits 
 t-shirt and loose tracksuit, both with the single word  imprinted in bold 
white letters on front and side. The image of thirty six iterations of the word 
 moving around the space drew out the fact that the Constitution exists for 
each and every citizen of the state, and every citizen is theoretically equally subject to 
its content, even if this is hardly the case in practice. As such, the use of the word 
 on the performers clothing brought attention to the universality of the 
Constitution and its invisible presence, violated or not, in the lives of every citizen. 
An attempt is made to embody this through the choreography, which, as Papina 
makes clear, is designed to extend from the abstract to the quotidian language of 
everyday gesture: 
      ,      
 ,        
   ,   ,  
   -   ,  
,  .        , , 
  .8 
The everyday is emphasised here in Papinas description of the kinds of gestures that 
the performers were encouraged to draw from in their improvisations  scratching 
their heads, doing manicures, or cleaning clothes. Papina describes her approach to 
choreography as horizontal rather than vertical, and focused on the democratization of 
the human body, which is to say, her aesthetic is anti-virtuosic. She describes 
virtuosity in language reminiscent of Mikhail Ugarov and his theorizations of 
contemporary theatre:         
.     - .9 Following from this, it is 
clear why the performers focus on translating and embodying the text of the 
Constitution in the language of everyday gesture.  
Such an approach is also necessary for participatory theatre, as it enables the 
spectator to be drawn into the performance and included in the situational event as it 
plays out in real time. However, these collections of everyday gestures are all built 
around the vocalization of the text itself. Although every element of the performance 
is connected to and dependent on others for its activation, ultimately everything 
develops from the transmission of the text, primarily through the simple act of reading 
the Constitution aloud from start to finish. In this regard, however grounded in 
8 Alena Papina, Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, 2019. 
9 Ibid. 
performance practices  may seem at first glance, there is an 
employment of the Ugarovian documentary device of the uninflected zero position 
in the reading of the text, in which both reader and listener-spectator serve as 
witnesses to the act. This is significant for consideration of the place of the document 
in contemporary performance theatre, but it is also useful for locating the spectator in 
the process of communication and emotional-affective exchange. 
 The second phase of the performance focused on the middle section of the 
Constitution, which addresses the federal composition and hierarchical power 
structure of the Russian state. Each federal constituent has its own gesture in Russian 
sign language  for example St Petersburg is an eagle, Dagestan is a  
traditional hat  and every time a republic or other federal administrative region 
(, , etc) was mentioned during the reading out of the text, the 
corresponding sign gesture for that region would be acted out. In addition to this, the 
performers spent some time going around the perimeter of the space and teaching the 
gestures to spectators on an individual or group basis. Spectators were then 
encouraged to repeat the sign gesture every time the corresponding word was heard 
thereafter. If in the first phase the audience were passive observers on the sidelines, 
then this was the first step in the gradual integration of the spectators into the 
performance. This passage of text is succeeded by one that addresses the powers and 
function of the president, and for convenience of reading, it contains many 
abbreviations of the positions of power in the constitutional hierarchy. This creates 
acronyms that are not designed to be spoken aloud, which presented a pronunciation 
problem for the performers. The solution that the creative team conceived was to 
employ artificial intelligence  specifically Apples iOS personal assistant Siri  to 
read all the clauses that related directly to the president, creating often nonsensical 
sounds that poked gentle fun at the Russian, and indeed Soviet, habit of abbreviating 
titles and names,   .10  
As and when the performers heard one of these acronyms pronounced by Siri, 
they would all simultaneously mimic the robotic pronunciation and shout it out loud, 
whilst continuing to move around and keep the viewers attention. The purpose of 
this, Papina states, was to create a linguistic sculpture of polyphonic sound and 
voice: 
   ,   .    
 ,    ,  Siri  ,  
   , ,   
,  . .     .  
   ,     .11 
Here Papina makes clear that the intention was to utter these acronyms as if they were 
curses, which adds additional nuance to the way that they might be perceived by the 
audience, reacting to the officialese of legal documents such as this one. Thus whilst 
the reading of the text occupied a neutral zero position, the response by the 
performers to the text was not necessarily so. The idea of creating a polyphonic sound 
sculpture to complement the evolving somatic landscape of the performance is clearly 
important. As was made clear from the online description and also repeatedly by 
Papina in our interview, the Constitution was to be translated and incorporated by 
performers and spectators alike, using both body and voice.  
 Following this scene, spectators were invited to come to the lectern and take it 
in turns to read the clauses of the chapter relating to the Parliament of the Russian 
Federation. Meanwhile, the performers resumed their work of interpreting and 
10 Papina appears to be referring here to Mikhail Bulgakovs parody of Soviet acronyms in his 
short story   (1925). 
11 Papina. 
translating the uttered text into the language of the body, specifically that of everyday 
gesture  quite a challenge when the content is the legal function of the state 
parliament, although as Papina says, this was based more on the intonation and 
rhythm of the voice rather than on the content of what was being said.  
 The final phase of the performance involved drawing the spectators further in 
to the action, to the point of active free participation. This was built around one of the 
last chapters of the Constitution, entitled  . Given the theme, the 
creators decided to present this section of the text as a court trial, albeit in a somewhat 
abstracted form. The performers took it in turns to whisper the text to the sign 
language interpreter, who took on the role of the judge, whilst the other performers 
coaxed as many spectators as were willing into the centre of the space and used them 
as props for their increasingly elaborate multi-person interpretive dance sequences. In 
what from a viewers perspective had turned into a spectacle somewhere between 
Japanese buhtoh and a game of Twister, the intensity of the motion continued to 
increase, lending the court room scene a certain ambiguity of interpretation (this was 
perhaps also due to the absence of props and it not being necessarily apparent to every 
viewer what was happening). To quote Papina on this scene: 
      ,    
   ,       ,  
    ,      .  
  ,     ,       
 ,      .12 
The point here is that the now active spectator, who has become a participant in the 
action, is both judging and being judged. The same can be said of participatory 
performance theatre in general. There is an element of the unknown and risk that 
12 Papina. 
theatre makers, performers, and spectators alike engage in with this form of theatre. In 
the words of theatre maker Boris Bakal, this is the high-risk dramaturgy of 
experimental participatory performance.13 It so happens that the framing of the show 
trial [] in the context of the Russian Constitution was the perfect vehicle 
for representing the centrality of this two-way judgement in performance  both 
judging and being judged  because of the way that it brings together the 
performativity of the court trial, the law, and the state apparatus on the one hand, and 
the performance aesthetics of contemporary non-dramatic theatre on the other hand.  
The court scene then transitioned into a rave in the middle of the space, with 
as many spectators as could be enlisted from the sidelines brought into the middle 
(which in the performance I saw was certainly the majority). This was with the 
intention of banishing the symbolic violence of judicial power and replacing it with a 
more human, more personal affective space that would conclude the performance on a 
positive note. Once the chaotic free-form communal dance ended, in a final gesture of 
humanity and interpersonal connection, the performers went around the spectators 
reading sections of verbatim text collected from ordinary people on the street. These 
touched on the most banal, everyday concerns of citizens in the present day, 
symbolically linking the past and the present in the marking of the quarter-century 
anniversary of the passing of the Constitution. This use of pure verbatim at the very 
end of the performance, almost after it had already ended, as a kind of postscript, 
presented a sharp contrast between the highly rhetorical, utopian language of the 
Constitution and the quotidian language of real speech addressing everyday concerns. 
These included, for example, how a citizen is afraid that he will not be able to pay 
rent for his flat that month, and how a schoolgirl felt uncomfortable in her school 
13 Boris Bakal, quoted in Duka Radosavljevi, Theatre-Making: Interplay Between Text and 
Performance in the 21st Century (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013), p. 179. 
uniform. This final moment addresses the question that until then had been left 
unspoken  what use is the Constitution to todays citizens, or indeed what relevance 
does it have to the everyday problems of real life? The utopian ideals contained in the 
Constitution did not materialise after it was written, and remained unrealised twenty 
five years later, so what was the status of this document in peoples lives? Is it an 
inherently unattainable utopia and therefore meaningless empty posturing, or does it 
continue to serve as an important ideological marker that is worth striving for? These 
are the questions that  posed, opening up a topic that perhaps for some 
had not previously existed or had otherwise gone unnoticed. 
 Although the text of the Constitution was read out in its entirety, it was not 
always discernible to the ear of the spectator, as in the moments described above in 
which the performers shouted out acronyms over the top of the reader and equally 
when they took it in turns to whisper the text to the sign language interpreter. As such, 
we should understand the function of the text as creating an affective space in which it 
can be interpreted and translated to the spectator in the language of somatic gesture 
and polyphonic vocal soundscape, and where the interaction of these two elements is 
a generative experience for the spectator. The text, therefore, becomes de-centred, 
functioning as the material base for the performance, but being secondary or 
subsidiary to it. The performance primarily generates its discourse through other non-
textual means. This is perhaps the crucial difference between document-based 
performance and documentary theatre  in the former the text is marginalised and 
secondary to the performance-event, whereas in the latter the text always remains 
central, even if the epistemological validity of the document itself is in doubt or under 
interrogation. The relegation of the text to the level of prop creates problems for 
spectators unaccustomed to this kind of theatre, and this proved to be the case for 
. Papina describes complaints received from viewers who felt that the 
text had been devalued and lost in the performance, but as she also points out, this is 
an artistic interpretation, not a public reading.14 This is in stark contrast to Teatr.doc, 
where respect for the text remains paramount. The two questions that arise here  
relating to the spectator and to the treatment of documents  are central concerns for 
all three productions considered in this chapter, as well as for the thesis as a whole, as 
they map the inter-relationship of text and performance in contemporary Russian 
theatre. There was very little written about this production in the media, not even on 
the usual specialist theatre- and arts-focused platforms, and many spectators walked 
out before the end (the long running time and lack of perceptible plot probably to 
blame for this). Most unfortunately, this epic-scale production that was exemplary of 
the possibilities for hybridised aesthetics in contemporary performance theatre in 
Russia was only performed a handful of times in late 2018 and early 2019, before 
being dropped from the theatres repertoire. This was in spite of it winning the 
coveted Blackbox residency programme and taking one year of preparation to bring to 
fruition, not to mention all of the theatres own limited resources that went into it, due 
to the lack of external funding from public grants. 
 To conclude, a brief word on the politics of . There is a 
discernible tendency in the work towards an aesthetics of the mass form in opposition 
to the individual. However, whilst the mass form may at first seem de-humanising  
as the discrete identity of the individual gets lost in the indiscriminate, faceless mass  
through the process of performance the mass comes to represent an emancipatory 
politics at precisely the level of the individual. On the one hand there is the tyranny of 
14  , ,     ,   .  , 
    - ,      ,    
 . Papina. 
the court scene: spectators atomized and alienated from both the audible sound of the 
reading of the text and the action of the performers, who exclude the spectators from 
their interpretative dance sequences. On the other hand there is the free-form group 
rave that the court room scene gives way to. The effacement that inevitably stems 
from the collective mass of bodies is thus framed as an emancipation of sorts, where 
each performer represents , in a discourse of communitarian collective 
individuality over individualism. In the age of global surveillance capitalism  the 
erosion of personal privacy and civil liberties caused by big tech on the one side and 
state security services on the other  and in the context of the recent roll-out of 
Chinese-built face recognition technology in the Russian capital by Mayor Sobianin, 
the empowerment of individual effacement takes on ever greater meaning and 
political significance as an act of resistance.15 In this regard, the final moment where 
short verbatim texts of ordinary citizens concerns are recited quietly on a one-to-one 
basis between performer and spectator functions as a re-individualizing of the 
collective body within a new political ecology of everyday humanism, free from 
hierarchical power and surveillance. Papina described the ending of the performance 
as such:        
,   ,  .16 This idea of the 
re-appropriation of ones life from the mechanistic world of state power and the law 
through democratization in performance reflects a theatre firmly engaged in the 
politics of aesthetics. In , it is the intersection of the universal form of 
the collective mass with the particular form of the verbatim testimony that generates 
its emancipatory political discourse. Textual documents can be seen to perform a 
15 Surveillance capitalism is Shoshana Zuboffs term. See Zuboff, The Age of Surveillance 
Capitalism: The Fight for a Human Future at the New Frontier of Power (London: Profile 
Books, 2019). 
16 Papina.  
number of different functions in this work, ranging from problematized oppressor, to 
democratic humanizer. Whether de-centred, silenced, shouted over, whispered or 
banished, documents were nonetheless present throughout. This is representative of a 
new documentarism in Russia, one that draws from an expanded field of ensemble 
performance practices in its treatment of documents. The consideration of two more 
productions in this chapter will reflect on other ways that documents are used in 
contemporary performance theatre in Russia, and how they complement what we 
have seen in this work. 
YouTube/  
Resembling a kind of postmodern, multimediatized variety theatre 
performance, YouTube/  is reminiscent of the scenic montage aesthetic of 
Vsevolod Meierkhold and the early Soviet avant-garde (the similarities being a 
reminder of the contingency of the term postdramatic, with its implication of 
following after drama in temporal terms). The production began life as an actor 
training exercise at Oleg Kudriashovs GITIS Masters programme, on a course led 
by actor-director Grigorii Dobrygin, who himself studied under Kudriashov on both 
the actors and directors programmes and is well-known in his own right as a film 
actor. According to Dobrygin, one of Kudriashovs exercises at GITIS is people 
watching [  ].17 Wishing to approach the task differently, the 
students on his course collectively decided to gather materials for the exercise not 
17 Grigorii Dobrygin, quoted in an interview with Iaroslav Zabaluev. See Zabaluev, Glavnyi 
geroi  eto otdelenie politsii: Grigorii Dobrygin rasskazal o svoem spektakle YouTube/V 
politsii, Gazeta.ru, 2 December 2016 
<https://www.gazeta.ru/culture/2016/12/02/a_10395623.shtml> [accessed 23 December 
2020]. 
from real life but instead from the social media platform YouTube. In this, the 
student-actors reflected the millennial generations perception of the world, which 
now exists as much in the virtual-digital space as it does in non-mediated reality. As 
Dobrygin observed,          
.18 In this regard, the production that emerged out of the actor training 
exercise at GITIS is responding to the zeitgeist, and to the changes in the way that 
younger generations perceive the world around them. The fact that we now look more 
into the screens of our smartphones than at our surroundings in everyday life has 
fundamentally shifted the way that we observe others  a large part of our common 
habit of people watching is now done online, in the vast digital realms of social 
media, including Facebook, Instagram, Tiktok and YouTube, the latter of which is a 
platform for live and recorded video performance, playback, dissemination and 
commentary. Of most significance here is YouTubes archival quality  everything 
from high art to the previously ephemeral everyday banal is uploaded and stored on 
its servers indefinitely. Dobrygin described the process of gathering materials as such: 
  ,         
,          
  YouTube.     ,   
  .     ,   
    , , .  ,  
       - .19 
The idea of creating a study of ordinary people, with all their defects and flaws, is 
nothing new to twenty-first-century Russian theatre, where Teatr.doc has been doing 
exactly that since 2002, but what is significant about this production is the approach 
that it takes to the interpretation and subsequent re-presentation of the scenes of 
18 Ibid. 
19 Ibid. 
everyday life found on the video sharing site. This is where it diverges from the 
Teatr.doc mode of documentary theatre as explored in the previous chapter. As 
Dobrygins words above make clear, the materials the students collected were not 
conscious performances uploaded by video bloggers or professionals, they were 
chance recordings of moments from everyday life. This is not to say that the people 
featured in the clips were necessarily unaware that they were being filmed. The key 
point is that they were non-professionals whose actions were not commercially-driven 
or scripted. In this sense they are representative of life in its new digitally-mediated 
performative mode.  
As a digital archive of the everyday, YouTube is overwhelming in its vastness, 
so for the purposes of creating a coherent performance using material found on the 
video-sharing platform, the creators needed a theme. That theme became the police 
station. The performance is spatially oriented, with a scenic construction that is closer 
to the variety show than to the drama. As to how this particular social setting became 
the focal point, Dobrygin explained: 
-,     ,     
  ,     . 
    .  -,  
        - 
  ,        
 .20 
The detention cell  or  as it is colloquially known  features here (and 
will reappear in the next chapter in relation to Dmitrii Danilovs   
) as a generative space for social observation in contemporary Russian 
theatre. The whole production owes its existence to the police force itself, whose 
employees record videos from their working life and subsequently a small portion of 
20 Ibid. 
these are leaked on to YouTube. The creators debt to the police for this wealth of 
material is one of the ironies that gives this production its contextual richness.  
 In a production that is not linear, does not have recurring or named characters, 
and contains no discernible plot as such, but yet remains definitively theatre, the 
twentieth-century Soviet avant-garde concept of montage is useful for considering 
how non-dramatic theatre functions without the usual support structure that is 
characteristic of the drama (plot, character development, dialogue, etc.). Montage 
relies on the impression created for the spectator by the individual scene and by its 
combination with others, which cumulatively create the image of the theme, as 
filmmaker and montage theorist Sergei Eizenshtein called it.21 Theatre scholar 
Jonathan Pitches summarizes the effects that a montage aesthetic had in 
Meierkholds theatre as follows:  
An episodic structure works against the incremental progression of 
Naturalism. It therefore supports all manner of stylization. Montage is 
intrinsically musical: the arrangement of the overall production can be likened 
to a composition. [] The collisions of ideas generated by montage naturally 
lead to the mixing of opposites and hence to the grotesque. And the montage 
itself is facilitated by the view of character as inconsistent or fluid, the result 
one might say of multiple masks in performance.22 
Episodic structure, stylization, musical composition, the grotesque, inconsistent and 
fluid characters  these attributes of the montage aesthetic are all applicable 
descriptions of Dobrygins production, with the addition of multimedia technology 
(TV monitors, speaker systems) that also becomes an actor in the performance. 
According to Dobrygin, the lead actor of the show is not a person but in fact the 
21 Sergei Eizenshtein, The Film Sense, trans. by Jay Leyda (London: Faber & Faber, 1943; 
repr. 1986), p. 59. 
22 Jonathan Pitches, Vsevolod Meyerhold (London: Routledge, 2003), p. 75. Italics in original. 
police station.23 When the main character of a performance, upon which the entire 
work hangs, is a non-human inanimate spatial setting, we are clearly in a form of 
theatre that cannot be called drama and must be approached from a different 
perspective. In its irreverent re-presentation of documents (in this case video clips 
found online) in a variety-style montage sequence, YouTube/  reflects an 
expanded, hybridised field of documentary practice, grounded in performance 
aesthetics.  
 After being staged at GITIS, YouTube/  subsequently transferred to 
Teatr Praktika, where Oleg Kudriashovs theatre studio has a residency. It premiered 
in December 2016 in the theatres  . With a running time of just over an 
hour, it conforms to the norm of  , where around an hour is customary, 
especially for documentary plays. The description provided on the website is laconic, 
to say the least:  
   found drama   ,   
    YouTube.24 
Dobrygin states that the creators of the performance invented the term found drama 
themselves. Putting aside the issue of genre, what this choice of terminology usefully 
reflects is the origin of the materials for the scenes. These are described as found, 
which emphasises the documentary origins of the production and the presence of the 
document (broadly conceived to include video) behind the performance, as well as 
highlighting the element of chance involved in the selection of materials. The 
document in this sense is the referent, as the performers actions refer out to the 
23      . Dobrygin, in Zabaluev. 
24 This appeared on the productions website page, which was still active on the Teatr 
Praktika website even after the work was removed from the repertoire in 2019, but has since 
been taken down.  
original source material, whilst their actions also exist independently, grounded in the 
present moment of the event. In contrast to documentary plays where the text is 
central, documents in these kinds of performances are de-centred, functioning more as 
the base material upon which scenic action is built. Dobrygin said in this regard: 
    ,  . ,  
  ,         
      .25  
The approach outlined here has strong echoes of that expressed by Alena Papina in 
regards to the making of  and to her approach towards choreography 
(see above). Taking the document as the point of origin (be that YouTube video or 
legal code), and transforming it into the language of performance, these two 
productions operate in a common discursive space, even though they are aesthetically 
very different. Dobrygins reference here to the search for scenic equivalents recalls 
the description of Meierkholdian montage by Pitches above. These scenic 
equivalents were combined with each other in a montage effect to create the 
Eizenshtein-ian image of the theme. 
Occupying the space between documentary and performance, document-based 
performance generates a new language of theatre that is derived from both forms and 
their respective realms of discourse. Dobrygin claims that nowadays,     
     .26 This alleged 
short attention span of the first digital generation is reflected in the structure of the 
work, which is fragmentary and plotless. In spite of this, however, there is a theme 
that emerges from the work as a whole  the black-comedy absurd world of the 
Russian police station. A description of three scenes will give a clearer idea of the 
25 Dobrygin, in Zabaluev. 
26 Ibid. 
image of the theme that emerges. This includes a song, a dance routine, and the 
finale. Together these episodes reflect the variety nature of the production, which is 
a composition of different numbers that are only tangentially connected, by the theme 
of the police station. The song and the dance routine are separately available to watch 
on YouTube, recorded and uploaded unofficially by spectators from their camera 
phones (something that the audience is asked not to do, but judging by the number of 
smartphones being held up around the auditorium that are easily visible in these two 
clips, the capitals theatre-goers have few qualms about ignoring this request).27 There 
is a certain irony in these clips that are themselves derived from YouTube videos 
being uploaded back on to the same platform and watched again by the public as new 
archival documents. That said, however, the iterative quality of such material and of 
the YouTube archive more broadly is a defining feature of social media and meme 
culture. The finale is not available online, so it will be recounted from memory, as a 
subjective account of the impression made on a spectator.  
 Starting with the song, this illicit video recording from one of the 
performances of the show was uploaded to YouTube in May 2018, has a running time 
of one minute thirty eight seconds, and at the time of writing has been viewed around 
five hundred times. By YouTube standards, this is very few. As a point of 
comparison, the original version of the song that is sung in the clip  Konstantin 
Stupins     has been viewed over 4.2 million times, albeit 
over a longer time period (the video was posted in 2014).28 The clip from YouTube/ 
 that features this song sees a policeman  in full blue uniform, including hat 
27 The song and the dance clips can be found respectively at: Olga Troshchenko, Youtube/ v 
politsii, pesnia, online video recording, YouTube, 1 May 2018, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r4RTT3HbjF8> [accessed 23 December 2020]; 
Troshchenko, Youtube/ v politsii, tanets, online video recording, YouTube, 1 May 2018, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qx8NLqQBODs> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
28 Konstantin Stupin, Bushy tail Fox, online video recording, YouTube, 29 April 2014, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZJA_2CTNjfA> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
and tie  reclining in a chair and strumming coarsely on an acoustic guitar whilst 
knocking his head back, one eye shut, and singing in a gruff, gravelly voice about the 
travails of a life hard lived. For those not familiar with Stupin, he is a cult hero of 
underground post-Soviet rock music, as famous for his battles with heroin addiction, 
petty crime, and many years spent in prison, as he is for his  musical style 
and irreverent, expletive-laden lyrics. The image of the policeman, therefore, brazenly 
growling out a Stupin song, is a strong juxtaposition, the irony of which was not lost 
on the audience, who laughed their approval. The connection of the police force to the 
underground criminal world is not an uncommon cultural trope in post-Soviet Russia, 
it has to be said. In this regard, the Stupin-singing policeman does not so much 
surprise anyone in the audience, as it does reinforce cultural assumptions and provide 
ironic amusement for the spectator. It is as much a moment of cultural intertextuality 
as it is social commentary. Actor Igor Kuznetsovs rendition of the song is almost 
virtuosic, which adds to the variety-show feel of the occasion. This gig scene is not 
connected to any other scene per se, and in referring out to a well-known musician in 
Stupin, it is self-sustaining (hence why it makes for a good online clip). However, it 
also exists as a part of the whole  it is a component of the total scenic affect 
generated by the performance, which means considering it in aggregate with other 
scenes.  
 Part of what made the dance scene that found its way on to YouTube so 
memorable was its striking title     . Whether this was the 
title of an actual YouTube clip involving real police officers or not is unclear. 
Whatever the original source material was, it is transformed by the GITIS students 
into a high-camp dance routine, which is evidently drawn from the actions and 
movements of physical-combat training. These inherently violent actions are queered 
in the process of transformation to a scenic equivalent. The dance routine is 
performed to a backing track of a hit pop song by post-Soviet estrada star Stas 
Kostiushkin (famous as one half of group  ) called ,   
 (2014). In her influential 1964 essay On Camp, Susan Sontag claims that 
pure camp is always nave, and that the essential element of pure camp is a 
seriousness that fails.29 A viewing of the music video for Kostiushkins song would 
testify to the high (or pure) campness of his estrada style, and no small element of 
this is transferred on to the routine of the performers in this scene.30 The actors are all 
dressed in the distinctive two-tone blue uniform of the Russian police force, with 
accompanying star-encrusted service hat and .31 When the all-male dance 
troupe in YouTube/  camply feign to slap and kick an imaginary  
combatant in sync with Kostiushkins music whilst dressed in police uniform, the 
playfulness of the scene is underlined by its camp aesthetic and by the interweaving 
of ironic cultural references with the reality of police violence. The  is the 
imaginary target in this instance, but given the notoriously indiscriminate use of 
violence by the Russian police force in recent years, there is an easy slippage here 
between social groups, with the , football fan, and peaceful protester existing 
on a short continuum.  
Underlying the immediate humour of this high-camp dance routine is 
institutionalised police violence and its indiscriminate application. These institutions 
of power and law enforcement are partly queered through the scenic transformation 
into the language of theatre. Following the passing of one of the most recent 
29 Susan Sontag, On Camp, in Against Interpretation and Other Essays (London: Penguin 
Classics, 2009), pp. 275-92 (pp. 282-83). 
30 The music video can be found here: Alexander Igudin, A-Dessa Zhenshchina, ia ne 
tantsuiu, online video recording, YouTube, 20 September 2014, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f9iE8b8jh2A> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
31 This lends the performance a striking resemblance to the striptease routine from the 1997 
British cult film The Full Monty, which was also notable for its (albeit knowing) campness. 
censorship laws, that forbidding the ill-defined concept of disrespect to authority, 
which came into law in March 2019, the inappropriate wearing of official service 
uniforms has essentially been criminalised. There have been a number of incidents of 
actors getting into trouble as a result of negative portrayals of figures of so-called 
authority, such as the case of actor Dmitrii Smolev being arrested and held in 
custody for more than a week for a YouTube video in which he was dressed as a 
police sergeant and pretended to be drunk.32 With this most recent legislative 
development, YouTube/  was forcibly relocated to within the grey area of 
legal uncertainty some time after its premiere in 2016, thus acquiring additional, 
contextual subversiveness as a result. The fact that the show was dropped from the 
theatres repertoire at around the same time as this incident perhaps reflected the new 
atmosphere of self-censorship in the cultural sphere.  
 The final scene of the show differs from all the others in that the actors are not 
the focus, the TV monitors are. All attention turns to the two screens positioned on the 
walls that up to that point have been used as secondary props to display the scene 
headings, as they were for the dance routine described above. For the finale, however, 
a video clip retrieved from YouTube is shown on the screens in the original as a 
video, without being translated into a scenic equivalent. According to Sontag, the 
ultimate camp statement is its good because its awful.33 This statement seems to 
apply to the clip found by the creators of YouTube/  and used for the shows 
finale. It was so perfect in its absurdity that it had to be shown in full on screens rather 
than acted out. The background context to this clip is the Western sanctions imposed 
on Russia after the events of 2014 and the subsequent counter-sanctions by Russia 
32 ProRU News Channel, Akter sygral pianogo politseiskogo i poluchil 8 sutok aresta, online 
video recording, YouTube, 1 August 2019, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TQkc1pGvDCw> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
33 Sontag, p. 292. 
that placed restrictions on imports of certain food products, predominantly from the 
European Union. In the wake of the so-called counter-sanctions, it became known 
that Russian border patrols were seizing newly contraband goods and destroying 
them. In this clip, police officers show to the camera that they are in possession of an 
E.U. chicken and resolve to destroy the . They do this by placing the 
small chicken carcass on the ground in the path of a huge old Soviet tractor, and 
proceed to drive the tractor back and forth over the dead animal whilst the other 
officers stand nearby, observing proceedings as witnesses, until the job is deemed 
done. The sheer size of the tractor in contrast to the tiny packed chicken gives this 
real-life scene a strong element of the grotesque. Too unbelievable to not be shown in 
the original, the actors in their police uniforms stand to attention and salute the TV 
monitors as the clip is run. For additional piquancy, the Russian national anthem 
loudly rings out around the room in accompaniment. The use of genuine archival 
footage from YouTube for the finale is a dramatically effective way to end the show, 
whilst also reminding us that this is a work grounded in such material, if by that point 
the absurdity of it all had reached such a degree that we as spectators had forgotten 
the documentary-archival nature of what we are seeing. As an instance of new 
documentarism, YouTube/  is a document-based performance that draws 
from the vast yet relatively untouched digital video archive that is YouTube in the 
construction of its absurdist-grotesque scenes of life in a Russian police station. 
With the significant caveat that YouTube is a platform owned by the worlds 
largest surveillance capitalist firm Google, the online video sharing site retains huge 
and still-growing potential as a source of material for documentary theatre, and indeed 
for any form of art that seeks to explore questions about the present through the use of 
archival documents. Making sense of the world through the collation, re-presentation, 
and interpretation of documents has always been the operational mode of 
documentary theatre and continues to be so, regardless of the particular form of 
document that is used. Similar to the loosening of the limits of fine art to an expanded 
field of practice in modernity, documentary theatre is benefitting from recasting the 
net wider into the digital space of content sharing in the realm of social media. The 
existence of this new archive and its exploitation by data miners and big tech firms 
should encourage artists to do the same, as a creative, ethical response to the crisis of 
democracy that surveillance capitalism has brought about.34 In a simplified sense, the 
use of YouTube in creating a show for Teatr Praktika is comparable to the 
surveillance capitalists profiting from the platform. It takes the raw materials 
willingly uploaded by its billions of users and processes them, with the ultimate aim 
of making sense of them in a way that is meaningful to consumers, the difference 
being that in this case it happens to be theatre goers seeking entertainment, rather than 
commercial companies seeking business insights. 
YouTube/  can perhaps be viewed as the analogue cousin of another 
satirical high-camp performance to be found on YouTube. In January 2019, a group 
of young male students at the Ulianovsk Civil Aviation Academy released a clip of 
themselves dancing semi-naked around their dormitory in a memetic parody of a 
parody  originally made by British Army soldiers in 2013  of the Benny Benassi hit 
pop song Satisfaction (2002).35 The original music video to this song involved 
scantily dressed women humorously demonstrating the functions of DIY equipment. 
This copy of a copy by the Ulianovsk cadets led to a public furore, which threatened 
34 Zuboff describes democracy as under siege by surveillance capitalist firms. See Zuboff, p. 
35 Aleksei Xhlebin, Kak razvlekaiut piloty mezhdu poletami, Ulianovsk snova znamenit, 
online video recording, YouTube, 16 January 2018, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AjBuk-onVWM> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
the future careers of the young men.36 Their plight caught the imagination of Russian 
social media and subsequently inspired a remarkable number of similar parodies by 
groups of citizens who came out publicly in support. This included Petersburg 
, Moscow State University skiers,  cadets, builders from Khimki, and a 
group of sewing factory workers, to name a few. The flood of videos imitating the 
Ulianovsk cadets were all uploaded to YouTube and helped propel the original video 
to fame, with over 1.25 million views.37 Whilst this is the kind of public visibility that 
fringe theatre in Russia rarely enjoys, there are notable similarities in the processes 
that underlie the professional stage performance of YouTube/  and the non-
professional home video made by the Ulianovsk cadets. The chief similarity between 
them is their iterative quality and the ability of both to do what Lavender describes in 
relation to viral YouTube video performances  to morph through different frames of 
reference.38 What started off as light distraction for the Ulianovsk cadets during time 
off quickly became political, as the video caught the attention of the authorities, and 
the young men and their bodies were drawn into the overactive regulatory regime of 
High Putinist conservative reactionism. As the examination of the cultural policy 
documents revealed above, tight control and regulation of youth education and 
development is a primary concern for the realisation of the   
 of the ideal society of the future. This was clearly demonstrated in the 
public castigation of the young men, which was framed in the terms of social, 
political, and sexual norms. 
36 See Vsevolod Boiko, Nosit furazhku s trusami ne zapreshcheno. Chem zakonchilas 
istoriia s tantsami kursantov, BBC Russian, 18 January 2018 
<https://www.bbc.com/russian/news-42737449> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
37 The original video is now hosted by many different users, who have reposted it. This figure 
is a rough total of those that are the most viewed at the time of writing. 
38 Andy Lavender, Performance in the Twenty-First Century: Theatres of Engagement 
(Abingdon: Routledge, 2016), p. 125. 
Authenticity is cited by some scholars as the defining cultural trope of the 
digital age, as we increasingly search for the authentic in an ever more artificial, 
virtual world.39 It was seemingly the element of authenticity that made the Ulianovsk 
cadets parody dangerous, transgressing as it did the hardening conservative mores of 
High Putinist cultural policy. Whilst YouTube/ , by its very nature as theatre 
and therefore not real, could not function with the same symbolic power, it can still 
be viewed as a manifestation of what social historian James C. Scott called 
infrapolitics.40 Infrapolitics are the micro-political actions of resistance and/or 
opposition to dominant power structures that take place every day but are invisible to, 
or go unnoticed in, the open political realm. Crucially, according to Scott, 
infrapolitical actions are the elementary forms of political life on which more 
elaborate, open, institutional forms may be built and on which they are likely to 
depend for their vitality.41 Scott locates these everyday actions in what he calls the 
hidden transcript, which is in contrast to the public transcript.42 In this 
conceptualization, there is a division between public and private discourse that 
privileges the visibility of those in positions of power. In infrapolitics, discourses of 
true collective feeling or opinion that are invisible in the mainstream political realm 
can be detected in less visible forums outside of it. When, however, the hidden 
transcript irrupts unexpectedly into the public realm, it temporarily exists in a liminal 
space between private and public, making up one of the many acts of micro-resistance 
that collectively form the base of real politics and without which the latter cannot 
exist. Theatre, of which new documentarism is a part, traditionally exists neither 
39 See, for example, Daniel Schulze, Authenticity in Contemporary Theatre and Performance: 
Make It Real (London: Bloomsbury, 2017). See also Lavender, and Rutten. 
40 James C. Scott, Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts (New Haven: 
Yale University Press, 1990), pp. 183-201. 
41 Scott, p. 200. 
42 Scott, pp. 4-5. 
fully in the hidden nor public realm, taking place behind doors, but nonetheless 
accessible through the purchase of a ticket (the exceptions to this  such as street 
performance, which is public, and studio theatre, which is hidden  prove the rule). 
As such, theatre always has the potential to act as a conduit between the two realms. 
Its liminal status as performance that is not real provides a platform for alternative 
discourses to the dominant to rise to the surface and threaten the integrity of the real 
public transcript. Thus, whilst YouTube/  could not achieve the same 
explosive subversiveness as the Ulianovsk cadets achieved, it was nonetheless a 
small but significant bellwether of broader cultural trends and collective feeling at the 
time, hidden in the less visible realms of public discourse.  
Locker room talk 
Locker room talk is an adaptation of a play by Scottish dramatist Gary 
McNair.43 It is notable for a number of reasons, not least of which is the fact that it 
involved an entirely female production team, down to the stage crew. The creators of 
the production  director Ada Mukhina, choreographer Daria Iuriichuk, and critic-
turned-theatre-maker Olga Tarakanova  were all women below the age of thirty at 
the time, and were keen to point out that female includes anyone identifying as 
such.44 Given the paucity of rigorous feminist discourse in contemporary Russian 
theatre, this is already a good indicator of what kind of production this is. The history 
43 Following the differing conventions in Russian and English capitalization of titles, Locker 
room talk refers to the Russian adaptation of Gary McNairs original Locker Room Talk 
(London: Oberon Books, 2017). 
44    ,      ,  ,  
   . See production page on Meyerhold Centre website: 
<http://meyerhold.ru/locker-room-talk-2/> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
of Locker room talk starts at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival in 2017, when Mukhina 
was in attendance at a performance of McNairs verbatim play about the phenomenon 
of so-called locker room talk, which is the often misogynistic, sexist, derogatory 
discourse that goes on behind closed doors in the exclusively male homosocial space, 
typified by the locker room or changing room. The play was inspired by the 
revelations of the sexist language used by then new US President Donald Trump as he 
described what amounted to sexual harassment to a journalist in 2005, and his later 
dismissal of this language as mere locker room banter.45 McNair set out to explore 
this phenomenon further, and his play is described as honest conversations with men 
when women are not around.46  
More than a year after seeing McNairs verbatim drama about male locker 
room talk in Edinburgh, Mukhina participated in the Meyerhold Centres Blackbox 
residency programme, which in its 2018 edition was dedicated to documentary 
theatre. The art-director of the Meyerhold Centre, Elena Kovalskaia, wished to 
reconsider the documentary form as a technique of theatre making, questioning its 
applicability and utility some two decades after its emergence as a major force in 
post-Soviet Russian theatre. Writing in an article for Teatr journal, Kovalskaia 
attributed this interrogation of the old documentary methods to the participants in the 
residency: 
45 David A. Fahrenthold, Trump recorded having extremely lewd conversation about women 
in 2005, Washington Post, 8 October 2016 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-lewd-
conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-bf8a-
3d26847eeed4_story.html> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
46 Website of Gary McNair: <https://www.garymcnair.co.uk/locker-room-talk/> [accessed 23 
December 2020]. 
     ,     
     .    , 
     .47 
In an interview I conducted with Mukhina, however, she contradicted Kovalskaias 
version of events, giving credit precisely to Kovalskaia for challenging the 
participants to re-think the possibilities of the genre: 
 ,     ,    
 ,    ,    
  ,  ,   , 
   , : 20      
,   .    -   
.48 
The Blackbox programme at the Meyerhold Centre always entails the participants 
submitting proposals for productions at the conclusion of the residency. The most 
promising proposal is selected, given financial and practical backing, and ultimately 
shown on the theatres Main Stage. As a result of this laboratory, Mukhina suggested 
to Iuriichuk and Tarakanova that they propose  as an all-female working group  to 
adapt McNairs verbatim text, exploring the effect of misogynistic language on the 
female body. Their proposal was selected, and the Russian adaptation of McNairs 
play premiered at the Meyerhold Centre in June 2019. Although the status of this 
production as a documentary work is not immediately apparent by conventional 
standards, in the context of McNairs verbatim text and of the Meyerhold Centres 
documentary laboratory programme, it becomes apparent that, similarly to the 
previous two works in this chapter, we are dealing with the new documentarism 
sought by Kovalskaia.  
47 Kovalskaia, Krutye pandusy, p. 55. Aleksandr Rodionov is the son of Elena Gremina. 
48 Mukhina, Unpublished interview.  
If in the verbatim method, theatre makers sought a social group or individual 
as an object of investigation, then the generation of new documentarists has a 
tendency to take itself as its object. There is a process of subjectivization here similar 
to that which occurred with the rise of identity politics and third-wave feminism (to 
which Locker room talk is connected by the feminist activists involved in the work). 
This process is also visible in the work of Teatr.doc after 2010, when the search for 
objectivity and the zero position were partly abandoned in favour of subjective 
truths and explorations of subjectivity more generally. Where Locker room talk 
departs from documentary theatre is in its de-centring of the text, and in its 
employment of somatic practices from contemporary dance, performance art, and 
participatory theatre. In this approach, it has much in common with the winner of the 
Blackbox residency from the previous year,  (although stylistically 
they are very different). Under Kovalskaias stewarding, this kind of document-based 
performance that reflects an expanded field of documentary practice seems to be an 
emerging trend at the Meyerhold Centre.  
 What the spectator sees unfold during a performance of Locker room talk is an 
investigation  the working methods of the team in their attempts to unpack and 
comprehend the verbatim text that lies at the base of the production. The performance 
is presented in the form of a conference, with presentations, slideshows, and panel 
discussions. It opens with the projection of the running order on to a large screen 
positioned in the centre of the stage. It is worth noting in this regard that the stage is 
configured as a black box space, so although there is a delineation between 
performance space and auditorium where the spectators are seated, the stage is not 
raised from the level of the first row of seats. This means that audience members can 
be summoned on to the stage without difficulty. This is especially important for the 
final scene, or  as they are called, where spectators must be able to enter the 
performance space quickly and with ease, when they are individually summoned. The 
other notable features of the stage set-up include a long table positioned stage right, 
where the mixing desk is stationed in plain view, rather than hidden out of sight as is 
customary. Performers sit at the table when not directly involved in the presentation 
taking place. They sit behind laptop screens, surrounded by microphones and cables. 
Stage left is a green screen and camcorder on a tripod, waiting expectantly to be 
brought into the action.  
If there is any doubt about the seriousness of the creators intent, it is quickly 
dispelled as they introduce their work from behind slick transparent lecterns that give 
an impression of weightlessness. In images reminiscent of Meierkholds futurist 
production of Maiakovskiis  (1929), the presenters are equipped with clipboards 
and headsets, and are dressed in costumes that resemble lab coats and medical scrubs, 
designed by contemporary Petersburg artist Anastasiia Kizilova. This format of 
conference-performance is a close relative of the lecture-performance genre pioneered 
in recent years most notably by French social scientist and philosopher Bruno 
Latour.49 This trend is also visible in the hugely popular phenomenon of TED Talks 
and its many imitators, which are all products of the rise of the internet and of 
YouTube as an online free digital archive, as explored earlier in relation to YouTube/ 
. The first thing that the audience is presented with in Locker room talk is a 
schedule for the conference-performance, which gives a good sense of the themes that 
will be addressed. This appeared projected on to a large screen in full view of the 
audience and looked as follows: 
49 See, for example, Latours 2018 lecture-performance Inside, available in two different 
versions on YouTube. 
    locker room talk: 
 (-)   ,   
  (-)   ,   
  ( )   ,  
 
 lol [sic] ( )    
et al. 
    (-)    
 (-)    et al. 
 ( ) 
In McNairs original play, there are fourteen sections dealing with different aspects of 
toxic masculine discourse. Here it is cut down to six sections, with the audience being 
invited on stage for a seventh, in what is effectively the post-performance discussion. 
This is in the best tradition of Russian documentary theatre, where the post-
performance discussion is an essential component, but here it is reconfigured into a 
less familiar format  the , or buffet reception, complete with a selection of 
fruit, biscuits, and confectionery for the audience to enjoy whilst informally 
interacting with each other and discussing their impressions with the performers. 
Mukhina cites a lack of time and resources that prevented the team from investigating 
and presenting on every section of McNairs text (they managed less than half). 
However, from a spectators perspective, the performance did not suffer from a lack 
of material, and indeed perhaps benefitted from the enforced cuts, which had the 
effect of making the choices of specific topics more targeted and selective, even if this 
was not entirely by design. The list of  indicates the uncompromising 
feminist critique of toxic masculinity, casual sexism, and patriarchy more broadly that 
is to come. Some of the key moments from the performance will be described in more 
detail to reflect on the tactics used by the creators for convincing the audience that 
locker room talk is a social problem worth addressing. 
 According to Mukhina, sections one and two were made first, performed as 
preliminary sketches for the Meyerhold Centre management and staff, as a way of 
monitoring the progress of the newly-commissioned work as it was taking shape. 
Entitled  and  , they both confront the gender inequality 
that continues to exist in contemporary society in spite of many wishing to believe to 
the contrary. The performers start by repeating aloud the warning contained in the 
description on the webpage:  
    /    
,      
 .50 
They go on to list the trigger warnings, so as to fully inform their audience about 
what they are going to see. These warnings include  ,  
,    ,   
,     .51 All these features come 
out with especial clarity in the second , which explores the scoring systems 
used by men to evaluate womens looks. As to be expected, these are entirely 
superficial evaluative systems, and are extremely crude. There is a particularly 
damning scene in which the group explores the evaluation of a woman as a paper bag 
job  this involves Iuriichuk putting various different kinds of carrier bag over her 
50 Meyerhold Centre website. 
51 Ibid. 
head, in an attempt to investigate the practicality of concealing a womans head 
during sex. The unsurprising conclusion is that it is not only discomforting and 
impractical but also poses a real danger of suffocation. Although this experiment 
takes a piece of locker room banter and literalises it in a manner that few would 
intend in practice, it nonetheless starkly reveals the implicit violence that underlies 
this kind of casual sexist language that occurs without thought or reflection on its 
implications.  
The paper bag scene is combined with an investigation into the problematic 
notion of the ideal female body, which is mentioned in the original text in reference 
to the character played by TV star Pamela Anderson in the hit US series Baywatch.52 
To probe this idea in combination with the previous one, Mukhina changes into a red 
swimsuit similar to the one famously worn by Anderson, and in front of the green 
screen she begins to run on the spot. Using the camcorder in conjunction with a 
handheld iPhone, they are able to project onstage a livestream video of Mukhina 
running along a generic beach with her face distorted, in order to achieve both notions 
of the ideal body and the paper bag job simultaneously. Although there is a heavy 
dose of irony in this literalised enactment of a male discourse not necessarily intended 
to be taken literally  and indeed it drew a great deal of laughter and astonished 
bemusement from the (predominantly female) audience  it is intended to make a 
serious point. Clearly, however, the emotional response will be different for different 
genders. Whilst for cis women it may be shocking, revelatory, infuriating, or 
informative (or perhaps none of these), for cis men it is more likely to be 
embarrassing, shameful, reflective, challenging to identity and/or self, and re-
evaluative (or perhaps none of these).  
52 Anderson starred from 1992 to 1997, although the show itself ran from 1989 to 1999. 
One of the questions for the theatre makers in their preliminary investigations 
had been to what extent misogynistic discourse is universal or particular to country or 
language. This was answered in one of the internal previews at the Meyerhold Centre 
when, upon seeing this scene, one of the young male directors from the theatre 
commented to the team:    -, ,    , 
   ,   -?53 This was much to the surprise of the 
creative team of young women, who had not known prior to this that such a joke 
existed amongst men in Russia, as well as in the English-speaking world. The 
difficulty cis men have in understanding why these issues are important to women, 
and indeed why the phenomenon of locker room talk is a problem at all, was aptly 
reflected in the response by then artistic director of the theatre, Viktor Ryzhakov, who 
was allegedly struggling to grasp what the all-female creative team were trying to 
achieve with their performance. Kovalskaia wrote in Teatr journal how Ryzhakov 
doubted that     .54 In our interview, 
Mukhina commented on this: 
,  ,   , 
     ,    ?    
,       .55 
As Mukhina points out, the problem is not just the locker room language itself. The 
problem also lies in the inability of many men to appreciate why it is an issue or even 
to acknowledge it as such. This is where the scenes that investigate the content and 
implications of locker room language and toxic masculinity more generally can be 
effective  they can initiate processes of re-evaluation, in the knowledge that it is not 
53 Mukhina. 
54 Kovalskaia, Krutye pandusy, p. 53. 
55 Mukhina. 
a quick or easy task, and that general awareness is the first step towards challenging 
and eventually overturning entrenched forms of patriarchy. 
 The four sections that follow the first two are variations on a theme, 
employing different presentational methods in an attempt to explore the issues from a 
variety of angles. These are respectively labelled as  , 
 , -, and -. The first two 
of these include the involvement of a trans woman, Alisa Kibin, as well as someone 
currently transitioning, Kolia Noekeln. They both separately explore the emotional 
complexities and practical difficulties of being trans in contemporary Russia, and 
familiarise audiences with common questions surrounding, for example, language 
(gendered pronouns and verbs, etc.). These presentations not only help to answer 
questions that the uninitiated may have, but also importantly give a rare public 
platform to representatives of the trans community. An extra dimension is added to 
each performance of Locker room talk by the changing physiognomy and appearance 
over time of Kolia Noekeln as they are in the process of transitioning. This aspect 
emphasises the event-ness of the performance for the audience, as each iteration is 
definitively unique due to Noekelns ever-evolving  . 
The title of his    lol  has the Roman letters lol 
incongruously sitting in the middle of the Cyrillic letters of the word . 
This refers to McNairs original verbatim text where, in a slip of the tongue, a man 
being interviewed describes feminism as a toxic ideolology [sic].56 The decision to 
keep the Roman letters in amongst the Cyrillic additionally brings out the presence of 
the English acronym lol  millennial text speak for laugh out loud  which has 
passed into Russian usage. So-called lol culture speaks to the themes of the 
56 McNair, Locker Room Talk, pp. 34, 41. 
production: where anything can be dismissed as a casual joke, not to be taken 
seriously or allowed to offend, by the addendum (spoken or written) of the now 
ubiquitous acronym lol, there are additional barriers to calling out problematic and 
offensive language. Challenging lol culture for its complicity in perpetuating toxic 
discourse continues into the penultimate presentation       
in which many of the most derogatory and sexist so-called jokes are compiled into a 
verbal montage and fired at the audience in quick succession. This has the effect of 
compounding many of the issues raised in the previous sections and overloading the 
spectator with the extent to which locker room talk has entrenched itself as a 
normalised form of discourse in the exclusively male social domain. 
All of the previous sections in one way or another combine to set up for the 
final performed section  . This is led by Mukhina, who prior to the 
making of Locker room talk studied contemporary theatre practice in Berlin and 
London, where she became acquainted with Augusto Boals theatre of the 
oppressed. Labelled a -, this section is a demonstration of Boals 
practice of so-called forum theatre.57 The concept of forum theatre is to activate 
the spectator by motivating them to take direct action through intervention in the 
scene being performed. The use of the word forum is not accidental, emphasising 
the roots of the concept in the Roman forum, where people met in public to discuss 
and exchange ideas. Forum theatre is just one aspect of Boals broader umbrella 
term, the theatre of the oppressed, which he intended as an emancipatory form of 
engagement between theatre practitioners and society. He says the following about 
the place of the spectator in his theatre: 
57 See Augusto Boal, Theatre of the Oppressed, trans. by Charles A. & Maria-Odilia Leal 
McBride (New York: Theatre Communications Group, 1985), pp. 139-42. 
In order to understand this poetics of the oppressed one must keep in mind its 
main objective: to change the people  spectators, passive beings in the 
theatrical phenomenon  into subjects, into actors, transformers of the 
dramatic action.58 
Whilst parallels can be drawn here to Lehmanns conceptualizing of the active 
spectator in his later formulation of postdramatic theatre, a more lateral connection is 
to the ideas of social historian James C. Scott, mentioned above in connection with 
YouTube/ . According to Scott, the hidden transcript that occasionally 
breaks out into the open and challenges the power vertical in a given social hierarchy 
has a prehistory that explains its capacity to produce political breakthroughs.59 This 
prehistory usually takes the form of infrapolitics that Scott detects everywhere in the 
everyday life of oppressed social groups. Approaching Boals conceptualization of the 
theatre of the oppressed from the perspective of Scott, we see a deliberate attempt to 
force the hidden transcript out into the public domain by means of training exercises 
or rehearsals. As Boal states:  
Maybe the theatre in itself is not revolutionary, but these theatrical forms are 
without doubt a rehearsal of revolution. [] Within its fictitious limits, the 
experience is a concrete one.60 
The revolution that Boal refers to is the overturning of established oppressive power 
hierarchies through openly challenging them, which necessarily constitutes the hidden 
transcript irrupting into the public one. This challenge, according to Boal, can and 
must be rehearsed in advance, to increase the chances of success: 
58 Boal, p. 122. 
59 Scott, p. 227. 
60 Boal, p. 141. Italics in original. 
The rehearsal stimulates the practice of the act in reality. [] The practice of 
these theatrical forms creates a sort of uneasy sense of incompleteness that 
seeks fulfillment through real action.61 
As suggested by the title of the    (-)  this 
scene in Locker room talk is to be one such rehearsal, training the spectators to object 
in a social situation where otherwise the offensive locker room banter would go 
unchallenged. Mukhina goes about this by constructing a scenario based on a drinking 
game in which men are called  and women are called , for no good 
reason other than that being the convention of the game. Using the forum theatre 
model, the scene is acted out once by the performers, then it is repeated, but this time 
the spectators are invited to intervene in the scene to try to alter the behaviour of the 
performers in the game with the ultimate aim of changing its outcome. The 
performers come prepared in advance to try to cover every possible eventuality and to 
work out ways to always circumvent the intervention of the spectator so that the same 
outcome is always reached. This intransigence is intended to demonstrate the deep-
rootedness of oppressive social hierarchies and the exceptional difficulty in 
overcoming them, but through proactive engagement with the exercise and trial-and-
error perseverance it should always be possible to beat the system and re-write the 
outcome of the scene.  
Discussing the role of the spectator in this form of theatre, Boal clarifies: 
The spectator [] changes the dramatic action, tries out solutions, discusses 
plans for change  in short, trains himself for real action.62 
The spectators in the performance of Locker room talk that I observed were not afraid 
to get involved, and they tried out various tactics to change the rules of the game so as 
61 Boal, p. 142. 
62 Boal, p. 122. 
to eradicate the casual use of derogatory sexist language. Whilst the first couple of 
spectators-turned-participants (including one man) tried and failed to circumnavigate 
the rules of the game away from casual misogyny, it was clear that the trial-and-error 
process was having an effect, as the behaviour and tactics employed by the 
performers against each new intervening spectator became more arbitrary and thus 
more ridiculous from an outside perspective. The most successful intervention came 
from a female spectator who, after repeated requests to the performers to cease using 
sexist language, resorted to throwing over the drinks tray, and so preventing the others 
from continuing the game. In this iteration of the scene, the spectator-participant 
simply refused to allow the game to continue if the other participants did not alter 
their behaviour and this meant ultimately bringing the game to a halt. This was a 
successful example of an intervention that fulfilled the objective of forum theatre  
firstly to call out and secondly to disrupt social oppression in daily life, in order to be 
a vehicle for positive change.  
The description on the Meyerhold Centre website states that, amongst other 
things, Locker room talk      
   .63 The feminist utopia referred to here 
emerges out of the exercise in forum theatre, during which objection to and 
intervention in an oppressive situation is rehearsed with the spectators as a part of the 
performance, in the hope that a similar situation in real life could be successfully 
challenged in the future. Social equality and respect  of oneself and others are a far 
cry from blindly misogynist fears of what a feminist utopia might look like. Once the 
forum theatre rehearsal ends, it gives way to the actual forum: the audience is 
invited on stage to start discussions with each other and with the performers about any 
63 Meyerhold Centre website. 
or all of the issues arising from what they have seen and felt during the performance, 
as well as to share and exchange personal stories of their own that are related to the 
problem of locker room discourse.  
 To give additional insight into what the creative team behind Locker room talk 
were trying to achieve, it is worth quoting Mukhina at length, speaking about how 
she, Iuriichuk, and Tarakanova together went about choosing the other participants 
they wanted involved in the project: 
          ,  , 
,     .        
.    , ,  ,    
     ,      
,       .   ,  
  .        
,   .      .  
,   .      , 
,   .          
,   ,      
,      .64 
Similar to some of the examples of Teatr.docs civic theatre seen in the previous 
chapter, the makers of Locker room talk went about bringing in non-theatrical people 
to collaborate on their project. This situates the production outside of the institutional 
norms of the theatre, which is a reflection of its theme: feminist activism as a 
marginal outsider to dominant patriarchy. This is true even for an institution as 
progressive and experimental as the Meyerhold Centre, in which the (male) artistic 
director doubted the motives of the (female) creative team, and yet which is needless 
to say one of the only theatres in Moscow where a performance of this kind could 
have been made. 
64 Mukhina. 
Much as Boals theatre of the oppressed is a radically inclusive participatory 
practice that nonetheless remains theatre, the creators of Locker room talk likewise 
assembled a team from outside the theatre to create a work that is fundamentally and 
intensely theatrical. Taking the initiative from Boal, this production targets oppressive 
power hierarchies in the linguistic field through revealing the existence of the 
problem, investigating why it is a problem, and rehearsing for future direct action. If 
Boals theatre was a harbinger of the theatres of engagement that characterise the 
contemporary era, its techniques still have something to offer to theatre makers 
seeking to re-imagine the possibilities of working with documents to create socially 
engaged (and, no less importantly, engaging) work. In its employment of Boal, the 
politics of Locker room talk intersect with broader global trends in contemporary 
theatre. For example, the UK-based theatre collective Earth Ensemble (which is 
affiliated with the Extinction Rebellion climate activist movement) extensively 
employs the theories and practices of the theatre of the oppressed in its work.65  
At first glance, Locker room talk may not appear to be a work of documentary 
theatre, but upon closer inspection it emerges as such, answering Kovalskaias call to 
the emerging generation of theatre makers to rethink the possibilities of the genre. 
Like the two other productions considered in this chapter, Locker room talk uses 
documents as the raw material for its experimental performance practices. These three 
document-based performances each in their own way expand the field of documentary 
theatre, contributing to the emergence of a new documentarism, which 
correspondingly contains new discourses and new horizons for engagement with the 
social and the political in the world at large.  
65 Acquaintance with the working methods and practices of Earth Ensemble was gained from 
participation in a workshop led by the group as part of the symposium Theatre and Climate 
Change, held at the University of Oxford on 7 March 2020. 
3) Body Politics:   in High Putinism 
 The concept of   has been much debated and contested since its 
inception in 2002, meaning different things for different people. This has ranged from 
claims of a coherent transnational artistic movement to  most simply  new writing. 
Whilst claims that   had run its course at the end of the first decade of 
this century have proved to be premature, its nature over the past decade has 
undeniably changed. Most notably,   is no longer the transnational 
project that it once was  after the events in Ukraine in 2014, it more or less split into 
its constituent nations and, particularly in the case of Ukraine, into its respective 
national languages.1 That said, however, 2020 witnessed the largest number of 
submissions of Russian-language new plays to Moscows Liubimovka Festival in its 
thirty year history (815 scripts), and this continues to include submissions from 
Ukraine and Belarus, as well as other countries from the former Soviet Union and 
around the world where there are Russian-speaking diasporas. Even within Russia 
itself,   is continually declared to be over, by theatre makers and critics 
alike. In an interview with the theatre director Zarema Zaudinova of Teatr.doc on this 
topic in 2019, for example, she stated:  
    ,     .  
  .     ,   , 
 ,      . []  2012   
,   .2  
Zaudinova here considers the major turning point to have been the violent suppression 
of the opposition to Putins re-election in 2012, which culminated in the arrests of a 
1 See J.A.E. Curtis, Introduction, in New Drama in Russian: Performance, Politics and 
Protest in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2020), p. 1. 
2 Zarema Zaudinova, Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, September 2019. 
number of protesters on Bolotnaia Square and their subsequent imprisonment in a 
case that came to be known as  . However, it was not until the loss in 
2018 of the creators and driving forces of the   movement, Mikhail 
Ugarov and Elena Gremina, that its coherence and unity as a project suffered a 
setback from which it is unlikely to recover. For Zaudinova, the   
movement has served its purpose  there are now new kinds of plays in Russia that 
are written and staged, and its legacy is a number of theatres, in Moscow and 
elsewhere, that specialise in new writing.  
Although Zaudinova claims that the opportunities for staging new works are 
fewer than in the heyday of  , nonetheless a handful of works from the 
main competition of the annual Liubimovka Festival usually get noticed and make the 
difficult transition from rehearsed reading to full stage production. The winner of the 
Brewhouse Stage Grant  which is an annual grant awarded to the most promising 
new play in the festival, to facilitate bringing the work to the stage as a full production 
 at the 2017 Liubimovka Festival was Belarusian Andrei Ivanovs  . This 
play went on to be staged in Moscow at the state-financed Pushkin Theatre, and 
subsequently elsewhere, including in Serov, in a production that garnered Ivanov a 
Golden Mask nomination for best work by a dramatist.3 In 2018, the strong female 
showing at the Liubimovka was affirmed by the awarding of the Brewhouse Stage 
Grant to Olga Shiliaevas 28 . The full production premiered the following year 
on the stage of Teatr.doc, and in a repetition of Ivanovs success the previous year, 
gained the debutant dramatist a nomination in the same Golden Mask category, as 
well as two further nominations in other categories (small-form drama and best 
3 This also included a nomination in the category of best small-form drama. See Golden 
Mask website <http://www.goldenmask.ru/fest_24_183.html> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
work by a director).4 Other plays from the 2018 Liubimovka to receive full stage 
productions include Maria Ognevas    at the Meyerhold Centre, 
and Aleksei Oleinikovs play-in-verse , which premiered in the Eastern 
Siberian city of Krasnoiarsk some two years after its rehearsed reading at the festival.5  
The conversion rate from rehearsed reading to full stage production overall 
remains low, however, and one of the problems faced by emerging dramatists in the 
second and third decades of this century is actually the success of the first generation 
of   writers, many of whom have broken through on to the stages of the 
state theatres and have been integrated into the theatrical hierarchy. Writers such as 
Ivan Vyrypaev, Mikhail Durnenkov, Pavel Priazhko, and Iaroslava Pulinovich 
dominate the programming of new works by the state-funded theatres, meaning that 
opportunities for lesser-known or untried writers have become harder to come by. 
Whilst Teatr.doc is famous for being financially independent from the state, allowing 
it full artistic freedom, it nonetheless used to apply for and receive grants for 
individual projects. This came to an end with the crackdowns on the cultural sphere 
that followed the war with Ukraine and the introduction of a more actively 
interventionist cultural policy, as outlined in the introduction. The decision to tie state 
funding to political loyalty to the regime meant Teatr.doc became strictly off-limits 
for the receipt of cultural grants, further starving it of funds and exacerbating the lack 
of opportunities for staging new works independently of the state. However, as the 
examples above demonstrate, new works of drama continue to filter through in a 
small number on to the stages of both state-funded and independent theatres. Whether 
4 See Golden Mask 2020 nominations page: <https://www.goldenmask.ru/fest_26_198.html> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
5  opened the 2020 season at the Krasnoiarskskii TIuZ, directed by Nikita 
Betekhtin, who at the same theatre one year earlier also directed a production of Masha 
Kontorovichs ,   , a play that featured in the main competition of the 
2017 Liubimovka Festival. 
we still want to call this   or not, it continues in the same historical 
lineage, centred around the Liubimovka Festival and Teatr.doc. The wave of 
legislative changes after 2012 that ushered in a new era of censorship and Socialist-
Realist-style cultural ideology has significantly altered the conditions for theatre 
making in Russia in recent years, making it necessary to talk about   
before and after 2012.   in High Putinism is, therefore, both a 
continuation of the well-established artistic movement from the first decade of this 
century, and distinct from it. 
This chapter examines three examples of plays from the High Putinist period 
that continue the traditions of  . It considers the politics and aesthetics 
of these works, which are concerned primarily with the body and corporeal forms of 
subjectivity. Whilst the body is not a new preoccupation for twenty-first-century 
Russian drama, it has become increasingly politicised as a result of the formation of 
the    , which foregrounds the body, particularly 
that of youth, at the centre of its conservative-nationalist ideological project. 
 The first play to be considered is Dmitrii Danilovs award-winning  
 , which beat Ivanovs aforementioned   to the Golden Mask 
award for best work by a dramatist in 2018. This was a Teatr.doc production, 
directed by Mikhail Ugarov. The fact that a Teatr.doc production was competing with 
a Liubimovka Festival winner for the best dramatist prize in that year shows the 
important role that these institutions of the   movement continue to play 
in the landscape of specifically new writing in Russia, in spite of the marginalization 
and blacklisting of Teatr.doc itself.    takes a story typical in 
recent years on Russian social media newsfeeds  a young man being arbitrarily 
arrested without pretext or explanation and interrogated in a local police station  and 
turns it into a philosophical exploration of human perception. Police violence upon 
the mind and body of the arrestee focuses the viewers attention on the prevailing 
body politics of High Putinism. There is a further reflection here on one of the 
mantras of    the zero position  and its place in theatre aesthetics 
during a time of conservative-authoritarian reaction.6  
 The second play is Valerii Pecheikins ,   . This 
work featured at the Liubimovka in 2016 but has never received a full stage 
production. It is unlikely that this will be possible for as long as the current state 
cultural policy and the accompanying legal restrictions remain in place. Tashkent-
born Pecheikin emerged out of the Liubimovka Festival in the late 2000s and has 
established himself in recent years as the in-house dramatist for Kirill 
Serebrennikovs Gogol Centre. By his own admission, he writes few new plays 
nowadays, so this work is an example of how one of the big names from the second 
generation of   writers has moved away from text-based new writing to 
focus more on visual theatre and film. This play displays a politics that rejects the 
normative regimes of High Putinism in relation to gender and sexuality, promoting 
instead a liberal politics of the body and sexual difference. 
 The final play is the aforementioned Liubimovka grant-winning and 2019 
Golden Mask-nominated 28 , by Olga Shiliaeva. This work was described by its 
producers and by critics alike as a  .7 It addresses the topic 
of the menstrual cycle, and the associated social, political, and economic issues that 
make this subject taboo in contemporary Russia. The challenging of taboos has been 
6 The zero position is essential in any analysis of  . As one critic commented 
in 2013,  -  -       [ ]. 
See Timur Khakimov, Obnulenie nol-pozitsii, Iskusstvo kino, 5 (2013) 
<http://old.kinoart.ru/archive/2013/05/obnulenie-nol-pozitsii> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
7 It is decribed as such on the productions website page, for example: 
<https://teatrdoc.ru/events.php?id=258> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
identified as one of the main traits in the emergence of the   
movement.8 Taboos  the number of which has been on the increase since the 
conservative-authoritarian turn in Russia  are the markers of ideological norms in 
society, and are thus often the frontier of conflict, charting the shifting lines of 
cultural and political discourse. In High Putinist ideology, taboos should be left 
unchallenged and social antagonism ideally eradicated, meaning that artistic works 
which challenge the political consensus become undesirable elements, even labelled 
as  in official state documents (see introduction). In its tackling of a 
major social taboo, Shiliaevas play represents a continuation of the political tradition 
of the   movement. Taken together, the works by these three 
playwrights demonstrate the continued capacity of specifically written drama as a 
form of theatre to reflect on and question the social and political order of the world 
around it. 
   
Dmitrii Danilovs    is one of the most successful new 
works of Russian drama in recent years. It premiered at Teatr.doc on 25 May 2017, 
and was followed by productions in theatres across Russia and abroad: besides 
Moscow, there have been productions in Norilsk, Sterlitamak, Iaroslavl, Kostroma, 
Omsk, Ioshkar-Ola, Sarov, Krasnoiarsk, Samara, and Irkutsk, as well as in Minsk and 
8         . Marina Davydova, in Eduard 
Boiakov, Marina Davydova and Daniil Dondurei, Nuzhny novye formy, novye formy 
nuzhny? Iskusstvo kino, 2 (2004), 18-31 (p. 28). 
Berlin.9 In a period when relatively few new writers have made it on to the stages of 
state-funded theatres  and when new works are staged they are predominantly by the 
established names of   from the previous decade  Danilovs theatrical 
debut stands out. Danilov is not a new name, however  he was already an established 
writer and poet, twice nominated for the Russian national literature prize  
, and subsequently the recipient in 2019 of the prestigious Andrei Bely Prize. 
Whilst Danilovs debut play may have taken the theatre world by storm, it was 
accused by some who were familiar with his literary output of repeating the same 
ideas.10 Nonetheless, Danilovs receipt of the Golden Mask for the best work by a 
dramatist in 2018, in what was only the second year of this categorys existence, was 
a major achievement for a debut play, especially given that it was a Teatr.doc 
production.11  
How to explain this surprising mainstream success, then, of a work associated 
with the marginalized Teatr.doc, in regional state theatres not known for 
experimentation and risk-taking? On first appearance, this is a play about police 
violence and the arbitrary abuse of power, so how is it that the staging of the play was 
even covered by the state-controlled TV network Rossiia in some of its regional news 
broadcasts?12 It would seem that the deep ambiguity of Danilovs play allows for it to 
be read in a number of different ways. Whilst the liberal, opposition-inclined audience 
9 This list does not include rehearsed readings, of which there have been many in other 
theatres in cities across Russia. 
10 See Sergei Morozov, Prinuzhdenie k prekrasnomu. O pese Dmitriia Danilova Chelovek 
iz Podolska, Pravda-info, 29 January 2017 <http://www.pravda.info/society/151638.html> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
11 The category is officially called / . It was first awarded in 2017, 
and is the only category in the festival that rewards stage writing of any description. The lists 
of past receipients can be found on the Golden Mask website: <https://www.goldenmask.ru> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
12 This included coverage of the productions at the Marii El theatre in Ioshkar-Ola and at the 
Novaia Drama theatre in Irkutsk. The production in Minsk at the Molodezhnyi Teatr was also 
covered by the tightly-controlled state TV channel Belarus-1. 
of Teatr.doc may see a play reflecting the violence of the modern police state that 
Russia has become in their eyes, it can also be viewed from another angle as an advert 
for the anti-Western patriotic-educational programme of the Ministry of Culture. 
Danilovs refusal to take a position regarding the psychological violence and 
brainwashing that takes place in the text could be equated with the tradition of the 
zero position promoted by the architects of the   movement, chief 
amongst whom was the plays director, Mikhail Ugarov.    was 
one of the biggest hits for Teatr.doc in recent years. Since its premiere, it has been one 
of the most regularly performed plays in the repertoire, consistently drawing large 
audience numbers, including those who would not usually attend Teatr.doc 
productions. This has provided an essential source of revenue for the unsubsidized 
theatre in what has been the most challenging period in its history, especially since the 
passing of its founders. However, the dual fact of the production being awarded a 
Golden Mask and the proliferation of the play throughout regional state theatres is 
evidence to suggest that this is one of Teatr.docs safest works of the troubled post-
2012 period. Not only is the play evidently on the safe list, but it is also perhaps seen 
as promoting the correct cultural values as espoused by the Ministry of Culture since 
the development of the    . This much is 
suggested by the framing of the play on the state TV channels in their coverage of it, 
where the message of the play is portrayed as anti-Western, anti-cosmopolitan and 
patriotic.13 
13 Clips of this coverage can be found on YouTube. See, for example: GTRK Marii El, ART-
Mari  Premera spektaklia Chelovek iz Podolska, online video recording, YouTube, 28 
February 2018, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LOznoH9_CGk> [accessed 23 
December 2020]; Vesti Irkutsk, Karaoke premera V Irkutske postavili spektakl Chelovek iz 
Podolska, online video recording, YouTube, 23 March 2018, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FZoPcGPLWYA> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
 One way perhaps to understand the readiness of the authorities and those 
acting in their interests to embrace Danilovs play is to look at the structure of the 
text, which essentially follows the Socialist Realist artistic model. It includes the 
tropes of the path to consciousness and the new (post-)Soviet man, as well as a 
play on the notion of engineers of human souls. It promotes a re-evaluation of 
beauty through a violently enforced re-education programme, carried out by the 
police upon an ordinary citizen who has committed no crime other than that of 
thought. What on paper could be an Orwellian dystopian critique, in Danilovs work 
becomes a highly ambiguous reflection on the subjective nature of beauty and 
knowledge. It attempts to level out the hierarchy of beauty that traditionally favours 
the achievements of Western European culture over its Russian counterpart. The 
argument goes that there is nothing more or less beautiful, only different kinds of 
beauty. In this line of logic, the suburban industrial town of Podolsk is no less 
beautiful than Amsterdam; one need only look with the right eyes. Thus, in addition 
to the devices of Socialist Realism in the text, there is also a Socialist Realist 
aesthetics here too, in which the world around should not be seen for what it is, but 
rather for what it is in the process of becoming.  
The drama is in one act, and takes as its premise the commonplace occurrence 
in todays Russia of a young man being taken in by the police for interrogation 
without any pretext for doing so or explanation why. At the end of the play, the 
audience is left to argue over the arbitrary application of state power, the absurdity of 
  (the plays driving force), and whether Nikolai, the 
eponymous man from Podolsk, is better or worse off as a result of the police 
interrogation when he is eventually set free at the end. Arguably, the ending is almost 
a positive one, with Nikolai seemingly having benefited from his incarceration 
process. As one reviewer noted, the ending is almost happy.14 The Socialist Realist 
character reformation trope is executed so convincingly by Danilov that the apparent 
dystopian irony in the text eventually gives way to an uneasy sincerity. Danilov is 
known for promoting the beauty of the mundane and the overlooked in his writing  
the sunset over an industrial zone, for example.15 The aesthetics of decay has a rich 
history in art at least since Romanticism, and is not under dispute. However, a 
contradiction arises when the promotion of such beauty is placed in conjunction with 
psychological violence and brainwashing by the police as a means to an end. The 
result can be interpreted as an argument in favour of the forced re-education of 
citizens who think and see differently to the regime. What that leads to in practice is, 
for example, the Soviet experience of the Gulag, and, in our time, the Xinjiang re-
education camps for the Uighurs in China. As with Soviet-era Socialist Realism and 
the ideology of the Gulag, the body of the individual is the centre of attention in 
Danilovs play: it must be disassembled and reassembled by the police according to 
the correct values of state ideology. As such, body politics is an integral feature of 
the discourse upon which the drama unfolds.  
The play is set in an ordinary Moscow police station, with only five 
characters  the man from Podolsk, a man from Mytishchi, two policemen and a 
policewoman. The action opens with Nikolai, the man from Podolsk, asking 
questions as to why he has been brought in on no apparent pretext, whilst the First 
Policeman fills out a report. The questions very quickly turn on Nikolai, and the 
seeming absurdity of the situation emerges, satisfying the viewers desire to see ironic 
critique of the authorities and the arbitrary use of power by the notoriously corrupt 
14       . See Tatiana Ratkina, 
Puteshestvie iz Podolska v Moskvu, Chastnyi Korrespondent, 30 June 2017 
<http://www.chaskor.ru/article/puteshestvie_iz_podolska_v_moskvu_42134> [accessed 23 
December 2020]. 
15 Morozov. 
and brutal Russian police force. However, over the course of the narrative, the 
policeman archetype in Russian popular culture (stupid, brutal, corrupt, bandit), is 
steadily eroded. Much to the astonishment of Nikolai, who fancies himself as an 
underappreciated musician whose talent is wasted in his hometown, the police 
officers show themselves to be well-versed in high culture and progressive sub-
culture alike  including, for example, references to both Mozart and to the cult 
German industrial-noise band, Einsturzende Neubauten. Interrogation sequences built 
on comically absurd general knowledge questions about Nikolais hometown of 
Podolsk  such as its population and founding year  (all of which he fails) set up the 
crux of the play, which is that Nikolai is guilty of living his life  . In a 
moment of extreme anthropocentrism  which in fact runs through the play as a 
whole, in its obsession with exclusively manmade beauty  the policeman equates 
Nikolais automaton existence with animal life, apparently assuming to know the 
experience of being an animal:     . []  
   . ?   .16 It is at this 
point that the narrative pivots its critique away from authority, towards the individual 
instead, and by extension to the spectator, who is indirectly accused of living  
 if they have ever considered the lower living standards in suburban or 
regional Russia to be less attractive than those in Moscow, St Petersburg, or other 
European capitals.17 There is a discernible Socialist Realist path to consciousness 
trope here, which is foreshadowed in the declaration near the beginning of the text by 
the First Policeman to Nikolai: ,    ,   
16 This equation of the automaton with the animal strongly echoes Descartes, who 
controversially claimed that animals are automata, and live without consciousness. For a 
discussion of this, see Animal Rights and Human Obligations, ed. by T. Regan and P. Singer, 
2nd edn (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1989), pp. 13-19. 
17 It is worth noting that Danilov himself was born and lives in Moscow. 
.18 Likewise, in the same breath he states in reference to the Man from 
Mytishchi:         
.19 This trope of the path to consciousness is used to justify the Chekist 
ideology at the core of the play, where   reigns and 
psychological violence is a necessary means to an end  the re-education of the 
citizen, in this case Nikolai, which is positively framed as being to his ultimate 
benefit.  
On one level, what takes place inside the police station between Nikolai and 
the police officers is a power game of language and gesture. There is a series of initial 
linguistic skirmishes, in which the power of the acting authorities to determine the 
rules of the language game being played with the detainee is asserted. Here we see the 
first instance of what in performance theory Judith Butler terms as when gesture 
becomes event.20 In the following passage, Nikolai has just called the proceedings in 
the police station thus far absurd: 
  ,       
 ,     . 
  : ( )    ( 
 ) 
 :  . 
         
   .      
  . 
18 Danilov. 
19 Ibid. 
20 This term is taken from Judith Butlers keynote speech at a conference titled Theater, 
Performance, Philosophy at the Sorbonne in 2014. See Labo LAPS, TPP2014: When 
Gesture Becomes Event, online video recording, YouTube, 11 October 2014, 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iuAMRxSH--s> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
  :  ..  ?   
 :   ? 
  : -  
         
.  
 : ,   , ,  
?  ? 
  : (     
)  ,  ,    ,   , 
 ,    ,    21 
Nikolais desire to understand the situation is denied to him until the end of the play, 
once his re-education is more or less complete. What takes place up until that point, 
however, is the gradual disassembling of his ability to comprehend language usage 
through techniques of violent psychological coercion and pressure. In the quote 
above, we see the police baton being wielded over the man from Podolsk. In the 
threat of violence represented by the baton, the policeman asserts his position of 
power and dominance over the defenceless citizen. The reaction of the character being 
threatened is as we might expect  he cries out before he has even been touched, and 
as such his body has been violated in advance of any physical contact. He has felt the 
pain pre-emptively. The baton does not need to make physical contact  its work is 
done through the psychological violence of the gesture. The two gentle taps of the 
baton on the shoulder then inscribe this gestural violence on to the body of the 
subject. This is an important part of the process of disassembling Nikolais 
subjectivity  his knowledge and perception of himself as he exists in the world  in 
21 Danilov. 
order subsequently to reassemble it in the image of the police consensus, which is to 
say, in the image of the High Putinist utopia where Podolsk is beautiful and perfect 
just as it is. 
According to Beumers and Lipovetsky, the ritual is an integral part of the 
aesthetics of  .22 They link this to what they perceive as a discourse of 
violence that is characteristic of the   movement.23 Although their 
thesis about violence as the dominant theatrical mode has been contested, in relation 
to Danilovs text it holds more true than for others.24 Channelling the anthropologist 
Victor Turner, the authors state that the modern ritual is designed to restore and 
recreate sacral meanings and corresponding psychological conditions in concrete 
social and cultural circumstances.25 The ritual thus defined becomes a key 
mechanism in the forced re-education of Nikolai  he is made to repeat multiple series 
of meaningless sounds and body movements, which, it is claimed,  
   .26 In other words, ritual repetition of 
sounds and gestures functions as an important brainwashing mechanism in the text, 
enacting the transformation required for Nikolais path to correct consciousness. In 
the following passage, we see the first appearance of the ritual song-dance that serves 
this performative-inscriptive purpose: 
 : []     
    .    
     
22 Birgit Beumers and Mark Lipovetsky, Performing Violence: Literary and Theatrical 
Experiments of New Russian Drama (Bristol: Intellect, 2009), pp. 39-43. 
23 Ibid., p. 43. 
24 For a contestation of Beumers and Lipovetskys thesis, see Kristina Matvienko, 
Putevoditel po zabluzhdeniiam i otkrytiiam, Oktiabr, 2 (2013) 
<https://magazines.gorky.media/october/2013/2/putevoditel-po-zabluzhdeniyam-i-
otkrytiyam.html> [accessed 20 December 2020]. 
25 Beumers and Lipovetsky, p. 41. 
26 Danilov. 
  .      
          
  ,   .   ,  
,  . 
       ,  
   ,    . 
, ,  .  , ,  .    , .  
    . 
,     
,    
,    
   . 
?  .     . , 
. 
  : (  ) ,   
 
 :  ,        
      . .27 
Nikolais subsequent failure to master the rules of the game  to repeat and mimic 
exactly as told  works to further deprive him of his ability to understand and respond 
appropriately to language usage. This psychological torture through oppressive 
domination and manipulation of the order of things  in this case, the conventions of 
language usage  ensures that Nikolais power of self-determination is gradually 
transferred to the interrogators. Once Nikolai eventually performs the song-dance 
routine correctly  bearing in mind that this is only the    and 
27 Ibid. 
more challenging exercises are still to come  he is praised for his achievement by the 
police officers, a praise which he accepts willingly, because by this stage, his sense of 
perception and of his own identity has been broken down sufficiently that the creation 
of   , as referred to by the First Policeman, can take place 
with little resistance. The creation of    is an important part 
of the re-education process, demonstrating the power of the ritual act to both erase 
and write simultaneously, which is to say, to overwrite. However, given that 
subjectivity is never static, always moving with time itself in an ongoing process of 
erasure and inscription, it is perhaps not unsurprising that the ritual has the power to 
restore and recreate sacral meanings and corresponding psychological conditions 
(Beumers and Lipovetsky), as it concentrates and intensifies these moments of 
overwriting in the event. The importance of ritual-as-event, used in   
 as a literary device, is undoubtedly one of the defining features of  
 and contemporary Russian theatre more generally. 
In the world of Danilovs text  the generic Moscow police station, where 
  is the order of things  we see the coordinates, which is to say, 
the norms and limits, of a totalitarian system. To quote Slavoj iek:  
Totalitarian ideology [] is no longer meant, even by its authors, to be taken 
seriously  its status is just that of a means of manipulation, purely external 
and instrumental; its rule is secured not by its truth-value but by simple extra-
ideological violence and promise of gain.28  
The fact that    is seen as both absurdist and realist, as a 
dystopian and yet all-too-real reflection of contemporary Russian reality, is indicative 
of social and political trends more broadly. The instrumentalization of violence in the 
re-education of Nikolai inside the police station reveals the totalitarian ideology that 
28 Slavoj iek, The Sublime Object of Ideology (London: Verso, 1989; repr. 2008), p. 27. 
underpins  , which does not aspire to be taken seriously; it only 
demands that the rules of the game it sets out are accepted as the unchallenged order 
of things. As such, when the questioning process resumes after the ritual dance-song 
seen above, Nikolai finds that he is unable to answer simple questions that ordinarily 
would be perceived and understood unambiguously by a native-speaking language 
user. The breakdown of Nikolais ability to understand simple language usage 
demonstrates his disempowerment from the symbolic order, which concomitantly 
means his total subjection to it. We see this illustrated in the following short extract: 
 :     [ ]? 
  :   ? 
 :      ?   
  ?    :     
.   ,   ?      
  ?   ? ? 
? :      .  , 
 ,   ?29 
The fact that Nikolai cannot answer this   without a thorough 
breakdown of exactly what is really meant by the question reveals the extent to which 
his ownership of language has been taken from him by the interrogation process. It 
also separately demonstrates how in the totalitarian world of the police station, the 
inherent polysemy of language is inadmissible  language usage and speech can only 
be , and as such it becomes an instrument of violence.  Similar 
instances of Nikolais inability to comprehend the rules of the game being played 
during the interrogation recur on a number of occasions, as an integral part of the 
process of his submission to the will of authority and corresponding re-education in 
29 Danilov. 
line with the police consensus. The ritual dance-song seen above is enacted on two 
occasions subsequently: the first is a long scene with multiple tasks, where a great 
deal of coercion and violent threats are involved, but again Nikolai submits in the end 
and eventually performs each task successfully; the second occasion is the final scene 
of the play, when Nikolai in tandem with the police officers performs a variation of 
the ritual willingly, with enthusiasm, and in harmony with the others. This resolution 
of the antagonism that has motivated the drama up to that point in the play, and the 
emergence of a utopian-totalitarian consensus in its place, signifies the total 
submission of the protagonist to the will of power, which is a necessary requirement 
for the conflict-less consensus to emerge. The subject has been successfully re-
educated, at least for the time being. 
Before the resolution of the conflict, however, Nikolai must first be made to 
understand why all this has happened to him, why he was picked off the street for no 
apparent reason and subjected to a violent re-education process by the police. They do 
this by revealing to Nikolai the report that has been written about him, in which, as 
mentioned earlier, he is described as living   and  . This 
is in contrast to the all-too-human police themselves, one of whom states at the end of 
the play,     .30 Nikolais perception of the world and his place in 
it has been broken to the extent that he accepts the charges made against him and 
signs the report, thereby inscribing his reformed self into a text within the text. The 
report describes his crime as follows:  
    ,       
            
          
30 Ibid. 
       
31 
Its contents come as a revelation to Nikolai, when by contrast if he had been 
presented with such accusations at the beginning of the interrogation, it is fair to 
assume that he would have vigorously rejected them, and certainly not signed his 
acceptance in writing. When Nikolai enquires as to why  is written with 
a capital letter, the policeman replies,     .32 
This is indicative of the violent, monosemic order of the police consensus, in which 
there can only be one Reality, controlled and determined by the ruling power. This is 
a totalitarian semantic realm in which the polysemy of abstract concepts is closed 
down and instrumentalized  subjective truths become Truth, subjective realities 
become Reality, much as there is only one version of history in the new state 
cultural policy and one traditional sexuality in the law. In the world of 
 , there is no room for alternate truths or competing narratives. 
In this world, individual subjectivity is circumscribed by the limits of the monosemic 
ideology of power, which is violently enforced and policed. 
   ends with Nikolais release from the police station, 
after he has signed his self-denunciation. The latter is a typical totalitarian-Chekist 
technique of power, exemplified by the Stalinist purges of the 1930s and re-appearing 
in recent times in high-profile so-called terrorism cases where detainees are tortured 
into giving false confessions, as seen in   and  from Chapter One. 
Nikolai reacts with indifference to being told that this will not be his last visit to the 
police station and that he will, from now on, be detained often:    
31 Ibid. 
32 Ibid. 
  , they cheerily inform him.33 His acceptance of this new state 
of affairs is the manifestation of his reformed, re-educated self, broken by the 
interrogation process. Furthermore, he is told that he will be detained   
, so in other words, at any time, indiscriminately.34 As such, Nikolai may have 
been set free from the police station, but he is now shackled by the oppressive weight 
of police surveillance and potential arrest, which is a powerful mechanism and driver 
of self-censorship. For Foucault, writing in the 1970s, surveillance was a textbook 
mechanism of power over the individual body subjected to its normalizing regimes.35 
Half a century later, in the era of digital technology, CCTV, big data, and 
surveillance capitalism more generally, the surveillance regimes have reached an 
entirely new level of complexity and penetration into our lives. For the man from 
Podolsk, therefore, as for us all now in the third decade of the twenty-first century, 
the shadow of total surveillance is an inescapable reality of modern life, meaning that 
the psychological violence of Nikolais re-education asserts its pervasive presence on 
his life long after the end of the play.  
 The message in    is that we should see beauty in the 
world immediately around us, rather than fetishizing other places. This is a noble idea 
in theory, but in practice it serves as an apology for social, political and economic 
failings, the material consequences of which should not necessarily be glorified as 
beautiful in their own way. We see the traces of capitalist realist ideology here, in 
which structural inequality and stratified wealth distribution are accepted as the 
natural order of things. To claim parity between Amsterdam and Podolsk is to ignore 
the socio-economic factors behind the respective infrastructure of these two very 
33 Ibid. 
34 Ibid. 
35 Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. by Alan Sheridan 
(London: Allan Lane, 1977; repr. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1991), pp. 170-77. 
different cities, and it is to accept the ideology of High Putinism, which would have it 
that life for ordinary people in postindustrial Russia is qualitatively no worse than in 
Western Europe, or in the Russian capital for that matter. As one reviewer of 
Danilovs play noted,         
      .36 Far from 
eradicating an arbitrary, culturally constructed hierarchy of beauty, Danilov merely 
replaces one hierarchy with another, founded on  , the eradication 
of antagonism, and blind acceptance of the status quo laid out by the state and 
patrolled by the organs of state power. What we learn about   
from this play is that it is inherently Chekist, and if left unchecked its logical end 
point is citizen re-education programmes, in regional police branches or internment 
camps.  
The fact that Danilov refrains from taking a position on proceedings leaves the 
play open-ended and ambiguously framed. As such, it was open to interpretation by 
the state media, who saw it as fitting the patriotic programme of the Ministry of 
Culture. The heavy saturation of the text with a knowing irony  perhaps even  
 does not fundamentally change this. Perhaps the zero position is less effective as a 
device in theatre making now, compared to the heyday of   when it was 
in vogue. Perhaps this is the new reality of the   referred to by 
Zaudinova above. What follows in this chapter are two plays that take an active post-
zero position, on two different issues relating to body politics. They do not accept the 
normative regime of the High Putinist consensus, but rather demonstrate dissensus  
different ways of thinking, doing, and seeing  that correspondingly give rise to the 
possibility of alternative subjectivities. 
36 Morozov. 
,    
 This play, by Valerii Pecheikin, is the only work considered in depth in this 
thesis that has never been staged as such (whether on an actual theatre stage or 
otherwise).37 Each year, the Liubimovka Festival has three categories  the main 
competition (for young, up-and-coming playwrights), the out-of-competition 
programme (showcasing new work by established writers), and the fringe programme 
(for short or experimental texts). Pecheikins play originated from an invitation to 
submit a play for the out-of-competition programme at the 2016 edition of the 
festival, which that year was curated by Elena Kovalskaia, art-director of the 
Meyerhold Centre. The play was presented as a rehearsed reading, directed by Talgat 
Batalov, and was the closing event of that years festival.38 In March of the following 
year, there was another rehearsed reading of the play, directed by German Grekov, at 
Teatr 18+ in Rostov-on-Don.39 Given the extensive depictions of nudity and sex (both 
hetero and homo), it is perhaps unsurprising that Pecheikins text has yet to be staged. 
However, in an interview I conducted with Pecheikin, he stressed that he wrote the 
play for live performance, not as standalone text or rehearsed reading. The dramatist 
believes that ,    (henceforth ) can be staged 
in present-day Russia, and that someone with a big enough name need only try. He 
37 This is true at the time of writing in late 2020, and the situation seems unlikely to change 
any time soon. 
38 The performance is available on YouTube. See: Festival Liubimovka, Filosofy  Valerii 
Pecheikin, online video recording, YouTube, 11 October 2016 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lQFr2ae6FS4> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
39 This performance is also available on YouTube. See: Ksenia Protosevich, Filosofy. Chitka. 
Teatr 18+, online video recording, YouTube, 27 March 2017 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RhbD-90Pe1Y> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
cites the recent production of his earlier play  at the Gogol Centre by the 
famous actor Nikita Kukushkin (written in 2015; premiered in 2019), as well as the 
decision by Konstantin Bogomolov to commission an adaptation of , Vladimir 
Sorokins infamous debut novel about a faeces-eating Soviet society, for the stage of 
his Teatr na Maloi Bronnoi (premiered in 2019; directed by Maksim Didenko, 
adapted by Valerii Pecheikin). He says in this regard: 
    . ,  , -
     .     
   ,   .     
  ,       . .  
    ,   :  .40 
Pecheikin rightly points out that the boundaries of permissibility in contemporary 
Russia are in practice largely precedent-based, rather than determined by the letter of 
the law. As outlined in the introduction, even where specific laws exist, they are often 
ill-defined, vague, and arbitrarily enforced. As such, no one can be sure what is and is 
not permissible until it has been tried and tested, and even then the reaction often 
depends on whether or not it gets noticed. He also claims that his text is not a 
provocation of the authorities: 
     ,    
    .     
 ,     ,  .  
  .     ,    
,   , .       
,           
 ,       .    
,  .41  
40 Valerii Pecheikin, Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, 2019. 
41 Ibid. 
Given that this work has not received a full stage production at the time of writing, 
and with no prospect of this in sight, there will naturally be more of an emphasis 
placed on the text itself in my analysis. The rehearsed readings do not offer significant 
insights into what a staging of  might look like, although they do perhaps 
offer preliminary indications of audience reaction, as well as demonstrating the living 
quality of the language and the inherently performative, dramatic nature of the text. It 
is worth noting Pecheikins apathy towards the rehearsed reading as a form (whilst 
separately acknowledging its importance for young directors and writers): 
   .     , 
  ,  .  ,  . []   
,     .      
 .42 
The dramatists interest in visuality can be seen in his work for Serebrennikov at the 
Gogol Centre, such as  (premiered in 2016), and his directorial debut film 
Perversex (2017). Nonetheless, Pecheikins plays lend themselves well to oral/aural 
performance, as evidenced by the success of his works over many years at the 
Liubimovka Festival. When I asked him how he conceived of the possibility of 
staging , especially in regard to the sex scenes, he replied that they would 
have to be real for the play to work at all on stage, and that this would most likely 
have to be done using pre-recorded video, because of the impracticality and 
unwillingness of actors to perform the scenes live on stage repeatedly.43 On the one 
hand, it is now common practice to incorporate video into live performance on stage, 
so this would be a realistic solution to the problem. On the other hand, it would 
42 Ibid. 
43  ,    - ,   -
  ,     ,     
.  , ,   ,    
 ,          . Ibid. 
somewhat negate the live-event quality of the performance, which ironically is 
something that the rehearsed reading as a genre has in abundance.  
 The full title of the play  ,     is a parody of the 
Enlightenment tradition of giving great works long names with alternate titles, joined 
by the conjunction or. The use of this naming tradition was usually intended to lend 
a work stature or importance, or to signify the authors intent that the work be 
considered as such. The fact that the alternate title is   automatically 
undermines the weightiness that usually accompanies this device, thus parodying the 
form through the content. The reading of the full name of the play at the Liubimovka 
Festival immediately drew laughter from the audience, setting the tone for what was 
to come. The title signals the intent for the work as a whole, and already marks it out 
as unstageable for state theatres. Even at the Liubimovka and in subsequent writing 
about the play, it was never referred to by its full name, being abbreviated from the 
outset to merely , as if the uncomfortable alternative title did not exist at 
all.44 The irony is that it is precisely this kind of prudishness that Pecheikin rails 
against in the play, thus affirming the extent of the problem that  
addresses.  
 The origins of the play are to be found in Vladimir Nabokovs  (1938), 
Pecheikin claims: 
      ,      
 ,      ,  
    .   ,   
44 See the Liubimovka website and YouTube channel, as well as internet blog posts by 
viewers, such as for example: Mikael Desse, Smeshnaia, zlaia i vysokaia, Dystopia.me, 
<https://dystopia.me/smeshnaya-zlaya-i-vysokaya> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
 ,       . []      
 .45 
Referential derivation of this kind is inherent to art and culture, and theatre is no 
exception (e.g. Tom Stoppards 1966 classic Rosencrantz and Guildenstern Are Dead, 
derived from two minor characters in Shakespeares Hamlet). Pecheikin makes the 
connection to Nabokov explicit in the epigraph to the play:   . 
 .46 This ironic meta-epigraph also drew laughter from the 
audiences at both rehearsed readings. In the reading in Rostov-on-Don, the narrator 
went so far as to request a Nabokov quote from the audience, which was duly 
supplied. It is worth noting that as well as Nabokov, there are comparisons to be made 
with other Russian Modernists, namely Daniil Kharms and Sigizmund 
Krzhizhanovskii. Of the latters work, there are similarities with his 1929 one-act play 
, consisting of a dialogue between two philosophers, which is exactly how 
 starts. Another example is Krzhizhanovskiis three-act play  
  (1930), where the main character is Death; likewise in  
the character of Death appears in personified form at the end of the play. In addition 
to these Russian authors, it is difficult to overlook the strong influence of Franz Kafka 
in Pecheikins work in general.  
  reflects on the subjective nature of truth, philosophical inquiry, 
and the difficulties of sex and sexuality. It is also a satire on consumerism, and 
contemporary culture more generally. There are two pairs of characters in  
 Severin and Vanda, who are the pair of so-called philosophers, and Avgust and 
Maria, who are both prostitutes. The philosopher-prostitute dynamic is a productive 
one, although any easy distinction between the two character types becomes 
45 Pecheikin, Unpublished interview. 
46 Pecheikin, Filosofy. 
untenable, as the respective nature of each is interrogated. In his interview for the 
Liubimovka Festival in 2016, Pecheikin stated that the play is about how  
 complicates sexual relations: 
   ,        
  .       
          -   
?  ,   ,   .  ,  
  .   , ,  
.47  
This is not the full picture, however, because half of the sketches have nothing to do 
with sex at all  rather they are concerned with parodying the interview format that 
has come to dominate cultural and political discourse in recent years, popularised on 
daytime television and by video bloggers such as Iurii Dud. There is also a criticism 
in the text of mindless consumption and the anti-intellectualism of unquestioning 
existence. In one scene, for example, the philosophers discussion comes to the topic 
of death, and the prostitutes reaction is indicative: 
:    ? 
:    , ? 
: ? --?  . , - .   
,  . 
: ,   -         ? 
:   .    . 
47 Pecheikin, quoted in Mila Deneva, V etu laboratoriiu vse nesut svoikh gomunkulov, 
Liubimovka blog, 10 September 2016 <http://lubimovka.ru/blog/327-v-etu-laboratoriyu-vse-
nesut-svoikh-gomunkulov> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
:  . 
: ? 
: . 
:   ,     ?   ?48 
In the face of no solid evidence to the contrary, the two philosophers are comically 
forced to concede that as far as they are able to ascertain, death probably does wear 
tights. This kind of pseudo-intellectual enquiry ad absurdum provides much of the 
humour in the scenes, but it also clearly represents the opposition of two extremes  
the   of the philosophers and the anti-intellectualism of the 
prostitutes. The assumption of the latter that death must be some kind of cheap 
consumer product is indicative of a culture in which anything of any value is 
consumable. Death is parodically reified  falsely perceived as a concrete thing  
which ironically turns out to be true when Death appears in human form at the 
denouement of the play.  
The constant failure of communication between the two pairs of characters is a 
failure of language, and this becomes a source of epistemological enquiry in the text. 
In this case, Marias linguistically logical yet false deduction that this unknown thing 
death must have legs and wear tights because it is a feminine noun () and is 
used with the verb of motion  leads to the absurd situation in which an 
abstract noun is then embodied with legs and wears tights. The subsequent appearance 
of embodied Death in the final scene  wearing tights  strikes mortal panic in the 
minds of the four interlocutors, and starts a chain of events that ends in the death of 
the two prostitutes shortly afterwards and the possible abandonment of philosophy by 
48 Pecheikin, Filosofy. 
Vanda and Severin. On the one hand, there is a dialectical opposition in  
that subjects both false intellectualism and anti-intellectualism to critical enquiry and 
thus exposes both for their inner contradictions and absurdities. On the other hand, 
ultimately it is the two prostitutes who die and the philosophers who survive, making 
this a didactic text in favour of the latter occupation. It is within this dialectical 
framework that the issues of gender and sexuality, predicated as they are on the 
individual body as a biopolitical subject, arise in the text. For Michel Foucault, the 
body is integral to understanding power relations in modern society, stating: 
Societys control over individuals was accomplished not only through 
consciousness or ideology but also in the body and with the body. For 
capitalist society, it was biopolitics, the biological, the somatic, the corporeal 
that mattered more than anything else. The body is a biopolitical reality.49 
It is the biopolitical reality of the body in contemporary Russian society that 
Pecheikin sets out to interrogate. 
 is a parody of philosophical inquiry. Pecheikin uses the traditional 
philosophical form of the dialogue to drive logical reasoning into epistemological 
aporias. As much is acknowledged in the title of the first scene of the play  
. In Pecheikins own words,     .50 This device of 
negation in the text creates a radical openness that resists any totalising enclosure by 
the normalising regimes of biopolitics. Judith Butlers major thesis in her seminal 
work Gender Trouble was that gender is performative.51 According to her, gender is a 
social construct that is without essential origin. As a form of interpellation, gender 
performativity works to reinforce social hierarchies, such as patriarchy, in favour of 
49 See Power: The Essential Works of Michel Foucault, 1954-1984, vol. 3, ed. by James D. 
Faubion, trans. by Robert Hurley and others (London: Penguin, 2002), p. 137. 
50 Pecheikin, Unpublished interview. 
51 Judith Butler, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (London; New 
York: Routledge, 1990). 
the status quo. We see evidence of this power dynamic in the first scene, where 
Severin (a man) asks Vanda (a woman) to identify herself (they have only just met, 
through a dating app): 
:    ? , , ? ? 
:   ,     ,     .52 
The implication here is that for Vanda to concede to such categorization would be 
automatically to place herself under the power of Severin. For Vanda to not commit to 
categorization at all is a source of empowerment  a sentiment that Butler would seem 
to agree with. This is a language game for symbolic power. For as long as Vanda can 
resist the imposition through language of a gender categorization that circumscribes 
her freedom to self-determination, she can hold the upper hand (or at least an equal 
hand) in her relations with people of the dominant sex, in this case Severin.  
Building on the issue of gender power dynamics, there is an inquiry into the 
related question of gender difference, and the categorization of bodies as such (the 
latter of which the character of Vanda was seen resisting in the extract above from the 
first scene). About mid-way through the play, the prostitute Avgust arrives  he has 
been called to the scene by the two philosophers in his capacity as a professional, to 
help them successfully engage in sexual acts with each other, an activity that has thus 
far eluded them. The gulf that separates the philosophers from the prostitute in terms 
of language usage makes for insurmountable barriers of communication between 
them. The inability of the philosophers to comprehend basic communicative language 
without driving it into epistemological aporias prevents them from being able to make 
physical contact with each other. It is only the forceful intervention of the 
52 Pecheikin, Filosofy. 
misapprehending prostitute Avgust that overcomes the epistemological paralysis in 
the text and brings about physical contact between the characters. In the following 
extract, the issue of gender difference arises, whilst also demonstrating a case of 
miscommunication: 
:  , , , ,    . 
:    ?     ? 
:  ,            
? 
:    ? 
:   . ? 
: ?     ?53 
Severin is interpreting Avgusts words philosophically, whilst Avgust is speaking and 
responding as a sex worker who is trying to understand the desires of his client. This 
kind of failure of language always leads to misunderstandings between the characters, 
most of which are of a sexual or scatological nature. In the exchange above, almost 
every question is answered with another question. Severins querying of the existence 
of free will naturally goes over the head of his interlocutor, who responds instead by 
performing dominating sexual acts upon him, which he does not resist. The 
prostitutes actions bring about a philosophical revelation in Severin. It is the 
physicality of the prostitutes intervention that overcomes the two philosophers 
former dialogic paralysis. In this way, gender difference (valued at 50 euros) is 
negated by unthinking action, rather than the inaction of thinking.  
53 Pecheikin, Filosofy. 
It is with this in mind that we can interpret the philosophers discovery of the 
existence of God through the transcendental power of sodomy. This realization is 
much to Vandas astonishment, as she tells Severin:   []  . 
 .      .54 Vanda experiences this moment 
of sexual and spiritual awakening vicariously, whilst observing the two men from the 
side. Her evident pleasure as onlooker contrasts with her later displeasure at physical 
contact. This is reflective of a discourse of sexual difference, as outlined by Eve 
Kosofsky Sedgwick in her work Epistemology of the Closet. In Axiom 1: People are 
different from each other, she writes, Many people have their richest 
mental/emotional involvement with sexual acts that they dont do, or even dont want 
to do.55 Vanda does not want to engage physically in the act herself, but she 
nonetheless derives a transcendental sexual pleasure from observing the others. This 
blurring of the boundaries of individual bodies in favour of a discourse of difference 
is hinted at earlier on in the play, in the first scene, when Vanda asks Severin,   
,       ?56 Severin replies,   
 .57 The    is one that the two philosophers 
between themselves are unable to break beyond. It is only the physical intervention of 
the prostitute Avgust that enables the transgression. Thus, although the dialectic in 
 ultimately favours the philosophers over the prostitutes, there is one key 
respect in which the prostitutes make a positive intervention into the lives of the 
philosophers, bringing about the long sought-after sexual experience that until that 
point had eluded them. In this regard, there is a discourse of doing over thinking when 
it comes to questions of gender and sexuality in the play. 
54 Ibid. 
55 Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick, Epistemology of the Closet (Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 1990), p. 25. Italics in original. 
56 Pecheikin, Filosofy. 
57 Ibid. 
The arrival of the second prostitute, Maria, signals a transition in the text from 
the dominance of thinking and thought  the logocentrism of the philosophers  to the 
other extreme, which is the carnal, corporeal, and biological world of the prostitutes. 
In language that is reminiscent of Vladimir Sorokin, Avgust describes to Maria how 
he ate his breakfast: 
:         ,  . 
  ,   . 
:      
:      .      
  ,    .58 
The attention here on the physiological processes of the body serves to reinforce the 
opposition between the materiality of the prostitutes and the metaphysical 
disembodiedness of the philosophers. As in Sorokin, Pecheikins writing of intensely 
material, carnal scenes of sodomy, fellatio, scatology, and general human bodily 
functions collectively serve a discursive function  that of the dialectic at the core of 
the text between doing and thinking. These scenes  which transgress various social 
norms and taboos  can be likened to what the scholar Mark Lipovetsky calls (in 
relation to Sorokins work) carnalisation.59 Lipovetsky defines this as the discursive 
deployment of bodily gestures, which can be only partially described as the 
materialisation of metaphors.60 He outlines three types of carnalisation  direct, 
indirect, and reverse. All three varieties can be traced in . A variation of 
the first kind can be seen in the extract above, in which the materiality of the 
58 Pecheikin, Filosofy. 
59 See Mark Lipovetsky, Fleshing/Flashing the Discourse: Sorokins Master Trope, in 
Postmodern Crises: From Lolita to Pussy Riot (Brighton, MA: Academic Studies Press, 
2017), 109-29. 
60 Ibid., p. 111. 
prostitutes is viscerally literalized (deployment of bodily gestures). Examples of 
indirect carnalisation, which functions more on the level of discourse (materialisation 
of metaphors), include the aforementioned discovery of God, immortality and good 
through sodomy, as well as nonexistence [] through fellatio.61 To this we 
can add Marias act of defecation on to a pile of books, ostensibly because there is no 
toilet in Vandas apartment where the stage action takes place.62 This symbolic 
violation of knowledge, as represented by the book, by the unthinking Maria is a 
manifestation of the clash of thinking and doing in the play. The third kind, reverse 
carnalisation, can be found in the closing scene, when the dead bodies of both 
prostitutes are lying on the floor and the two philosophers remain. Vanda asks Severin 
what to do with the corpses. He replies,         
 .      .63 Leaving aside 
the questions raised here by the implication of a repeated action, this statement 
suggests a simultaneous process of disembodiment and materialisation. By 
transforming the characters from flesh into text in the form of books, the bodies 
themselves are literalised, but only to the extent that they are already only text. This is 
a reversal of the Biblical notion of incarnation (which is itself synonymous with 
carnalisation), where instead of The Word became flesh (John 1. 14), we see flesh 
become words. There is perhaps an eschatological concern here for life after death 
existing through and in text.  
The image of the prostitutes corpses becoming re-embodied as books is a 
fittingly ironic ending for characters who represented anti-intellectualism and 
unthinking action. However, as Pecheikin makes clear, this ending was inevitable, for 
61 Pecheikin, Filosofy. 
62 Ibid. 
63 Ibid. 
 is ultimately a didactic work about the victory of knowledge and thought 
over carnal existence and consumption: 
   .    . 
 ,   .   , , 
,   .64 
Embodiment, disembodiment, and re-embodiment characterise Pecheikins play, as 
processes of carnalisation take place in both directions. This fluidity of somatic form 
troubles the notion of the body, as well as our understanding of what it is to be an 
embodied subject. Through the employment of negation, the discourse of  
is resistant to normalizing regimes of body politics that would otherwise circumscribe 
individual subjectivity, particularly in relation to gender and sexuality.  
In her moment of sexual-spiritual revelation, Vanda tries to describe the 
experience to Severin in words: -      . - 
 .65 In this fleeting synthesis of the material and the 
transcendental, embodied in the first-person-singular letter , we see a 
preoccupation with a corporeal subjectivity that is also a defining feature of the next 
play considered in this chapter  Olga Shiliaevas 28 . The politics of both plays 
are focused on the body, reflecting the extent to which the body continues to be a 
highly contested political site in contemporary Russian society. In the half century 
since Foucaults writing, the body is no less of a biopolitical reality now than it was 
then. Given the recent legislative interventions that have seen the intensification of 
policymaking with the body as its focus  and the banishment of non-normative 
sexuality from the public realm  Pecheikins play can be read as an artistic response 
to juridico-political shifts. The radically open body politics of , which 
64 Pecheikin, Unpublished interview. 
65 Pecheikin, Filosofy. 
promotes an individual subjectivity that is not circumscribed by pre-determined 
categories or normative regimes, is a direct challenge to the rigid binaries of 
prevailing gender and sexual politics in High Putinist Russia. 
28  
 28  first saw the light of day as a rehearsed reading, when it took the 2018 
Liubimovka Festival by storm. For some in the audience, it was difficult to believe 
that this work by young psychologist Olga Shiliaeva from St Petersburg was a 
theatrical debut, such was the strength and maturity of the writing. Modelled on a 
Greek tragedy, the play effectively utilised a highly formal structure to explore a topic 
of present and universal significance  the menstrual cycle, along with all of the 
associated social, cultural, and political issues that it invokes. Shiliaevas debut was 
subsequently awarded the Brewhouse Stage Prize, to bring the play to the stage of 
Teatr.doc. The co-directors of the rehearsed reading, Iurii Muravitskii and Svetlana 
Mikhalishcheva, stayed on as directors to adapt the text for full stage performance, 
along with the same group of actors, who were the graduating year of Muravitskii and 
Mikhalishchevas acting course at the Moscow School of New Cinema. Due to the 
fact that Teatr.doc had no permanent space at the time, having been evicted from 
Malyi Kazennyi pereulok the previous September and still being in search of a new 
permanent home, the production premiered at NOL Project in the south west of 
Moscow on 30 January 2019.66 Once Teatr.doc established itself on Sadovnicheskaia 
66 NOL Project was an experimental theatre platform led by Ilia Romashko from the Gogol 
Centre that existed for a year and a half inside Mozaika, a large shopping mall in the 
naberezhnaia (named DOC na ostrove) the following spring, all subsequent 
performances of the play took place there.  
Such was the impact of the production on the Moscow theatre scene that it 
was nominated for Golden Masks in three categories: best small-form drama; best 
director; and best dramatist. Following on from Dmitrii Danilovs win in the previous 
year, Shiliaevas nomination for her debut work on a taboo subject that polarized 
audiences and critics was no less of an achievement. Muravitskii and 
Mikhalishchevas staging of the play also divided opinion, so any discussion of the 
success of the work must include the directorial decisions and various discussions that 
went on around the transformation of the text from rehearsed reading to full stage 
production. Considering the text, the stage adaptation, and the critical reactions 
simultaneously, a picture will emerge of a work that engages with body politics, 
which is an integral feature of the landscape of High Putinism and its dominant 
discourses of patriarchy and tradition. As a work of drama, it demonstrates the 
continued capacity of the genre for an active politics, and shows the possibilities for 
feminist drama, free from phallogocentric regimes of normative forms and 
processes.67 
 Shiliaeva chose to subtitle her play   . 
Affirming the genre of the work as tragedy, the dramatis personae consists of three 
characters  She [], Chorus [ ], and Male Voice [ ]. It 
is made immediately apparent that Shiliaeva is employing a Classical Greek tragic 
form, with a dialectical arrangement of protagonist-antagonist-chorus. This form of 
Dubrovka region of south west Moscow. The name appears to refer to the - of 
the   movement. NOL Project ceased operation in March 2020. 
67 Phallogocentrism  a neologism combining phallocentrism and logocentrism  is a 
term that came to prominence in feminist discourse in the 1970s, led by figures such as 
Hlne Cixous, Luce Irigaray, and Julia Kristeva, who all in different ways critiqued what 
they saw as the male structural bias in Western civilisation, focused around language, writing, 
psychoanalysis, and philosophy. 
tragedy is in line with the model developed by Aeschylus, and indeed the key to the 
surprising suitability of this highly formalistic, traditional structure is in the final word 
of the subtitle  . The cyclical nature of menstruation, the inevitability of its 
occurrence and recurrence, by definition lends any drama about it a fatalism that lies 
at the base of tragedy as a genre. Even if the protagonist is not necessarily being 
controlled by the gods, as in Renaissance tragedy, the very categorization of a play as 
tragedy automatically seals the protagonists unhappy fate. So it proves in 28 .  
In this cyclical drama, the first words uttered by She are destined to repeat 
themselves, following on from the last words at the end of the play and filling the 
void beyond the curtain call, as the cycle reaches the end which is also the return to 
the beginning. The opening exchange between She and the chorus immediately 
establishes the dynamic between the two acting agents, which can loosely be 
characterised as a conflict between individual and society, where She is the individual 
who speaks from the first person, and the chorus is the collective social body, with all 
of the norms, mores, taboos, and received wisdom and opinions that make up society. 
 .         
          
          
 . 
  . 
           
  
  . 
   
  . 
 ?        
         
 ?68 
The distress and physical pain of the protagonist is dismissed by the chorus three 
times in succession, with repetition of the commonly heard phrase  . 
The multivalent word  can be used in many contexts, as affirmative, 
negative, or neutral, depending on the intonation. Its intention here is no less 
multivalent, perhaps being dismissive but also perhaps reassuring, explaining, and 
encouraging. The chorus, speaking for and on behalf of women as an interpellated 
social group, tells the protagonist that her pain and blood are normal. This sets up 
the dialogue between the individual and society in the narrative, where the chorus is 
equivalent to the Lacanian Other  the invisible presence of a judging, normalising 
force that determines and restricts thought and action without ever appearing in 
concrete form.69 The response of the protagonist is to push back against the Other, to 
not accept the order of things handed down by the chorus, and instead to question and 
interrogate this assumed order. She asks,   ? The dialogue 
68 Shiliaeva. 
69 Bruce Fink describes the Lacanian Other as language, knowledge, law, career, academia, 
authority, morality, ideals, and so on, and with the objects designated (or, more strongly 
stated, demanded) by the Other: grades, diplomas, success, marriage, children. See Fink, The 
Lacanian Subject: Between Language and Jouissance (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1995), p. 87. 
that is set off here between woman as subaltern on the one hand and the Other of 
patriarchal society on the other hand generates a dialectical enquiry about female 
subjectivity in a male-dominated social order. The repetition of key motifs by the 
chorus is one of the devices for bringing the spectators attention to certain norms and 
questioning their underlying assumptions, whilst also providing the musicality and 
rhythmic poetic quality required for the chorus, which by Ancient Greek tradition is 
sung.  
 One of the most striking features of the stage directions is the frequent 
employment of blood, which appears five times, making it a key visual motif in 
Shiliaevas conception of the work. Blood is mentioned frequently in the dialogue as 
well. To understand the function of this motif for the author, Shiliaeva stated the 
following in an interview with theatre critic Aleksei Kiselev:  
       [],   
  ,   .  ,   
.70 
The authors opposition to euphemisms positions her work in the tradition of the 
  movement, which strove to replace the literary language of the stage 
with the living language of natural speech. The ubiquitous presence of blood on stage 
in Shiliaevas text can be seen in the same vein, as an attempt to escape the literary in 
favour of the literal. Moreover, if tragedy in Ancient Greece was born out of ritual 
ceremony, then in 28 , blood is the symbolic leitmotif that provides for the 
emergence of the ritualistic in the text. Although the presence of blood spilt through 
violence on stage is well-established in theatre since at least the Early Modern period, 
70 Aleksei Kiselev, Dlia menstruatsii slishkom mnogo evfemizmov: Olga Shiliaeva  o 
svoei feministskoi oratorii, Afisha Daily, 30 January 2019 
<https://daily.afisha.ru/brain/11167-dlya-menstruacii-slishkom-mnogo-evfemizmov-olga-
shilyaeva-o-svoey-feministskoy-oratorii/> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
the same cannot be said for menstrual blood, which is considerably more taboo. Early 
on in the text, the chorus lists the comically absurd euphemisms that exist in the 
Russian language for menstruation: 
  ,      
   . 
  .      
  .        
  .        
   .      
 .       
 .        
  .       
 .        
  .        
 .         
 .        
 .        
 .        
  .       
 .        
   .      
  .71 
The fact that this list appears very early on in the script reflects the importance for the 
author of overcoming the euphemistic language of societal propriety, in favour of a 
more direct, literal language that normalises this natural biological process. What 
emerges from the conflict of individual and society in the text is an imagined 
alternative world  a feminine utopia in which     
.    .72 Dramaturg and critic Natalia Zaitseva 
writes in this regard: 28 ,     , 
71 Shiliaeva. 
72 Shiliaeva. 
   .73 Zaitseva goes on to claim that this   
is one that is characterized by   .74 In line 
with feminist criticism concerning the othering of female physiology in favour of 
the male norm, 28  proposes another world in which female physiology is the 
norm.  
Perhaps it is the saturation of the text with blood and its repeated spilling on to 
the stage that ritually enacts the processes required to bring about this other world. 
Blood as the symbol of cyclical life and death has the capacity to enact this rebirth 
through the power of the ritual. However, blood is a multivalent discursive image, 
symbolising birth, death, and cleansing, whilst also being capable of signifying the 
inescapable horror of the abject, such as the blood on the hands of Lady Macbeth that 
she cannot wash away. In 28 , the inescapable, returning presence of the expelled 
blood is integral to its discourse. The clothes worn by the protagonist, as well as those 
worn by all ten members of the chorus, are all stained with blood. Furthermore, it is 
written in the stage directions that at one stage they all collectively mop the floor to 
clean away the blood, only for it to reappear spreading across the floor a short time 
later. The cyclical return of the expelled blood therefore has more of an abject quality 
in the text than a cleansing one. As such, the abjected menstrual blood that covers 
everything in 28  has an unresolved, ambiguous status in the configuration of the 
other world. 
 Given the ubiquity of blood in 28 , and its centrality to the poetics of the 
text, it is perhaps surprising that when it was brought to the stage of Teatr.doc, the 
directors chose to leave this detail out. Instead of buckets of blood and blood-stained 
73 Natalia Zaitseva, Nastroika optiki: O feministskom povorote v rossiiskoi dramaturgii, 
Teatr, 38 (2019), 40-51 (p. 51). 
74 Ibid. 
clothes as in the stage directions, the actors wore red and black clothing of various 
hues, unfortunately reproducing exactly the kind of metaphorical stage language that 
Shiliaeva was critiquing. In an interview I conducted with co-director Iurii 
Muravitskii, he told me that he understood the authors intention, but with the 
resources they had at their disposal and with the technical limitations of the Teatr.doc 
performance space, it was impossible to achieve Shiliaevas vision satisfactorily, 
stating: 
  ,   ,      , 
  .     ,    - 
 ,   - ,   . , 
 .    ,  
,     ,  , .    
, , ,   , ,  ,   
 ,   ,     .    
        , 
 ,  .doc,    ,   
     .75 
Muravitskii considered that approaching the text with a certain ironic distance, rather 
than literally, was the only solution to staging it successfully within their financial and 
technical means. It is worth noting that in two other productions of 28  that came 
after that of Teatr.doc  one in Kemerovo and one in Izhevsk  neither saw fit to 
follow the stage directions either, with not a drop of blood in sight anywhere.76 Whilst 
the technical limitations are undeniably a determining factor, there is a suspicion that 
the literal depiction of menstrual blood onstage in Russia remains taboo to the extent 
75 Iurii Muravitskii, Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, 2019. The original 
interview was planned to take place with both directors present, but Mikhalishcheva was 
unfortunately unable to attend on the day.  
76 These two productions, directed by Olesia Shilova in Kemerovo and Ivan Lichidov in 
Izhevsk, can be found on YouTube. See: Pavel Starikov, 28 Dnei, online video recording, 
YouTube, 13 February 2020 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lL0GX3zmJcM> [accessed 
23 December 2020]; Art-rezidentsiia, 28 DNEI, online video recording, YouTube, 11 
December 2019 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9FXb6TsNnb0> [accessed 23 
December 2020]. 
that it cannot be done without metaphor, however much Shiliaeva would wish to see 
otherwise. Given the popularity and success of the rehearsed reading at the 
Liubimovka, it is evident that the text alone is powerful enough to exist as a purely 
aural experience. Indeed, the focus of all the stagings of the play to date has been text-
centred. Whilst Muravitskii and Mikhalishchevas production is undeniably 
successful on many fronts, what it loses in its refusal to literally depict the menstrual 
blood that soaks the entire text is the transformative power of the ritual. Without 
blood, any staging of 28  is limited to being social satire and critique, rather than 
creating new symbolic and discursive meanings  the glimpse of the other world  
through ritual death and rebirth.  
Muravitskii is quoted as saying on the Teatr.doc website that realism and 
traditional psychological dramatic methods  which have dominated Russian theatre 
since Stanislavskii to this day  do not work here.77 The characters are not 
characterised as such and do not possess character arcs  instead they are flat, 
generalised figures who represent social groups rather than concrete individuals. In 
this regard they conform to Beumers and Lipovetskys description of Russian 
documentary theatre (see above). In the employment of Brechtian devices of 
alienation, irony, knowingness, and self-reflexivity, Muravitskii and 
Mikhalishchevas 28  created a removed distance from the text. It would seem 
that the dispute which arose over their interpretation in the staging of the text derived 
from this issue of distance from the text. Should the text be the subject or object in the 
staging? Should it be treated as if from the first person or the third? Russian feminist 
activist Maria Alekhina of Pussy Riot fame told Muravitskii that she did not like his 
77 ,     . Iurii Muravitskii, quoted on the 
Teatr.doc website page for 28 dnei, <https://teatrdoc.ru/events.php?id=258> [accessed 23 
December 2020]. 
staging of the play. According to Muravitskii, her impression was:   
,  []     ,    .78 
There was also criticism from other voices in the feminist community, including 
Shiliaeva herself who expressed regret at the use of metaphor for the visual depiction 
of menstrual blood.79 One of the aspects of the Teatr.doc production that seemed to 
cause the most disagreement amongst audiences and critics familiar with the text was 
the directorial decision to dress the protagonist in a Snow White costume. Although 
this image was too ironic for some peoples liking, when it is placed in the context of 
the staging of the play as a Brechtian epic-opera, with all of the words sung instead of 
spoken, the costume choice appears to function as a dismantling and conflating of 
high and low genres, as pioneered by Brecht in his epic (or as he later called it, 
dialectical) operas, such as The Threepenny Opera (premiered in 1928) and The Good 
Person of Szechwan (premiered in 1943).  
The problem with the Brechtian approach is that whilst the director may 
unequivocally side with the feminist cause at the core of the play, he cannot avoid 
interrogating that cause and reflecting on it from a distance, as an object of ironic 
theatrical play. In Muravitskiis words,      
.80 He states that any other approach is a form of self-censorship:  
T     ,      
 ,        : 
   ,   ,   ,  ,  
 ,          , 
.     ,       .81 
78 Muravitskii. 
79 See Kiselev. 
80 Muravitskii. 
81 Ibid.  
This is the dialectical approach that made Brecht such a famously frustrating figure 
for the political left in his lifetime, and it would seem that the same is still true of this 
approach today, in Russian theatre at the very least. Nonetheless, Muravitskiis 
Brechtian approach to the material can be considered a success, for making it 
accessible to a broader audience who were, thanks to the Brechtian alienation effect, 
in fact not alienated from the feminist content but were able to engage with it from a 
certain distance. This came, however, at the cost of some of the core audience  the 
feminist community  who saw it as ironic laughter at issues important to them. This 
contradiction could not be resolved and remains the legacy of Muravitskii and 
Mikhalishchevas interpretation of the text. 
 28  is certainly deserving of a rigorous and engaged analysis from a 
feminist  and female  prespective, which would be productive and illuminating, but 
that is not a task for this author. Instead, I wish to interrogate another standout feature 
of the text, which is its reflection of a discourse of corporeal subjectivity.82 This 
includes the Foucauldian notion of biopolitics, and in this regard it has much in 
common with the other works considered in this chapter. In spite of its 
uncompromising feminist critique of patriarchal society, 28  ultimately ends up 
in a qualitatively similar kind of ontological aporia.  
 Diana Coole identifies several binary oppositions in Western cultures 
treatment of the body that reveal a structural gender bias: mind-body, culture-nature, 
subject-object, rational-irrational, active-passive, public-private  in which the first of 
each pair is perceived as superior, masculine, the norm.83 Although current state 
cultural policy takes the position that    , it is clear from this list 
82 Corporeal subjectivity is Raia Prokhovniks term, quoted in Diana Coole, The Body and 
Politics, in The Oxford Handbook of Gender and Politics, ed. by Georgina Waylen and 
others (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), pp. 165-88 (p. 184). 
83 Coole, p. 168. 
that Russian culture is in this regard inseparable from Western/European in displaying 
a similar gender bias.84 As Michel Foucault demonstrated, the history of the 
nlightenment is the history of the medicalisation and regulation of the body, where 
its excesses are pathologised and categorized as lying outside of the (masculine) 
norm. The claim of objectivity in the medical sciences, which for a long time held that 
women were irrational and inferior due to their biology, was subsequently revealed to 
be a contingent social construct. It is this same question of female irrationality that 28 
 begins to investigate and deconstruct in its latter stages. In the process, it reveals 
that this question is not yet consigned to history, no less an assumed truth today than 
in the past. It reflects on this truism, questions its veracity, and overturns it to present 
an other world in which this irrationality is in fact the rational view of the order of 
things. In other words, it is a moment of clarity and truth  a revelation: 
 ,        
   - ?      
           
   ?      
   ?      
  ,   ,       
       ?    
   ?       
 ,        
   ?       
   :       
          
  .       
 ,   ,       
   ?       
  ,        
    .      
  , ?       
84 The phrase     appeared in an earlier draft of the Osnovy 
gosudarstvennoi kulturnoi politiki, which was seen by leading cultural figures. Its presence 
was heavily criticised by both Mark Zakharov and Elena Gremina in the discussion about the 
document that took place at the Meyerhold Centre in 2014, and the phrase subsequently did 
not appear in the final published version. See Obsuzhdenie Osnov gosudarstvennoi 
kulturnoi politiki RF, Meyerhold Centre, Moscow, June 2014 (unpublished transcript). 
           
  ?       
   ,      
 ,        
  ,       
 ,        
   ,      
   ,       
  ,        
 ,        
  ,        
 ,        
 .85 
This passage is the climax of the dialogue between protagonist () and antagonist 
( ), mediated by the chorus. Everything that the protagonist has 
thought, experienced, questioned, and felt through the course of the dialogue  
between the woman and the man, and the woman and the chorus  has brought her to 
this moment of subjective self-reflection. If the medicalisation of premenstrual 
syndrome (PMS) and the prescription of tablets to women in order to regulate its 
perceived excesses is the dominant order of things, then this moment of questioning 
that order offers an alternative perspective, in which the processes of female biology 
become a source of empowerment and truth. They offer a glimpse of alternative 
subjectivities, and perhaps equip the protagonist with the clarity required to take 
action for positive change in her life as a result. In this regard, what emerges is an 
emancipatory politics of female empowerment through the very bodily processes that 
are the source of past and present oppression, from prejudice in the workplace to 
exclusion from high office. What immediately follows the passage quoted above is a 
list of atrocities from the news, as well as firsthand accounts of sexual violence and 
harassment, all of which affect the (female) protagonist emotionally, whilst only 
arousing dismissive contempt from the (male) antagonist. His reaction is 
85 Shiliaeva. 
condescendingly to tell the protagonist that her problem lies in watching the news too 
much and listening to sad music. This is a reflection of the kind of binary oppositions 
listed by Coole, in which a contrived notion of objective masculine detachment is 
superior to the subjective feminine compassion expressed by the protagonist. 28  
questions this assumption by elevating compassion above masculine emotional 
indifference, although it leaves the binary itself intact. The protagonist responds,  
  . []     .86 There is an ethics of 
responsibility here, in which the female protagonist cannot in good faith look away 
and ignore the plight of others, in contrast to the male antagonist, who has no qualms 
about doing so. Advancing the form that this feminine other world would take, she 
proposes new collective rituals to compensate for the suffering that is all around in the 
world:   .  ,    - 
.87 What emerges in the proposition of a feminine utopia in 28  is a 
world of shared suffering, of compassion, empathy and emotion, unregulated by the 
norms of a medico-scientific rationality derived from patriarchal society. 
 What makes this other world an imaginary utopia rather than a concrete 
proposition are the repeated shifts between emotional states that contradict and 
override the previous ones, as the hormonal cycle inexorably progresses. The sadness 
and compassion for the suffering of others described above gives way to calm, quiet 
inner reflection in the dying moments of the play: 
 ?         
   ?       
      ?      
  ?         
   ?        
    ?       
86 Ibid. 
87 Ibid. 
   ,        
           
  ,         
           
   ?       
  ?       
     ?     
  ?         
    ?     
  ?88 
These are the final words uttered in the play, and as such they conclude the conflict. 
An existential aporia has been reached from which there is no way out, except via the 
inexorable motion of the hormonal cycle. These words reflect the irresolvable 
dilemma of subjectivity, in which questions of authenticity, veracity, truth, 
objectivity, and identity are all enclosed by the philosophical question of the 
knowability of reality versus its perception, and the insurmountable gap that exists 
between them. This existential turn in the play perhaps comes as a surprise, casting 
doubt over the proceedings and undermining the veracity of what has come before, 
which it turns out was only ever a product of a transitory subjective perception of 
reality at a given moment in time and place. On the other hand, it is the inevitable 
result of the dialectic of tragedy that underpins the structure of the play. As in Brecht, 
dialectical theatre does not lend itself to partisan political manifesto-making  things 
are revealed as contingent, subjective, and always in a constant state of change.  
The existential aporia of   is the end point of the interrogation of 
corporeal subjectivity, and is also its beginning. This is demonstrated by the final 
action that the protagonist performs, which is silently to draw floral patterns in her 
own menstrual blood on the floor of the stage. The blood is symbolic of death, as well 
as being literally the material stuff of creativity, which is a rebirth. A uniquely 
88 Ibid. 
feminine creativity thus emerges out of symbolic death and pain. This provisionally 
restores the promise of the other world; a world that incorporates the abjected 
menstrual blood as the essence of its materiality. 
 28  was described by one (male) viewer on social media as a work of 
radical feminism drunk on resentment.89 There is no place for feminism in the 
current state cultural policy, which sees the place of women and their role in society 
in purely traditional terms. This is reflected in the negative view of feminism held by 
many, including amongst women. Suspicion of feminism is stoked by, amongst other 
things, the patriarchal ideological worldview of the (overwhelmingly male) regime, a 
view which is widely promoted by state media in tandem with the increasingly 
influential Russian Orthodox Church. As Zaitseva points out,   
     .90 However, the 
irony here is that 28 , in all its contradictions, questioning, and existential self-
reflection, is far from being radically feminist in form or content. It sketches the 
outlines of a feminist utopia before casting it aside, and follows a highly formal model 
that was created by the patriarchal Ancient Greeks, with a dialectic derived from 
phallogocentric Western philosophy. In utilising these traditions, however, 28  
presents a serious political challenge to the patriarchal culture of High Putinism, 
which cannot accommodate its interrogation of the social consensus. In this regard, 
Shiliaevas text is a political project to unveil the contingent norms that regulate 
society and that patrol womens place in the social order.  
89 Aleksandr Tyryshkin, Facebook post, 20 September 2019:  . 
 . []      , 
  .       
 . 
90 Zaitseva, p. 51. 
What ultimately unites all three of the plays in this chapter are characters who 
struggle to understand one another, which is in turn a reflection on the shortcomings 
of language and the inadequacies of human communication in modern society (a 
concern in drama since at least Chekhov). In response to this, each play resorts to 
different interrogations of subjectivity and the perception of reality as such.  ? 
is a question that appears in one form or another across all three texts, and each 
considers this universal human problem in different ways that are nonetheless all 
grounded in the particular context of contemporary reality. They reflect on the 
contingent and arbitrary nature of the ideological norms that police society, as well as 
on the identity formation and self-determination of the individual who is subjected to 
its normative regimes. If, in   , a citizens perception of the 
world around him can be violently overwritten by the ideological norms of the 
authorities, then human perception is always unstable and subject to change, liable to 
rewrite itself in the inexorable process of subjective becoming. This is what we then 
see in both  and 28  with the emergence of alternative subjectivities, 
not controlled or regulated by those same normative regimes. These new works of 
Russian drama lay the groundwork for a politics of resistance and dissensus  
different ways of seeing, doing and thinking  in the aesthetics of contemporary 
theatre at the margins of High Putinism.  
4) Actionist Theatre: The Burden of Gruz 300 
 Moscow Actionism [ ] arose as an artistic 
phenomenon in the Russian capital during the 1990s, although its roots trace back to 
Moscow Conceptualism and the performance actions of Kollektivnye deistviia in the 
late Soviet period. This chapter aims to analyse the incursion of Actionism  
traditionally located in the realm of contemporary art  into the space of the theatre in 
recent years. This has been primarily the work of a collective called Gruz 300, who 
stage unsanctioned performances on the city streets in Moscow and elsewhere. The 
collective is comprised largely of artists and musicians, rather than trained theatre 
makers. They avoid stages and dedicated theatre spaces. Instead, they perform in 
public space in the summer, and in found space in the winter (in empty warehouses, 
for example, for which they negotiate temporary usage).  
The first question is: what makes these performances theatre rather than 
contemporary art, and what makes them different from other works of Russian 
Actionism, which are not considered to be theatre? The reasons are threefold. Firstly, 
the collective calls itself a theatre and describes its performances as , a 
word that is used only in relation to theatre. he use of the words  and 
 does not necessarily mean anything in and of itself, but in combination 
with the other factors, it is clear that they are not meant ironically and indeed it seems 
that the collective would like their performances to be considered seriously as theatre. 
Secondly, although some performances were free, most required the purchase of a 
ticket online in advance, thus making it quite unlike a usual Actionist , which 
is unannounced ahead of time and carried out before an unsuspecting public. Thirdly, 
the performances fulfil the basic criteria for theatre set out by the influential British 
director Peter Brook, which is to say, there is a performer and a spectator, and 
everything else is extra.1 To this we might add that the performances are of a finite 
length, which is now also usually considered a prerequisite for theatre.  
In the light of twenty-first-century developments in theatre with buzzwords 
such as postdramatic, immersive, site-specific, and interactive, coupled with 
the rise of performance art and the expansion of the field of performance studies, no 
solid distinction between theatre and performance is now tenable. In 2010, one of the 
most well-known performance artists of our time, Marina Abramovi, was asked what 
the difference is between theatre and performance art. She answered: 
To be a performance artist, you have to hate theatre. Theatre is fake The 
knife is not real, the blood is not real, and the emotions are not real. 
Performance is just the opposite: the knife is real, the blood is real, and the 
emotions are real.2 
Whilst this statement was most likely intended as a provocation (Abramovi makes 
theatre of her own, and recently starred in an opera), the point here is that the kind of 
classical theatre that Abramovi is referring to is no longer the only one, and in fact 
the difference that she identifies between theatre as fake and performance as real has 
been steadily eroded over the past few decades to the point where it is impossible to 
distinguish theatre and performance in such a categorical way. This is as true in the 
West as it is in Russia, where, to give one example, it would be difficult to describe 
the   of Teatr.doc as fake or not real, and yet it is firmly still 
theatre. The hybridization and erosion of a solid distinction between these two fields 
of art has facilitated the incursion of the Gruz 300 performance collective into the 
1 Peter Brook, The Empty Space (London: Penguin, 2008), p. 11. 
2 Marina Abramovi, quoted in Sean OHagan, Interview: Marina Abramovi, The 
Guardian, 3 October 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/oct/03/interview-marina-abramovic-
performance-artist> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
discursive space of the theatre (if not into the physical space), and legitimized their 
claims to make theatre that is consciously situated outside of the mainstream 
establishment.  
 Gruz 300 was founded in the early part of 2019 as the creative team behind an 
immersive show of the same name,  300. It went on to produce another work the 
following autumn, called   228. As a theatre collective, Gruz 300 is non-
hierarchical and employs ensemble working methods and practices, meaning that 
there is no director as such. However, the performances are billed as curated by 
Katrin Nenasheva. Nenasheva is a well-known performance artist and , 
whose previous actions include   (2015), - (2016) and  
  :    (2017). For  , Nenasheva 
wandered around central Moscow every day for thirty days dressed in a prison 
uniform, in an effort to bring attention to the problems of women in Russian prisons. 
In -, the artist spent twenty one days in Moscows most popular public 
spaces with a metal bed frame strapped to her back, in an attempt to raise awareness 
of the treatment of children in Russian orphanages. Using a similar approach for 
   , Nenasheva spent twenty three days viewing the world through 
a virtual-reality (VR) headset whilst blindly feeling her way around the city centre. 
The headset showed the interior of a psychiatric institution [ 
], and was designed to induce members of the public who put on the headset 
to reflect on the invisible imprisonment of thousands of Russian citizens in such 
places, many of whom have never seen the city for themselves and would similarly 
fumble their way around, were they suddenly to appear unaccompanied in a public 
place.  
Nenasheva identifies herself with what has been described as the third wave 
of Russian Actionism.3 During an interview I conducted with the artist in Moscow in 
October 2019, Nenasheva laid out the three so-called waves of Russian Actionism 
as follows: 
    .    
: ,  ,  91-98 ,  2008-2012 
        , Pussy Riot  
 ,      ,  
   ,        ,  
        : 
          
   -,  ,    
.4 
The other name in the emerging field of so-called third-wave Actionism is Daria 
Serenko, whose action   (2016) was, as its name suggests, a more subtle 
and less aggressive form of Actionism than the famous examples set by Voina, Pussy 
Riot, and Petr Pavlenskii. I would suggest that this shift in Russian Actionism towards 
something more closely resembling Anglo-American social practice is what enabled 
an Actionist such as Nenasheva to consider theatre as a viable medium through which 
her artistic practice could manifest itself. The reformulation of the objective of the 
Actionist performance []  from monologic, unidirectional political statement, 
to dialogic communication with ordinary people  brought it closer to the kinds of 
communicative practices that are characteristic of contemporary theatre, examples of 
which were seen in the preceding chapters.  
It is also true, however, that the two jailed members of the allegedly second 
wave Actionist group Pussy Riot  Nadia Tolokonnikova and Maria Alekhina  have 
3 See Pavel Mitenko and Sylvia Chassaing, Tretia volna aktsionizma: iskusstvo svobodnogo 
deistviia vo vremia reaktsii, Khudozhestvennii zhurnal, 102 (2017) 
<http://moscowartmagazine.com/issue/60/article/1241> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
4 Katrin Nenasheva, Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, 2019. 
both separately made works of theatre in recent years on the back of their experiences 
in prison and newfound global fame.5 In addition to this, Nenasheva performed one 
day of her month-long action   with Tolokonnikova, which puts the notion 
of a third wave of Actionism as a distinct emergence under question, especially 
given the absence of any substantial time lapse between the so-called second and third 
waves. As we saw with documentary theatre over the same period (see Chapter One), 
the events of 2012  namely the return of Putin to the presidency, the protest 
movement that culminated in  , and the imprisonment of Actionists 
Tolokonnikova and Alekhina of Pussy Riot for their performance of - 
in Moscows Cathedral of Christ the Saviour  were the signs of a turning tide in 
Russian politics. It is therefore reasonable to assume that the change in circumstances 
necessitated a different kind of Actionism to that of the preceding Putin and 
Medvedev years, and equally to that of the first wave in the 1990s. In this regard, 
so-called third wave Actionism should also be considered for its qualities as a 
practical response of adaptation to the new, post-- reactionary 
environment of High Putinism. 
 It is clear that the wave of restrictive legislation which started in 2013 affected 
the kind of action that the leading figures of Actionism at the time could perform 
without risking their personal safety and freedom. This resulted in the emigration 
from Russia of some of its leading figures, namely the married couple Oleg 
Vorotnikov and Natalia Sokol of Voina, as well as Petr Pavlenskii. Even the work of 
Tolokonnikova and Alekhina since their release from prison in 2014 has become less 
overtly provocative and more focused on helping ordinary citizens, as seen in their 
5 Tolokonnikova made Inside Pussy Riot (2017) in collaboration with the theatre collective 
Les Enfants Terribles at the Saatchi Gallery in London. Alekhina made and acted in Burning 
Doors (2016) in collaboration with Belarus Free Theatre, which premiered at the Journeys 
International Festival in the UK. 
founding of the human rights organization Zona prava and the online media platform 
Mediazona. The actions of the third wave (Nenasheva, Serenko) are certainly a far 
cry from the first major work of Actionism in the 1990s, when art group E.T.I. lay 
down in front of the Lenin mausoleum in Red Square, using their bodies to spell out 
the word .6 The same is true for the most famous actions prior to the 
conservative-reactionary turn, such as that performed by Voina in 2011, which won 
the group the prestigious Innovation Prize for best work of visual art. This is probably 
the best-known work of Russian Actionism in the twenty-first century after Pussy 
Riots world famous -. It was called     , and 
involved a sixty-five- by twenty-seven-metre phallus drawn on to Liteinii Bridge in St 
Petersburg, which when the bridge was raised at night presented itself directly facing 
the Bolshoi dom  the notorious regional headquarters of the NKVD during the 
Stalinist Terror, then succeeded by the KGB, and now occupied by the FSB.7 It is 
difficult to compare provocative actions such as these by E.T.I., Voina, and Pussy 
Riot to the subtly engaging practices of Actionism from more recent years. In this 
regard, Actionism as a field of artistic practice has undergone an adaptive 
transformation that reflects the broader paradigm shift for cultural production in 
Russia since 2012. This process seems to have brought radically dissensual 
performance art into an overlap with its equivalent in the theatre. Recalling theatre 
director Iurii Muravitskiis reflections on his production of 28  from the previous 
chapter, he described discussing moving the work    
,  .8 It would seem that the two fields were 
6 The action was called     and took place on 18 April 1991. See 
Anatolii Osmolovskii, Khui na Krasnoi ploshchadi  25 let, Artgid, 18 April 2016 
<https://artguide.com/posts/1019> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
7 Voine prisudili gospremiiu za fallos na Liteinom mostu, Sankt-Peterburg.ru, 8 April 
2011 <http://saint-petersburg.ru/m/culture/old/301495/> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
8 Iurii Muravitskii, Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, 2019. 
moving in the direction of one another simultaneously at the end of the 2010s. 
Russian Actionism has a history distinct from that of the theatre.9 Yet here, in the 
particular ecology of High Putinism, we see the convergence of the two and the 
emergence of a new phenomenon in the history of both that speaks to the theme of 
this thesis  the interaction of politics and aesthetics in contemporary Russian culture. 
 Gruz 300 is a loose collective, consisting of three regular collaborators  
Katrin Nenasheva, Sasha Starost (musician-activist), and Stas Gorev (musician)  
and a number of others who participate on a project-by-project basis. The two major 
works by Gruz 300 in 2019 will be considered up close in this chapter, followed by 
one of Nenashevas personal projects. The first is the work of the same name   
300 (in italicised Cyrillic, as differentiated from the name of the collective Gruz 300, 
which is in unitalicised Roman letters). This work is described as an immersive show 
about torture. The second is   228, which is called a -, 
and broaches the theme of falsified convictions under article 228 of the criminal code 
(possession of narcotics). The third and final work is a project entitled  20:20, 
which deals with depression  one of the most widespread illnesses in Russia, that 
rarely gets acknowledged as such. This final performance is not by the Gruz 300 
collective  its creation is credited to Nenasheva and video artist Ivan Shevel. 
However, it is similar to the work of Gruz 300 and demonstrates many of the same 
9 Literature is sparse on the history of Russian Actionism. The only book-length publication 
that exists dedicated to this topic is Andrei Kovalevs catalogue Rossiiskii aktsionizm, 1990-
2000 (Moscow: World Art Muzei, 2007). However, many journalistic and scholarly articles 
exist in both Russian and English, and a recent attempt was made to document the history of 
the broader field of performance in Russia, including but not limited to Actionism. See 
Russian Performances: Word, Object, Action, ed. by Julie A. Buckler, Julie A. Cassiday, and 
Boris Wolfson (Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press, 2018). Also of relevance is the 
catalogue from the 2017 Saatchi Gallery exhibition of the same name, Art Riot: Post-Soviet 
Actionism, ed. by Andrei Kovalev (Moscow: ABCdesign Studio, 2017). On the more specific 
topic of Pussy Riot, there is a slightly larger volume of literature. See, for example, Eliot 
Borensteins most recent publication Pussy Riot: Speaking Punk to Power (London: 
Bloomsbury Academic, 2021). 
traits that define the two works by the theatre collective, to the extent that it will be 
productive to consider them alongside each other. As the final production to be 
analysed in detail in this thesis, it will also serve to illustrate the disappearance of any 
solid distinction between theatre and performance art at the margins of contemporary 
Russian culture.  20:20 was not labelled by its creators as theatre, and yet it 
has many of the qualities that define hybrid experimental performance theatre around 
the world in the present epoch.  
 The term  300 arose in the Soviet Union during the war in Afghanistan 
and is Russian military jargon for injured soldiers and personnel who need to be 
withdrawn from frontline action (in contrast to  200, which refers to the 
deceased). During the infamously bloody and protracted conflict in Afghanistan, 
many Soviet soldiers were forced out of action not only by physical injuries, but by 
mental conditions such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) as well. Naming the 
theatre company Gruz 300, from the outset the artists established a reference to the 
burden of physical and psychological trauma that many former soldiers carry with 
them. They expanded the meaning of the term to apply to all citizens who carry 
invisible burdens deriving from trauma in all its varieties, which the work of the 
theatre is oriented towards revealing and working through.10 Analysing the work of 
Gruz 300 and Katrin Nenasheva, this chapter will build on the trends and conclusions 
drawn in the previous chapters, where certain common themes were described: 
discourses of torture (Chapter One); new documentarism (Chapter Two); and body 
politics (Chapter Three). It is in the meeting of Actionism and theatre that some 
10 Nenasheva stated in an interview that the name is partly a reference to Aleksei Balabanovs 
film Gruz 200 (2007), which also deals with the theme of social violence and trauma. See 
Leva Levchenko, Khoroshii gorod, gde pytaiut: Interviu s Katrin Nenashevoi, The 
Village, 4 October 2018 <https://www.the-village.ru/village/weekend/art/327405-katrin> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
unexplored contours of politics and aesthetics in contemporary Russian culture reveal 
themselves.  
 Being the seat of federal government and state power, Moscow is historically 
the focal point of Russian Actionism, as the artists attempt through their  to 
generate a dialogue with the acting authorities, using the general public as their 
audience and witness. Although all of the performances in this chapter are described 
in their Moscow iterations, it is of central importance to the Gruz 300 project and 
indeed to Nenasheva in her solo work that the performances are seen and heard 
beyond the capital.  300 has played numerous times in St Petersburg, as well as 
in Vladimir.  228 has been adapted for Samara, Perm, and Cheliabinsk, as well 
as St Petersburg.  20:20 took place on the streets of Moscow, but was live-
streamed online with full interactive access to anyone, anywhere in the world with 
internet and smartphone access. The works featured in this chapter should therefore 
not be viewed as purely a Moscow phenomenon. 
 300 
 Like the three works of new documentarism that were considered in Chapter 
Two, this production does not have a conventional play script to refer to as such and 
no recordings are available, meaning that a description of the performance and a 
documentation of its history is important for any analysis. As with those works, my 
sources are a combination of interviews (conducted both by me and by others) and 
primary sources collected during attendance at performances in Moscow, 
supplemented by a variety of materials available online. For  300, a valuable 
additional resource is a copy of the unpublished working scenario, which was shared 
with me by Nenasheva for the purposes of this research project. The tangible 
advantage in working with shows linked to a relatively high-profile artist-Actionist is 
that a lot more attention is paid to them by the media, as well as by users of social 
media, which widens the variety of secondary sources available on the internet 
relating to the performances. That said, however, the attention these works receive is 
almost entirely superficial, focusing on the headline-grabbing aspects, such as police 
intervention, rather than critiquing the works themselves. The nature of these 
performance-actions is that they are always changing as the project evolves and 
matures, to say nothing of the need to adapt to the specificities of each new 
performance site. This fluidity presents both challenges and opportunities to the 
artists, as well as to subsequent critical engagement with the works in question. 
 300 premiered on 10 February 2019 at a converted warehouse space 
called Modul, located in the north-east of the city beyond the Third Ring. In addition 
to Nenasheva, Starost, and Gorev,  300 also involved Artem Materinskii (listed 
as a ), Olesia Gudkova (), and Polina Andreevna 
(). The running time for the performance was approximately three 
hours, and was divided into three roughly equal length parts. The first contained five 
documentary-style acted scenes based on the testimonies of torture victim Ruslan 
Suleimanov; the second part was an interactive game called ; and the third 
part was a post-show discussion for those who were willing (and who remained until 
the end). In the performance I attended there was no discussion, because the game 
section was cut short by the news that the police were on their way  this was one of 
the drawbacks of locating that particular performance in public space, when most 
others had taken place behind closed doors. However, what was lost by the curtailed 
performance was compensated for by the choice of location  perhaps the most 
unusual monument in the Russian capital, the pithily titled Memorial to the 
Defenders of the White House in 1993. This location was particularly generative in 
terms of the discursive interaction between performance and place: as mentioned in 
relation to  in Chapter Two, the regime of violence and systemic abuse 
of power that characterises High Putinism can be traced back to the constitutional 
crisis and the events of 1993 that this site commemorates. This is in addition to the 
simple act of locating a performance about violence (and the consequences for its 
victims) on a site that commemorates the victims of state power and violence. This 
monument to one of the defining moments in the history of the modern Russian state 
thus serves as the mise-en-scne for a performance about perhaps the defining feature 
of its history in the present  systemic violence in the form of torture.  
An immersive show about torture is a paradox that takes the immersive 
genre to its logical end point. What started as a novel form of experimental 
participatory theatre that was intended to emancipate the spectator from the passivity 
of the seat in the auditorium became commodified and commercialised in the twenty-
first century to the extent that any claim to emancipatory politics became untenable. 
Indeed, the inevitable distancing from the immersive tag has already begun. One of 
the leaders in the field, UK-based theatre company ZU-UK released their Post-
Immersive Manifesto in 2020, stating the following:  
Over the past decade, immersive has arguably been one of the most overused 
terms to describe theatre productions that aim to involve audiences in 
unconventional ways. With the mainstream success of specific immersive 
productions, this trend goes beyond the theatre and arts industry. From games 
distributors to Westfield shopping centres, just about every organisation seems 
to be discussing how immersive events can give their product an edgier 
public profile or increase sales.11  
Twentieth-century Modernists across Europe and at different times dreamed of a new, 
radically participatory theatre, that could repair the damage to society wrought by 
bourgeois capitalism. From Romain Rollands seminal 1903 book Le thtre du 
peuple, through Platon Kerzhentsevs popular theoretical work for the Proletkult 
  (1918), to Guy Debords La socit du spectacle (1967), early 
attempts were made to overcome the conventions of script-based drama through the 
active participation of the spectator in the performance-event.12 The emergence of so-
called immersive theatre at the end of the twentieth century has been linked with the 
concomitant rise of neoliberalism as the dominant global economic order.13 The 
radical Modernist dream of social emancipation for the spectator has been replaced by 
the immersive consumer experience. The experience economy continues to 
dominate production in the culture industry, of which theatre is a part.14  
The rise of hybrid forms of theatre and immersive experiences has for many 
years been a feature of trendy cultural life in Moscow and St Petersburg. I 
experienced this first-hand as a minor character in an immersive adaptation of the 
Strugatsky brothers 1969 novel    , directed by 
Maksim Didenko at the Richter Hotel in Moscow in 2018. The show turned out to be 
11 See Jorge Lopes Ramos and others, The Post-Immersive Manifesto, International Journal 
of Performance Arts and Digital Media, 16, 2 (2020), 196-212 (p. 196) 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/14794713.2020.1766282>. 
12 See: Romain Rolland, Le thtre du peuple (Paris: Cahiers de la Quinzaine, 1903); Platon 
Kerzhentsev, Tvorcheskii teatr (Petrograd: [n. pub.], 1918); Guy Debord, La socit du 
spectacle (Paris: Buchet/Chastel, 1967). 
13 See Adam Alston, Introduction: Theatre as Experience Machine in Beyond Immersive 
Theatre: Aesthetics, Politics and Productive Participation (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2016), pp. 1-34. 
14 For the relationship of the experience economy and the theatre, see Chapter Eight of 
Andy Lavender, Performance in the Twenty-First Century: Theatres of Engagement 
(Abingdon: Routledge, 2016), pp. 158-92. 
in large part a promotional event for a new brand of flavoured liqueur. Likewise, a 
simple Google search on 20 May 2020 for   produced a 
number of hits: for example, a Time Out Moscow article from 2018 entitled 5 
  , which leads with a photograph of a young 
woman standing in a doorway dressed in black and with her face painted in Mexican 
Day of the Dead style.15 This kind of highly commercialised, appropriative immersive 
theatre now dominates the scene, and for many people the immersive tag is now 
associated with light entertainment rather than art-activism or social engagement. 
Writing about  300, the theatre critic Ilmira Bolotian expressed such a view: 
    ,    
,       .16 Thus, 
when the makers of  300 labelled it an immersive show about torture, they 
ironically subverted the commercial-consumer expectations of the immersive genre: it 
was apparent (or should have been apparent) to the prospective spectator that such a 
show would not be the usual light-hearted entertainment.  
The question that each potential spectator was confronted with when deciding 
whether to buy a ticket for the show or not was what form an immersive show about 
torture would take, and how far were the makers willing to go with this idea. There 
were unspoken questions such as: Will I personally be tortured? Surely the limits of 
theatre (and the law) are such that a spectator cannot be physically tortured during a 
show? Is real physical violence permissible in the realm of theatre, where members of 
the public are not coming with such expectations or desires? These kinds of questions 
presented the spectator with a high degree of unpredictability and uncertainty over 
15 Aleksandra Vial, 5 luchshikh immersivnykh spektaklei, Time Out Moscow, 24 March 
2018 <https://www.timeout.ru/msk/feature/475870> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
16 See Ilmira Bolotian, Teatr kak pytka: Gruz 300 i ego protivorechiia, Teatr, 38 (2019), 
98-103 (p. 100). 
what exactly they were signing up for when buying a ticket. On the one hand, this can 
be seen as a re-appropriation of the immersive genre, taking it back to its original idea 
as a form of cultural and artistic emancipation. On the other hand, it can be seen as the 
opposite of this  as a reflection on the genres imprisonment within the expectations 
that it has built for itself, revealing the modern spectators insatiable desire to 
consume experiences, as an integral component of the contemporary creative 
economy of the Russian capital. 
Because the  300 team are not theatre makers, they display no interest or 
personal stake in the kinds of internal disputes and battles for recognition that go on 
within the theatre world. This is not for lack of ambition, however, with Nenasheva 
boldly stating on her social media:    .17 In one 
sense, their work could be called outsider theatre, because it is made by people with 
no specialist theatre training or background in theatre practice, although because they 
are all artists and creatives of some description, it cannot be labelled outsider art, 
which is somewhat different. On the one hand, this outsider-ness is a liberating force 
on their work, as they are not bound by the conventions or standards that trained 
theatre practitioners inevitably set themselves in and against. On the other hand, it is 
this same lack of training and experience that undermines the quality of the work on 
occasion, as inconsistencies across performances make it a perpetual work in 
progress. By the time I became a spectator at one of the final performances of  
300, many of the earlier flaws commented on by critics had been ironed out. One of 
these included, for example, placing performers in the audience to unexpectedly 
intervene during the game section. Because the performers are not professional actors, 
17 Katrin Nenasheva, Facebook post, 24 November 2019. 
this set-up was easily detected by the audience.18 Whilst tweaking a performance 
during the run is a natural part of theatre, the significant variations between 
performances of  300 demonstrate the element of unpreparedness that the 
creators as non-professional theatre makers were willing to accept when opening the 
doors to the public for the first time.  
The creators stated aim for the project was to use the medium of theatre as a 
means through which to talk about one of the most taboo subjects in Russian public 
discourse  systemic violence and the consequences for its victims. The description 
for the performance on the promotional clip uploaded to Nenashevas YouTube 
channel poses the questions that it seeks to raise and sets up the expectations of the 
spectator: 
   ?    ?    
  ?     300  
  ,  ,     . , 
,           
 .         
  .19 
In the first formulation here we see a reworking of Hamlets ubiquitous words, 
punning on the phonetic similarity of the Russian words  [to be], and  [to 
beat]. The implication of the new reworked version, to be or not to beat, is that the 
state of being is one of violence, and conversely not to beat, i.e. not to use violence, is 
a state of non-being. This equation of being and violence as one and the same, as a 
metonymy, is to say that violence is the ontological state of being. This equation lies 
at the core of the discourse generated by  300. In this regard, the performance 
18 This criticism came from theatre critic Viktor Vilisov in his Telegram post about the show. 
See Vilisov, Telegram channel @apollonia, 2 April 2019. 
19 Katrin Nenasheva, Gruz 300: immersivnyi spektakl o sistemnom nasilii, online video 
recording, YouTube, 4 March 2019 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eNu_rDsNUhA> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
presents violence as the ontology that defines and determines the experience of reality 
in High Putinist Russia. There is no place for non-violence in the world of  300, 
where the choice is not between violence or non-violence, but instead between 
violence or non-being. In one respect, this recalls Beumers and Lipovetskys thesis 
about the discourse of violence in Russian theatre in the post-Soviet era, although in 
most other respects we are dealing here with something different to the dramatic 
hyper-naturalism of  .20 
 One of the peculiarities of this work is its backstory  it started life not as 
theatre, but was in fact originally conceived by Nenasheva as a personal exhibition, 
with a series of performance pieces to accompany it, on the theme of torture and 
PTSD. The project was titled  300:  , and was due to be 
exhibited at the state-funded Galereia na Solianke, which has a long history of being a 
platform for contemporary performance art in the Russian capital. Somewhat 
predictably, the scheduled exhibition fell foul of the authorities and the opening was 
postponed a matter of days before it was due to open to the public in September 
2018.21 Shortly afterwards, it was cancelled completely and was followed later that 
year by the resignation of the gallery director, curator Fedor Pavlov-Andreevich, who 
had been in charge for nearly a decade.22 In the run-up to the scheduled opening of the 
exhibition, Nenasheva staged an action multiple times in Moscow and other nearby 
cities in which she could be found in the middle of a busy street inside an animal 
cage, itself wrapped entirely in cling film. A sign was hung on the cage stating that it 
20 For hyper-naturalism in  , see Birgit Beumers and Mark Lipovetsky, 
Performing Violence: Literary and Theatrical Experiments of New Russian Drama (Bristol: 
Intellect, 2009), pp. 34-39. 
21 Galereia v Moskve otmenila vystavku protiv pytok Katrin Nenashevoi, Radio Svoboda, 
20 September 2018 <https://www.svoboda.org/a/29500108.html> [accessed 23 December 
2020]. 
22 Direktor galerei na Solianke uvolilsia iz-za otmeny vystavki o pytkakh, Radio Svoboda, 
24 September 2018 <https://www.svoboda.org/a/29673922.html> [accessed 23 December 
2020]. 
contained  body which had been tortured  this was a reference to Nenashevas 
personal experience in the self-proclaimed Donetsk Peoples Republic (DPR), where 
she had been taken captive and tortured for two days by the local paramilitary earlier 
that year.23 Her desire to stage an action on this theme was twofold: firstly, as a 
performative exploration of and confrontation with the burden of trauma that she 
carried as a result of her first-hand experience of torture; and secondly as an attempt 
to bring attention to the widespread phenomenon of torture that occurs in state 
institutions on a daily basis throughout the country. During the transition from gallery 
exhibition and street action to theatre performance, the precise nature and extent of 
routine torture specifically in the state prison system came into sharp focus as a result 
of the public testimonies of Ruslan Suleimanov, amongst others, as well as the 
emergence of videos in July 2018 from Yaroslavl penal colony showing the brutal 
torture of an inmate by a large group of guards.24 Thus, by the time  300 became 
a theatre work, a significant amount of media attention had been paid to the censored 
exhibition, as well as to Nenashevas public statements in response. However, none of 
this could have prepared audiences for the immersive element of the  300 
experience. 
 The first part of the performance is the more conventional  it is documentary 
in style, with a mixture of verbatim text and autobiographical monologue. There are 
also light interactive elements for the spectator, although these do not determine the 
course of the action at this stage. An example of this is when one of the characters 
prepares buckwheat in an imaginary kitchen and feeds it to the spectators. This part is 
23 Nina Nazarova, Oret, chto nas podorvut na minakh: Aktivistka Katrin Nenasheva o 
pytkakh v DNR, BBC Russian, 26 June 2018 <https://www.bbc.com/russian/features-
44618444> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
24 Olga Bobrova, 10 minut v klasse vospitatelnoi rboty, Novaia gazeta, 20 July 2018 
<https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2018/07/20/77222-10-minut-v-klasse-vospitatelnoy-raboty> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
built around a series of monologues, all of which derive from three sources: firstly, 
the public statements made by Ruslan Suleimanov that were published in Novaia 
gazeta relating to his experiences of torture whilst imprisoned in Omsk;25 secondly, 
an additional interview with Suleimanov carried out by Nenasheva subsequently for 
the purposes of the project; and thirdly, Nenashevas own first-person testimony 
relating to her experiences as a hostage in the DPR. In the working scenario text, there 
are five characters (numbered, without names). Suleimanovs testimonies are split up 
and distributed between them. Nenasheva speaks her own testimony in its entirety, a 
fact which casts this particular element of the performance into the category of 
witness theatre, as pioneered by Teatr.doc over the past decade (see Chapter One). 
There are four occasions in the script when the specific names of those prison guards 
who tortured Suleimanov are called out. The calling out of the names of those 
responsible is the same device that is used in the three documentary works analysed in 
Chapter One, and is especially central to , where a long list of the names of the 
perpetrators is read out. The importance of naming those responsible during the 
performance as an act of witnessing and of citizens justice in the absence of concrete 
legal justice was considered in the context of that work, but there is good reason to 
apply a similar reasoning here. A public statement made by Nenasheva in relation to 
her cancelled exhibition supports this idea: 
      ,    
  .          
 ,        
,       .26 
25 Elena Masiuk, Lomka. Omsk, Novaia gazeta, 13 May 2018 
<https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2018/05/13/76435-lomka-omsk> [accessed 23 December 
2020]. 
26 Nenasheva, in Levchenko, Khoroshii gorod, gde pytaiut 
For Nenasheva, the act of witnessing is important because, as she says,    
  . As we saw with the three documentary plays in Chapter 
One, bearing witness to the event is a fundamental part of the creation of meaning in 
this form of theatre, and is what generates the ethical demand for the spectator-as-
witness. This is where the similarities end, however, because if in  the horror 
lies in the observation of the matter-of-fact playing out of torture and our 
corresponding inability as spectators to act (being compelled passively to sit and 
watch in the audience), in  300 the horror is reversed: the spectator is able to 
move around and act but is powerless all the same, unable to bring themselves to 
intervene or to change the course of the action, and correspondingly becoming 
complicit in the violence. This becomes more acute as the performance goes on, but 
there is one indicative moment from the first (documentary) section, when we hear a 
verbatim monologue taken from Suleimanovs testimony: 
     -1  ,     17,  
    ,    .   
  ,    ,    
   ,         
 .     . 
[]    6-7.      , 
   ,    , ,    
      .   ,  
,     ,    
.27 
This testimony, when placed in combination with the scene that precedes it when one 
of the performers cooks and distributes buckwheat for the spectators to eat (which all 
were strongly encouraged to do, although it was possible to decline), generates a 
27 Ruslan Suleimanov, in Katrin Nenasheva and others, Gruz 300 (unpublished scenario, 
2019). See also Masiuk, Lomka. Omsk. 
particular kind of horror of the real. The association for the spectator between the 
two elements  the buckwheat that features in the description of Suleimanovs 
physical violation by guards, and the buckwheat that they still hold in their hands on a 
small disposable plate and were moments ago consuming with a plastic spoon  has 
the potential to generate a visceral reaction in the spectator (most likely nausea and 
revulsion, but various reactions are possible). In this manner,  300 works with 
affect to try to set up and create reactions in the spectator through sensory and 
associative triggers such as this one. This is a kind of immersive montage of 
attractions similar in function to Eizenshteins famous cattle-slaughter scene in 
 (1925). Here the image  in this case buckwheat  generates the affective 
associations that relate to the overall theme of the work.  
In contrast to conventional documentary plays that maintain the division 
between performers (who perform) and audience (who watch), the freedom that the 
spectator is granted to wander at will around the performance space in  300  to 
move from room to room, and to accept or decline the offer of buckwheat  creates a 
complicity with the event that is a different kind of demand to that of bearing witness 
in a documentary play. The freedom of choice  to come and go, to walk away and 
not participate  becomes a burden in itself. A question is posed in the promotional 
video for the performance: 
      ,  
   ?  
This is followed not by an answer to the question, but by an imperative: 
  .28 
The final choice of phrase is seemingly an ironic reference to Putins 2018 
presidential campaign, in which this three-word slogan circulated in the media and in 
public discourse across the country. Popular internet memes arose in response, 
reflecting the feeling of the total absence of choice in the election and the 
corresponding meaningless of the slogan. For example, one meme stated,  
 .   . The choice that is euphemistically referred to in 
the political slogan is mirrored in  300, where choice turns out to be rather its 
opposite. Here it becomes a (non-)choice not between Putin and Putin, but between 
systemic violence and the social contract. As the spectator discovers over the course 
of the performance, the freedom of choice they are endowed with as an integral part 
of the immersive experience can be an unexpectedly heavy ethical burden. This 
feeling was perhaps heightened in  300 due to the fact that the kinds of choices 
spectators are accustomed to making in more commercially-oriented immersive 
experiences are considerably less demanding, often amounting to little more than 
the freedom to spend money.29 
 The first few lines of Nenashevas opening monologue in the performance are 
worth quoting here at length, for a useful insight not only into the authorial intention 
behind  300, but also into the other two works in this chapter, and into the 
performance artists approach to her work as a whole: 
 ,         , 
          . , ,  
28 Nenasheva, Gruz 300: immersivnyi spektakl o sistemnom nasilii. 
29 Regarding choice in immersive shows, Ramos et al. state: This is an analogue of the 
unfreedom twenty-first-century citizens are trained to think of as experiences of true freedom; 
the freedom to choose between drinking beer or vodka, or eating sweets or chocolates, 
constitutes nothing more than the freedom to spend money. See Ramos and others, p. 197. 
,            
 ,        .   ?  
   ?   . ,   
,      ,     - 
. , ,     ,   
   .         
?      ?     
.      ?    
   [sic].30 
This Brechtian epic device of addressing the audience directly, in the first person, 
and informing us what she has been told to say by fictitious puppet masters behind 
the scene sets the tone for the rest of the performance, which is continuously looking 
to subvert the norms of theatre and the expectations of the spectator. One of the major 
themes in Nenashevas work in general is speaking out about trauma and giving a 
platform to marginalised or otherwise unheard voices. The question posed in her 
monologue above      ?  is one that she 
repeatedly returns to and tries to address in different ways across multiple different 
works, in the process enabling others to do the same. At three points during her 
opening monologue, Nenasheva holds up a placard. In order of appearance, they each 
read: 
1)   ? 
2)   ? 
3)     ?31 
In response to Nenasheva holding up these placards, one of the performers positioned 
in the audience begins to throw pebbles at her. In this way, the psychological trauma 
suffered by a victim of torture, and the questions that the victim struggles with as a 
30 Nenasheva and others. 
31 Ibid. 
result, are answered by society in the form of a public stoning. This is symbolic of the 
response that a trauma victim receives when they publicly ask such questions, because 
as Nenasheva said in her opening monologue, why should everyone know about your 
trauma when     . The questions from these placards are the 
transitional link to the second part of the performance, the interactive game called 
. 
 As the spectators walk to the area where the game will be played, some still 
awkwardly holding a half-eaten plate of buckwheat in their hands, the performers 
assume a more casual persona, playing themselves. As written in the directions in 
the scenario,            ,   
    .32 Having access to the scenario is insightful, for 
making visible some of the working mechanisms behind this text-decentred 
performance piece. It confirms notions discussed previously relating to the real in 
contemporary performance aesthetics. The instructions quoted above are indicative of 
the fact that however much a performer appears to play themselves or not act as an 
aesthetic choice in bringing the real into the performance, a persona or image 
[] must always necessarily remain.  
The rules of the game are explained to the audience roughly as follows: two 
names of spectators are pulled out of a hat; the first name to be pulled out plays the 
role of  and the second name plays the role of . For a duration of 
three minutes, the  has total power over the . The role of the 
 is to exercise this power in whatever way they wish. Correspondingly, for 
the duration of the game the  must submit totally to the authority of the 
 and carry out their orders without exception. The rules of the game are 
32 Ibid. 
sufficiently simple that no one could be left confused by them. However, the rules 
also open up such a vast space of freedom for the person playing the  that it 
proved difficult to get the game going due to the reluctance and understandable 
hesitancy of the participants to fully exercise the power they were unexpectedly 
handed. The game was clearly an exercise in power relations between individuals, and 
an exploration of the boundary      
( 300 promotional clip, quoted above). This is the moment at which we as 
spectators-turned-participants are expected to make our choice (the   
 from the promotional clip). How will we use the unlimited power we have 
been given, and equally how will we react to being given orders and told to submit to 
the authority of a stranger unconditionally, especially when it crosses our personal 
tolerance thresholds or lines of moral acceptability? These personal boundaries are 
different for everyone, a fact that became apparent in the playing out of the game. 
 The varying reactions to the game each time it was performed are indicative of 
the problems and successes that the production had as a whole. At the premiere and 
early performances in Moscow, before the show had been written about and when 
audiences had no expectations coming into it, the reactions were the most 
controversial. Many people left in objection or disgust long before the end of the 
game, whilst those who refused to participate in the game when their name was drawn 
from the hat were offered two options: either to hold up a sign with the words  
    if they wished to remain, or to leave the performance 
entirely. In one notable instance publicised on social media and even reaching some 
online news outlets, a spectator initially chose the former option (the sign), but after a 
short period of time changed their mind and left, then subsequently returned with 
others to disrupt the performance, which controversially ended with said spectator 
being slapped by one of the performers.33 In the show attended by Ilmira Bolotian, 
she estimated that around half of the audience left before the end of the game, some 
more publicly than others.34 This was roughly the same proportion as during the 
outdoor performance at the Monument to the Defenders of the White House in 1993, 
which took place more than half a year after the premiere. This suggests that 
audiences were still not coming prepared for what they saw, having difficulty 
accepting the premise of the game even after it had become known about and reported 
on in various media outlets.  
Some rounds of the game did become violent and visibly distressing for the 
participants, which as a result made for extremely difficult viewing from the sidelines. 
Other rounds passed by fairly uneventfully, with spectator-participants clearly 
uncomfortable and conflicted about how to act in the situation, to the point of inertia. 
The game far from always descended into violence, but nonetheless the power 
dynamic of master-slave that existed between the two players meant that violence was 
intrinsic to all the interactions between them. It was also not necessarily the case that 
the  would be the one to break down. In reality, it was often more difficult and 
traumatising for the , who was the active agent, and therefore had to 
grapple with the violation of the boundaries of consent in their actions more than the 
, in their passive role. This was particularly evident when there was a pre-
existing social inequality at play, such as in the case of a male  and a female 
 (a man being reluctant to hit a woman). It was also notable how there seemed 
to be fewer inhibitions to immersion in the roles when such a structural inequality was 
33 See Sergei Feofanov, Posetitelnitsy immersivnogo spektaklia o nasilii Gruz 300 
poluchili poshchechiny, The Village, 3 April 2019 <https://www.the-
village.ru/village/city/news-city/346517-gruz-300-poshechiny> [accessed 23 December 
2020]. 
34 Bolotian describes how some spectators did not hold back from making their feelings 
known as they departed early, shouting out various critical assessments on their way out. See 
Bolotian, Teatr kak pytka. 
reversed, i.e. a female  and male . Making something of a 
generalisation: women were more willing to be violent, more so towards men, less so 
towards other women. Complex issues around power hierarchies in society  
connected to gender, race, education, class privilege, and cultural capital  all seemed 
to contribute to the psychology of the game and determined its playing out in real 
time. 
For those who became emotionally overwhelmed by what they were seeing or 
experiencing, the organisers specially brought in a therapist to each performance who 
sat in a separate room, where tea and biscuits were provided along with space and 
time to talk. According to Nenasheva, this service was taken up in almost all of the 
performances they put on, a fact which testifies to the difficulty that some audience 
members experienced as a result of the game. Some viewers complained afterwards 
on social media that the game was reckless and irresponsible, with one stating, 
          .35 The irony of this 
criticism is that the intention of the game was to make exactly that point  to show 
that passive complicity in violence is no better than the violent act itself. The 
performance goes one step further, revealing how easy it is to become complicit, and 
correspondingly how difficult it is to object and intervene when violence is the rule of 
the game, which is to say, when it is systemic, as it is in the prison system and indeed 
in all organs of state security and law enforcement. This was seen previously in 
 and . Likewise, the difficulty of objection and intervention in a 
hierarchical social structure with pre-determined rules was seen in Locker room talk. 
In  300, these two phenomena are brought together, reflecting on the nature of 
these power structures, as well as revealing the burden of trauma that they produce. 
35 See Feofanov. 
Whilst the reaction and audience feedback to the performance was mixed, few 
were left indifferent, and this is perhaps one measure of its success.36 If its aim was to 
bring attention to the experience and burden of trauma caused by torture, and not just 
to the fact of its occurrence, then the focus shifts from the informational sphere to the 
emotional-therapeutic. This relates to the activist work of Nenasheva and Starost in 
what they call , where they try to bring public attention to the 
problems of mental health and psychological trauma that are experienced by a large 
proportion of the population and yet are largely stigmatized, covered up, ignored and 
underfunded in the public health system. Here, the object of the performance is not an 
other to whom this occurs; it is not Suleimanov, Nenasheva, or a generalised 
representative of a social group. The spectators themselves become the object. This is 
therefore not a victimization or objectification of the real figures whose testimonies 
feature as the starting point for the performance  they are quickly forgotten once the 
game starts. Instead, the only objectification can be of ones own self, whose senses 
of propriety, dignity, and respect have been starkly revealed as arbitrary, contingent, 
and porous. To remain, to play and observe the game, means to be complicit, but to 
walk away in objection is not by any means the more ethical option  this is to deny 
subjectivity to the victims of violence, and to turn a blind eye to the acts of violence 
that are committed every day in institutions of state security and law enforcement 
(prisons, jails, FSB and Centre E offices). To turn away is also to refuse to try to 
understand both sides, to deny the experience of the other as necessarily part of 
ones own. After all, this is just a game played in public by consenting adults with full 
supervision by a group of observers (the other spectators). The irreconcilable ethical 
36 The work was almost entirely ignored by the theatre community itself, however. Bolotian 
wrote a piece on the work for the journal Teatr, and Vilisov wrote a post about it on his 
Telegram channel. There were also a handful of non-specialist commentaries and news 
articles on various small online media platforms, mostly of a superficial nature. 
contradiction lies in the the fact that any accusation of taking the game too literally 
can likewise be countered with accusations of taking violence too lightly, and vice 
versa.  
Many online reviewers (professional and non-professional) writing about the 
performance described being left shaken up and affected emotionally by what they 
had experienced, in a way that they had clearly not encountered in the theatre before. 
In this regard, its divisiveness links it to Aleksei Balabanovs no less controversial 
film  200 in more than just name. Where Balabanovs film dealt in corpses (the 
 200 of the title),  300 is very much about the living  those who carry the 
invisible burden of trauma with them every day of their lives, unbeknownst to or 
ignored by the healthy. As Nenasheva commented regarding her experience of torture 
in the DPR: 
      ,     
 ,    , , ,   
       []:    
?   :      .37 
In the final instance, then, the performance of  300 makes the widespread social 
phenomenon of  300 visible, which is to say, the experience of playing and 
observing the game  indicates towards the burden of trauma that a large 
segment of the population carries with it. It works to de-stigmatise the issue and to 
normalise the discourse of help and support that is needed. These people have not 
disappeared [lit. dissolved], as the human rights worker suggested to Nenasheva. 
They are very much still alive and at large in society, and in need of social support. 
 300 does not overcome systemic violence in and of itself  if anything, it 
37 Nenasheva, in Nazarova. 
reproduces it in order to interrogate it  but no theatre performance or indeed any 
work of art can achieve that alone. What it does, however, is start the conversation. 
 A criticism of  300 is its failure to get all of the spectators on board with 
the game. The performance was clearly billed as immersive, which meant that 
audiences were prepared for this aspect and came willing to take part proactively in 
some capacity. As Ramos et al. make clear in their Post-Immersive Manifesto, when 
staging games as part of a work of participatory theatre, certain criteria and conditions 
are important for it to succeed: 
Clear boundaries from the outset can enable individuals to know what is 
expected of them, and therefore overcome personal fears of being exposed by 
getting it wrong. The earlier audiences sign up to a clearly articulated 
invitation, the quicker audiences can allow themselves to inhabit this agreed 
game-world and become an active participant in it. Creating a contract of 
engagement from the outset can reduce gaps between audience members 
feeling of ownership, entitlement and active engagement.38 
Clearly the makers of  300 partly failed in this regard, although they themselves 
stated publicly that the problem lies with the unpreparedness of Russian audiences, 
rather than with the performance itself.39 Given that the creative team are not 
professional theatre makers and had little prior experience of making participatory 
theatre events, it is perhaps unfair to lay all of the blame on the audiences. Whilst the 
walk-outs can be passed off as the collateral damage of an immersive show about 
torture, and that it was an audience failure not an artistic one, some responsibility 
must lie with the artists for the set-up. A lack of clear boundaries from the outset 
meant that a significant portion of people (around half of the audience) were not able 
to tolerate the playing out of the game and chose to leave before the end. Perhaps this 
was the point and the organisers were willing to accept this loss. However, had a more 
38 Ramos and others, p. 211. 
39 Nenasheva, in Feofanov. 
clearly articulated invitation been made, then perhaps more people would have 
remained until the end, thereby creating a more inclusive experience and subsequently 
a more constructive dialogue and post-performance discussion, which the makers 
claim was their ultimate intention. Spectators leaving in objection or disgust cannot be 
a measure of success when the stated aim is to address an important social issue 
collectively.  
That said, however, the successes of  300 certainly outweigh its 
shortcomings. It brutally exposed the arbitrariness of public decency  more 
specifically that of the liberal cultural elite of the cosmopolitan Russian capital  who 
are able to tolerate the widespread torture of others and violence by the state on a 
daily basis when it is behind closed doors, but cannot bear to see violence with their 
own eyes, even when it is in a controlled environment with the explicit aim of 
investigating its forms and effects. Judging by the reaction online, no one had 
experienced anything quite like  300 before, so this unexpected Actionist 
intervention into the world of the theatre came as a shock. The creators managed to 
pursue an important social issue without resorting to pathos or didacticism, and there 
was no sense of victimisation or objectivisation of individuals for artistic ends. The 
arrival of the Actionists on the theatre scene disrupted the commercialised and 
commodified immersive genre. The immersive experience is taken to its outer 
limits, where the pleasure of interactive spectating gives way to the unbearable act of 
observing and participating in real violence. In other words, the spectator is forced to 
confront the inescapable abject, which in this case is the unwelcome, unwanted sight 
of the usually invisible burden of trauma caused by violence that is carried by others.  
For Ramos et al., the immersive fallacy is the proposition that greater 
pleasure is produced for an audience by transporting them into a simulated reality  
wherein they are further embedded through their choices and actions.40 What we see 
in  300 is the immersive logic taken to its extreme  where the greatest possible 
pleasure tips over into the greatest possible displeasure, to un-simulated pain and 
violence  whilst posing the final question, Are you not entertained? Audiences who 
came to  300 because of its immersive billing and expected to be transported to 
another world, to the unreality of VR or other technological gimmicks, would have 
had a surprise (and were perhaps some of those who left early) because in the world 
of  300 the spectator is not transported anywhere, and the only escape from the 
horror of the reality that it presents is the exit. By avoiding the immersive fallacy, 
our agency as spectators in  300 is not just the freedom to move around and 
participate in the action during the performance  it is also the freedom to think and 
act after it ends. This, for Rancire, is where emancipated spectatorship takes 
place.41 Can such agency be a force for reconfiguring social relationships and building 
community through a disavowal of the High Putinist consensus that would always 
suppress and conceal rather than address and discuss? This is a question that the Gruz 
300 collective took into its next project, which premiered only half a year after the 
explosive arrival of the Actionists on the scene with their first work. 
  228 
Spectators received geographic coordinates by text message the evening 
before the event. These led to Park Gorka, in the Kitai-gorod region of central 
40 Ramos and others, p. 210. 
41 Jacques Rancire, The Emancipated Spectator, trans. by Gregory Elliott (London: Verso, 
2009), pp. 22-23. 
Moscow. The message also advised bringing a fully-charged smartphone, 
headphones, a raincoat, and ID. Upon arrival, transparent plastic wallets were 
distributed, which contained two sheets of A4 paper, a pencil, and a piece of chalk, as 
well as two smaller pieces of paper  one with instructions on how to start the show, 
and the other with contact details for support in case of arrest.   228 
(henceforth  228) was the second work of 2019 by the Actionist theatre 
collective Gruz 300, this time on the theme of narcotics and the falsification of 
criminal cases under article 228 of the Russian criminal code.  
It was billed by the creators as a - and as an immersive 
show, but besides that very little additional information was shared with spectators 
prior to the event. As with  300, it was not apparent ahead of time what form of 
immersive to expect. The promenade description suggested that a degree of 
walking would be involved. The instructions in the pack told spectators to subscribe 
to a chat-bot in the Telegram messenger application in order to start the show. Upon 
entering /start into the chat-bot, the first message appeared, which set the scene and 
set up the expectations of the spectator: 
   228     , , 
  .    .    
,    ,   .  
    .      
.       ,  
 .        . 
   42 
At this point we as spectators still have very little idea about what exactly is going on, 
what form the show will take, and what is expected of us as participants. From this 
message we learn that there are documentary materials involved, and we learn that we 
42 Telegram chat-bot @rave228_bot, 28 September 2019. 
will need to seek things out. We also learn that there will be a finale of sorts a few 
hours from now, but we do not know where. The description of the work as a city 
symphony implies that our journey will be integrated into and interactive with the 
topography of urban Moscow.  
Pressing the button  within the chat-bot released the first set of 
instructions, which included a pinned location (somewhere in the vicinity of 
Armianskii pereulok), a photograph of a dark back alley with a red arrow and circle 
drawn on to it, and an audio track. It was only at this point that it became clear what 
the spectator was expected to do in this immersive promenade: 
         -  
   ,  ,    -
,     .43 
Thus, in what was akin to an adult treasure hunt, on a city-wide scale, we set off in 
search of , the small plastic bags used in the drug trade, which are bought 
and sold illegally online and stashed in secret locations around the city. This was an 
attempt to simulate the real experience of drug users in acquiring illegal substances in 
contemporary Russia. One of the creators stated aims with the project was to raise 
awareness of this underground practice and in so doing to de-stigmatize the people 
whose lives are affected by it  not only the users themselves, but also their families 
and dependents, including partners, children, and parents. There were six such 
searches, which required journeys by foot and metro around the city. Each search was 
accompanied by an audio track, which was timed to coincide with the length of time 
required to get from one location to the next. The audio contained verbatim accounts 
of peoples experience with recreational drugs, state therapy programmes, the 
43 Ibid. 
criminal justice system, and the falsification of criminal charges under article 228 
resulting in real prison sentences. In addition to this, at each location a task was 
revealed, which incited the spectator to take action in ways that reflected on the 
individual stories being heard. This brought the spectator into dialogue not only with 
the content of the audio, but also with the city as an interlocutor, as an actor, and as a 
discursive space.  
 Before describing the  228 experience in more detail, it is worth 
mentioning some statistics on the scale of the problem that the creators were trying to 
address with their work. Over 140,000 Russian citizens are doing time in prisons 
throughout the country under the infamous article 228 of the criminal code  the 
possession or acquiring of illegal substances. Significantly more people are convicted 
under this article than any other, a state of affairs that has earned article 228 the 
nickname  . In 2019, over a quarter of the total prison population 
were serving convictions  , which is to say, under article 228. A decade 
and a half earlier, in 2004, the total number serving under article 228 was two thirds 
less (43,000 people), and this is against a background of a one third drop in the total 
prison population over this period, which is to say that whilst the prison population 
has been steeply declining, the number of people serving time under article 228 has 
risen sharply.44 Unfortunately, these statistics are neither due to higher illegal 
substance circulation nor due to better policing. According to Olga Romanova, the 
director of  , a Moscow-based NGO that assists citizens who come into 
contact with the Russian legal justice system, around 40% of such cases involve 
44 Olga Romanova, My Ivan Golunov. Kak fabrikuiut dela o narkoprestupleniiakh, 
Carnegie Moscow Centre, 10 June 2019 <https://carnegie.ru/commentary/79278> [accessed 
23 December 2020]. 
people who are innocent.45 This should be set against the statistic that guilty verdicts 
were handed down in 99.77% of cases brought to court in 2018, or 1 person reprieved 
in 425.46 This conviction rate is one of the highest in the world, and concomitantly 
Russias legal justice system was ranked at 94 out of 128 globally in 2020 by the 
World Justice Project  officially the worst-performing of all post-Soviet countries, 
having dropped below Uzbekistan since the year before.47 To the question as to why 
there are so many convictions in Russia under article 228, Romanova said: 
,      . 
    ,     
.     :   ?   
.48 
Furthermore, Romanova stated that in the entire history of the existence of  
, which she founded in 2008, she can only remember one case where the 
court turned the tables back on the prosecution, but even that was not on the grounds 
of falsification (which is a Constitutional crime)  it was for abuse of authority and 
extortion, which is a lesser crime. This is to say that the chances of proving a 
falsification and bringing a case against the authorities are practically zero. The huge 
public outcry and resulting scandal surrounding the case of journalist Ivan Golunov, 
who was arrested in June 2019 on clearly fabricated charges of possession of 
narcotics under article 228, is the exception that proves the rule: even in his extremely 
high-profile case, only a few low-ranking police employees were dismissed as a 
45 Ibid. 
46 Aleksandr Sokolov, Goskorporatsiia Pravosudie: Chast pervaia. Issledovanie o tom, 
mozhno li dokazat nevinovnost v rossiiskom sude, Proekt, 15 May 2019 
<https://www.proekt.media/research/opravdatelny-prigovor> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
47 World Justice Project Rule of Law Index 2020, World Justice Project, 11 March 2020 
<https://worldjusticeproject.org/our-work/research-and-data/wjp-rule-law-index-2020> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
48 Romanova. 
result, and the case against them for falsification was kicked into the long grass of the 
Russian court system.49  
The team behind  228  co-creators Katrin Nenasheva, Diana 
Meierkhold, and Konstantin Chaplii  were keen to shift the narrative focus away 
from high-profile public figures such as Golunov and those considered political 
prisoners, who usually receive a great deal of media attention, in order to highlight 
the plight of ordinary people whose cases are never picked up on by the media, many 
of whom serve long prison sentences for crimes they have not committed without 
anyone taking notice. This is not to detract from individual cases, but it is an attempt 
to redress the extreme imbalance that exists, where Golunov can be saved thanks to 
the media rallying around him in support, and yet in the vast majority of other cases 
of falsification the authorities win. Speaking about the project, Nenasheva stated the 
following in this regard: 
 ,   - ,  , 
 ,  ,          
   -  
 . , , ,   
,         
.            
.     -  ,  
     . 
[]    -   ,    
,    ,   ,    
    -   ,   
,            , 
    ,       
  ,     228 .     
49 The case against five low- and middle-ranking former police officers is still ongoing at the 
time of writing. See, for example, Delo eks-politseiskikh iz dela Golunova peredali v 
Genprokuraturu, Kommersant, 9 October 2020 <https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/4528324> 
[accessed 23 December 2020].  
      ,    
  .50 
Acknowledging the scale of the problem, the creators of  228 set out to tell the 
real stories of ordinary people that had not caught public attention. To do this they 
employed a combination of participatory performance practices, documentary 
techniques, and technology to create an experience for the spectator which brushed up 
against the topography of the city and its people in a direct way that carried a small 
but nonetheless real degree of personal risk for everyone involved. 
 Walking from Park Gorka in the direction of Armianskii pereulok, the first 
audio file plays on our smartphones. The walk is only ten or so minutes, yet the audio 
file is nineteen minutes in length, so spectators are free to slowly meander their way 
through the backstreets of the historic Kitai-gorod district. Already the feature that 
marks this work out from its predecessor is the isolated, atomized nature of the 
experience: everyone walks in silence, listening to the audio through headphones. 
Even if you are walking in a group, having come in a pair or perhaps having teamed 
up with other spectators, it is a solitary, individual journey that everyone makes from 
one location to the next. Each story we hear narrated to us is told by someone who 
finds themselves isolated, and in every case it is a similar story  one person against 
the system. It is in this regard that the atomization and isolation of the spectator 
through the individual walks around the city and through being plugged into a 
smartphone  where all attention is directed to it, rather than to any performer or other 
person  is a recreation of the conditions that the narrators of the stories find 
themselves in. It is additionally a reflection on the isolated, stigmatised status of drug 
50 Nenasheva, Unpublished interview, 2019. 
users and addicts in a society that shuns them and refuses to engage with the broader 
issues at play in this phenomenon.  
Criminalisation and pathologisation are, for Foucault, two of the chief 
mechanisms by which overreaching structures of state power attempt to subjectivise 
and thus regulate the individual in society.51 These mechanisms are ideologically 
motivated and avoid addressing the real causes of social problems, such that those 
that result in and arise from drug abuse. Thus, as we walk in search of our first 
, we enter into dialogue with an underground subculture that is one of the 
most stigmatized in Russia and statistically carries the highest degree of personal risk. 
A misunderstanding with the police during the show could easily lead to serious 
problems for spectators and performers alike, especially given the widespread practice 
of falsifications that the work is directly addressing. Falsifications under article 228 
are usually motivated by quotas handed down from above, fulfilment of which can 
mean bonuses and professional promotions from the lower ranks of the police force.52 
With this in mind, there is a question of ethics here on the artists part, putting 
spectators directly at risk of suffering a similar fate to some of the figures whose 
stories are heard: that is, the falsification of evidence and subsequent imprisonment 
under article 228. However, the organisers make clear from the beginning that there is 
such a risk, and participation is not recommended for migrant workers or those whose 
papers are not in order. The fact that some people are more able to participate freely 
and safely in the show than others highlights another problem  that of institutional 
racism and inequality before the law. 
51 Michel Foucault, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. by Alan Sheridan 
(London: Allan Lane, 1977; repr. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1991). 
52 This fact is acknowledged by the federal Investigative Committee in the Golunov case, who 
concluded that the police officers involved were merely targeting quotas when they planted 
drugs on the journalist (rather than it being a politically-motivated targeting on account of his 
journalistic activities). See Delo eks-politseiskikh iz dela Golunova. 
 The first story that we hear narrated to us is by a young man who first 
experimented with recreational drugs when he was thirteen. He subsequently 
developed severe mental health problems including schizophrenia as a result of 
substance abuse, and spent many years in and out of psychiatric wards and prison, 
although life for him had improved since and seemingly stabilised. In his own words, 
looking back he regrets nothing and would not change anything in his life. The 
narration ends with a heavy rock/industrial track, performed by the band Starost (the 
primary members of which are Sasha Starost and Stas Gorev, also of Gruz 300). 
Having followed the directions to the precise map location, the spectator finds 
themself standing in a narrow, non-descript back alley, with one arm fumbling behind 
an old air conditioning unit, searching for a small ziplock packet. It turns out to be 
inconspicuously hidden on the underside of the metal unit, using a small magnet to 
hold the packet in place. After entering the code word contained inside the packet  
, which refers to the schizophrenia suffered by the first narrator  I receive a 
new message from the chat-bot, explaining the meaning of this location, and giving 
further instructions: 
         
   .    ,   
 -       .   
    ,    
- ,          
  .    ,   ( 
      ).53 
53  [ ] is a form of psychiatric hospital where people 
with serious mental health problems are kept for indefinite periods. Approximately 150,000 
people reside in such institutions in Russia, which are almost impossible to leave, let alone be 
discharged from, and it is almost equally difficult to gain access from the outside. See Sasha 
Sulim, V virtualnoi realnosti zdes nakhoditsia nelzia: Interviu aktsionistki Katrin 
Nenashevoi, kotoruiu zaderzhali na Krasnoi ploshchadi v VR-ochkakh (i vyzvali k nei 
At this point it becomes clear what the piece of chalk included in the pack is for. 
Others who arrived earlier have already written messages on the tarmac:  
   ; . These messages were visible from the upper 
windows of the psychiatric ward, and it was hoped that those being kept inside would 
see them and feel a rare acknowledgement of their existence from the outside world. 
This moment was a direct link to Nenashevas previous action,    , 
when she felt her way around the city in VR goggles that displayed the inside of one 
such institution. This gesture of writing in chalk on the tarmac was tied to the content 
of the first verbatim story, whilst also referring out to another separate but connected 
issue  the state system for treating serious mental health problems in contemporary 
Russia, which, according to Nenasheva, is unchanged since the late Soviet period.54 In 
this way, a discursive layering occurred that made the performance more than a 
single issue work, and brought multiple marginalized social groups from the 
shunned periphery to the centre of the spectators attention. 
 Pressing the button   on their device, the spectator 
immediately receives a new set of coordinates, photograph, and audio track. 
Returning from the visceral materiality of the Moscow back alley to the virtual world 
of the Telegram messenger app, our chat-bot tour guide leads us towards the 
childrens department store Detskii mir on Lubianskaia Square, directly past the front 
doors of the FSB building. The audio file this time starts with music, an electronic 
track that is the first overt nod to the rave part of the title of the work,  228. A 
young woman then narrates her story, which includes first trying narcotics at the age 
of fourteen and falling into a scene of users on the Arbat due to problems at home. 
psikhiatrov), Meduza, 24 June 2017 <https://meduza.io/feature/2017/06/24/v-virtualnoy-
realnosti-zdes-nahoditsya-nelzya> [accessed 23 December 2020].  
54 Ibid. 
She reflects on this period of her life, saying,  ,   , 
  . She ends by positively appraising the influence of certain 
euphoric and psychedelic substances on her life in the more recent past, and claims 
now to live a normal life. She describes the social stigma around rehabilitation centres 
in the country, and the difficulties she had with her family, but takes a pragmatic view 
towards the issue in general.  
Having tracked down the next packet inside Detskii mir, after entering the 
password  I receive my next task, which is to write a letter to my 
teenage self, openly confessing to the difficulties and traumas of the past, and, with 
the benefit of hindsight, describing how they were managed or overcome. I can keep 
this letter for myself or leave it there amongst the toys for someone young to find and 
perhaps learn from or remember in years to come. In this exercise, taken from 
psychotherapy, we as spectators work through our own traumas and mistakes, whilst 
also sharing them with the world, in an act of de-stigmatization. Acknowledging the 
difficulty of growing up in a world where so many expectations are imposed upon 
people from a young age, there is an acceptance here that the experience of navigating 
childhood and teenage years is different for everyone. In this moment, the burden of 
the past that we all carry to greater or lesser degrees is ever so slightly lightened, as 
perhaps was also the case for those people who narrated their stories for others to 
listen to during the performance. 
 The next stage of the journey takes us a short distance, to the entrance of the 
Chamber Stage of the Bolshoi Theatre on Nikolskaia Street. On the way we hear 
from a young man who reminisces about the 1990s:    
,   , he tells us. He describes his life as a heroin addict in 
St Petersburg in the latter half of the decade, after control of the citys drug cartel had 
been taken over by the police who, he claims, flooded the market with cheap heroin. 
He then vividly describes his experiences in state rehabilitation programmes, which 
range from ineffectual group therapy sessions to beatings and starvation in solitary 
confinement. He also reflects on the practice of sending addicts to do forced labour on 
construction sites in monasteries without pay, which, he says, only makes a persons 
mental and physical health worse. Regarding the states approach to therapy, he says, 
    . Having entered the code word found in the 
third ziplock packet    into the chat-bot, I am then tasked with giving 
away or exchanging one of my possessions with a stranger. As the bot explains, this is 
intended to replicate the experience that drug users go through when they must 
traumatically trade their own belongings to serve their addiction. The message ends 
with the words:          
  ,  . This is perhaps the best possible summary description of the 
artistic approach that the creative team take towards the spectator experience in  
228. Indeed, taking people out of their comfort zone is the Gruz 300 approach in 
general. Its work is always oriented towards first locating boundaries and then 
probing them  both the personal boundaries of each individual spectator, and the 
boundaries of the social body as a whole.  is the Gruz 300 device for 
achieving this. 
 The final three audio tracks all contain verbatim accounts of police 
falsification through the planting [] of drug packets similar to the ones we 
spend the afternoon searching the city for. We hear from a young man who describes 
how drugs were planted on him by the police and the subsequent falsification of the 
criminal case against him, using fake witnesses employed full-time by the state 
prosecution. He concludes by questioning how someone like him can be noticed and 
campaigned for when there is such a stigmatization of those convicted under article 
228 in the country. We hear another story, again from a young man. He is a political 
activist and social campaigner. The police planted over a hundred grams of marijuana 
in his car, only after they had tried to stuff the packet into the back pocket of his 
trousers and failed on account of it being too large. He was found guilty and given 
real time in prison in spite of many inconsistencies in the evidence against him. This 
story bears striking similarities to that of Oiub Titiev in Chechnya, whose case was 
the subject of the documentary play  in Chapter One, demonstrating that this is a 
widespread blueprint for falsification across the country. This young man says how 
228 is the easiest article to convict someone under, and how it is impossible to prove 
your innocence if charges are brought against you. Police can always easily fabricate 
evidence, and   will always testify against you in court. He was 
given a three-and-a-half-year suspended sentence, with consequent burdens on normal 
life, restrictions on travel, and difficulty in finding a job. He says he now has serious 
health problems after a year and three months spent in high-security jail [] 
whilst his case was ongoing, as a result of which he now needs medical care, but he 
plans to continue his social activism regardless. He is still on occasion lost for words 
regarding what happened to him, rhetorically asking,     
        []  228 ?  
The next testimony comes from a middle-aged woman who describes how 
marijuana and heroin were planted on her husband by the police when they were 
leaving their apartment. Her husband subsequently spent two months in jail, where 
the police forced him to admit to a crime under article 228, allegedly threatening to 
send their children to an orphanage if he refused. They also planted leaflets in his bag 
promoting the Ukrainian nationalist group Pravii sektor and accused him of 
extremism.  were used to confirm that the man had been distributing such 
leaflets, although during the trial none of them could even correctly identify what the 
accused had looked like at the time. At the time of the performance (autumn 2019), he 
was being threatened with a minimum eight-year sentence in prison under article 228. 
The woman was doing her best to help her husband, but she felt that there was very 
little she could do. She concluded her narrative despondently,      
-  ?  . This monologue is followed by a dark, 
brooding electronic track with haunting vocals by Sasha Starost, who sings in the 
refrain,  , []   ,     
Having located the next packet and entered the code word , I receive 
instructions to retrieve from my pack the second sheet of A4 paper, which turns out to 
be a wanted poster. Printed on the paper is an image of a young woman with her 
face scrubbed out, and an accompanying text below, which reads: 
 
    
   / 
: 100 000  
    
It turns out that this particular  was hidden directly across the street from a 
local branch of the district police department. The instructions were to pin the poster 
either on or in the vicinity of the police building, or to hand it to a passer-by and 
explain about the problem of falsifications under article 228. On the one hand, this 
could not be seen as anything other than a direct provocation, but on the other hand it 
was a chance for every spectator to become an Actionist for a brief moment, and to 
stage a micro-protest right then and there in the middle of the performance. The 
danger was undeniable, but the act was empowering, and functioned as something of 
a democratization of Actionism, which is usually carried out exclusively by the artists 
themselves. What we can see at work here in these micro-actions carried out by 
theatre spectators rather than performance artists is the artist becoming the facilitator 
rather than the sole actor in the performance. This is reflective of broader trends in 
contemporary performance practices grounded in participation, where responsibility 
for the action is delegated from the artist to the spectator-participant. It also suggests a 
shift in the perception of what constitutes an Actionist action. If Actionism 
previously meant the grand gesture of the artist or artists, who took full responsibility 
and full credit for it, the appearance of the radically participatory Actionist theatre 
signified a social turn in Russian Actionism at the end of the second decade of the 
century. In words that could be said of the Actionist theatre of Gruz 300 in 2019, art 
historian and critic Claire Bishop writes regarding the social turn in European art of 
the 1990s: 
The artist is conceived less as an individual producer of discrete objects than 
as a collaborator and producer of situations; the work of art as a finite, 
portable, commodifiable product is reconceived as an ongoing or long-term 
project with an unclear beginning and end; while the audience, previously 
conceived as a viewer or beholder, is now repositioned as a co-producer or 
participant.55 
With the artist as producer of situations and the spectator as participant, we see in 
 228 the re-establishment of the connection between two associations of the word 
  an artistic act or gesture performed by artists in public space on the one 
55 Claire Bishop, Artificial Hells: Participatory Art and the Politics of Spectatorship (London: 
Verso, 2012), p. 2. Italics in original. 
hand, and collective political activity by a social group or groups on the other  with 
all the possibilities for inclusive, broad-based direct action that open up as a result.  
 Hurriedly fleeing the scene after sticking my poster to an urn opposite the 
police station, I head in the direction of Tverskaia metro station in search of the next 
packet, which is hidden deep underground on one of the train platforms. Once more 
plugged in to my smartphone, I listen to a middle-aged woman recount how her 
daughter was unjustly convicted under article 228, how the police planted the 
substances in an envelope in her handbag whilst she was in the toilet of the police 
station, and how  were again employed to give evidence supporting the 
prosecutions version of events. Since then the mother has studied the legal system 
and how falsifications are carried out, and she now runs a small NGO helping people 
who fall into similar problems with the law enforcement agencies. She has already 
personally assisted in defending 173 similar cases of falsification. She describes how 
frightening it is to learn of the true scale of the problem and of the huge number of 
people in the country who are imprisoned on falsified charges. She says that the 
problem is not only with article 228, because the police can plant other things on 
people and will always win in court. Once the authorities falsify a case against you, 
she says,   ,  ,  ,    
  ,    ,    
 [ ].  
The packet turned out to be hidden under a metro noticeboard, and finding it 
drew the attention of passers-by. Fortunately, there were no police or Rosgvardiia in 
sight. Boarding the next train and heading south to Zamoskvoreche district as 
instructed, I listen to the final audio file on the way, which is narrated by a young 
woman called Nastia Marochkina. She recounts how when she was a teenager her 
mother and stepfather were taken away in the night by the police and she was left at 
home alone. They spent two years in detention just waiting for the conclusion of the 
court case. Her mother and stepfather were subsequently given ten years in prison 
each under article 228. The young girl was taken in by her biological father and his 
new family. Social stigma surrounding article 228 made it impossible for her to 
discuss what had happened with anyone. When she tried to tell a school friend, she 
was accused of lying and making things up. She describes her subsequent struggles 
with depression and alcohol abuse. At the time of narration, her mother had already 
served six years of her sentence in a maximum security prison in Mordovia, and was 
fifty five years old. Nastia describes her visits to the prison, the tears and arguments 
she often has with her mother when she is there, and how she brings her food products 
from a list that her mother sends to her in advance. Her mother often requests black 
bread, which it is not permitted to bring inside the prison because something could be 
hidden inside. After locating the next packet hidden in a hole in the wall adjacent to a 
branch of the Magnoliia supermarket chain, and having entered the key word  
into the chat-bot, I receive a photograph of one of the letters that Nastia was sent by 
her mother. Certain words have been highlighted  they are the food products that 
Nastias mother would like her daughter to bring on her next visit to Mordovia. The 
spectators task is to purchase any item listed in the letter and bring it to the location 
of the final set of coordinates, which it turns out is somewhere inside Paveletskii train 
station, a short walk away. The chat-bot provides one more audio file to fill the few 
minutes required to get there. This time there is no speaking; just a dark, pulsating 
German techno track  So Heisser Es Wird, by Schwefelgelb. The rave had started. 
 In contrast to most train stations in the UK nowadays, it is still possible to 
walk without a ticket on to railway platforms in Russia, where it is not uncommon to 
see entire families gathered to greet or send off a single relative. As I and a handful of 
other spectators entered Paveletskii station at the same time, we searched for the 
platform that matched the one in the photograph. At a certain point, music became 
audible, and following its direction brought us to a gathering of people in the middle 
of a long, narrow platform, hemmed in on either side by two stationary trains. Sasha 
Starost was in the middle of the group, dressed all in black with a sequin mask and 
bright red streaks under her eyes. She was playing a small, handheld barrel organ, 
whilst chanting verses repeatedly, in mantra-like fashion. Stas Gorev, in black leather 
jacket, played an accordion, whilst multiple spectators had also been enlisted to play 
various small instruments, such as tingsha cymbals, singing bowls, maracas, panpipes, 
and tambourines. A young woman, also dressed all in black, complete with a black 
headscarf tied under her chin, stood motionless and expressionless in the centre of it 
all, staring vacantly into the middle distance. On her outstretched palms lay a loaf of 
ordinary black bread. In what was an unexpected moment of Teatr.doc-style 
 , it turned out that this was Nastia Marochkina herself, who 
had narrated the story of her mother and the favourite black bread she is forbidden in 
prison, which we had heard through our headphones not long before. At Nastias feet 
there is a large tartan-patterned laundry bag, with a sign leant against it:  228. 
This is the final key word, which I enter into my chat-bot and in reply receive 
instructions to sacrifice the food that I bought in the shop at the  228. All the 
donations will be taken to Nastias mother in prison in Mordovia. The gesture of 
donating real food to a real person who is presently suffering under the injustice of 
article 228 is both symbolic and real simultaneously. Having donated to Nastias 
mother, spectators have done something to help one of the victims of falsification in a 
concrete way, however small. This is the theatre of direct action in which a tangible 
result is produced, and in which a face-to-face interaction is facilitated between 
spectator-as-consumer and one of the real individuals whose story lies at the base of 
the performance. This moment, therefore, is an irruption of the real through the 
symbolic in the act of the performance-turned-ritual sacrifice. 
Nenasheva calls the work of Gruz 300  . This is a 
succinct description, but it is not quite Actionism in the familiar sense of the word. 
The work of Gruz 300 is closer to Anglo-American socially engaged practice, in 
which the social interaction is at some level the art.56 The presence of Marochkina 
herself on the train platform for the finale, which linked the symbolic and the real in 
the performance, has a precedent in Nenashevas work: in her 2016 action -
, she brought a disabled teenager from an orphanage to Red Square and 
retied the bandages on his bedsores in public. The interaction of symbolic and real 
gesture in both - and  228 made them aesthetically and discursively 
generative as artistic works. Ritual used in this way is clearly important to the 
performance practices of Nenasheva and the Gruz 300 collective. Its function as a 
confrontation with and short-circuiting of mediatised spectacle (Debord) is integral 
to the discourse of  228. The centrality of ritual as a device is made clear in the 
final message from the chat-bot, which serves as both a liberating incantation and as 
an epitaph to the performance: 
 ,      ,  .    
 ,     .   
  .    ,   
 .    :     
. 
56 Tom Finkelpearl, quoted in Art Terms: Socially Engaged Practice, Tate Online 
<http://circuit.tate.org.uk/art/art-terms/s/socially-engaged-practice> [accessed 23 December 
2020]. 
                       
             
                  
              
                  
               
                      
               
                      
             
                
             
                
             
                
             
                     
               
           
       .57 
The words of this so-called , which are a modern ode to freedom and 
justice, are chanted by the whole group, performers and spectators alike, during the 
ritual sacrifice  the donation of provisions at the  228. The ritual is thus 
reinforced by an incantatory practice that serves as a substitute for   
. The lack of confidence that society has in the legal system to protect citizens 
or to act in their interests is thus reflected in  228 by a turn to ritual and magic. 
The rite [] that is appealed to in the prayer is, according to the performers, a 
prehistoric Actionism, which requires the participation of the whole group as a 
collective practice. To repeat Beumers and Lipovetskys paraphrasing of Victor 
Turner, the ritual is designed to restore and recreate sacral meanings and 
57  (   ) is the state organ in charge of 
prisons and the penal system as a whole in the Russian Federation. 
corresponding psychological conditions in concrete social and cultural 
circumstances.58 The ritual in the Actionist theatre of Gruz 300 thus serves as the 
mechanism by which the artists social practice is materialised, in which new 
meanings and psychological conditions are created that resist the widespread police 
practices of , falsification, and wrongful imprisonment.  
 In spite of Nenashevas insistence that it is never her aim to attract the 
attention of the police, to my knowledge none of her major Actionist works have 
passed by without incident. On numerous occasions they have ended in her being 
arrested, and even on one occasion in an attempt to section her (   
).59  228 was no exception to this rule, as the ritual finale on the train 
platform was interrupted by police officers, who randomly singled out co-creator 
Konstantin Chaplii and tried to take him in for a   the very same procedure 
which led to the framing and imprisonment of many of those figures whose 
testimonies we had heard earlier in the show. This incident with the police at the 
conclusion of the performance was ironically demonstrative of the problem that the 
work was trying to address  the unaccountability and arbitrariness of the actions of 
state law enforcement agencies, and the destruction of the lives of innocent people 
that occurs as a result. After long explanations, negotiations, and collective pressure, 
the police officers eventually conceded  perhaps deciding that there were too many 
witnesses  and instead disbanded the unsanctioned gathering of people, thus bringing 
the performance to an all-too-fitting close. It is clear, however, that Chaplii was lucky 
to escape so lightly that time, and with the  228 first-hand testimonies still fresh 
in our minds, the encounter with the police served as a painful reminder of the fact 
58 Beumers & Lipovetsky, p. 41. 
59 See Sulim. 
that the vast majority of people who come up against the article-228 machine are 
rarely so fortunate.  
This moment was cause for reflection on the work as a whole, and particularly 
on the wisdom of putting a group of young people in real danger of a 
misunderstanding with the same corrupt police and legal justice system that has 
undone the lives of hundreds of thousands of people around the country just like 
them.60 As one journalist covering the event wrote: 
  ,  ,     
    ,    
   .     ,  
        
  ,        .61 
As was also seen in the three documentary plays that featured in Chapter One, 
arbitrary injustice is a widespread phenomenon that does not discriminate. If Chapter 
One primarily focused on political prisoners, then the two works so far in this chapter 
have borne witness to the less visible human cost of   in 
High Putinist Russia, and the cases of ordinary people who have fallen foul of the 
system. With its raw, unpolished participatory performance practices, the Gruz 300 
collective began to develop effective mechanisms for directly engaging with and 
confronting this phenomenon through theatre.  
60 It should be stated that the finale of Reiv 228 was only performed once more outside in 
public space in Moscow, subsequently moving behind closed doors where such problems 
with the police were less likely to arise.  
61 Leva Levchenko, Reiv  228: Kak spektakl, na kotorom ishchut zakladki, rasskazyvaet 
o narkopotreblenii v Rossii, The Village, 16 October 2019 <https://www.the-
village.ru/village/weekend/weeknd-theatre/364687-gruz-228> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
 20:20 
 In contrast to the preceding eleven works examined in detail, the final work 
under consideration here is not theatre as such, and did not call itself theatre. The 
hope is that this work will demonstrate something of the erasure of concretely 
determinable boundaries when it comes to experimental theatre making in 
contemporary Russia at the end of the second decade of the twenty-first century. This 
work calls itself a hyper-reality show [- ], a description which 
indicates towards the content of the show as being more real than a typical reality 
TV show. There are two components to the show: live action, which is streamed 
online in real time; and an interactive game, which is played on a smartphone 
simultaneously. The name  20:20 refers to three things: firstly, the impending 
new year at the time in late 2019; secondly, the twenty-twenty vision of human eyes; 
and finally, a point scoring system in a game. The show was conceived to mimic the 
stereotypical format of a reality TV show, in which there are multiple episodes and 
seasons. At the time of writing in late 2020, only one season had been realised, in part 
due to the global COVID-19 pandemic, which made continuation of the project in 
2020 impractical, and in part due to Nenashevas view that the project had been 
something of a failure.62 
Each season was conceived as having a different generic character type in the 
lead role, with character types chosen for their social universality and symbolic 
capital. In what sounds like the beginning of a High Putinist-era joke, the characters 
planned for future seasons included the policeman, the priest, and the activist. 
Owing to Nenashevas diagnosis with depression shortly before the launch of the 
62 Katrin Nenasheva, Unpublished interview with author, online, 2020. 
project, the first season was played by a character suffering from depression, and was 
accordingly subtitled  . This first  and so far only  season of 
 20:20 contained eleven episodes, of which eight were played by Nenasheva 
herself, and three were played by invited artists who also had histories of depression. 
They were Nika Nikulshina (third episode), Olia Kuracheva (fourth episode), and 
Sasha Starost (tenth episode). All of these episodes were live-streamed online, on 
Nenashevas Facebook page. Whilst this ensured a high level of visibility and 
accessibility (Nenasheva had nearly five thousand Facebook followers at the time), it 
was not the most reliable or stable of streaming platforms and most episodes were 
affected by technical difficulties to some degree. The advantage of this platform, 
however, is that the streamed videos remain in place indefinitely, for as long as 
Facebook exists or until the user removes the posts. Although it is not easy to scroll 
back months or years to find old posts, they are there nonetheless and can be found if 
desired. Nenasheva speaks frankly about how she uses Facebook and other social 
media platforms as her virtual gallery space, in the absence of any possibilities for 
displaying her work in physical gallery spaces following the aforementioned  
300 exhibition scandal at Galereia na Solianke. Whilst its limitations are many, the 
advantage that this virtual gallery of Nenashevas has is that it cannot be removed or 
censored (at least not by ) and is theoretically permanent, thereby 
functioning as both personal gallery and archive simultaneously. It has this in 
common with YouTube, as seen in the context of YouTube/  in Chapter 
Two. What we see with  20:20 is how a social media platform can also be the 
virtual stage for performance art, as the show is live-streamed online. The interactive 
game element of the show was operated through a Telegram chat-bot in conjunction 
with the livestream on Facebook, thus demonstrating how a combination of different 
social media platforms and electronic devices can carry out the functions of stage, 
gallery, auditorium, prop, and archive of the artists work simultaneously.  
The meticulous documentation and digital archiving of the event  which also 
included still-image documentation by photographers with cameras during each 
episode  is reminiscent of the late-Soviet performance art collective  
, whose performances were, according to art historian Boris Groys, 
meticulously, almost bureaucratically documented, commented on, and archived.63 
Bishop contrasts this with Western performance practice, where a deliberate lack of 
documentation and the resultant ephemerality of the event were considered tactics of 
resistance to spectacle, and to the commodification and commercialism of the art 
world.64 However, the documentation and archivisation of  20:20 serves a 
different purpose. The creators consider this to be a manifestation of their Actionist-
activist artistic agenda, and as such the work should be open and accessible to as large 
an audience as possible, in order to raise maximal awareness of the issue in question  
that of depression and mental health in contemporary Russia. The first season of 
 20:20 is too large to tackle in its entirety here, so I have chosen to focus on 
the second episode alone, which was played by Nenasheva and passed off with a 
minimum of technical issues. The first episode was played as an offline session, 
which meant that the game could only be played by an audience gathered in a specific 
place and was not open to anyone online, as all but one of the other episodes were. 
Thus, the second episode was also the first episode that could be played online by 
anyone, regardless of physical location. Episode Two is in many ways exemplary of 
all the subsequent episodes because the format of the hyper-reality show did not 
change, although the content from episode to episode naturally did, so whilst it is 
63 Boris Groys, quoted in Bishop, p. 159. 
64 Bishop, p. 159. 
worthwhile watching all of them, a good sense of the project as a whole can be 
grasped from this one episode alone. 
 One of the facts that we learn from the  20:20 website is that 
approximately eight million people suffer from or have suffered from depression in 
Russia, and yet this is rarely talked about and only half of this number will ever seek 
qualified help for their illness.65 The source for this statistic is an article on the topic 
published by the newspaper Kommersant in 2017, in which it turns out that eight 
million is a conservative estimate and the real figure could be twice as high (around 
11% of the population).66 This is towards the high end of the World Health 
Organizations statistics for the global average (8-12% of the population). Galina 
Mazo, head of Endocrinological Psychiatry at the National Medical Research Centre 
of Psychiatry and Neurology in St Petersburg, estimates that seventy five per cent of 
people suffering from clinical depression in the country never receive any form of 
qualified help, meaning that for millions of people throughout the country their illness 
is left untreated, and often subsequently manifests itself in other ways (personal 
and/or social harm). Furthermore, men are half as likely to seek medical help 
compared to women, often turning to alcohol or substance abuse as an alternative. 
One of the tragic consequences of this can be self-harm and suicide, the latter of 
which was banned from public discourse in 2012 by the infamous law   
  ,      . It 
consequently became illegal to use the word suicide in the print media and in online 
publications. This has led to the absurd situation where the word  has 
65 The  20:20 project website is currently inactive but previously existed at the 
address: <https://russia2020.online/>. 
66 See Vladimir Rubinskii, Vremia nervnykh: Kazhdyi desiatyi rossiianin  v depressii, 
Kommersant, 15 April 2017 <https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3253726> [accessed 23 
December 2020]. 
become a euphemism in some independent media publications for suicide.67 Mazo 
estimates that the majority of the approximately twenty thousand suicides per year in 
Russia are connected to depression. Russias population is the ninth-largest in the 
world, and yet the country occupies third place in the world for the annual number of 
suicides, and first place for the number of men. The fact that this cannot be discussed 
openly in the media is not the only problem, according to Vladimir Rubinskii writing 
in Kommersant:        
,       , .68 Furthermore, the chief 
cause of suicide  depression  is also something of a taboo topic generally, and little 
effort is made at the state level to address this:     , 
 ,    ,  
  ,  .69 In this context, the work of grass-roots 
activists in filling the information- and support vacuum becomes especially important. 
As with the previous works in this chapter that tackled social themes  trauma and 
violence in  300; the stigma surrounding narcotics and article 228 in  228  
 20:20 aims to de-stigmatise depression, and to raise awareness of mental 
health issues, as well as pointing to the support that is available for those in need.  
The promotional clip for the show takes the visual template of an old-school 
pixelated video game and integrates it with a video recording of Nenasheva in 
character, to create a hybridisation of media.70 There are players, levels of difficulty, 
and various other optional settings. These do not have any actual bearing on the show 
67 This includes Mediazona, amongst others. See Arina Markelova and Albina Salakhova, 
Pochemu v Rossii ne priniato govorit o suitsidakh, FreeNews-Volga, 10 September 2019 
<https://fn-volga.ru/news/view/id/131239> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
68 Rubinskii. 
69 Ibid. 
70 Nenasheva could not identify the exact name of the game used as the graphics template, but 
it clearly derives from the Sega Mega Drive console era (1988-1997). 
itself, but function more as affective mise-en-scne.71 To add to the game-like 
appearance of the show, the character  who is suffering from depression  wore a 
hangmans noose around their neck for the duration of the game, as well as a 
kettlebell weight around their ankle (although the latter did not feature in all 
episodes). The noose represents the unfreedom, entrapment and suicidal inclinations 
of a person suffering from depression, and the kettlebell represents the emotional and 
physical burden that people commonly describe as analogous to the experience. Once 
more, we see invisible burdens and trauma as important themes in Nenashevas work. 
Although the noose and the kettlebell are somewhat crudely literal manifestations of 
psychological phenomena, they are nonetheless useful as symbolic conceptualisations 
of how people with depression feel, especially for those spectators who do not have a 
personal experience of mental illness. During the course of each episode, the audience 
 either a limited number assembled physically in a room, or a potentially unlimited 
number participating online  must participate in a number of multiple-choice polls in 
real time, each of which determines the action that the character takes in the real 
world. Each action carried out by the character has a corresponding effect on their 
state of well-being, and this is ranked from one to ten in three categories: 1) 
; 2) ; 3) . If any of these three 
indicators reaches the maximum level of ten then the game is lost, and the episode 
ends. Likewise if these levels decrease and the character survives to the end without 
maxing out any of the categories, then the game has been won and the character can 
remove the noose from their neck in a symbolic gesture of temporary victory over 
depression. Games are an increasingly prevalent feature of contemporary performance 
practices, for their power to affect and integrate a spectator-participant into a show in 
71 The clip can be found on Nenashevas VKontakte page 
<https://vk.com/video181636730_456239070> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
ways that conventional theatrical performance cannot.72 One typical episode from the 
first season of  20:20 will be considered in this context. 
Episode Two took place on 15 October 2019. This episode can be played back 
on Nenashevas Facebook page, although it is not intended for playback: without the 
interactive game element, it loses a significant part of its incorporative engagement 
with the viewer.73 It had a running time of a little over an hour, and had a relatively 
modest number of online participants playing the game  between twenty to thirty 
people actively voting in the online polls at any one time. This contrasts with later 
episodes where sometimes one hundred to one hundred and fifty people were tuned in 
and participating. It clearly took some time for the word to spread and for the show to 
gather momentum. This episode began and ended with some technical difficulties, but 
it is worth noting that whilst the technical issues were ironed out over the course of 
the eleven iterations of the show, this did not necessarily equate to a better or more 
engaging experience for the spectator-player. Some of the most interesting moments 
in the show from a viewers perspective occurred precisely at these points, when 
things were not quite going to plan. However, such moments were mostly of an 
incidental nature. 
Whilst we waited for the technical issues with the live voting system to be 
resolved, Nenasheva took it upon herself to carry out a demonstration of one of the 
actions that had been proposed in the poll: to wash the street paving slabs. As she set 
about this task in the small square next to the Tretiakov Gallery on Bolshoi 
Tolmachevskii pereulok, she explained that it is common for people in a state of 
depression to perceive all their actions as pointless, even down to buying food for 
72 See Lavender, pp. 183-89. 
73 The video was live-streamed on Nenashevas Facebook page on 15 October 2019 and 
remains viewable <https://www.facebook.com/katrin.nenasheva/videos/2394886124099141/> 
[accessed 23 December 2020]. 
themselves. As such, the futile activity of washing paving slabs outwardly reflects the 
same pointlessness that is felt internally by someone in a state of depression. This is 
aimed at symbolically representing the experience of depression for an audience of 
people not suffering from it, and who are therefore not able to access the particular 
perception of the world that a sufferer inhabits. This action is exemplary of many of 
the choices of actions that spectator-participants must vote on in the game. It is often 
not immediately apparent why these choices are available or what purpose they serve, 
but it subsequently becomes so when the character performs the action, which in 
some way increases or reduces one of the three indicators (, 
, ). The washing of the paving slabs, for example, 
relates to the category of . 
One of the aims of the game is to elicit interactions with random members of 
the public. This has three intentions, which are in turn performative, activist, and 
sociological: performative, to generate intrigue and live action for the viewer; activist, 
to initiate dialogue with Muscovites about the taboo topic of depression; and 
sociological, to find out what the public knows about depression and what their 
opinions and views are regarding it. Whilst there was usually at least one constructive, 
genuinely productive conversation in each episode, more often than not interactions 
with members of the public were short and unsuccessful, and these failures in 
themselves reflected the scale of the problem being addressed. People generally did 
not want to know, or were actively hostile towards any attempt at informing them. For 
example, when Nenasheva started to wash the paving slabs  whilst repeatedly 
muttering to herself the phrases    and  
     an old woman approached her and told her to stop, 
commenting,   . Despite Nenashevas attempts to engage the passer-
by in conversation, the old woman is not interested to learn why Nenasheva is 
performing this unusual activity. Instead, she waves her arm dismissively as she turns 
and walks away. Owing to the passer-bys lack of interest and refusal to talk, 
Nenasheva explains her actions to the camera instead, saying,     
  ,      . Nenasheva 
soon makes her way to a different street, following the orders dictated to her by the 
results of the polls in the now-functioning chat-bot. The kettlebell attached to her 
ankle is dragged along behind her, creating a shrill ringing sound as it bumps along 
the infamous paving slabs associated with Moscow Mayor Sergei Sobianins 
 of the city.74 The gratingly dissonant noise it creates is perhaps 
cause for a momentary reflection on the human cost of the underfunding of mental 
healthcare in favour of expensive vanity projects such as Moscows   
programme and other .75  
Other actions that were voted for by spectator-participants over the course of 
the episode include: make the acquaintance of a stranger (to decrease anti-sociality 
level); ask passers-by the question    ? (most people refuse to 
answer, one middle-aged woman suggests trying antidepressants); eat chocolate 
(Nenasheva tries to share a bar of chocolate with passers-by, most of whom decline, 
but one young woman accepts and an interesting, productive conversation ensues on 
the theme of depression). Nenasheva is seemingly surprised when members of the 
public are reluctant to engage with her, perhaps forgetting the strangeness of her 
appearance  a hangmans noose around her neck and a kettlebell weight tied to her 
74 The phenomenon of   including Moscows   programme 
and    is considered by Micha Murawski in his article Falshfasad: Disavowed 
Infrastructure and Everyday Marxism in Putins PPParadise, American Ethnologist 
(forthcoming). I am thankful to the author for sharing this paper with me prior to publication. 
75 The Russian state spends twenty seven times less on mental health per capita than the UK, 
for example. See Rubinskii. 
ankle, in addition to a cameraman and a photographer following her every move. At a 
later stage, Nenasheva carries out the action    . She 
explains to the camera that when conducting research for the project, the creators 
interviewed a number of people from all over Russia who suffer from depression, and 
one of the common ways that people resort to self-harm is through this action. This 
relates to the category of , as she explains to the camera:   
,    . These words recall those of the cult 
Moscow Actionist Oleg Mavromatti who, whilst nailed to a cross opposite the newly-
built Cathedral of Christ the Saviour, was asked by a journalist what pain is, to which 
he replied,       .76 In her attitude towards pain, 
it is clear that Nenasheva follows in the best artistic traditions of Actionism. The next 
action that Nenasheva must carry out is  , so she retrieves a small 
bottle of the cheapest vodka from her bag and proceeds to drink it whole, in spite of 
the obvious revulsion that she experiences. She comments that alcohol is strictly 
forbidden when suffering from depression, and that it will only make her condition 
worse, but she does it anyway because it has been voted for by those participating in 
the live polls. This was the point at which the ethical demand of the show became 
apparent. If we as spectators are really controlling the actions of a person suffering 
from depression, then that entails a certain responsibility for their welfare, and 
concomitantly an imperative as a group to vote for choices that should help the 
character in their navigation of the world for the duration of the game.  
It is here that  20:20 firmly diverges from a conventional video game, 
in which ethical choices and moral responsibility as a player of the game are not 
76 This action was called    and took place on 1 April 2000 at the Institute of 
Cultural Studies in Moscow. A video recording of the action can be found on Mavromattis 
Vimeo channel. See Ultrafuturo666, Do Not Believe Your Eyes, 2000, online video recording, 
Vimeo, 18 March 2011, <https://vimeo.com/21220322> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
required, and indeed, in the case of games such as Grand Theft Auto (Rockstar 
Games, 1997), the point of the game is to transgress them. What we experience in the 
game world of  20:20  not only as viewers looking at a screen but also as 
players making decisions that have a real effect on a real person in the real world  is 
that our moral agency (to borrow the term of participatory theatre makers ZU-UK) 
as empathetic human beings is activated in the process.77 What noticeably occurred 
mid-way through the episode is that the actions voted for by the audience became 
more benign. These included singing the national anthem in the middle of the street, 
and helping a stranger carry their bags. The latter action produced the absurd situation 
where Nenasheva insisted on helping a young woman who was perfectly capable of 
carrying her own bags, and subsequently struggled to keep up with her because of the 
heavy weight of the kettlebell tied to her ankle that she had to painfully drag along 
behind her. This action unexpectedly induced the most productive dialogue of the 
whole episode as the pair discussed the project and the problem of depression. The 
young woman was visibly affected by what she heard and thanked Nenasheva as she 
went on her way, with the departing words  . This incident best 
demonstrated the point of the project, and the tangible effects that it can have on three 
fronts: on the spectator-participant; on the real person behind the character whose 
actions are being controlled; and on the members of the public with whom 
interactions occur. Regrettably, such positive interactions of this kind were few and 
far between, and it is for this reason that Nenasheva considered the project a failure.78  
What turned out to be the final action of the episode was a phone call to 
, to ask the question   ? Nenasheva managed to 
get through to an operator, who initially struggled to understand the question, but 
77 Ramos and others, p. 210. 
78 Nenasheva, Unpublished interview, 2020. 
upon the second time of asking responded with the words,   .  
, after which they immediately hung up the phone. Fittingly for a 
conversation with the censorship board, at this point the technology failed and the 
livestream cut out. Shortly afterwards, Nenasheva posted a video in the chat-bot 
explaining that she had taken the decision to end the game after the livestream cut out, 
and that we had succeeded in saving the characters life because none of the three 
indicators had maxed out. Whilst the scoring system is vague and seemingly arbitrary 
(it is not clear how it is determined or by whom), this does not detract from the 
overall experience of the game. What is clear is that  unlike a conventional video 
game  this game is not played purely for its own sake. It is played to generate a 
greater understanding and awareness of a specific social phenomenon that concretely 
exists in the world. It is also designed to de-stigmatize and initiate discussion in the 
public sphere about a taboo topic. On the one hand, this could be viewed as an 
instrumentalisation of art and video games, but on the other, the show successfully 
hybridises various technological and artistic media to effectively engage and 
incorporate spectators into its world, whilst activating their moral agency during the 
performance as an ethical choice. 
The rise of performance art and the associated field of performance studies has 
had a profound impact on the world of theatre over the past half a century, and 
continues to do so. However, in spite of what performance artists such as Abramovi 
themselves might suggest, the reverse is also true. Theatre has had a strong influence 
on performance art (and art more generally), in what is a mutually generative 
relationship.79 The convergence of these previously opposed fields and the resulting 
79 Art historian Claire Bishop made an attempt to re-write the history of contemporary art 
from a theatre perspective in her book Artificial Hells. She states in the opening pages, It is 
hybridisation has made interdisciplinary research possible on the area where they 
overlap.  20:20 is located on this ground  a work that does not claim to be 
theatre and has no aspirations to be so, yet nonetheless can be productively placed in 
the broader landscape of contemporary theatre, where it can form a useful part of the 
debate. There is little to separate the Actionist theatre of the Gruz 300 collective from 
Nenashevas online game show project  20:20, the primary difference being 
that the works of Gruz 300 took place in the physical presence of spectators, whereas 
 20:20 was online. Other than that, as interactive participatory performances, 
they functioned in much the same way. Given that these works were made by artists 
rather than theatre makers, it is perhaps unsurprising that they do not look and feel 
like conventional theatre. However, this ignores their striking similarity with 
Teatr.doc-style  , which is clearly present in all of them and 
which is fundamental to the power of the real that they are each able to generate. 
 , therefore, can be seen as a discursive bridge between theatre 
and performance in the 2010s.  
In words that could almost have been written about the three performance 
works made in 2019 explored in this chapter, Bishop describes the work of 
  in the late 1970s and 1980s: 
What CAGs works gave rise to, then, was [] difference, dissensus, and 
debate; a space of privatized experience, liberal democratic indecision, and a 
plurality of hermeneutical speculation at a time when the dominant discourse 
and spectatorial regime was marshalled towards a rigidly schematized 
apparatus of meaning.80 
hoped that these chapters might give momentum to rethinking the history of twentieth-century 
art through the lens of theatre rather than painting or the ready-made. Bishop, p. 3. 
80 Ibid., p. 160. 
In spite of Nenashevas view of the project as a failure,  20:20 worked on the 
same principle described above, opening up a space for difference, dissensus, and 
debate through its direct intervention into public space. If in  300 and  228 
the intervention was into the discursive space of theatre as a medium and was mostly 
a private experience for the groups of spectators, then in  20:20 the target was 
television and mass media, and the aim was to engage the general public. As real 
reality TV to the extent that such a thing is possible before becoming documentary, it 
both exposed the fallacy of conventional reality TV in all its spectacular artificiality, 
and engaged the public in a frank discussion about a widespread illness, information 
about which is acutely lacking. In this way,  20:20 broke through the surface 
of the mediatised spectacle, which is the illusion of reality created by state 
propaganda and mass media.  
To the question of why performance in public space is so important to 
Actionism, Nenasheva said in relation to her 2017 action    : 
         
, ,      
,     ,   . , 
   ,     .81 
Nenashevas insistence here that the word  did not apply to her work is 
typical of performance artists in general who  like Abramovi said above  are keen 
to avoid what they perceive as the artifice or fakeness of theatre. In the context of 
 20:20, it is undeniable that the most engaging interactions occurred 
spontaneously, with random members of the public, even though there was still a 
degree of set-up involved to bring about these moments. It was here that the humanity 
and the singularity of the event became most tangible. Every one of the people who 
81 Nenasheva, in Sulim. 
entered the camera frame, however briefly, had a story to tell about the society and 
the world in which they lived at that moment in time. These stories were expressed 
not only in words but also in glances, gestures, facial expressions, and visual 
appearance. The interactions that occurred were not always pretty  indeed they often 
reaffirmed certain negative social stereotypes  but in amongst them were moments of 
kindness, life-affirming sociality, and cooperation: human interactions that gave hope 
and cultivated feelings of community rather than stoking fear, division, and hate. This 
directly related to the problem that  20:20 was aiming to address. As 
Aleksandr Asmolov of the psychology faculty at Moscow State University explains in 
relation to the wave of depression in contemporary Russia: 
  :  ,  ,   
,          , 
  ,  ,     
 .82 
Although not always successful,  20:20 confronted head on the fear and 
raised anxiety that pervades society in High Putinist Russia. It attempted this 
through open, honest dialogue with people on the streets of the capital, in the process 
showing a different kind of TV to the   that comes from state-media 
propaganda. Far from being a failure, the hyper-reality show demonstrated the 
potential power of art as a socially engaged practice that can work constructively 
with audiences to build grass-roots support networks and community in the gaps 
which are too often and too easily fallen through.  
82 Aleksandr Asmolov, quoted in Rubinskii. 
 The Actionist intervention into theatre and television shows early promise of 
being one of the most significant new developments in the performing arts in Russia 
in recent years. Like the arrival of documentary theatre two decades ago at the very 
start of the Putin era, the fledgling Actionist theatre perhaps demonstrates some of 
that same potential to revitalise the possibilities for theatre, and to open up new 
aesthetic pathways for theatre makers to explore new ways of making sense of the 
world around them. There are undoubtedly things that both Actionists and theatre 
makers can learn from each other, but with High-Putinist Capitalist Realism set to be 
the dominant order of things for Russians in the long term, the necessity of 
collaboration and mutual support in generating alternative narratives, dissensus, and 
the very possibility of conceiving of an alternative as such falls on them collectively. 
Conclusion 
Tracing the interaction of politics and aesthetics, a heterogeneous image of 
Russian theatre in the second decade of the twenty-first century has emerged over the 
course of this study. However, it is worth remembering that theatre production in 
Russia is still largely dominated by the state dramatic theatres. These theatres are 
wholly dependent on state funding for their existence, and due to the absence of an 
intermediary body between state and theatre (such as the Arts Council in the UK, for 
example), the sector is highly susceptible to the external pressure of financial and 
legislative censorship, which in turn generates a culture of self-censorship. This is 
evidenced by the fact that by and large the authorities do not need to interfere in the 
running of theatres, because they conform by themselves anyway. Nevertheless, 
independent and semi-independent theatre exists in Russia, as seen in the range of 
different theatrical experiments in this study, and it has continued to develop and 
innovate over the past decade. It is clear, though, that in the absence of sustained 
external investment, a lack of funds is stunting its growth and holding it back from 
achieving the depth and breadth that there is evidently the potential for. 
The twelve works examined in detail across the preceding chapters were all 
responses in one way or another to external changes in the political and social realms. 
In this regard, they are products of their environment, which throughout this thesis has 
been called the period of High Putinism. This period started in 2012, following the 
conservative-reactionary turn that came with Vladimir Putins return to the presidency 
for a third term, and which continues unabated at the time of writing in late 2020, 
mid-way through his fourth term. Considering the interplay of external socio-political 
factors with internal theatrical and artistic ones, a picture emerged of a theatre 
ecology in contemporary Russia that simultaneously engaged with its environment 
whilst it innovated aesthetically. Indeed, as the works considered have demonstrated, 
the two are inseparable. 
On the one hand, my selection of particular productions for inclusion was 
perhaps driven by an attraction to works that displayed this dialectical quality of art; 
works that reflected on the contradictions in society and culture in the present day, 
attempting to make some sense of the world around, whilst allowing themselves to be 
determined by and products of external events. On the other hand, many of the works 
chose themselves, as they stood out from the crowd by pushing the boundaries of 
theatre and subverting my own personal expectations. It is also true that a focus on the 
underrepresented field of text-decentred theatre came at the expense of many fine 
plays that have been written and performed over the past decade, which are the 
worthy subject of a separate study.  
In Chapter One, three examples of documentary plays from recent years 
reflected the increasing politicisation of contemporary theatre in Russia (along with 
society more broadly), in response to the abuses of power and systemic violence that 
became the norm during Putins third term in office. As Curtis points out, against a 
background of the continued curtailment of freedom of speech and other 
constitutional rights under Putin, documentary theatre acquired a function as a forum 
for the exploration of human rights issues.1 Whilst this is not the case for all 
documentary theatre produced in this period, and in fact works of such an overt 
political nature remain in the minority, they nonetheless stand out for their 
uncompromising pursuit of social and political accountability in the absence of an 
adequately functioning legal justice system. In this regard, Teatr.docs civic theatre 
1 J.A.E. Curtis, Introduction, in New Drama in Russian: Performance, Politics and Protest 
in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2020), p. 1. 
in some small measure holds the regime to account for its crimes and failings, whilst 
simultaneously offering a stark glimpse beneath the immaculate surface of the media 
image of Putins Russia, constructed and maintained by the state propaganda machine 
and its censorship mechanisms. In the words of Mikhail Ugarov, if such plays achieve 
nothing else, then at the very least   .2 
Chapter Two embraces contemporary performance practices, associated with 
the hybridisation of theatrical conventions and the performing arts, including 
contemporary dance, variety, and musical theatre, which are combined with digital 
technology and other media to create works that do not conform to traditional 
categories or genres. What these works have in common is the use of documents as 
the foundational material for their experimental performance-based aesthetics. They 
are grounded in the real, as they take up documents of social and political 
significance and create text-decentred, hybrid performances, which nonetheless 
reflect certain common concerns: the civil rights enshrined in the Constitution, the 
social malevolence of patriarchy, and police power. These three seemingly disparate 
works of theatre demonstrate a new documentarism, which is an expanded field of 
documentary practice that proves the continued capacity of the genre for renewal and 
evolution, some two decades after its emergence as a major force in Russian culture. 
In Chapter Three, we saw three examples of new playwriting that are 
reflective of contemporary drama. Each in its own way responded to the crisis of 
subjectivity in High Putinist society, by interrogating conformity to ideologically 
prescribed notions of tradition and normality, particularly in relation to questions of 
sexuality, gender, and beauty. Each play made different attempts at the de-
2 Mikhail Ugarov, in Istoriia Sergeia Magnitskogo na stsene teatra v spektakle Chas 
vosemnadtsat, Radio Ekho Moskvy, 5 June 2010 
<https://echo.msk.ru/programs/kulshok/684833-echo/> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
hierarchisation of social power structures, with varying outcomes. If   
 demonstrated the inherent violence of enforcing ideological consensus, 
then  and 28  favoured a radical equality of plural subjectivities. 
Where the former work portrayed an all-too-real dystopian world, the latter two works 
reflected the utopian trend in dissensual art, which is not utopian in the literal sense of 
being divorced from reality, but is rather grounded in the concrete. They proposed 
material alternatives to the status quo that are firmly within the realms of the possible 
and the imaginable, ultimately expressing a rejection of the High-Putinist Capitalist 
Realist message of  .  
Chapter Four followed what happened when a group of performance artists 
turned their hands to theatre making, which became in turn a reflection on the 
boundaries of contemporary theatre itself. These boundaries were also examined from 
the other side, as it were, through consideration of a work of performance art that did 
not pertain to be theatre and could not be called theatre, yet had certain characteristics 
in common that made for a productive comparison. The very public nature of Russian 
Actionism makes it one of the most politically provocative forms of artistic 
expression in post-Soviet Russian culture. If Moscow Actionism originally emerged 
as a rejection of late Soviet Neo-Academism, then the Actionist theatre of the Gruz 
300 collective can likewise be seen as an intervention into the world of the theatre that 
rejects its norms and conventions, in favour of non-representational performative 
modes and participatory practices. To refer back to the prologue, Actionist theatre is 
fundamentally   . This it has in common with the 
post-zero documentary plays of Chapter One, and the performance-based new 
documentarism of Chapter Two, as well as with certain formal and stylistic qualities 
of the dramas in Chapter Three, particularly the Brechtian staging of the modern 
Classical Greek tragedy 28 . 
A uniting thread in these seemingly disparate modes of theatre making is the 
device of witness theatre, which appears at various times and to varying degrees, 
demonstrating a common concern for the real in contemporary Russian theatre. 
Witness theatre  which is a manifestation of the current global trend for the theatre 
of the real  causes an irruption of the real into the world of the performance. The 
real becomes an effective way of cutting through the mediatised spectacle that 
sustains the illusion of the status quo as the natural order of things. It is for its power 
to circumvent censorship  and to generate alternate ways of seeing, thinking and 
doing through a confrontation with the real  that the device of witness theatre is 
used effectively in a number of these works.  
 The controversial constitutional reforms of 2020 have paved the way for Putin 
to remain in power until 2036, which would make him the longest-serving Russian 
leader in modern history, surpassing Stalin. For this reason, the restrictions and 
repressions that characterise the era of High Putinism  and its accompanying cultural 
policy, Capitalist Realism  remain the reality for theatre makers in Russia for the 
foreseeable future. The response from nonconformist theatre makers has been to 
continue to critique the underlying structures that sustain the status quo.  
 at the Meyerhold Centre, for example, broke ground by seriously 
discussing the effects of neoliberal capitalism on theatre production, and the 
precarious labour that the industry exploits. This was the follow-up work from the 
creative team behind Locker room talk (with the addition of choreographer Alena 
Papina from ), thus demonstrating the productive relationships being 
built amongst a core group of female theatre makers, who are not afraid to critique the 
economic system as well as patriarchy.3 Such works are only likely to become a more 
frequent occurrence as the millennial generation  who do not carry the traumatic 
memories of the difficult transition from socialism to capitalism  reaches full 
maturity. This generation has grown up with the internet, and in its outlook and social 
attitudes is hardly distinguishable from its European counterparts.4 Eventually it will 
come to supersede the ageing Soviet generation embodied by Putin, which remembers 
and yearns for the glories of empire. 
When the last work that featured in this study   20:20  took place in 
the final months of 2019, no one could have foreseen that a few months later all 
theatres would be closed and cultural life put on hold, as the country went into a 
national lockdown in the spring of 2020. The outbreak of the COVID-19 pandemic 
brought theatre life practically to a standstill for most of the year, drawing a line 
under the theatre of the second decade of the twenty-first century and having as yet 
unknown consequences for the theatre of the decade ahead. Although theatres were 
allowed to re-open in early summer, the so-called second wave of the epidemic 
forced new restrictions to be introduced, and at the end of 2020 theatres were still 
only permitted to operate at twenty five per cent audience capacity (although in some 
of the worst-hit regions theatres were closed once more). In spite of theatres partly 
reopening, however, many would-be spectators were reluctant to attend at all, faced as 
they were with a moral-epidemiological dilemma whilst the epidemic raged on. The 
desire to support the theatres and the artists was counterbalanced by the general 
3   was made by Ada Mukhina, Alena Papina, Olga Tarakanova, and 
Daria Iuriichuk. It premiered at the Meyerhold Centre in September 2019. See the 
Meyerhold Centre website <http://meyerhold.ru/karies-kapitalizma> [accessed 23 December 
2020].  
4 Maria Snegovaya, Denis Volkov, and Stepan Goncharov, What Would It Take for Russias 
Millenials to Topple Putin, Foreign Policy, 6 October 2020 
<https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/10/06/russian-millennial-putin-regime-dissatisfied-
apolitical-reform/> [accessed 23 December 2020]. 
distrust of the government and its handling of the crisis, which was only exacerbated 
by the suspicion that public gatherings of any kind, especially indoors, posed a 
potentially life-threatening risk to ones health. State financial support for the sector 
was not forthcoming during the pandemic, as a result of which theatres found 
themselves hard up and forced into opening their doors, regardless of the risk 
involved. 
The pandemic ruptured social and cultural life to such an extent that a line was 
drawn in time, between pre- and post-COVID. This has had the unexpected effect of 
turning this study into a historical documentation of the final days and years of the 
pre-COVID era in contemporary Russian theatre. Once theatre life fully recovers 
from the damage caused by the pandemic  which could realistically take a few years 
 the world will already be a different place, and it seems inevitable that post-COVID 
theatre in Russia will look and feel different to the theatre ecology described above, in 
turn reflecting and responding to the new concerns and priorities of the day. 
Nonetheless, it will doubtless show the same vitality and critical incisiveness that has 
characterised its enduring appeal in the twenty-first century thus far. 
Bibliography 
(a) Published Primary Sources 
(i) Legislation Documents (listed in chronological order) 
O zashchite detei ot informatsii, prichiniaiushchei vred ikh zdoroviu i razvitiiu, N 
436-F3, 29 December 2010 
O vnesenii izmenenii [...] v chasti regulirovaniia deiatelnosti nekommercheskikh 
organizatsii, vypolniaiushchikh funktsii inostrannogo agenta, N 121-F3, 20 
July 2012 
O vnesenii izmenenii [...] v tseliiakh zashchity detei ot informatsii, 
propagandiruiushchei otritsanie traditsionnykh semeinykh tsennostei, N 135-
F3, 29 June 2013 
O vnesenii izmenenii [...] v tseliakh protivodeistviia oskorbleniiu religioznykh 
ubezhdenii i chuvstv grazhdan, N 136-F3, 29 June 2013 
O vnesenii izmenenii [...] v sviazi s sovershenstvovaniem pravovogo regulirovaniia v 
sfere ispolzovaniia russkogo iazyka, N 190238-6, 5 May 2014 
Ob utverzhdenii Osnov gosudarstvennoi kulturnoi politiki, N 808, 24 December 
O deiatelnosti na territorii Rossiiskoi Federatsii inostrannoi ili mezhdunarodnoi 
nepravitelstvennoi organizatsii, v otnoshenii kotoroi priniato reshenie o 
priznanii nezhelatelnoi na territorii Rossiiskoi Federatsii ee deiatelnosti, N 
129-F3, 23 May 2015 
O gosudarstvennoi programme Patrioticheskoe vospitanie grazhdan Rossiiskoi 
Federatsii na 2016-2020 gody, N 1493, 30 December 2015 
Strategiia gosudarstvennoi kulturnoi politiki na period do 2030 goda, N 326-r, 29 
February 2016 
O vnesenii izmenenii [...] dopolnitelnykh mer protivodeistviia terrorizma i 
obespecheniia obshchestvennoi bezopasnosti, N 374-F3 & N 375-F3, 6 July 
O vnesenii izmenenii v Kodeks Rossiiskoi Federatsii ob administrativnykh 
pravonarusheniiakh, N 28-F3, 18 March 2019 
O vnesenii izmenenii v statiu 15-3 Federalnogo zakona Ob informatsii, 
informatsionnykh tekhnologiiakh, i o zashchite informatsii, N 31-F3, 18 
March 2019 
 (ii) Play Scripts 
Brittain, Victoria, and others, The Tricycle: Collected Tribunal Plays, 1994-2012 
(London: Oberon Books, 2014) 
Danilov, Dmitrii, Chelovek iz Podolska, Novyi mir, 2 (2017) 
<https://magazines.gorky.media/novyi_mi/2017/2/chelovek-iz-podolska.html> 
[accessed 23 December 2020] 
Gremina, Elena, Dmitrii Bel, and Mark Ravenhill, Voina blizko (Moscow: Bookmate 
Originals, 2020), ebook <https://ru.bookmate.com/books/xyiqKbIw> 
[accessed 20 December 2020] 
Kovalskaia, Elena, ed., Elena Gremina, Mikhail Ugarov: Pesy i teksty, 2 vols 
(Moscow: Novoe Literaturnoe Obozrenie, 2019) 
McNair, Gary, Locker Room Talk (London: Oberon Books, 2017) 
Zaudinova, Zarema, Anna Dobrovolskaia, and Elena Gremina, Oiub (Moscow: 
Bookmate Originals, 2020), ebook 
<https://ru.bookmate.com/books/WcgMj9re> [accessed 20 December 2020] 
Zaudinova, Zarema, Ekaterina Kosarevskaia, and Aleksei Polikhovich, Pytki 
(Moscow: Bookmate Originals, 2020), ebook 
<https://ru.bookmate.com/books/TJktP5oX> [accessed 20 December 2020] 
 (iii) Performance Recordings 
Art-rezidentsiia, 28 DNEI, online video recording, YouTube, 11 December 2019 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=9FXb6TsNnb0> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Chitka pesy Dialogi ubiits. V osnove  proslushka razgovorov ubiits Markelova i 
Baburovoi, Dozhd, 19 January 2019 
<https://tvrain.ru/lite/teleshow/experiment/dialogi_ubijts-478993/> [accessed 
23 December 2020] 
Festival Liubimovka, Filosofy  Valerii Pecheikin, online video recording, YouTube, 
11 October 2016 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lQFr2ae6FS4> 
[accessed 23 December 2020] 
 Pytki: Obsuzhdenie pesy Ekateriny Kosarevskoi, Alekseia Polikhovicha, Zaremy 
Zaudinovoi, online video recording, YouTube, 25 September 2018 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=b9WhaomchwM> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
MBKh media, Teatr.doc: Zapis premery spektaklia Oiub, online video recording, 
Youube, 13 June 2018 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=2a9GLr6yCH8> 
[accessed 23 December 2020] 
Nenasheva, Katrin, Gruz 300: immersivnyi spektakl o sistemnom nasilii, online video 
recording, YouTube, 4 March 2019 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=eNu_rDsNUhA> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Novaia gazeta, (18+) Teatr.doc  TRI SESTRY. Aktsiia v podderzhku sester 
Khachaturian, online video recording, YouTube, 2 July 2019 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=uOMYr7-6Lbw> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Protosevich, Ksenia, Filosofy. Chitka. Teatr 18+, online video recording, YouTube, 
27 March 2017 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RhbD-90Pe1Y> 
[accessed 23 December 2020] 
Starikov, Pavel, 28 Dnei, online video recording, YouTube, 13 February 2020 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lL0GX3zmJcM> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
TORCH, OYUB Radio Play, online video recording, YouTube, 18 June 2020 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KFrY5_ZJEus> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Troshchenko, Olga, Youtube/ v politsii, pesnia, online video recording, YouTube, 1 
May 2018 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r4RTT3HbjF8> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
 Youtube/ v politsii, tanets, online video recording, YouTube, 1 May 2018 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=qx8NLqQBODs> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
 (iv) Other 
Bolshoi Theatre website <https://www.bolshoi.ru/> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Bulgakov, Mikhail, Polnoe sobranie sochinenii v vosmi tomakh, vol. 4, ed. by V.I. 
Losev (St Petersburg: Azbuka, 2013) 
Constitution of the Russian Federation <http://www.constitution.ru/> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
GTRK Marii El, ART-Mari  Premera spektaklia Chelovek iz Podolska, online 
video recording, YouTube, 28 February 2018 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=LOznoH9_CGk> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Igudin, Alexander, A-Dessa Zhenshchina, ia ne tantsuiu, online video recording, 
YouTube, 20 September 2014 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=f9iE8b8jh2A> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Meyerhold Centre website <http://meyerhold.ru/> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Nenasheva, Katrin, Facebook post, 24 November 2019 
ProRU News Channel, Akter sygral pianogo politseiskogo i poluchil 8 sutok aresta, 
online video recording, YouTube, 1 August 2019 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=TQkc1pGvDCw> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
The Royal Court website <https://royalcourttheatre.com/> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Skovoroda, Egor, ed., Dialogi ubiits (Moscow: Common place, 2019) 
Stupin, Konstantin, Bushy tail Fox, online video recording, YouTube, 29 April 2014 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=ZJA_2CTNjfA> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Teatr Praktika website <https://praktikatheatre.ru/> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Teatr.doc website <https://teatrdoc.ru/> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Tyryshkin, Aleksandr, Facebook post, 20 September 2019 
Ugarov, Mikhail, Facebook post, 18 March 2016 
 Facebook post, 18 March 2018 
 Facebook post, 21 March 2018 
Ultrafuturo666, Do Not Believe Your Eyes, 2000, online video recording, Vimeo, 18 
March 2011 <https://vimeo.com/21220322> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Vesti Irkutsk, Karaoke premera V Irkutske postavili spektakl Chelovek iz 
Podolska, online video recording, YouTube, 23 March 2018 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FZoPcGPLWYA> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Vilisov, Viktor, Telegram post, @apollonia, 2 April 2019 
Xhlebin, Aleksei, Kak razvlekaiut piloty mezhdu poletami, Ulianovsk snova 
znamenit, online video recording, YouTube, 16 January 2018 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=AjBuk-onVWM> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Zhdanov, Andrei, Speech at the First All-Union Congress of Soviet Writers, Moscow, 
1934, VikiChtenie <https://biography.wikireading.ru/184434> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
(b) Unpublished Primary Sources 
Obsuzhdenie Osnov gosudarstvennoi kulturnoi politiki RF, Meyerhold Centre, 
Moscow, June 2014 
Mukhina, Ada, Unpublished interview with author, online, 2019 
Muravitskii, Iurii, Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, 2019 
Nenasheva, Katrin, Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, 2019 
 Unpublished interview with author, online, 2020 
Nenasheva, Katrin, and others, Gruz 300 (unpublished scenario, 2019) 
Papina, Alena, Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, 2019 
Pecheikin, Valerii, Filosofy, ili Velikaia orgiia (unpublished playscript, 2016)  
 Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, 2019 
Shiliaeva, Olga, 28 dnei (unpublished playscript, 2018) 
Skovoroda, Egor, and Zarema Zaudinova, Tvoi kalendar/Pytki (unpublished 
manuscript, 2018) 
Tvoi kalendar/Pytki (unpublished video recording of performance, 20 December 
2018, Moscow) 
Tvoi kalendar/Pytki, video recording (fragment), Royal Court, 28 March 2019 
Zaudinova, Zarema, Private correspondence with author, 20 May 2019 (used with 
permission) 
 Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, April 2019 
 Unpublished interview with author, Moscow, September 2019 
(c) Secondary Sources 
Abdullaeva, Zara, Postdok: Igrovoe/neigrovoe (Moscow: Novoe literaturnoe 
obozrenie, 2011) 
Adorno, Theodor, and Max Horkheimer, Dialectic of Enlightenment, trans. by John 
Cumming (New York: Herder & Herder, 1972; repr. London: Verso, 1997) 
Alston, Adam, Beyond Immersive Theatre: Aesthetics, Politics and Productive 
Participation (London: Palgrave Macmillan, 2016) 
Amnesty: Reshenie po UDO Oiuba Titieva  dolgozhdannyi shag, no ne torzhestvo 
spravedlivosti, Amnesty International, 10 June 2019 
<https://eurasia.amnesty.org/2019/07/01/amnesty-reshenie-po-udo-oyuba-
titieva-dolgozh/> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Arcimovich, Tania, The Transformation of the Language of New Drama in 
Belarus, as a Reflection of a New Model of Identity, in New Drama in 
Russian: Performance, Politics and Protest in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus, 
ed. by J.A.E. Curtis (London: Bloomsbury, 2020), pp. 213-22 
Arendt, Hannah, Eichmann in Jerusalem: A Report on the Banality of Evil (London: 
Faber and Faber, 1963) 
 The Origins of Totalitarianism (New York: Harcourt Brace, 1951; repr. Schocken 
Books, 2004) 
Art Terms: Socially Engaged Practice, Tate Online <http://circuit.tate.org.uk/art/art-
terms/s/socially-engaged-practice> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Autant-Mathieu, Marie-Christine, ed., Les Nouvelles Ecritures russes (Pzenas: 
Domens, 2010) 
 The Story of Russian-Language Drama Since 2000: PostDoc, the Postdramatic 
and Teatr Post, in New Drama in Russian: Performance, Politics and Protest 
in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus, ed. by J.A.E. Curtis (London: Bloomsbury, 
2020), pp. 23-40 
Barthes, Roland, The Reality Effect, in The Rustle of Language, trans. by Richard 
Howard (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1989), pp. 141-48 
 Writing Degree Zero, trans. by Annette Lavers and Colin Smith (London: Cape, 
1967) 
Beauvoir, Simone de, The Second Sex trans. by Constance Borde and Sheila 
Malovany-Chevallier (London: Vintage, 2010) 
Beumers, Birgit, and Mark Lipovetsky, Performing Violence: Literary and Theatrical 
Experiments of New Russian Drama (Bristol: Intellect, 2009) 
Bindman, Eleanor, Social Rights in Russia: From Imperfect Past to Uncertain Future 
(Abingdon; New York: Routledge, 2018) 
Birksted-Breen, Noah, The Watershed Year of 2014: The Birth of Ukrainian New 
Drama, in New Drama in Russian: Performance, Politics and Protest in 
Russia, Ukraine and Belarus, ed. by J.A.E. Curtis (London: Bloomsbury 
Academic, 2020), pp. 121-40 
Bishop, Claire, Artificial Hells: Participatory Art and the Politics of Spectatorship 
(London: Verso, 2012) 
BIZNES Online, Khudruk Teatra.doc Mikhail Ugarov vystupil s lektsiei v 
Smene, online video recording, YouTube, 29 January 2015 
<https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=oxgZ3DTzCgY> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Boal, Augusto, Theatre of the Oppressed, trans. by Charles and Maria-Odilia Leal 
McBride (New York: Theatre Communications Group, 1985) 
Bobrova, Olga, 10 minut v klasse vospitatelnoi rboty, Novaia gazeta, 20 July 
2018 <https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2018/07/20/77222-10-minut-v-klasse-
vospitatelnoy-raboty> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Boiakov, Eduard, Marina Davydova and Daniil Dondurei, Nuzhny novye formy, 
novye formy nuzhny? Iskusstvo kino, 2 (2004), 18-31 
Boiko, Vsevolod, Nosit furazhku s trusami ne zapreshcheno. Chem zakonchilas 
istoriia s tantsami kursantov, BBC Russian, 18 January 2018 
<https://www.bbc.com/russian/news-42737449> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Bolotian, Ilmira, Antislovar Mikhaila Ugarova, Teatr, 34 (2018), 122-30 
 Teatr kak pytka: Gruz 300 i ego protivorechiia, Teatr, 38 (2019), 98-103 
Bolshinstvo ekstremistskikh del v 2018 godu byli sviazany s Vkontakte, Radio 
Svoboda, 9 April 2019 <https://www.svoboda.org/a/29871214.html> 
[accessed 23 December 2020] 
Bondarenko, Uliana, Dovolno unylyi teatr: V chem smysl spektaklia s 
zaderzhaniem na Krasnoi ploshchadi, The Village, 2 June 2019 
<https://www.the-village.ru/city/react/352175-teatr-na-taganke> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Borenstein, Eliot, Pussy Riot: Speaking Punk to Power (London: Bloomsbury, 2021) 
Brook, Peter, The Empty Space (London: Penguin, 2008) 
Buckler, Julie A., Julie A. Cassiday, and Boris Wolfson, eds, Russian Performances: 
Word, Object, Action (Madison, Wisconsin: University of Wisconsin Press, 
2018) 
Butler, Judith, Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity (London; 
New York: Routledge, 1990) 
Clark, Katerina, The Soviet Novel: History as Ritual, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1985) 
Coole, Diana, The Body and Politics, in The Oxford Handbook of Gender and 
Politics, ed. by Georgina Waylen and others (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2013), pp. 165-88 
Curtis, J.A.E., ed., New Drama in Russian: Performance, Politics and Protest in 
Russia, Ukraine and Belarus (London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2020) 
Davydova, Marina, Konets teatralnoi epokhi (Moscow: Zolotaia maska; OGI, 2005) 
 Kultura Zero: Ocherki russkoi zhizni i evropeiskoi stseny (Moscow: Novoe 
literaturnoe obozrenie, 2018) 
Debord, Guy, La socit du spectacle (Paris: Buchet/Chastel, 1967) 
 The Society of the Spectacle, trans. by Ken Knabb (London: Rebel Press, 2004) 
Delo eks-politseiskikh iz dela Golunova peredali v Genprokuraturu, Kommersant, 
9 October 2020 <https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/4528324> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Delo seti: Kto eti liudi i za chto ikh sudiat, OVD-Info, 13 May 2019 
<https://ovdinfo.org/articles/2019/05/13/delo-seti-kto-eti-lyudi-i-za-chto-ih-
sudyat-gid-ovd-info> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Deneva, Mila, V etu laboratoriiu vse nesut svoikh gomunkulov, Liubimovka blog, 
10 September 2016 <http://lubimovka.ru/blog/327-v-etu-laboratoriyu-vse-
nesut-svoikh-gomunkulov> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Desiat let bez pravosudiia: V etot den v 2009 godu byla ubita chechenskaia 
pravozashchitnitsa Natalia Estemirova, Amnesty International, 15 July 2019 
<https://eurasia.amnesty.org/2019/07/15/desyat-let-bez-pravosudiya-v-etot-
den-v/> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Desse, Mikael, Smeshnaia, zlaia i vysokaia, Dystopia.me, 
<https://dystopia.me/smeshnaya-zlaya-i-vysokaya> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Direktor galerei na Solianke uvolilsia iz-za otmeny vystavki o pytkakh, Radio 
Svoboda, 24 September 2018 <https://www.svoboda.org/a/29673922.html> 
[accessed 23 December 2020] 
Dolin, Anton, Tanki Kima Druzhina: nash otvet filmu Smert Stalina, Meduza, 
23 April 2018 <https://meduza.io/feature/2018/04/23/tanki-kima-druzhinina-
nash-otvet-filmu-smert-stalina> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Dziadko, Tikhon, Pavel Lungin o tom, pochemu 84% - eto ne liubov, i zachem on 
podpisal pismo po Krymu, Dozhd, 13 March 2015 
<https://tvrain.ru/teleshow/harddaysnight/rezhisser_pavel_lungin_o_svoem_se
riale_rodina_patriotizme_ljubvi_i_proshlogodnem_pisme_v_podderzhku_pozi
tsii_putina_po_ukraine_i_krymu-383818> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Eizenshtein, Sergei, The Film Sense, trans. by Jay Leyda (London: Faber & Faber, 
1943; repr. 1986) 
Esli segodnia Belarus rukhnet, sleduiushchei budet Rossiia, Kommersant, 9 
September 2020 <https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/4484252> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Fahrenthold, David A., Trump recorded having extremely lewd conversation about 
women in 2005, Washington Post, 8 October 2016 
<https://www.washingtonpost.com/politics/trump-recorded-having-extremely-
lewd-conversation-about-women-in-2005/2016/10/07/3b9ce776-8cb4-11e6-
bf8a-3d26847eeed4_story.html> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Feofanov, Sergei, Posetitelnitsy immersivnogo spektaklia o nasilii Gruz 300 
poluchili poshchechiny, The Village, 3 April 2019 <https://www.the-
village.ru/village/city/news-city/346517-gruz-300-poshechiny> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Fink, Bruce, The Lacanian Subject: Between Language and Jouissance (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1995) 
Finkelpearl, Tom, What We Made: Conversations on Art and Social Cooperation 
(Durham, North Carolina: Duke University Press, 2013) 
Fisher, Mark, Capitalist Realism: Is There No Alternative? (Winchester: Zero Books, 
2009) 
Flynn, Molly, The Trial That Never Was: Russian Documentary Theatre and the 
Pursuit of Justice, New Theatre Quarterly, 30, 4 (2014), 307317 
 Witness Onstage: Documentary Theatre in Twenty-First-Century Russia 
(Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2020) 
Foucault, Michel, Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison, trans. by Alan 
Sheridan (London: Allan Lane, 1977; repr. Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1991) 
 Power: The Essential Works of Michel Foucault, 1954-1984, vol. 3, ed. by James 
D. Faubion, trans. by Robert Hurley and others (London: Penguin, 2002) 
Freedman, John, Contemporary Russian Drama: The Journey from Stagnation to a 
Golden Age, Theatre Journal, 62, 3 (2010), 389-420 
Galereia v Moskve otmenila vystavku protiv pytok Katrin Nenashevoi, Radio 
Svoboda, 20 September 2018 <https://www.svoboda.org/a/29500108.html> 
[accessed 23 December 2020] 
Gary McNair website <https://www.garymcnair.co.uk/> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Golden Mask website <http://www.goldenmask.ru/> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Goldhoorn, Bart, Sources and Structure of Capitalist Realism, Project Russia, 24 
(2001), 6-11 
Goldhoorn, Bart, and Philipp Meuser, Capitalist Realism: New Architecture in Russia 
(Berlin: DOM Publishers, 2006) 
Gremina  tak emko pishut tolko o smerti: Teatr.doc vypuskaet sbornik pes, 
postavlennykh za 18 let, Novaia gazeta, 22 May 2020 
<https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2020/05/22/85489-gremina-tak-emko-pishut-
tolko-o-smerti> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
OHagan, Sean, Interview: Marina Abramovi, The Guardian, 3 October 2010 
<https://www.theguardian.com/artanddesign/2010/oct/03/interview-marina-
abramovic-performance-artist> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Hanukai, Maksim, After the Riot: Teatr.doc and the Performance of Witness, TDR: 
The Drama Review, 61, 1 (2017), 4355 
Harvie, Jen, Fair Play: Art, Performance and Neoliberalism (Basingstoke: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2013) 
Healey, Dan, Russian Homophobia From Stalin to Sochi (London; New York: 
Bloomsbury, 2018) 
Iablokov, Aleksei, V 2014 gody gosudarstvo vserez vozmetsia za kulturu, 
Vedomosti, 11 October 2013 
<https://www.vedomosti.ru/lifestyle/articles/2013/10/11/v-2014-godu-
gosudarstvo-vserez-vozmetsya-za-kulturu> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Istoriia Sergeia Magnitskogo na stsene teatra v spektakle Chas vosemnadtsat, 
Radio Ekho Moskvy, 5 June 2010 
<https://echo.msk.ru/programs/kulshok/684833-echo/> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Jameson, Fredric, Postmodernism, or, The Cultural Logic of Late Capitalism 
(London: Verso, 1991) 
Jonson, Lena, Art and Protest in Putins Russia (Abingdon: Routledge, 2016) 
Kempf, Lucie, Giving Testimony in the Face of an Authoritarian Regime: The 
Evolution of Documentary Forms at Teatr.doc, the KnAM Theatre, and the 
Belarus Free Theatre, in New Drama in Russian: Performance, Politics and 
Protest in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus, ed. by J.A.E. Curtis (London: 
Bloomsbury, 2020), pp. 41-52 
Kempf, Lucie, and Tania Moguilevskaia, eds, Le Thtre neo-documentaire: 
rsurgence ou rinvention? (Nancy: NLO, 2013) 
Kerzhentsev, Platon, Tvorcheskii teatr (Petrograd: [n. pub.], 1918) 
Khakimov, Timur, Obnulenie nol-pozitsii, Iskusstvo kino, 5 (2013) 
<http://old.kinoart.ru/archive/2013/05/obnulenie-nol-pozitsii> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Khudruk Novoi stseny Aleksandrinki: Samotsenzura ubet teatra kak vid iskusstva, 
Rosbalt, 13 April 2015 
<https://www.rosbalt.ru/piter/2015/04/13/1388293.html> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Kiselev, Aleksei, Dlia menstruatsii slishkom mnogo evfemizmov: Olga Shiliaeva 
 o svoei feministskoi oratorii, Afisha Daily, 30 January 2019 
<https://daily.afisha.ru/brain/11167-dlya-menstruacii-slishkom-mnogo-
evfemizmov-olga-shilyaeva-o-svoey-feministskoy-oratorii/> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Kotkin, Steven, Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as a Civilization (Berkeley; London: 
University of California Press, 1995) 
Kovalev, Andrei, ed., Art Riot: Post-Soviet Actionism (Moscow: ABCdesign Studio, 
2017) 
 Rossiiskii aktsionizm, 1990-2000 (Moscow: World Art Muzei, 2007) 
Kovalskaia, Elena, Krutye pandusy, Teatr, 38 (2019), 52-59 
 Zhivoi zhurnal Mikhaila Ugarova: I tak, i tak, Teatr. Mikhail Ugarov: 
Teoriia, praktika, politika, pedagogika, 34 (2018), 144-91 
Kozlov, Petr, Chto meshaet iskliuchit Svidetelei Iegovy iz rossiiskogo spiska 
ekstremistov?, BBC Russian, 12 February 2019 
<https://www.bbc.com/russian/news-47216797> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Kristeva, Julia, Powers of Horror: An Essay on Abjection, trans. by Leon S. Roudiez 
(New York: Columbia University Press, 1982) 
Kunst, Bojana, Artist At Work: Proximity of Art and Capitalism (Winchester: Zero 
Books, 2015) 
Labo LAPS, TPP2014: When Gesture Becomes Event, online video recording, 
YouTube, 11 October 2014 <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=iuAMRxSH-
-s> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Langdon, Kate, and Vladimir Tismaneanu, Putins Totalitarian Democracy: Ideology, 
Myth and Violence in the Twenty-First Century (Cham: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2020) 
Lavender, Andy, Performance in the Twenty-First Century: Theatres of Engagement 
(Abingdon: Routledge, 2016) 
Lehmann, Hans-Thies, Postdramatic Theatre, trans. by Karen Jurs-Munby 
(Abingdon: Routledge, 2006) 
Levchenko, Leva, Khoroshii gorod, gde pytaiut: Interviu s Katrin Nenashevoi, 
The Village, 4 October 2018 <https://www.the-
village.ru/village/weekend/art/327405-katrin> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
 Reiv  228: Kak spektakl, na kotorom ishchut zakladki, rasskazyvaet o 
narkopotreblenii v Rossii, The Village, 16 October 2019 <https://www.the-
village.ru/village/weekend/weeknd-theatre/364687-gruz-228> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Lipovetsky, Mark, Fleshing/Flashing the Discourse: Sorokins Master Trope, in 
Postmodern Crises: From Lolita to Pussy Riot (Brighton, MA: Academic 
Studies Press, 2017) 
 Predislovie, in Elena Gremina, Mikhail Ugarov: Pesy i teksty, ed. by Elena 
Kovalskaia (Moscow: Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie, 2019), pp. 5-26 
Lisitsina, Anastasiia, Veriu Stanislavskogo peremestilos v grazhdanskuiu 
ploskost: Interviu Mikhaila Ugarova, Gazeta.ru, 24 July 2012 
<https://www.gazeta.ru/culture/2012/07/24/a_4691369.shtml> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Lotman, Yu. A., and B. A. Uspensky, On the Semiotic Mechanism of Culture, New 
Literary History, 9, 2 (1978), 211-32 
Lovtsa Pokemonov vnesli v spisok ekstremistov i zablokirovali ego scheta, RIA 
Novosti, 14 June 2017 <https://ria.ru/20170714/1498494928.html> [accessed 
23 December 2020] 
Markelova, Arina, and Albina Salakhova, Pochemu v Rossii ne priniato govorit o 
suitsidakh, FreeNews-Volga, 10 September 2019 <https://fn-
volga.ru/news/view/id/131239> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Martin, Carol, History and Politics on Stage: The Theatre of the Real, in Not Just a 
Mirror: Looking For the Political Theatre of Today, ed. by Florian Malzacher 
(Berlin: Alexander Verlag Berlin, 2015), pp. 32-43 
 Theatre of the Real (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013) 
Masiuk, Elena, Lomka. Omsk, Novaia gazeta, 13 May 2018 
<https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2018/05/13/76435-lomka-omsk> [accessed 
23 December 2020] 
Matvienko, Kristina, Putevoditel po zabluzhdeniiam i otkrytiiam, Oktiabr, 2 (2013) 
<https://magazines.gorky.media/october/2013/2/putevoditel-po-
zabluzhdeniyam-i-otkrytiyam.html> [accessed 20 December 2020] 
Medinskii, Vladimir, Kto ne kormit svoiu kulturu, budet kormit chuzhuiu armiiu, 
Izvestiia, 17 June 2015 <https://iz.ru/news/587771> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Medinskii zhaleet khudrukov, dopuskaiushchikh netsenzurnuiu leksiku v 
teatralnykh postanovkakh, TASS, 15 November 2018 
<https://tass.ru/kultura/5797454> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Medvedeva, Anastasiia, Pokhorony i menty, menty i pokhorony: kak vlasti 
neskolko let pytaiutsia zakryt Teatr.doc, OVD-Info, 10 April 2019 
<https://ovdinfo.org/articles/2019/04/10/pohorony-i-menty-menty-i-pohorony-
kak-vlasti-neskolko-let-pytayutsya-zakryt> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Mitenko, Pavel, and Sylvia Chassaing, Tretia volna aktsionizma: iskusstvo 
svobodnogo deistviia vo vremia reaktsii, Khudozhestvennii zhurnal, 102 
(2017) <http://moscowartmagazine.com/issue/60/article/1241> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Morozov, Sergei, Prinuzhdenie k prekrasnomu. O pese Dmitriia Danilova 
Chelovek iz Podolska, Pravda-info, 29 January 2017 
<http://www.pravda.info/society/151638.html> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Murawski, Micha, Falshfasad: Disavowed Infrastructure and Everyday Marxism in 
Putins PPParadise, American Ethnologist (forthcoming) 
Na Krasnoi ploshchadi zaderzhali rukovoditelia Teatra na vynos s plakatom 
Protiv sistemy Stanislavskogo, Novaia gazeta, 31 May 2019 
<https://novayagazeta.ru/news/2019/05/31/152146-na-krasnoy-ploschadi-
zaderzhali-rukovoditelya-teatra-na-vynos-s-plakatom-protiv-sistemy-
stanislavskogo> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Nazarova, Nina, Oret, chto nas podorvut na minakh: Aktivistka Katrin Nenasheva 
o pytkakh v DNR, BBC Russian, 26 June 2018 
<https://www.bbc.com/russian/features-44618444> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Novosibirsk: Direktor uvolen iz-za Tangeizera, BBC Russian, 29 March 2015 
<https://www.bbc.com/russian/russia/2015/03/150329_russia_novosibirsk_the
atre_director> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Osmolovskii, Anatolii, Khui na Krasnoi ploshchadi  25 let, Artgid, 18 April 
2016 <https://artguide.com/posts/1019> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Otmena Nureeva: tri versii sluchivshegosia, BBC Russian, 10 July 2017 
<https://www.bbc.com/russian/features-40372730> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Paget, Derek, Acts of Commitment: Activist Arts, the Rehearsed Reading, and 
Documentary Theatre, New Theatre Quarterly, 26, 2 (2010), 173-193 
Parkhomovskaia, Nika, 2008-2012: Teatralnye innovatsii v deistvii, Teatr, 32 
(2017), 16-20 
Petrov, Nikolai, Putins Neo-Nomenklatura System and its Evolution in Stubborn 
Structures: Reconceptualizing Post-Communist Regimes, ed. by Blint 
Magyar (Budapest: Central European University Press, 2019), pp. 179-215 
Pitches, Jonathan, Vsevolod Meyerhold (London: Routledge, 2003) 
Politsiia ne nashla propagandy terrorizma i narkomanii v spektakliakh Teatra.doc, 
TASS, 14 January 2020 <https://tass.ru/obschestvo/7518057> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Pomerantsev, Peter, Non-Linear War, LRB Blog, 28 March 2014 
<https://www.lrb.co.uk/blog/2014/march/non-linear-war> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Prokuratura ishchet ekstremizm v oprose pro blokadu, Dozhd, 30 January 2014 
<https://tvrain.ru/teleshow/novosti_sajta/prokuratura_ischet_ekstremizm_v_o
prose_pro_blokadu-361646/> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Pskov: teatr ne otmenit spektakl iz-za zhalob akterov, BBC Russian, 14 April 2015 
<http://www.bbc.com/russian/society/2015/04/150414_pskov_theatre_play_sc
andal> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Racheva, Elena, Issledovanie ada v golove sovremennogo cheloveka, Novaia 
gazeta, 15 March 2018 <https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2018/03/16/75819-
issledovanie-ada-v-golove-sovremennogo-cheloveka> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
 O liudiakh, gotovykh k vzletu, Novaia gazeta, 14 June 2018 
<https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2018/06/14/76800-o-lyudyah-gotovyh-k-
vzletu> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Radosavljevi, Duka, Theatre-Making: Interplay Between Text and Performance in 
the 21st Century (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013) 
Ramos, Jorge Lopes, and others, The Post-Immersive Manifesto, International 
Journal of Performance Arts and Digital Media, 16, 2 (2020), 196-212 
<https://doi.org/10.1080/14794713.2020.1766282> 
Rancire, Jacques, Dissensus: On Politics and Aesthetics, trans. by Steven Corcoran 
(London: Bloomsbury, 2013) 
 The Emancipated Spectator, trans. by Gregory Elliott (London: Verso, 2009) 
 The Politics of Aesthetics: The Distribution of the Sensible, ed. and trans. by 
Gabriel Rockhill (London: Bloomsbury, 2013) 
Ratkina, Tatiana, Puteshestvie iz Podolska v Moskvu, Chastnyi Korrespondent, 
30 June 2017 
<http://www.chaskor.ru/article/puteshestvie_iz_podolska_v_moskvu_42134> 
[accessed 23 December 2020] 
Regan, T., and P. Singer, eds, Animal Rights and Human Obligations, 2nd edn 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1989) 
Reprintseva, Iulia, V Peterburge zapretili Pytki, Novaia gazeta, 26 May 2018 
<https://novayagazeta.ru/articles/2018/05/26/76610-v-peterburge-zapretili-
pytki> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Robin, Rgine, Socialist Realism: An Impossible Aesthetic, trans. by Catherine Porter 
(Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press, 1992) 
Robinson, Paul, Russian Conservatism (Ithaca: Northern Illinois University Press, 
2019) 
Rolland, Romain, Le thtre du peuple (Paris: Cahiers de la Quinzaine, 1903) 
Romanova, Olga, My Ivan Golunov. Kak fabrikuiut dela o narkoprestupleniiakh, 
Carnegie Moscow Centre, 10 June 2019 
<https://carnegie.ru/commentary/79278> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Roskomnadzor poiasnil zhurnalistam, chto takoe mat, BBC Russian, 25 December 
<https://www.bbc.com/russian/russia/2013/12/131225_roskomnadzor_obscen
e_words_list> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Rubinskii, Vladimir, Vremia nervnykh: Kazhdyi desiatyi rossiianin  v depressii, 
Kommersant, 15 April 2017 <https://www.kommersant.ru/doc/3253726> 
[accessed 23 December 2020] 
Rudnev, Pavel, Drama pamiati: Ocherki istorii rossiiskoi dramaturgii, 1950-2010-e 
(Moscow: Novoe literaturnoe obozrenie, 2018) 
Rudnitskii, Konstantin, Russian and Soviet Theater, 1905-1932, trans. by Roxane 
Permar (New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc., 1988) 
Rutten, Ellen, Sincerity After Communism: A Cultural History (New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 2017) 
Schulze, Daniel, Authenticity in Contemporary Theatre and Performance: Make It 
Real (London: Bloomsbury, 2017) 
Scott, James C., Domination and the Arts of Resistance: Hidden Transcripts (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 1990) 
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky, Epistemology of the Closet (Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press, 1990) 
Serebrennikov, Kirill, Foreword, in Birgit Beumers and Mark Lipovetsky, 
Performing Violence: Literary and Theatrical Experiments of New Russian 
Drama (Bristol: Intellect, 2009), pp. 9-11 
Sergeev, Igor, and others, Kak rukovoditeli gosudarstvennykh teatrov platiat 
gonorary sami sebe, Transparency International Russia, 23 October 2017  
<https://transparency.org.ru/special/teatr/> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Shestakova, Anna, Chto takoe politicheskii teatr: Opros izvestnykh moskovskikh 
rezhisserov i khudrukov, Teatr, 8 (2012) <http://oteatre.info/chto-takoe-
politicheskij-teatr-opros-izvestnyh-moskovskih-rezhisserov-i-hudrukov> 
[accessed 23 December 2020] 
Skillen, Daphne, Freedom of Speech in Russia: Politics and Media from Gorbachev 
to Putin (Abingdon; New York: Routledge, 2017) 
Smirnov, Sergei, Vlast ozabochena seichas, chem zaniat silovikov. Liuboi otvet na 
etot vopros  plokhaia novost: Pavel Chikov predchuvstvuet novuiu 
realnost, Mediazona, 21 May 2019 
<https://zona.media/article/2019/05/21/pchikov> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Snegovaya, Maria, Denis Volkov, and Stepan Goncharov, What Would It Take for 
Russias Millenials to Topple Putin, Foreign Policy, 6 October 2020 
<https://foreignpolicy.com/2020/10/06/russian-millennial-putin-regime-
dissatisfied-apolitical-reform/> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Sokolov, Aleksandr, Goskorporatsiia Pravosudie: Chast pervaia. Issledovanie o 
tom, mozhno li dokazat nevinovnost v rossiiskom sude, Proekt, 15 May 
2019 <https://www.proekt.media/research/opravdatelny-prigovor> [accessed 
23 December 2020] 
Solomonov, Artur, Mark Zakharov: samotsenzura igraet vse bolshuiu rol, 
Artursolomonov.ru, 24 December 2014 <https://artursolomonov.ru/mark-
zaharov-samotsenzura-igraet-vse-bolshuyu-rol/> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Sontag, Susan, On Camp, in Against Interpretation and Other Essays (London: 
Penguin Classics, 2009), pp. 275-92 
Spektakl Serebrennikova Chelovek-Podushka proveriaiut sledovateli, RIA 
Novosti, 3 July 2013 <https://ria.ru/culture/20130703/947409699.html> 
[accessed 23 December 2020] 
Sulim, Sasha, V virtualnoi realnosti zdes nakhoditsia nelzia: Interviu 
aktsionistki Katrin Nenashevoi, kotoruiu zaderzhali na Krasnoi ploshchadi v 
VR-ochkakh (i vyzvali k nei psikhiatrov), Meduza, 24 June 2017 
<https://meduza.io/feature/2017/06/24/v-virtualnoy-realnosti-zdes-nahoditsya-
nelzya> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Teatr. Geografiia nezavisimosti, 35 (2018) 
Teatr. I feminizm: Tendentsii, personalii, 38 (2019) 
Teatr. Mikhail Ugarov: Teoriia, praktika, politika, pedagogika, 34 (2018) 
Teatr. Vremen Dmitriia Medvedeva i ego Platforma, 32 (2017) 
Thon, Jan-Nol, Post/Documentary: Referential Multimodality in Animated 
Documentaries and Documentary Games, Poetics Today, 40 (2019), 269-
Trustrum Thomas, Alexander, From Stalinist Socialist Realism to Putinist Capitalist 
Realism: Tracing Cultural Ideology in Contemporary Russia, in New Drama 
in Russian: Performance, Politics and Protest in Russia, Ukraine and Belarus, 
ed. by J.A.E. Curtis (London: Bloomsbury, 2020), pp. 53-68. 
V Barnaule nachalsia sud nad Mariei Motuznoi. Ee obviniaiut v ekstremizme iz-za 
kartinok VKontakte, BBC Russian, 6 August 2018 
<https://www.bbc.com/russian/news-45082507> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
Van Buskirk, Emily, and Andrei Zorin, eds, Lydia Ginzburgs Alternative Literary 
Identities: A Collection of Articles and New Translations (Oxford; New York: 
Peter Lang, 2012) 
Vial, Aleksandra, 5 luchshikh immersivnykh spektaklei, Time Out Moscow, 24 
March 2018 <https://www.timeout.ru/msk/feature/475870> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Vilisov, Viktor, Nas vsekh toshnit: Kak teatr stal sovremennym, a my etogo ne 
zametili (Moscow: ACT, 2019) 
Voine prisudili gospremiiu za fallos na Liteinom mostu, Sankt-Peterburg.ru, 8 
April 2011 <http://saint-petersburg.ru/m/culture/old/301495/> [accessed 23 
December 2020] 
Wilson, Andrew, Virtual Politics: Faking Democracy in the Post-Soviet World (New 
Haven: Yale University Press, 2005) 
Wood, Elizabeth, Performing Justice (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2005) 
World Justice Project Rule of Law Index 2020, World Justice Project, 11 March 
2020 <https://worldjusticeproject.org/our-work/research-and-data/wjp-rule-
law-index-2020> [accessed 23 December 2020] 
Zabaluev, Iaroslav, Glavnyi geroi  eto otdelenie politsii: Grigorii Dobrygin 
rasskazal o svoem spektakle YouTube/V politsii, Gazeta.ru, 2 December 
2016 <https://www.gazeta.ru/culture/2016/12/02/a_10395623.shtml> 
[accessed 23 December 2020] 
Zaitseva, Natalia, Nastroika optiki: O feministskom povorote v rossiiskoi 
dramaturgii, Teatr, 38 (2019), 40-51 
Zatari, Amaliia, Posledniaia draka Sokrata. Kak zhil i umer Aleksei Sutuga, odin iz 
samykh izvestnykh rossiiskikh antifashistov, BBC Russian, 3 September 2020 
<https://www.bbc.com/russian/features-54003900> [accessed 23 December 
2020] 
iek, Slavoj, The Sublime Object of Ideology (London: Verso, 1989; repr. 2008) 
Zuboff, Shoshana, The Age of Surveillance Capitalism: The Fight for a Human 
Future at the New Frontier of Power (London: Profile Books, 2019) 
