00001t.tif
RE-INTERPRETING THE SOVIET SYSTEM: 
THE LEVIATHAN REVOLUTION
Thesis submitted for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
at the University of Leice&ici 
Mnasri Chamseddine MA (Portsmouth) 
Department of Politics 
University of Leicester
June 2007
UMI Number: U235373
All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS 
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript 
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.
Dissertation Publishing
UMI U235373
Published by ProQuest LLC 2013. Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition  ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against 
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
ProQuest LLC 
789 East Eisenhower Parkway 
P.O. Box 1346 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346
Reinterpreting the Soviet System: 
The Leviathan Revolution 
Mnasri Chamseddine
Abstract
Leninism-Stalinism has been conceived as part of Marxism as a political ideology. 
However, both the crisis and collapse of the Soviet system have led to a reconsideration of the 
fundamental theoretical grounds upon which the practices of the Leninist-Stalinist state were 
premised. This thesis is an attempt to redefine the nature of the Soviet state in its Leninist- 
Stalinist dimension. The ultimate aim of this work is to prove that the equation Marxism = 
Leninism = Stalinism is debatable. In doing so, I start by investigating Lenins work and its 
impact on the future of socialism in the Soviet state. I will also argue that the authoritarian 
state which emerged from the Russian Civil War resulted in the Stalin tyranny (I dub it 
leviathanism). The method of approach I adopt in this thesis is political-philosophical. I argue 
that the theoretical father of the Soviet state was Thomas Hobbes rather than Karl Marx. In 
arguing so, I mainly focus on aspects in Hobbess leviathan theory which coalesce with the 
political practices from 1917 to the 1930s. Adopting such a method, I seek to challenge the 
dominant Continuity thesis which argues that the Soviet practice was but a logical 
application of Marxian theory. I challenge such a thesis by arguing that Leninism-Stalinism 
was an autholitarian (both authoritarian and totalitarian) system which, like Hobbess 
sovereign, was concerned more with the consolidation of the state rather than 'smashing it.
This is to certify that:
(i) the thesis comprises only my original work
(ii) due acknowledgement has been made in the text to all other material
used.
For Rafika, my comrade, whose love, care, and commitment are simply 
unimaginable.
For Nadine and Chedy.
Acknowledgements
This thesis owes so much to individuals and institutions in two countries. In England, 
Professor John Hoffman, my former supervisor, showed great interest in supervising my 
work. He patiently showed me the intricacies of political scientific research, challenged many 
of my preconceptions, and helped with books, discussion, and generous feedback. He also had 
to deal with some of my administrative problems which without his help were impossible to 
solve. Mr. Stephen Hopkins, my new supervisor, kindly accepted to take over from Professor 
Hoffman. He had to re-read the whole thesis and comment on it in detail. His feedback has 
been really constructive. He also helped so much with administrative work. Hr Anwar Tlili 
from Kings College London generously helped with financial and moral support. I thank 
Professor Mark Cowling from the Marxism Specialist Group of the Political Studies 
Association for inviting me to give two papers in Leicester and Manchester.
In Tunisia Dr Tahar Labassi offered to help on many occasions. I also benefited from 
his invaluable comments. Professor Jaleleddine Boucedra encouraged me and showed much 
support. Dr Abdennabi BenBeya was particularly helpful and allowed me to use his extensive 
personal library. Special thanks to Professor Salah Mosbah who introduced the work of 
Joseph Vialatoux. I also thank the British Council for offering a research scholarship in 2003. 
I also owe a debt to Amel Gasmi who helped both financially and morally and showed 
untiring support for me and my family.
Table of Contents
1 The Necessity of Social-Democracy
2 Social-Democracy and the Russian Context
3 Theoretical Knowledge and the Task of Social-Democracy
1 The Russian Social-Democratic Party as Party of a New Type
2 Lenin, Party Centralism, and the Critics
3 Lenin and the Nature of Bolshevism
1 The Role of the Party and the Untimely Revolution
2 The Significance of Marx and Engels
3 The Significance of Peasant Participation in the Revolution
1 The Late Lenin and the Rejection of Social Democracy
2 The Rejection of the Democratic State
3 The Soviet State as the Means for the Withering Away of the State
1 The Civil War and the New Soviet State
2 War Communism in Perspective
3 The Birth of Soviet Authoritarianism
1 Stalinist Leninism
2 Leninism and Revolution
1 The Nature of the First Five-Year Plan
2 The First Five-Year Plan and National Socialism
1 The Liberal Democratic Trap
2 The Crisis and Collapse
1 Lenin, the Bolsheviks, and the Challenge of the Totalitarian Model
2 Marxism and Leninism: the Genetic Link
1 Revisionists against Totalitarians: Responses to Responses
2 Participatory Bolshevism
3 Chaotic Stalinism
1 Stalinism and the Family
2 The New Intelligentsia and Mobility
3 Privileged Groups
1 A Reflection on the Continuity Thesis
2 Leviathanism and Autholitarianism
3 The Ideological Basis for Autholitarianism
1 Joseph Vialatouxs Thesis and the Critics
2 Implications of Hobbess Formula for Peace
3 Leviathan as Basis for Soviet State Repression
1 The Face of October: the Use and Abuse of Marx
2 Lenins Marxism and the Limits of What is to be Done?
3 The Leviathan Revolution
4 Stalin as Leviathan
Introduction
1/ Aims and Structure of Thesis:
The present work is an attempt to offer a contribution to the debate about the nature 
and practice of the Soviet (Leninist-Stalinist) system. My main argument is that the Soviet 
state (1917-1940) was not the true realisation of Marxs theory. Rather, it was the modem 
form of an authoritarian-totalitarian theory inherent in Thomas Hobbess theorisation of the 
state. In order to advance my own reading of the October Revolution and its aftermath, I 
mainly focus on three aspects which, I argue, would help the reader grasp my main thesis. 
First, I attempt to approach the nature of the Soviet state by assessing several aspects that 
helped the Bolsheviks conquer power in 1917. The most important of such aspects, it seems to 
me, is Lenins thinkinghis early adoption of Social Democracy, his contribution to the split 
of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party in 1903, his theory of the dictatorship of the 
proletariat and the peasantry, his late rejection of Social Democracy and the democratic state, 
and the Soviet workers state. Second I try to show how the forced concept of the workers 
state only gave birth to an authoritarian state which transformed the promised proletarian 
rule into a rule by coercion practised by the minority regime. Third, I seek to address why the 
October Revolution was historically condemned to usher in the Stalin dictatorship. In 
addressing this question, I deal with what seems to me to be the two main schools of 
interpretation in the field of Soviet studiesthe Totalitarian Model and the Revisionist 
School. I discuss and assess some of the main theses of these two schools. I also try to 
present my own reading of Soviet history through assessing their achievements and failures. 
My main thesis stems from, first, my account of the evolution of Bolshevik thinking and the
birth of what I call the Soviet Leviathan state, and, second, my assessment of the debate 
about the nature of both the 1917 October Revolution and the Stalin Revolution of the 1930s. 
The ultimate aim of my thesis is to contribute toas well as challengethe existing scholarly 
debate.
The thesis comprises four main parts. Part one is entitled The Backdrop for the 
Crisis: Lenins ambivalent Marxism. This part mainly broaches the defining ideas, concepts, 
and attitudes of the father of the October Revolution, Lenin, and traces the central events 
which helped the Bolsheviks conquer power in 1917. It also treats significant critical 
responses to Lenins thinking (Rosa Luxemburg, Leon Trotsky, etc.). The structure of Part I is 
focused on three main aspects: 1) Lenins early adoption of Social-Democracy and his fight 
for a Russian Social-Democratic party; 2) Lenins late Rejection of Social-Democracy being, 
according to him, a reductive ideology; and 3) Lenins theorisation of the Soviet workers 
state, being the sum result of the Bolshevik Revolution. Part II is entitled The Crisis: from 
the Authoritarian State to the Collapse. It is an account of the main results of the October 
Revolution. It describes the authoritarian state which derived from the Russian Civil War, the 
rise of Stalinist rule, and the eventual Soviet collapse as a logical culmination of the crisis of 
Soviet Socialism. (1) Part II comprises three main sections: 1) The impact of the Civil War on 
the future of the Soviet state and the birth of authoritarianism; 2) Emergence of Stalinism as 
an alleged realisation of Marxism-Leninism, and the birth of a state against the proletariat; 3) 
the end of Stalinism through Gorbachevs reforms.
Part three is entitled Theories on the Crisis: Revisionists against Totalitarians. This 
part mainly discusses two opposite theories (the Totalitarian Model Vs the Revisionist 
School.) which have attempted to explain the link between Marxism, Leninism and 
Stalinism, and the nature of the Soviet system in its Leninist and Stalinist faces. Part three is 
divided into two main sections. The first section deals with two central aspects: 1) the
Totalitarian models treatment of the continuity between Marxism, Leninism, and Stalinism; 
and 2) the models description of the totalitarian nature of both the October Revolution and 
the Stalin Revolution. The second section examines first the Revisionist (social historians) 
critique of the Totalitarian model, and second the research orientations of the school of 
Revisionism. The last Part of my thesis is The Forgotten Crisis: the Leviathan Revolution. 
In this part, I present the main thesis of this work. Basically, I argue that the alleged 
ideological link between Marxism (Marx and Engels), Leninism, and Stalinism was belied by 
both the October Revolution and the Stalin Revolution. My main argument in Part four is that 
such revolutions were of a leviathan nature, and that the real crisis of the Soviet system was 
not a crisis of Marxism itself; the forgotten crisis, as I dub it, was that of a system which, 
believing itself to be following a humanist ideology, was only negating such an ideology by 
acting against its emancipatory premises. Part four comprises three main sections. The first 
section examines Hobbess authoritarian theory as a basis for totalitarianism; the second looks 
at the link between Hobbess leviathanism and Soviet state repression ;and the third 
discusses Lenin and Stalin as leviathan leaders.
2/ Differing Approaches:
Eric Hobsbawm once asked, Can we write the History of the Russian Revolution? 
The answer he suggests is yes. Yet, the more intricate question for him is: how can we write 
such a history? In Hobsbawms view, no single historian can ever write the definitive (my 
italics) history of anything...including, of course, [that] of the Russian Revolution. (2) The 
only history one might write is history as a serious activity...because historians can agree 
about what they are talking about, on what questions they are discussing, and even on enough 
of the answers to narrow down their differences sufficiently for meaningful debate. (3)
The question posed by Hobsbawm here is a crucial one for my enquiry in this thesis.
This is mainly because I think that meaningful debate is hard to achieve without allowing 
some space for intellectual and scholarly difference. One of the most significant questions 
concerning the political history of the Soviet Union is the degree of accuracy in interpreting 
the politico-ideological basis of the Soviet state in both its Leninist and Stalinist faces. Given 
the enormous work carried out in the field of Soviet studies, one is obliged to admit how 
much difficult it is for a new comer to this field to explore the history of a state system that 
has massively been approached by political scientists, historians, and other scholars with 
different focuses and interests. One of the most difficult tasks in this respect, I would argue, is 
that of trying to find in the far too trodden field of Soviet studies a different, convincing, and 
comprehensive interpretation of the main causes behind the collapse of Soviet and Soviet-type 
socialism. What was the nature of the October Revolution? Why was it carried out in 1917 
and not later? How did Lenin make use of the experience of Social Democracy? How did he 
contribute to such a revolution? Why did he theorise and support a revolution with a strong 
peasant basis? Why did he justify the Bolshevik Revolution by using Marxs praise for the 
Paris Commune? Why did he rush the collapse of the democratic state and abolition of the 
Constituent Assembly in 1918? Why did he support the use of force against the peasants in 
the period of War Communism? On the other hand, how did Stalin turn the promised 
workers state into a state against the workers? How did he reduce the international 
significance of the Revolution to a socialism in one country? And was his drive for the 
Purges explainable in purely Marxian terms? All these questions have preoccupied most 
Sovietologists. Yet, according to me, a fundamental question one should pose is the extent to 
which the already existing literature has succeeded in interpreting the October Revolution and 
its aftermath.
Most Sovietologists do agree that the history of both the October Revolution and the 
Stalin Revolution of the 1930s are still open to differing interpretations. This has to do with
two basic facts: 1) interpretation depends on disciplinepolitical science, history, etc.; and 2) 
conclusions are the result of either archival or conjectural research. It is mainly for such 
reasons that meaningful debate has gained ground in the field of Soviet studies. Writing the 
history of the Russian Revolution and its aftermath has been contrived under several labels 
that have to do with schools of thought related to very specific disciplines.
The main schools concerned with the interpretation of the Russian Revolution are the 
Party history approach, the ideological approach, the Trotskyist approach, (4) the 
Totalitarianism approach, and the Revisionist approach. The party history approach argues 
primarily that there was a close link between Lenins thinking in What is to be Done? and the 
stream of theories and policies adopted by the Bolshevik party. What Lenin bequeathed Stalin 
was the idea of a strong, central, and vanguard party. Such an approach also suggests that 
Stalin inherited Lenins contempt for the working class. The party history approach is 
represented in the work of, among others, Merle Fainsod and R. H. McNeal. (5) The second 
approach, the ideological, is inspired by both social and political history. It focuses on the 
significance of the transition from Lenins policies to those of Stalin. While Lenins New 
Economic Policy (NEP), for instance, left unanswered some questions like those relating to 
the future of socialism, Stalins position was a moderate ideological manoeuvre the aim of 
which was to save Bolshevism and Russian socialism through collectivisation and 
industrialisation. (6) For this approach, Stalins struggle with both the Left and Right 
opposition can be justified by what Stephen Cohen calls the salient political fact of 1928-29. 
(7) The cohort of the ideological approach are mainly such historians as Moshe Lewin and E. 
H. Carr. (8) The third approach, the Trotskyist, is centred on the assumption that the October 
Revolution was aborted in the process when Stalin decided to localise it. When the revolution 
became national rather than international, socialism was condemned to fail. Instead of the 
workers state, a state against the workers emerged. The new state was characterised by a
yawning gulf between civil society and the ruling regime. In the last analysis, what emerged 
was a bureaucratic state being controlled by party and non-party apparatuses.
The two remaining approaches are the Totalitarian and the Revisionist. These are, 
in my view, the most important in the debate. They are important not only because they 
fundamentally differ from the preceding three approaches but also because they have 
attempted to provide systematic analyses of the nature of the October Revolution and the 
Stalin Revolution of the 1930s. Their contribution to the debate has been most invaluable; 
each has shown deep interest in reading and interpreting the findings of the other, and each 
often reads the history of Soviet Russia with particular attention to counter-disciplines. In 
terms of scholarly discipline the totalitarian model has worked in a political-scientific, and, 
equally, political-historical framework whereas the revisionist school is mainly focused on the 
significance of Soviet socio-cultural history.
There are mainly three premises of contention between the totalitarian model and 
the revisionist school: 1) the relationship between Marxism, Leninism, and Stalinism; 2) the 
nature of the 1917 Revolution; and 3) the Stalin Revolution in the 1930s. While until the 
1950s the totalitarian model dominated scholarship (mainly Western scholarship) in the field 
of Soviet studiesby primarily interpreting the Soviet regimes as monsters controlling the 
whole societythe opening of several archives after Stalins death allowed social historians 
to penetrate what had been conceived as the political scientists impregnable walls; the fresh 
enquiries into the importance of social history started to gain ground since the 1970s with the 
emergence of such brilliant scholars as Moshe Lewin. The totalitarian model has sought to 
study the Soviet system by firstly asserting that Soviet history has been that of an 
unchallengeable dominance of the state over society initiated by Lenin and continued through 
Stalins revolution from above, and second arguing that there is an incontestable continuity 
between Marx, Lenin, and Stalin. (9) The Revisionist schools main argument, however,
comes as a reply to the controversial theses of the totalitarian model. It basically premises its 
overall thesis on the claim that Soviet history (especially in its Stalinist face) had not totally 
rested on the absolute dominance of the state over society. There was rather some sort of 
negotiation between civil society and the state system. This, for instance, can be seen in 
observing the influence of several groups, and even the working population, on governmental 
policy-making. The second claim of the revisionist school is that the alleged continuity 
between Marx, Lenin, and Stalin was only relatively accurate. (10)
In this thesis, I advance my main argument in response to these two rival schools. The 
aim behind my exposition of the two schools in question is to try to show how the Soviet 
system has been subject to interpretations that are in great part based on either political 
scientific surmise or socio-historical investigation. In doing so, I mainly intend to show how 
the adherents to the totalitarian model in particular, albeit strong in certain areas, have been 
only partly convincing in their theorisation of the nature of the Soviet system.
3/ Methodology:
The method of approach I adopt in this thesis is politico-philosophical. By politico- 
philosophical I mean an approach which addresses the nature of the Soviet state (Leninist- 
Stalinist) in relation to Hobbess leviathan argument. It is mainly an approach which argues 
that the Soviet practice had a Hobbesean authoritarian-totalitarian element. My approach is 
fundamentally different from that of the schools of totalitarianism and revisionism. The 
particularity of this approach stems from my belief that while the revolutionary Leninist- 
Stalinist state pretends to have had Marxian rootsthe class struggle, proletarian revolution, 
the dictatorship of the proletariat, the socialist state, and communism (the classless and 
stateless society)the actual practice revealed that the Soviet state had coercive roots that can 
be traced back to Thomas Hobbess conceptualisation of the state. Why Hobbes in particular
is significant in this respect is because his leviathan theory rests on an authoritarian element 
which when put at work may soon develop into dictatorial rule; while promising in scope, 
leviathan theory does in no way prevent power abuse, and is far from capable of preventing 
even the most democratic of authoritarian democracies from lapsing into rule by tyranny 
when the standing army and the police are turned into a tamed apparatus of the state. In the 
context of the Soviet state, I argue, the two concepts of authoritarianism and 
totalitarianism overlapbut are not similarmainly because the one easily converts into 
the other. The Soviet state began basically as an authoritarian state speaking in the name of 
the proletariat, but it soon turned into a dictatorial one-party state acting against proletarians: 
The Kronstadt, War Communism, and the 1930s Purges do attest to this.
My leviathan idea, however, is not totally new. Basically, I borrow this idea from 
the work of the French political philosopher Joseph Vialatoux who in 1952 published a 
bookLa Cite de Hobbeson the link between Hobbess Leviathan and the modem 
totalitarian states. My attempt in this thesis is not merely to repeat verbatim what Vialatoux 
writes, but essentially to make use of his theory by applying it to a specific state practice, 
namely the Soviet experience. Vialatouxs contribution, I think, cannot be denied, since he 
traces the politico-philosophical basis of the modem totalitarian state. However, my 
contribution here is that I take Vialatouxs concepts away from their conjectural framework 
and apply them to specific cases. For instance, I will try to show how Stalin, just like 
Hobbess sovereign, predicates the relation between the state and individuals on the couple 
of protection and obedience. For Hobbes, a mler can guarantee social peace only when 
individuals obey him unquestionably. Stalin did but follow such a Hobbesean line of 
reasoning.
My main argument is that the Leninist-Stalinist state proved in practice that its 
ideology at work could amount to anything but revolutionary and humanist Marxism. This
appeared greatly in the conflict between what Marx and Engels preached, and the despotic 
rule which resulted from the Soviet system. Bolshevisms theoretical basis, What is to Be 
Done? (hereafter referred to as WBD), Lenins untimely October revolution, the strangling 
of democracya necessary epoch in Marxian theoryforced collectivisation and 
industrialisation, Stalins racialisation of Marxs notion of classby creating new enemy 
classes of priests, former capitalists, nepmenthe exclusive communist party, and the Great 
Purges were all unhealthy features of a state that was far from withering away; they were 
features of a new phenomenon in history that translated only one concern: how to force a 
socialism that seemed healthy only to the party apparatus and to the topmost leaders who in 
the last analysis only sought to search a popular supportfor carrying out the revolution and 
maintaining unbound powerthat turned later into veritable testimonials of individuals 
against themselves in show trials like the Shakhty engineers case in the 1920s, and the Great 
Purges in the late 1930s.
This new phenomenon in the history of state rule was a novel form of government 
much more destructive of the structure of society than totalitarianism. It was a Leviathanism 
which not only subjugated individuals will to that of an all too powerful state but also 
dictated that once leviathan rule is established there will be no individual, and no society; 
their existence becomes simply virtual. My politico-philosophical approach to the question of 
the Soviet state does not, however, mean that the nature of such a state can only be explained 
through this approach; ideology as well as economic issues are important interpretations, but 
an answer to the question why the Kronstadt or the Great Purges happened can only, as I 
firmly believe, be explained by the fact that the need for dictatorship even in its original 
Marxian sense is a Janus-faced claim that, though presenting an emancipatory and just cause, 
might backfire and turn into a source of politico-ideological compulsion the end of which is 
but tyrannical rule. It was thus how Soviet emancipatory socialism turned into oppressive
state rule: the binding Hobbesean logic was practiced by the Bolshevik leadership using such 
slogans as Soviet government must keep order, the Communist Party must lead the 
proletarian movement, and the peasants have to accept requisitioning willy-nilly. If any of 
the musts should be abandoned, then the state will punish the lawbreakers.
Adopting such an approach, I seek to contribute to the overall debate about Soviet 
studies. Nevertheless, while I believe that a politico-philosophical approach is crucial to 
understanding the nature of the Soviet system, I still believe that other approaches such as the 
totalitarian or socio-cultural do articulate a defensible argument. In approaching these two 
schools I do not pretend to argue that my own interpretation of the nature of the Soviet state 
should overshadow their interpretations. My thesis, I believe, should be best seen more as a 
contribution to the scholarly debate. My overall argument, however, differs from other 
arguments not only in terms of disciplinepure political science and social history being 
the canonbut also in terms of the general perspectives. I take what I believe is useful from 
both the political scientific approach and the Socio-historical view. I also rely on the findings 
of the Party History Approachespecially the impact of What is to be Done? on the future 
form of the Soviet state.
Part 1
The Backdrop for the Crisis: Lenins Ambivalent 
Marxism
Introduction:
Part I of this thesis aims to address Lenins thinking which, I suggest, was an 
underlying cause for, first, the crisis, and second, demise of the Soviet system. I will 
particularly focus on the development of Lenins theory of revolution through such works as 
What is to be Done? and The State and Revolution. The major themes I will discuss are 
Lenins adoption and praise of Social-Democracy in his early work and the rejection of 
Social-Democratic politics in his late work. Lenins changing and controversial ideas and 
attitudes were, as I firmly believe, at the origin of the 1917 October Revolution and, more 
importantly, the totalitarian state forged by Stalin in the 1930s. In dealing with the 
development of Lenins thought and its transformation in what came to be called Leninism, I 
mainly aim to demonstrateas will be revealed in Part fourhow Lenins particular views 
on Social-Democracy, the class struggle, proletarian revolution, and the dictatorship of the 
proletariat and peasantry do raise some cause for concern, mainly because they had ushered 
in the crisis of the Soviet state which started in 1918 with the dissolution of the Constituent 
Assembly.
What shows a two-faced Lenin and, therefore, a two-faced Leninism are two basic 
facts: Lenins changing attitudes to central issues (including Social-Democratic work) and the 
way he dealt with the October experience. Lenins adoption of Social-Democracy and his late 
rejection of it, his positive views on the German workers movement and the divorce of the 
Second International, his valuing of theoretical knowledge and contempt for working class 
consciousness, and his veneration of party dictatorship, all reveal how much the father of the 
Soviet Union was chained by his own particularity; Lenins apologia for the October 
Revolution as an alleged Commune experience, his treatment of the question of the socialist 
state during the Civil War, and his controversial policy of War Communism were on the 
other hand a confirmation of how much his revolutionary career clashed with his theoretical
promises. This part then is an attempt to help the reader grasp my thesis that, as the founding 
theory of Soviet state practice, Leninism was only the ideological expression of a problematic 
revolutionary theory which often clashed with its own emancipatory logic. By suggesting so, I 
argue that what actually emanated from Leninism was an unpredictable context which 
brought in Stalins Revolution of the late 1920s and 1930s. The ultimate aim of this part is to 
reveal how the birth of Leninism as a theoryalbeit speaking in the name of Marxismled 
to self-contradictory policies, and reflected, as I tend to show in Part four, the birth of an all 
too devouring Hobbesean Leviathan state instead of a Marxian one.
The main concern raised in this part of my thesis is how Lenin forged a particular 
theory of the party, and why he repudiated in his late work Social-Democracy altogether. In 
this part I will try to show how Lenin throughout his work had developed non-Marxian 
thinking. This task necessitates a deep interrogation of basic concepts such as economism, 
spontaneity, consciousness, theoretical knowledge, social-chauvinism and petty- 
bourgeois reformism. These concepts, however, were context-bound and had specific 
resonance which coincided with specific periods in the development of Lenins thought 
through the overall Russian Marxist tradition which had begun with Populism in the 1860s, 
developed into several variants such as the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (1898) 
and the Socialist Revolutionaries (1901), and got consummated by the foundation of the 
Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) and the Communist International (Comintern) 
shortly before Lenins death. To this extent, most of these concepts forged or addressed by 
Lenin are particularly telling. Yet, for the sake of theoretical consistency my focus on such 
concepts will be addressed in light of general themes which touch on the question of 
continuity or discontinuity between Marxs and Engelss theory and that branded by Lenin. 
The basic themes I address in this part are: Lenins party of new type, the advocacy of party 
centralism, and the irrevocable departure from Social-Democracy.
1/ Lenin and the Importance of Social Democracy:
II The Necessity of Social-Democracy:
In Our Programme (1969), Lenin expressed his particular views of Marxs theory:
We do not regard Marxs theory as some thing completed and inviolable; on the contrary, we are 
convinced that it has only laid the foundation stone of the science which socialists must develop in all 
directions if they wish to keep pace with life. We think that an independent elaboration of Marxs 
theory is especially essential for Russian socialists; for this theory provides only general guiding 
principles, which, in particular, are applied in England differently than in France, in France differently 
than in Germany, and in Germany differently than in Russia. (1)
Lenins apologia for a Russian revolution that does not follow the strict lines of Marxs theory 
is clearly broached in this declaration which stresses the necessity to read and apply Marxs 
text with a careful consideration of different contexts. A close reading of this statement 
suggests that Lenin held that Marxism was the only theory of revolution which made itself a 
system-adaptive doctrine fit for and applicable to all contexts regardless of their economic 
base. This is mainly because Marxism, in Lenins view, constituted the scientific basis 
(scientific socialism) for every revolutionary mass movement. Lenins concern about the 
Marxian text was echoed in WBD where his celebration of scientific socialism as a 
revolutionary theory is at its highest. But, Lenins concern about a Russian reading of 
scientific socialism had also to do with a specific interpretation of the class struggle.
For Lenin the class struggle, following from a purely Marxian logic of course, does 
exist so long as the conflict between capital and wage-labour exists. In theory, however, one 
would argue, when the proletarianisation of society happens in response to the encounter 
between the forces of capital and those of labour the question of emancipation is raised. And
emancipation means that the class struggle must culminate in the triumph of labour. But 
emancipation from what?: from the economic basis which follows from the systemic structure 
dictated by the laws of capital accumulation, or from the political expression of the class 
struggle which responds to the will of the ruling class to use the state as an oppressive 
machine? Indeed this question stands as most revealing in relation to Lenins view of the 
necessity of political struggle for emancipation in the case of Russia. And this is, in my view, 
what marks Lenins particularity in reading Marx and Marxism when it comes to the question 
of the class struggle. Lenin does not deny that at origin the problem is economic since the 
class struggle itself emanates from the degree of exploitation by which a possessing class 
subordinates a non-possessing class. But the solution for him requires more than pay increase 
and improvement of the conditions of work: something more substantial than mere reform. 
The solution resides in a radical political transformation. Such a question forms, I believe, the 
pith of Lenins views on class conflict and his attack on the economists.
The economists are identified by their belief in the necessity of the economic struggle 
of the workersa belief that greatly clashes with the premises of Social-Democracy. 
Economism (2) was the instance of emphasising the importance of the workers economic 
rather than political struggle which had to be led by the trade union leaders. The economists 
held that the spontaneity of struggle had a leading role, and that the recourse to violence in 
the movement against capital was totally warranted as a medium for emancipation. 
Economism gave little importance to the political representation of the working class in 
bourgeois government. Lenin criticised economism by addressing two conflicting concepts, 
namely spontaneity and consciousness. He thought that the former is an obstacle in the 
face of the latter, and has unremitting dangerous consequences on the evolution of workers 
consciousness of the class struggle and the inevitability of the proletarian revolution. The 
Economists bow to the spontaneity of the pure and simple labour movement... (3)
Spontaneity meant that the working class, relying on its own means of resisting exploitation, 
is devoid of conscious action against such exploitation. The proletariat is at best only capable 
of trade union consciousness (4) It is for this very reason that in its incipient phase 
proletarian consciousness is limited to an extremely narrow scope of knowledge which is 
generated immediately through their experience in the factory (industrial proletariat) or farm 
units (agrarian proletariat). It is therefore more than necessary to make the workers conscious 
about their unconsciousness. That would definitely demand a theoretical rather than a 
practical training for the bulk of the workers. Spontaneity in this respect does not only imply 
mere struggle over economic demands, including hours of work, etc, but also the recourse to 
violent action against the owner of the means of production. In Lenins eyes, however, 
revolutionary violence was totally permissible in such revolutions as 1905 and 1917 (5) Yet, 
spontaneous politics should not amount to a guiding doctrine to follow if proletarians should 
engage in a real proletarian revolution.
Therefore, the alternative to economism, Lenin firmly put it, was Social-Democratic 
struggle. But what type of Social-Democracy was most suitable for the Russian context? 
What preoccupied Lenin in the period between 1898 and 1903 was the type of Social- 
Democracy that the Russian working classes should adopt. In WBD he states clearly the 
importance of the German experience, especially that the intellectual German Social- 
Democrats and their popular basis had been injected by the revolutionary spirit of scientific 
socialism. (6) Lenins interest in the German Social-Democratic experience was fuelled by a 
contextual quandary in Russia: the majority of the workers were hardly class-conscious (7), 
and the professional revolutionaries had to act in a level of organisation tantamount to that 
of the German Social-Democrats. In consequence, the challenge that the Russian vanguard 
faced was how to re-produce the German Social-Democracy in the Russian context while both 
objective and subjective obstacles were hard to grapple with. Such a concern forced Lenin to
think that the working classes in Russia had to depart from any formula of struggle dismissive 
of strong political intervention by leading professional revolutionaries. This means that the 
aim of all Social-Democrats cannot be achieved without some form of paternalism in which 
the leading intellectuals of the mass movement guide the majority of workers towards 
political consciousness and, therefore, class consciousness. (8)
On the other hand, in focusing on the necessity of Social-Democratic struggle, Lenin 
sought also to bridge the yawning gulf between the workers and intellectuals. He did so by 
arguing that the workers needed to be educated by the vanguard before they could acquire any 
political consciousness. Lenin argued in WBD that the struggle for economic emancipation 
could only occur in the presence of political struggle. And such a struggle can only occur 
through a constructive action by leading intellectuals. Actually, here arises as intriguing and 
important question which Charles Elliot addressed some forty years ago. Elliot argued that the 
question of the relation between the proletariat and the leading intelligentsia had even 
perplexed Marx and Engels. Marx and Engels never satisfactorily addressed such issues as the 
workers turning away from historys path. The question according to Elliot was that Marx 
had left such a dilemma unresolved, and it was the task of his heirs to do the job; by 
implication, it was Lenin who had to face such a dilemma, and even had to argue against 
Luxemburg over the question of the role of the proletariat. (9) Thus the relationship between 
the leading intellectuals and the working class posed a problem for Lenin who was aware that 
a conciliatory relationship could hardly be maintained if the Russian Social-Democrats failed 
to see the importance of theoretical knowledge. A central preoccupation that perplexed Lenin 
was how to opt for a Russian Social-Democratic struggle not divergent from that of Germany.
Lenin starts his argument by supposing that the crisis of the Russian Social- 
Democracy had been intellectual at origin, since the labour movement was most 
spontaneous and weak in character, and since the labourers were fettered by unplanned
struggle against tsarist autocracy. (10) The question that seemed constructive for him had to 
do with the possibility to turn trade union struggle into Social-Democratic struggle (11), 
that is, transform reformist struggle into revolutionary political struggle. The experience of 
Social-Democracy then had to follow from the theorisation of the relationship between the 
labour movement and its guiding vanguard. In this respect, Lenins envisagement of the 
Russian socialist revolution was responsive to his critique of the level of workers 
organisation in their fight against tsarism. He, for our purpose, did not blame the failure to 
engage in political struggle on the workers in particular; he constantly thought that the 
working classes were all too unconscious of their situation to change the status quo. Rather, 
he sharply criticised the sections of the Russian Social-Democracy which subjected the 
proletarian movement to the domination of the economist trend.
Some Russian Social-Democrats...regard the economic struggle as incomparably the more important 
and almost go so far as to relegate the political struggle to the more or less distant future. This 
standpoint is utterly false. All Social-Democrats are agreed that it is necessary to organise the economic 
struggle of the working class, that it is necessary to carry on agitation among the workers on this basis, 
i.e., to help the workers in their day-to-day struggle against the employers, to draw their attention to 
every form and every case of oppression and in this way to make clear to them the necessity for 
combination. But to forget the political struggle for the economic would mean to depart from the basic 
principle of international Social-Democracy, it would mean to forget what the entire history of the 
labour movement teaches us. The confirmed adherents of the bourgeoisie and of the government which 
serves it have even made repeated attempts to organise purely economic unions of workers and to divert 
them in this way from politics, from socialism. (12)
The question which requires a careful answer in light of Lenins argument here is how 
socialism can ever develop at the same time when political struggle is utterly ousted from the 
equation set forth by international Social-Democracy. There can hardly be an emancipation of
the workers once the action in pretension of such an emancipation is solely guided by policies 
of reform. The desire to depoliticise working class demands amounts to the depreciation of 
the leading role played by the Social-Democrats who would in the last analysis get the 
workers conscious of their class nature, the class struggle, and the viability of the dictatorship 
of the proletariat. This question however evokes Lenins insistence on preaching the most 
appropriate kind of Social-Democratic action.
Lenins criticism of spontaneous action on the part of the working-class movement is 
in the last analysis but a criticism of the theoretical background which forms the basis of the 
workers spontaneity. In Lenins words, the spontaneous development of the labour 
movement leads to its becoming subordinated to bourgeois ideology and the task of Social- 
Democracy is to combat spontaneity, to divert the labour movement, with its spontaneous 
trade-unionist striving... (13) The failure to adopt a revolutionary theoretical premise akin to 
the Social-Democratic one would only drown the labour movement in its entirety. (14) In 
arguing so, Lenin maintained that the economists were the mongers of trade union 
politicsthus forgetting about the real predicament of Russian society. As Frances Becker 
put it, the underlying reason for Lenins rejection of economism is that because it strongly 
feeds on spontaneity, which divorces the working class from the professional class of 
revolutionaries (15) The fundamental flaw of such economists as Martynov (16), Lenin firmly 
thinks, is primarily conceptual, since they perceive that the proletariat can get political 
consciousness from within... by means of economic struggle (17) For Lenin, such a formula 
was reductive in the sense that it excluded the role of political knowledge. (18) The remedial 
formula would only reside in organising struggle by, first, starting over from the necessity to 
marry theoretical knowledge to practical politics, and second, conceiving of a highly 
centralized party (19) able to harmonize the proletariat and the revolutionary vanguard.
In practical terms, it can be argued that Lenins attack on economism was very much 
akin to Marxs criticism of socialist sectarianism (20) which Engels also criticised with 
regard to proletarian action at the time of the Paris Commune. (21) The representatives of 
sectarianism in Marxs view were the groups of socialist activists who pretended to be 
struggling for workers, but with absolutely no theoretical knowledge or party programme: 
Proudhonists in France, Lassaleans in Germany, and Bakunists in Russia. (22) It was the First 
International, Marx contended, which represented the remedy against sectarianism, an 
instance of theoretical and political struggle uniting the world working-class movement round 
the same principles, and thus forming the organising body of action. Lenin treated the 
conditions of the workers in Russia in response to what he thought of as economisms failure 
to amount to a political project for emancipation. The solution for him then resided in 
strengthening the Russian Social-Democratic movement by focussing on the necessity to fend 
off such sects as the Bemsteinists through forging the link between theoretical education 
and militant politics. (23)
It was WBD which reflected Lenins concern about the future of Social-Democracy in 
Russia. Sympathizers like Tom Freeman hold this belief and argue that the mainstream 
(Totalitarian school essentially) maintains an erroneous reading of Lenins interpretation of 
Marx in WBD. Lenin, Freeman writes, did in no way reject Marxs basic theory of socialist 
party organisation. Lenins alleged departure from Marxs concept of class-consciousness 
can be refuted by the fact that  What is to Be Done? could be seen as a concrete expression of 
Marxs own concern with the role of consciousness in working-class self-emancipation. (24) 
It was for this reason that WBD, Freeman asserts, constituted a Marxian mode of 
argumentation seeking to warrant the struggle against economism, reformism and 
opportunism. Such were the trends of Russian Marxism which were bent on considering the 
Russian working class movement only in its immediate context where the revolutionary
demand was, for them, too ambitious and far-reaching to reckon with in present day Russia. 
(Socialist Revolutionaries, Mensheviks, etc.)
For Lenin, to rid itself of the myopic pseudo-liberal economism instilled by 
Bemsteinism (25) for instance the present proletariat and peasantry had got to accept a 
formula of struggle in which they could only act under the auspices of the leadership of an 
intellectual class. Such a formula would constitute the historical task awaiting the mass 
movement which should acquire the theoretical premise for historical revolt. And that 
necessitated the foundation of a party tradition in which party membership and militancy 
can only build on the leading role of party intellectuals. In this respect, what is more 
important in considering Lenins standpoint as regards the unity of the workers and the 
vanguard in one single movement is the particularity of his theory of revolution.
However, an intriguing question to pose is how theoretical struggle can lead to a 
political struggle which ignores in great part the economic condition (capitalism) preparing 
the ground for revolution. In theoretical terms, however, one might argue, Lenins 
theorisation of an inopportune revolution (different from Marxs original theory) can be 
atoned for by the fact that Marx and Engels themselves looked so differently to the Russian 
context; for example, their views of the Narodniks and other Russian revolutionaries were to 
bear witness to how revolutions in countries other than Western Europe can be justified even 
under violent circumstances. (26) Yet, Marxs overall assessment of the Russian context did 
not reflect, I would argue, his main theory. In his correspondence with Vera Zasulisch, for 
example, Marx emphasised some facts which might be wrongly interpreted or intentionally 
diverted to mean that a revolution in Russia can happen even if the village commune was 
still predominant. (27) Marxs point in the Preface to the 1882 Russian Edition of the 
Communist Manifesto is also particularly misleading: If the Russian Revolution becomes the 
signal for a proletarian revolution in the West, Marx warns, the present Russian common
ownership of land may serve as the starting point for a communist development. (28) Marxs 
statement here is misleading because it seems to suggest that the socialist stage of 
development may occur in the absence of a developed capitalist system. Marx, however, was 
but an admirer of such an idea, and had been engaged with the Russian situation only in 
passing. Furthermore, his statements about a possible socialist revolution without the 
capitalist stage were impacted by his own health problems in the 1870s. (29) Having been 
impressed by the Paris Commune, he was also interested in the revolutionary tradition 
established by the Narodniks. Since he considered the Russian experience different, he had a 
particular pleasure in reading, for example, N. G. Chemyshevskys writings on the possibility 
of socialism without the capitalist stage. (30)
One question that might well raise some doubt is whether Lenin, in his desire to justify 
an unpropitious revolution, was guided by his reading of Marxs interest in the Russian 
context in the 1870s. The answer to this question must not, as I firmly believe, exclude the 
supposition that Lenin was only moved by Marxs and Engels writing on the Paris Commune 
and Russian Populism. In posing this question, I would like to assert that the alleged 
continuity between Marx and Lenin is but an artificial continuity which Lenin, in his rush to 
legitimate his faithfulness to Marx and Engels, made the basis of his thought and work. The 
continuity between Lenin and Marx on the basis of the latters views on the Commune and the 
Narodniks is a forced one at best. I will address such an artificial continuity in relation to my 
leviathan argument in Part four of this thesis.
Lenin advances his argument for the necessity of theoretical struggle by primarily 
arguing against the trends of Russian Marxism which had, according to him, dispossessed 
scientific socialism of its theoretical and practical consistency. According to him, the unity of 
theory and practice in militant politics does largely warrant possibilities of action relating to 
an intelligent management of that unity. Since theory should necessarily lead to an opportune
practice.characterised by conscious action on the part of the workersa practice without 
theoretical legitimacy can only lead to the fragmentation of Social-Democracy as a world 
mass movement. [I]n order to be able to provide the workers with real, universal, and live 
political knowledge, Lenin writes, we must have our own men, Social-Democrats, 
everywhere, among all social strata...Such men are required for propaganda and agitation, but 
in a still larger measure for organisation. (31)
2/ Social-Democracy and the Russian Context:
Lenins reliance on the work of Marx and Engels has to do also with his evaluation of 
the Russian Social-Democratic movement in relation to that of Germany. In order to present 
his formula of the Russian Social-Democracy, he employs Engelss position with regard to 
theory and practice. (32) Lenin was also anxious to brush aside the possibility of advancing 
practice at the expense of theory. In terms of method, the process of struggle should be based 
not on the immediate Russian context, mainly because such a context could not reasonably 
allow a marriage between the present Russian form of Marxism and a working class 
movement that was already in embryo (33) For him, that was a matter of historical 
continuity wherein ideology (Marxist doctrine, etc) adapted to the Russian context, together 
with different contexts for the development of Social-Democracy (Germany, etc), would 
directly dovetail with working class struggle in Russia. For this reason, the Russian variant of 
Marxism would be stagnated at the level of spontaneous politics if it failed to learn from the 
German version which had by then reached its apogee. (34) Besides, this stagnation would be 
more problematic in the presence of other objective obstacles imposed by, for example, the 
different Marxist parties (Socialist Revolutionaries, etc).
In view of this Lenin raised the question of how to draw upon specific tactics in order 
to achieve a German Social-Democratic level work with a possible Marxian practice fit for
and linear with a Marxian theory. In other words, it was Lenins concern to focus both on the 
doctrinal importance of Marxian theory and the immediate organisation of workers struggle; 
this means that he, as he argues in most of his work, attached so much importance to the 
canonical reading of the Marxian text and its conversion into practical politics (35) What 
follows from this is the question of political practice in relation to a party education on the 
basis of the Marxian text: it is the task of who would teach who, and which version of 
Marxism should be taught; that implies that the question of organisation was an urgent matter 
to grapple with. In order to acquire Social-Democratic consciousness, the working class need 
to distinguish between trade unionism and political struggle.
Lenins answer to the above question is illustrated in WBD. This work was certainly 
based on the attempt to read Marxism with a careful consideration of the Russian context. 
Lenins focus on the European experience, from the Paris Commune onwards, constituted for 
him the very objective condition allowing the welding of a Marxist theoretical history with a 
Marxist practical present. Thus the theoretical struggle for an accomplishment of Social- 
Democratic consciousness for the Russian workers constituted the specificity of Lenins own 
theory of revolution. On the other hand, Lenins preoccupation with the complementarity of 
theory and practice was closely linked to his understanding of the continuity between 
ideology and the labour movement. For him, the Russian context could be fully reckoned with 
only in the attempt to approach the European theoretical and practical experience in its 
entirety. As for theory the Russian intelligentsia could benefit from France (etc), and in terms 
of practice it had to build on the German Social-Democracy. (36)
3/ Theoretical Knowledge and the Task of Social-Democracy:
In no way can a scholar acquainted with Lenins early work deny or overlook the 
importance of theory in his overall argumentation. It is equally quite important to appraise this
central theme in relation to his intellectual pedigree. In arguing so, the reader of Marxisms 
history on this basis would definitely trace the influence of the authors of The Communist 
Manifesto. The influence was, of course, not dissociated from general circumstances of 
political and economic import, and which Lenin himself capitalised in order to arrogate both 
Marx and Engels to his own ideological endsby claiming his birthright to Marxian thought 
(thus axing all other claimants like the Mensheviks and the Social Revolutionaries). In 
studying Marxs and Engelss influence on Lenin, I attempt here to shed some light on the 
weight of theoretical knowledge. Theoretical knowledge is significant because it was, as 
Lenin maintained, an essential component of revolutionary struggle without which proletarian 
consciousness is unthinkable. For this reason, Engelss and Marxs work was of particular 
resonance. (37) Although in WBD Lenin sketches in full detail the importance of theory in 
getting the workers to the level of Social-Democratic consciousness, he, for all of the novelty 
of this work, relies heavily on Engelss belief in the necessity of theoretical struggle (a 
position so much akin to his deployment of Engelss concept of a workers state as is 
broached in The State and Revolution). Yet, Lenins general position in his overall work on 
the workers consciousness does in many instances focus on why theoretical struggle forms 
the basis of a strong party organisation. In WBD there are two capital arguments which make 
up Lenins very theory of party organisation: 1) the critique of economism; and 2) the 
importance of Engelss and Marxs views on the necessity of theoretical knowledge. Probably 
Lenin thought so because he was aware of the significance of theory to both Marx and Engels: 
Without knowledge the workers are defenceless, with knowledge they are a force (38) 
Lenins concern about a working-class consciousness that ignores trade unionism signifies 
greatly his desire to make the workers in tune with the leading intelligentsia.
Lenin answers the question of the necessity of theoretical knowledge by authenticating 
three forms of struggle elaborated by Engels: political, economic, and theoretical. (39) While
the first form of struggle is context-bound and very specific, the second is the primordial 
condition for any revolutionary task, and the third (40), relates to a politically self-conscious 
proletariat which negotiates its own emancipation from capitalist exploitation through 
revolutionary work. But the question here is why theoretical strugglethe third formshould 
be an instrumental and guiding motto. For Lenin, it was Russias workers condition which 
necessitated a very particular reading of Social-Democracy in Russia. Engels, for that, as 
Lenin himself maintained, was instrumental: Engelss writing on Social-Democracy was far 
from related to Russia, but Lenin, mostly for this fact, sought to slot Engelss interest in 
theoretical knowledge in his overall theoretical preoccupation that the workers are in urgent 
need for political consciousness.
In principle, however, both Marx and Engels were not utterly against a revolution in 
Russia which could be negotiable on a practical ground not necessarily comprehensive of the 
three forms of struggle already mentioned. That in itself, albeit somehow paradoxical in 
relation to Lenins very theory of struggle, constituted a legitimate premise for Lenin who 
then prided both Marx and Engels on sanctifying a revolution in a non-Western country like 
Russia. Paradoxically, yet, Marxs and Engelss prospect of illegal struggle, violent 
revolution and the spontaneous movement of the working-classes made Lenins formula of 
the necessity of political struggle off at a tangent, since Lenin was mostly in favour of tactical 
work even in the most hostile environment: for example, by 1921 he blamed the Bolsheviks 
boycott of the Duma in 1906. (41) Marx and Engels had celebrated the assassination of Tsar 
Alexander II in 1881 as the formation of a Russian Commune. (42) Marx even considered 
such practices as assassination a specifically Russian and historically inevitable method 
about which there is no reason...to moralize for or against (43) In practical terms, this can be 
considered as an unabashed challenge to Lenins adaptation of Engelss views in WBD, since 
Lenin regarded the tactical method of combining economic and political struggle the most
fruitful in the Russian context. However, such arguments by Marx and Engels were so open 
to interpretation that Lenin contended (as I show it in the opening citation of Section one) that 
Marxism was not a set of rigid codes to follow. Rather, it was perfectly feasible to reintroduce 
Marxism in Russia in accordance with circumstances particularly Russian. (44) Here the view 
that the Russian proletariat also needed the same training as that of the rest of the Western 
proletariat was in Lenins logic very accurate.
Lenins argument that Marxs and Engelss theory was context-adaptive carried him to 
the conclusion that the Russian Social-Democracy was in terrible need for a doctrinal 
education that would emerge from the very teaching of the authors of the Manifesto. That, in 
turn, accounted for Lenins concern to engage the mass movement into a direct political 
struggle against tsarism. On the other hand, such a concern ushered in the emergence of 
theoretical struggle as a guiding cliche which became characteristic of Leninisms 
conception of revolution; theoretical struggle meant also that a workers struggle without a 
theoretical knowledge of both the Marxian text and past experiences (Germany, France, etc) 
would in the last analysis be reducible to a trade union struggle. Capitalising Engels for this 
purpose, Lenin insists that like the German workers, the Russian workers will have to 
undergo trials immeasurably... (45) Actually, for this purpose, Lenin quotes Engelss words 
about the German workers:
The German workers have two important advantages compared with the rest of Europe. First, they 
belong to the most theoretical people of Europe; second they have retained that sense of theory which 
the so-called educated people of all Germany have lost...In the same manner as the German 
theoretical Socialism will never forget that it rests on the shoulders of Saint Simon, Fourier, and 
Owen...so the practical German labour movement must never forget that it has developed on the 
shoulders of the English and French movements, that it had utilised their experiences.. .For the first time 
in the history of the labour movement, the struggle is being conducted that its three sides, the
theoretical, the political, and the practical economic...form one harmonious and well-planned entity.
The Russian context was, of course, far-flung from that of Germany, and proletarian struggle 
historically and qualitatively different: there was a yawning gulf between the contexts in 
which the two variants of Social-Democracy developed. Nevertheless, Lenin was anxious to 
assert that the Russian proletariat on its part equally needed to pass through similar phases of 
struggle. Engelss lesson to the Russian proletariat was that they, as their German 
counterparts, had to acquire and develop revolutionary tools for developing their 
consciousness, hinging on similar tools used by Germans: the need for practical solutions 
(economic) necessitated the foundation of a theoretical culture. Therefore, the German 
context, having been a medium for theoretical inspiration, had to be followed only because 
without a sense of theory, scientific socialism would have never become blood and tissue of 
the workers. (47)
On the other hand, Lenins employment of Engelss ideas conveys the significance of 
the leading role of theory. Theory could only be fully owned by intellectual revolutionaries 
who had the capacity to pass on their knowledge and experiences to the labouring classes. 
Theoretical struggle could not be accomplished root and branch unless a certain Marxist 
theoretical history be traced, grasped, and deployed. It was Marx himself who ascertained that 
a practice with a dovetailing theory had to be imparted to the workers. In their struggle for 
economic emancipation, proletarians have to follow Communists in terms of practice and 
theory, because the latter ...theoretically have over the great mass of the proletariat the 
advantage of clearly understanding the line of march, the conditions and the ultimate general 
results of the proletarian movement. (48) In focussing on the necessity to acquire a German- 
like proletarian consciousness, Lenin saw that holding on to the status quo by the Russian 
Social-Democrats meant the historical entanglement of the workers (and by far the peasants as
well) in spontaneous action (trade union), and, hence, the deadly fate of Russian Social 
Democracy in its entirety. For Lenin, Social-Democracy is the basis for emancipation mainly 
because it represents the sum total of the combination of economic struggle and political 
struggle into a single class struggle of the proletariat. (49) It follows that Social-Democracy 
becomes here the raison d etre of the struggle for both economic and political emancipation.
Engels had argued in the preface to The Civil War in France (1871, 1970) for the 
necessity of theoretical knowledge. His appraisal of the Paris Commune can tell us about the 
importance attached to theoretical knowledge in times of working class struggle. According to 
Engels, the experience of the Commune could be assessed only on the basis of the character 
of the Commune itself. He contended that compared to the Proudhonists, the Blanquists 
constituted the majority in the Commune. Yet, the followers of Blanquis ideas were at the 
time Socialists only by revolutionary, proletarian instinct..., (50) and only the minority of 
Blanquists had attained greater clarity on principles preached by Edward Vaillant who was 
familiar with German scientific socialism. (51) What explains the failure of the Commune, in 
a way, was the inability of the workers to reach a level of consciousness tantamount to 
Vaillants; scientific socialism was the revolutionary theory that had to be adopted so that the 
success of the mass movement against the will of the autocratic state could be asserted. The 
problem for Engels then was that the heroes of the Commune were in no way capable of 
consolidating a strong theoretical basis for the revolution: both Blanquists (as related to 
politics) and Proudhonists (in charge of economic matters) were blind to comprehensive 
measures that could have been decisive in favour of the Commune. In his words, Engels 
accused the two trends of French socialism of doing the opposite of what the doctrines of 
their school prescribed. (52) What the Paris workers had to be blamed for was only the 
unconscious technical mistakes for which they were but partly responsible: both Blanquism 
and Proudhonism were found wanting due to their own doctrinal mistakes. Therefore, a
proletariat socialist by instinct is in sharp conflict with a proletariat feeding on the maturity 
of political experience as prescribed in the theory of scientific socialism.
In this respect, as a Russian Social-Democrat, Lenin had been greatly influenced by 
Marxs and Engelss views as regards the labour movement. His evaluation of the political 
experience of the German Social-Democrats and the practical experience of proletarians led 
him to draw many conclusions that, in his eyes, would benefit the Russian working class in its 
present condition where it lacked elementary requirements for being a revolutionary class in 
the scientific sense of socialism. The small shape of the proletariat, together with its 
unconsciousness about its historical role, made Lenin think of a formula of radical change 
centred on two roles: (1) to learn the lessons of German proletariat which had to pass through 
strenuous stages of development in order to gain unprecedented consciousness; (2) to rethink 
the nature of a Russian revolutionary party, and emphasise the differences from other Marxist 
groups (Mensheviks, etc.) But, as far as the first question is concerned, can we speak of a 
similitude between German workers struggle and a Russian struggle, given that the former 
formally functioned within die framework of a Social-Democracy theoretically warranted by 
the developed socio-economic conditions in Germany, and the latter objectively stagnated by 
a lingering autocratic system and a state largely dependent on the vestiges of feudalism?
For Lenin, an approach to both contexts is purely technical, mainly for the difference 
in degreeand less in kindbetween the workers struggle in Germany and that in Russia. 
(53) Basic contact between the Social-Democrats and the population had been almost of no 
avail in the Russian context, mainly because of the autocratic basis of the Russian state: The 
Westem-European Social-Democrats find their work...facilitated by the calling of public 
meetings, to which all are free to go, and by the parliament, in which they speak to the 
representatives of all classes. We have neither a parliament, nor the freedom to call 
meetings... (54) The difference thus was that the enemy of the workers in Germany was less
complex, and therefore, easier to deal with: In a word, the Germans stand for what is and 
reject the changes; we demand changes, and reject subservience to, reconciliation with what 
is. (55) Thus conceived, the struggle according to Lenin is much harder for the Russian 
proletariat, only because Germans are in a position of power vis-a-vis their critics and 
enemiesespecially with the existence of universal suffragewhile Russians are on the 
defensive. What is more, Germans and Russians are also different when it comes to their 
respective realities. Lenin argued that it was the absence of recognized party ties and party 
traditions which made the Russian version of Social-Democracy less responsive to the 
necessity of efficient struggle. This, in turn, made the workers and peasants unable, or, at best, 
less inclined to engage politically in throwing away the order dictated by the tsar.
Lenin was particularly conscious of the hard task awaiting the Russian Social- 
Democratic Labour Party (RSDLP) mainly not only for the difficult objective circumstances 
in tsarist Russia but also for the battle over who would eventually organise the struggle, and 
over what means should be deployed: since the formation of the party in 1898 Lenin had to 
struggle over, for example, issues relating to the Central Organ (Iskra) and the Central 
Committee. The split of the RSDLP at the Second Congress in 1903 widened the conflict 
between the Iskra-dominating group (Mensheviks) and the Bolsheviks who controlled the 
Central Committee of the party. In this respect, Lenins view of the task of Russian Social- 
Democracy was also confused by the opposing political position of the Mensheviks and 
Socialist Revolutionaries (Chernov, etc.). Lenins insistence on summoning the Third Party 
Congress (1904) for example attested to the condition of quandary in which the Bolsheviks 
were caught up.
The organisation under the three forms of struggle accentuated by Engels meant that 
the leading body would be the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party. This, in turn, means 
that the RSDLP would form the basis of all forms of struggle and that the party must
technically be conceived as the vanguard of proletarians. In consequence, the workers 
should redefine their tasks. They should pre-suppose that their unity is contingent on the 
degree of their loyalty to a leading party: [T]he Social Democratic Party as the vanguard of 
the working class must not be confused with the entire class (56) Such was the position of 
Lenin when he started over by considering the necessity to unite the three forms of struggle 
spelled out by Engels. However, in practical sense, Lenins focus on the absence of party 
traditions in Russia was an invitation to give the Social-Democratic movement there more 
authority in asserting Marxist principles: the immediate method of action had to follow 
characteristically from the evaluation of the experience of the German Social-Democracy and 
the position of the socialist movement at the time of the Paris Commune.
Theoretical struggle in this sense means the foundation of a party prerogative 
following from the German experienceordaining the unity between the workers and their 
leaders on the basis of the theoretical knowledge passed on to the proletariat. As Andrzej 
Walicki reminds us, Lenin forged his theory of the vanguard by basing his suppositions on the 
rich history of Social-Democracy. (57) The foundation of a strong party tradition was 
however not only inspired by the work of Engels and Marx but also both the Russian and 
German variants of Marxism: mainly Plekhanovism and Kautskyism. These two variants had 
the lions share in inspiring and, thus, composing Lenins theory of the vanguard As Leszek 
Kolakowski points out, Russian Marxism (post-Narodnik, I would argue) had not only 
impacted the way Lenin saw the necessity of theoretical struggle but also his conception of 
the class struggle as a whole. (58) Yet, Lenin differed from those theoreticians in the sense 
that he sanctioned the adaptability of Marxian scientific socialism to different contexts of 
differing socio-economic bases. This transformed his socialist theory into a system-adaptive 
theory. (59) He conceived of Russia as a rather complex context in which the immediate 
demands of working people were far unsafely entrenched in the present backward economy.
(60) And it was that fact which made him re-read Marxian theory on the basis of the new 
reality. For him it would be contingent to try to liken such Social-Democratic demands to the 
advanced form of the German Social-Democracy. (61) The solution would be to lay the 
ground for a Russian Social-Democratic experience that had to overlook, albeit consciously 
and temporarily, the bourgeois basis that, in the Marxian sense, is at the origin of the 
proletarian revolution.
II. Party Vanguardism and the Bolsheviks:
II The Russian Social Democratic Labour Party as Party of a New Type:
The period of Bolshevisms emergence (62), and which Stalin himself traces in his 
essay Some Questions Concerning the History of Bolshevism (63) was that which emanated 
straight from the disagreements with the Menshevik faction over issues of RSDLP 
programme, methods of struggle (reformism or militancy, etc), and institutional tasks (Iskra, 
etc.). A few years before the 1903 split, Lenin had been concerned with the possibility to 
forge an all-class alliance within the framework of RSDLP. In his The Fight for a Marxist 
Party (1946), he stressed the capital importance of consolidating the Social-Democratic 
Party as a revolutionary party, and making use of a unified Party program (64) This is also 
clearly pronounced in WBD: to bring political knowledge to the workers the Social- 
Democrats must go among all classes of the population, must despatch units of their army in 
all directions. (65) The pronouncement of a Marxist party being principally entrenched in 
Social-Democracy clearly signifies that Lenin greatly valued the Social-Democratic 
programme as developed in Western Europe first and advanced towards Russia itself later. A 
unified Party program meant that the theory of socialism was conceived in relation to 
Lenins sustained belief in the possibility to forge a strong Social-Democratic Party in Russia, 
regardless of differences or contrasts between party sections. The founding Marxists in
Russia, for example, like Plekhanov, Axelrod, and Zasulich were at first not in conflict with 
Lenin . Their connection with him had been fortified through such media as the literary and 
political review Sotisial Democrat (The Social-Democrat) in which they had communicated 
their revolutionary ideas to the Russian proletariat between 1890 and 1892. (66)
The concept of a Marxist party following from an alliance between Social-Democrats 
precedes the beginning of conflict which arose after the foundation of the RSDLP. The seeds 
of a Social-Democratic party might well be attributed to the period of the St Petersburg textile 
workers strike in 1896: it was even heralded by the League of Struggle for the Emancipation 
of the Working Class in 1895, chiefly led by Lenin. (67) Although the period between the 
formation of the RSDLP and its split was extremely short, (1898-1903) the idea of a unity of 
Social-Democrats in a Marxist party was not totally unworkable. It started with the League in 
response to working class economic discontent. In WBD Lenin clearly reveals such a historic 
possibility to stand up against official Russia. The formula for him was three-fold: 1) the 
Russian socialist intellectual leaders should lay the foundation for an independent Social- 
Democratic party that responds to the contextual specificities of Russia ; 2) the experience of 
the German Social-Democracy should be highly considered and respected; and 3) the Russian 
workers should be guided in order to establish a party tradition. All three components would 
be indispensable in deciding a possible future for the existence of a Marxist party in Russia. 
Lenin did that in extremely limiting circumstances where the Russian Social-Democracy was 
still in embryo and he himself exiled to Eastern Siberia (68) But his insistence on a Russian 
party tradition meant also an unabashed refutation of the early form of Russian socialism, 
namely Narodnism (69) which, as previously mentioned, had been praised by the authors of 
the Communist Manifesto themselves. Lenin did not differ fundamentally from other Russian 
Marxists who were anxious to break away with revolutionary Narodism by the 1880s (70) 
(only to assert his full support of Russian Marxism as had developed since the early 1880s
with Plekhanov, Vera Zasulich, and Paul Axelrod.) Yet, the other work to do was to try in 
those same circumstances to make use of the experience of the Russian Marxists and to learn 
from the German Social-Democracy. It is from that instance that his particular conception of 
Russian politics was forged. (71) The entire idea of having a party cemented by mass support 
and an organising leading elite demarcates Lenins very reliance on the role of a socialist 
party that is capable of blending the German and local experiences, (also a party strongly 
sustained by the technical basis provided by the central organ and the Central Committee) 
Lenins position in relation to a Marxist party in Russia led Benett Becker back in 
1937 to draw some kind of comparison between Marxs concept of historical materialism 
and Lenins view of the leading role of revolutionaries. In Russia, Becker argued, Lenin 
wanted anxiously to prove that historical coincidence forced the emergence of the vanguard 
leaders, which implied putting at work Marxs formula of the necessity to change the world 
rather than interpret it (73) This implies that reality and circumstances are not some thing of 
our choice, and the moment we seize upon an opportunity to change them we must be 
actuated by whatever means to push for the change. In Leninist logic, this is in total harmony 
with the Marxian theoretical grounds whereupon the scientific thrust of historical materialism 
is predicated. Yet, for Lenin, the change cannot be achieved without capitalising the very 
teaching of historical materialism, and without party organisation and rigour. Actually, to 
galvanise the working class into revolutionary action, Lenin asserted that the struggle for 
emancipation necessitated not the call for reform as the economists believed but political 
struggle. The struggle for a Marxist party was then impacted by the necessity to establish a 
strong Russian Social-Democratic party premised on order and discipline and feeding on 
the constructive role of the vanguard. This is what would prove Marxs predictions true.
Nevertheless, the supposition that the leading vanguard can be an efficient, if not the 
only efficient, way to apply Marxs historical materialist logic to reality is a misleading 
supposition. Changing the world through the leading party would, I firmly argue here, 
reduce Marxs historical materialism to an elitist theory which serves the party leadership 
rather than the proletariat as a whole. Lenins argument in WBD that Russia needs a strong 
party tradition was to translate his overall concern to codify a certain view of party 
organisation pedantically grounded on a deviant (from German orthodoxy for instance) 
reading of Marxs theory of revolution. While primarily not against the spirit of the Social- 
Democracy characteristic of Germany until 1914, Lenins reading was rather an attempt to 
distance his conception of revolutionary work from that of the Legal Marxists, the 
Mensheviks, and the Socialist Revolutionaries. (74) In a sense, it is Lenins difference from 
such Marxists which renders his version of Marxism problematic. Lenin, of course, was 
moved by objective constraints reflecting the Russian context, and was hardly keen to 
consider Marxism as a doctrine of strictly inflexible codes. It was for this reason that he drew 
on a very specific strategy in his preparation for the October Revolution. It was for the same 
reason that he attacked what he called the centrist and defencist trends in Social- 
Democracy which began to emerge as early as World War I.
2/ Lenin, Party Centralism, and the Critics :
Lenin began to forge his specific conception of the party as early as 1904. This came 
shortly after the foundation of the Bolshevik wing of the Russian Social-Democracy. Lenin 
expounds his theory of the party in One Step Forward, Two Steps Back. His argument draws 
on two main questions: party organisation and primacy of leadership. (75) As far as the 
question of organisation is concerned, Lenin suggests that the true foundation of a strong 
Russian Social-Democracy cannot be carried out without clearly ascertaining a level of party
organisation that would guarantee the success of the labour movement in its fight against 
tsarism and opportunism. For this reason there must be a social democratic centralism that 
derives its legitimacy from, first, the Central Committee and, second, the rest of the party 
branches ( the party congress, etc.)
As for the second point, importance of the leadership, Lenin saw that it was necessary 
for the proletariat to gain political consciousness through the help of the leading intellectuals 
of the party (76); it follows that party membership should be highly exclusive. In the first 
place the proletariat is not directly involved in party organisation, and the majority of the 
workers have to act from outside the party branches, thus awaiting the intelligentsia to 
introduce them to the partys structure and programme. This had been clearly confirmed 
before the split: [I]t is no longer the proletarians but certain intellectuals in our party who 
need to be educated in the matters of organization and discipline. (77) Lenins definition of 
party membership is focussed on the concentration of the highly organisational tasks in the 
hands of elite of intellectuals who devote not their spare evenings but their entire 
existence to the revolution. They would bring class consciousness to the Russian proletariat 
from without. This organisation of Russian Social Democrats should, Lenin asserted, 
maintain rigid secrecy and specialization of functions. (78)
Lenins definition of the party and the party tasks was to reduce the role of the 
Mensheviks who both Luxemburg and Trotsky sympathized with in protest against Lenins 
extremist theorisation of the role of the leadership. Rosa Luxemburg responded to Lenins 
definition of the party by backing Martovs vision of the party and organisation. (79) She 
expressed her dissatisfaction with what she saw as Lenins rigid attitude towards party 
organisation and membership. In her Leninism or Marxismoriginally Organizational 
Questions of the Russian Social Democracy (1904)she argued that Lenins reading of 
Marxism was erroneous in two respects: 1) exaggeration of the role of the centre in relation
to the rest of the proletariat and 2) forcing very intolerant conditions for accepting and 
recruiting party members. Lenins concern, Luxemburg writes, Us not so much to make the 
activity o f the party more fruitful as to control the partyto narrow the movement rather 
than to develop it, to bind rather than to unify it. (80) Here Luxemburg thinks that the 
question of centralisation in Lenins Russia is far from responsive to the forced necessity to 
establish a strong Social-Democratic party temporarily dominated by its leading organising 
centre. For her, there is no error in accepting centralised party rule in the absence of the rule 
of the majority of conscious workers in the party (81). Yet Lenins strategy demanded more 
than the mere task of founding a provisional supremacy by the Central Committee over the 
working class movement. Luxemburg argued that Lenins definition of the role of the centre 
tries to reconcileand thus confusesMarxian and non-Marxian organisational questions.
Much of the same concern was raised by Leon Trotsky who attacked Lenins views of 
the party by claiming that the working class must not be dissociated from the leading 
revolutionaries. In Our Political Tasks (1904) he emphasised that the group of professional 
revolutionaries was not marching at the head of the conscious proletariat, it was acting...in 
the place of the proletariat. (82) This according to Trotsky made Lenins party amount to a 
one-man dictatorship: the whole class was supplanted by the party, the party by the Central 
Committee, and the Central Committee by the leader. (83) Luxemburg, on the other hand, 
sharply criticised Lenins One Step Forward, Two Steps Backward for its ultra-centralism 
and its denial of the creative role of the proletarian masses into the socialist movement. 
The fact that Lenin relies for his legitimation on the explanation of Blanquism in relation to 
Social-Democracy poses a grave problem for the Social-Democratic movement. Luxemburg 
sees that, apart from Lenins unconditional support of centralism, Blanquism cannot be 
viewed as an organised movement that blends in a harmonious way the doctrinal principles of 
the leading revolutionists and the spontaneous action of the workers. Blanquism builds on
conspiratorial politicswith the mass at some distance (84)while Social-Democracy 
reckons...on the organization and the direct, independent action of the masses. (85) She 
proceeds by arguing that spontaneous mass strikes have in many instances proved more 
availing than the organising centre believes. She gives the example of the 1896, 1901, and 
1903 strikes in St Petersburg and Rostov-on-Don. (86) Her justification is that the 
unconscious might well come before the conscious (87) and that unorganised mass 
insurgence might lead to better results. This contradicts so much with Lenins point 
concerning the necessity of party leadership in actuating proletarian struggle for 
emancipation.
To view Social-Democracy as Lenin does, Luxemburg thinks, is to take a position 
characteristically alien to the socialist movement. For her, the socialist movement could only 
spring from the unity of the toiling classes and the leading revolutionaries. To draw such a 
parallel between the differing theoretical and contextual elements of Russia and France would 
amount not only to a methodical anomaly but also to a serious misreading of the theory of 
scientific socialism. In Luxemburgs view the Blanquists during the Franco-Prussian war 
were actuated by conspiracy while their mass basis acted in extremely pressing 
circumstances; such a mass found itself almost entirely unconscious of its historical role and 
class interests. (88) However, the Social-Democrats in Russia were socialists who had to act 
according to the theory of scientific socialism as advanced by Marx. Such a theory posits the 
workers as the class which in its struggle against all forms of exploitation would terminate all 
class rule and therefore all state rule. (89)
3/ Lenin and the Nature of Bolshevism:
Not long ago Lars T. Lih raised the question whether WBD constituted a profound 
revision of orthodox Marxism, and whether the guiding theory of Lenin in this work became
itself synonymous with Bolshevism as developed after the split between the two main factions 
of the RSDLP. (90) Lih answers this question by arguing that the textbook interpretation of 
WBD is profoundly incorrect (91), and that such a single work did in a very little sense 
present Bolshevisms worldview, and could hardly be dubbed a founding document. (92) 
He assertively thinks that the significance of this work has been wrongly conceived by such 
scholars as Adam Ulam and Alfred Meyer (93) WBD, Lih adds, only discussed and debated 
temporary issues relating principally to the question of the Social Democratic Party 
organisation and the critique of the Emigre journal Robochee Delo. (94) WBD, on the other 
hand, can only be considered as a blueprint for negotiating a political reality in which Social 
Democratic leadership would guide the would-be proletarian vanguard (95) Lihs critique of 
what he calls the textbook interpretation poses the challenging question whether there was 
an organic link between the content of WBD and the essence of Bolshevism, and whether 
Bolshevism was inherent in Lenins general theory as was developed in WBD.
If Bolshevism should be defined as the theory of socialism which pre-supposes a 
vertical ( unequal) relationship between the party leadership and the working class, one might 
well assert that it was in WBD that Bolshevism took shape. But if one should suppose that 
Bolshevism preached a horizontal (constructive and equal) relationship between the 
professional revolutionaries and the proletariat, one would argue that WBD was anything but 
an articulation of Bolshevism. In the eyes of its critics (Mensheviks, Socialist Revolutionaries, 
Luxemburg, etc.) Bolshevism was particularly obsessed with centralisation, strict discipline, 
and intolerance. WBD, on the other hand, formed the basis for these categories. (96) But the 
other question is whether, as the critics maintain, scientific socialism as a revolutionary theory 
was erroneously approached in WBD, and became an ideological instrument for trading an 
authoritarian state. What proved accurate some of the critical responses to WBD was the fact
that Lenin changed his positions in such much more mature works as The State and 
Revolution, and showed more flexible attitudes to the question of the state.
It is true, I would argue, that the link between WBD and authoritarianism (97) is clear- 
cut. Yet, suggesting that Lenins ideas became less doctrinaire in The State and Revolution is 
not a totally convincing argument. There is an alternative argument which can be raised in 
this respect: Lenins struggle for centralism, discipline, and a powerful state was not absent in 
The State and Revolution. He continued emphasising their importance by tacit means. 
Centralism was accentuated, albeit implicitly, by Lenins rejection of "parliamentarianism in 
such works as the April Theses and The State and Revolution.".. .We can and must imagine 
democracy without parliamentarianism. (98) On the other hand, the democratic proletarian 
state remains a controversial issue in Lenins treatment of the subject. He emphasises that the 
experience of "smashing the state in Russia should be guided by a logic akin to that of the 
Paris Commune; the state, in its bourgeois dimension, must be "smashed not by means 
prescribed by Marx or Engels; it should be dissolved through
the experience of the mass movement which would provide the answer to the question as to what 
specific forms this organization of the proletariat as the ruling class would assume and as to the exact 
manner whereby this organization would be combined with the most complete and consistent conquest 
of democracy. (99)
In dealing with the task of smashing the state, Lenin intentionally makes implicit the 
centrality of the vanguard since he mixes up the respective roles of the party leadership and 
the proletariat:
we are not Utopians. We do not have dreams about dispensing at once with all administration, with all 
subordination...we want the socialist revolution with people as they are now, with people who cannot 
dispense with subordination, with control...But the subordination must be to the armed vanguard of all
the exploited and labouring people, to the proletariat (my italics)... We ourselves (Lenins italics), the 
workers, will organize large-scale production on the basis of what has already been created by 
capitalism, relying on our experience as workers, establishing strict, iron discipline (my italics) 
supported by the state power of the armed workers... (100)
Two significant points appear in Lenins conception of the task of the new state. First, the 
necessity to continue demonstration, subordination and control; second, the close link 
between the proletariat and the leadership. Here Lenin does not mention the leading 
Bolsheviks by name, but calls them we ourselves, the workers. The only distinction he 
makes is between the armed vanguard (the working class) and the organizing vanguard ( 
political leadership). Such a distinction is not of kind but has to do with their respective 
functions.
The attempt by Lenin to identify the tasks of the leadership and the working class does 
itself confirm his early ( especially in WBD) belief in a necessary division of labour where the 
party plays the central role politically whereas proletarians form the armed force for the 
party. As a matter of fact, the rise of the Soviet authoritarian state in 1918 might well be said 
to have such a division of labour at origin. The link between the vanguard and the workers, as 
prescribed in the above-quoted paragraph, should come in the shape of a binding contract 
whereby the party-state imposes strict, iron discipline and the working people only support 
state power. In my view, this binding contract is but closely tantamount to the leviathan 
contract between the sovereign and his subjects as is theorised by Thomas Hobbes in his 
political philosophy. This argument is central to my thesis, and will be examined in Part Four 
of this work.
Although Bolshevik thinking is closely related to Lenins WBD, it should be noted that 
not only this work can be considered as the blueprint for Bolshevism. True, some of the 
theoretical premises of Bolshevism can be traced back to WBD, yet studying the latter as a
single work would by no means provide a thorough account of the degree of Lenins 
application of Marxism. Here, Lihs claim, I would argue, seems more forceful than that of 
the totalitarian model, basically because WBD cannot explain the entirety of the Bolshevik 
worldview. Lenin broaches the essence and function of Bolshevism only in such works as 
Left-Wing Communism: an Infantile Disorder (1921). In chapter two of Left-Wing 
Communism Lenin argues that the success of Bolshevism historically had been conditioned 
not only by the rigour of the Bolsheviks to assimilate and put at work Marxian theory but 
also thanks to the ramblings, vacillations, mistakes and disappointments of revolutionary 
thought in Russia (including the early forms of Russian Marxism), the importance of 
checking and comparison with the European experience and the rich international 
connections. (101)
Lenin assertively adds that Bolshevism was a true application of Marxism only 
because it communicated the message that the dictatorship of the proletariat is the fiercest 
and most merciless war of the new class against its more powerful enemy, the bourgeoisie... 
(102) Bolshevism also fully fathomed the nature of the bourgeoisie and its class war against 
the workers. (103) In terms of its constructive role leading to the revolution over the 
bourgeoisie, Bolshevism, Lenin firmly puts it, is the combination of the proletarian 
vanguard (the source of proletarian consciousness) and society as a whole ( including 
working class and lumpen) (104) Here one cannot deny that Lenins analysis of the success of 
Bolsheviks in his Left-Wing Communism and other works was primarily accounted for by his 
conception of the party, revolution, and emancipation as is broached in his early work. In 
WBD Lenins concern about the condition of Social-Democracy in Russia is expressed 
through his call upon true Social-Democrats to despise economism, rally round the 
vanguard, and learn from European and non-European experiences. In my view, Bolshevism 
represented more than what was theorised in WBD. Bolshevism, it seems to me, practically
developed through two different stages: 1903-1917 and 1917-1923. The first stage had to do 
with the development of Social-Democracy (nationally) and the Second International; the 
second with the Communist Party and the Comintern.
As for the first period of development (which is my concern here), the ideology of 
Bolshevism was first officially declared in 1903 after the split of the two groups constituting 
the RSDLP. It emerged with its opposing counterpart Menshevism. The alleged chief 
principle of the Bolshevik party was to defend the Marxist tradition against what the 
Bolsheviks called reformism and the heavy reliance on parliamentary democracy. 
Revolutionary politics necessitated that the leading role in revolutionary work should go to 
the intellectual revolutionaries of the movement. The workers in turn had to follow the path 
drawn by such intellectuals. The division of the proletarian vanguard and the working class 
was what accounted for Lenins specific theorisation of the party, party membership, 
revolution, the withering away of the state, etc. This was accentuated by his famous 
dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry forged in 1905, and which bore the first prints 
of his very revision of Marxs original formula of the dictatorship of the proletariat (105) 
This, on the other hand, was one of the defining characteristics of the theory of Bolshevism.
Probably because Lenin was wholly aware of Russias difficulty to face up the future 
challenges to a socialism that starts over not from a capitalist context, he then had to ensure a 
safe path to the development of an inopportune socialism. But to do so, he first had to forge 
a theory co-extensive with, and not wholly deviant from, Marxs theory of revolution. One of 
the most compelling questions which preoccupied Lenin in his attempt to maintain a level of 
party organisation that would not disregard the technical basis for carrying out a revolution 
was how to deal with the Russian political context with a view of socialism substantially 
obstructed by the absence of a majority of the proletariat in a peasant-based society. To bridge 
such a gulf Lenin had to prop up his theory of the vanguard by focussing on the necessity to
have a class alliance between the industrial workers and the peasantry. His attitude towards a 
revolutionary peasantry that could help change the status quo had started as early as 1905. 
And there was a very particular element that Lenin considered in evaluating the experiences 
of the Russian peasants: violence as unorganised struggle.
Ill/ The Question of Revolution:
1/ The Role of the Party and the Untimely Revolution:
Lenin based his theory of revolution on the central role of the party. On the other hand, 
for him, the path to a strong Bolshevik party resided in the combination of Marxs scientific 
socialism with his own theory of the vanguard. In principle, he hardly differed from Marx and 
Engels as regards the role of petty-Bourgeois intellectuals in the working class movement. 
(106) Yet, his conception of the vanguard was often carried to an excess as it took Marxs and 
Engelss original concept of the party beyond what they theorised. On the other hand, central 
to both is the principle of proceeding to revolutionary work through scientific socialism 
against other forms of socialism. Here, the question is whether Lenin forged his theory of 
revolution on an elitist attitude that had to do with his obsession with the professional 
revolutionaries as was first forged in WBD. The question is also whether Lenin should be 
scolded for assigning a leading role to the intellectual elite. Some critics do totally oppose this 
suggestion. For Lih, Lenin did in no way suggest that the proletarian movement should be 
drowned by the Social Democratic intelligentsia. This is articulated by such Mensheviks as 
Potresov. Potresov, Lih affirms, rightly argued that bringing socialist consciousness to the 
workers is not meant as an insult to the workers but as an invitation to the praktiki to 
exercise inspiring leadership. (107)
One might also argue that the disjunction that arises from Lenins heavy reliance on 
the professional revolutionaries is also indicative of the quandary of Marxism in its entirety
when it comes to the question of the relationship between the elite of revolutionaries and the 
workers. Marx himself was criticised for the same position by Bakunin who thought that in 
Marxs theory proletarians were left under the mercy of an elite believing themselves to be the 
protectors of society. (108) This comparison between Marx and Lenin might, I would argue, 
mislead the reader. Marxs view of the working class was different from that of Lenin in great 
part. Marx and Engels assert in the Communist Manifesto that the Communists do not set up 
any sectarian principles of their own, by which to shape and mould the proletarian 
movement. (109) Lenin, on the other hand, encouraged such sectarian principles without 
calling them sectarian; his contempt for working class consciousness, and his drive for 
establishing a hierarchical relationship between the party leadership and the rest of the 
proletariat were but symptomatic of his theoretical and technical separation of such two 
categories. Whether a criticism of Lenin on this basis is valid remains to be revealed in what 
follows.
As previously mentioned, in Lenins view (based on Engels) the relationship between 
the revolutionary party and the proletariat resides in the unity between three forms of 
consciousness (political, economic, and theoretical). But the combination of the three forms is 
only theoretically feasible. There were objective obstacles which prevented Lenin from 
forging a practical solution premised on the unity of the forms in question. It was the Polish 
revolutionary Luxemburg who, in spite of being inconsistent while treating Lenins work, 
defended Lenins position as regards the possibility of revolution in Russia. In response to 
Lenins theory of revolution she articulated, and thus justified, the difficulties facing Lenin 
and Bolshevism in grappling with the task of leading the Russian Social-Democracy to a 
successful stage:
Everything that happens in Russia is comprehensible and represents a chain of causes and effects, the 
straight point and end term of which are: the failure of the German proletariat and the occupation of 
Russia by German imperialism. It would be demanding something superhuman from Lenin and his 
comrades if we should expect of them that under such circumstances they should conjure forth the finest 
democracy, the most exemplary dictatorship of the proletariat and a flourishing socialist economy. 
(110)
There is a great degree of accuracy in Luxemburgs claim that the failure of German 
proletariat and Russias occupation by German forces constituted the most compelling 
circumstance which prevented Bolshevik revolutionaries from guiding their movement 
towards a resolute dictatorship of the proletariat. That objective question was Lenins concern 
too, especially as he explained the complexity of the workers movement in its German 
version. As Luxemburg noted, circumstances obliged Lenin to re-read Marxian theory in the 
hope of adapting it to a reality that stands in sharp contrast with the economic reality 
envisaged by Marx. Here the argument advanced by Luxemburg is emphasised in her view 
that the Bolsheviks were compelled by historical necessity to force Social-Democracy in a 
pre-bourgeois Russian context (autonomy, landed interest etc) (111)
The difficulty facing Russian revolutionaries was how to create a Social Democratic 
movement at a time when the state is not yet in the hands of the Bourgeoisie (112) The 
transition to socialism according to Luxemburg could by no means happen in circumstances 
dictated by a political situation the technical basis of which had not ushered in a bourgeois 
order. The transition from feudalism to capitalism, which had hitherto been a defining 
characteristic of England, France, Germany, and the USA, could take centuries for Russia. 
Then, the major complexity in Russia was that the socialists sought to jump from one bank 
of the river to another without appropriating the tools necessary to perform such a jump. But 
was such a jump a forced necessity, or at least a justifiable move according to Luxemburg?
The form of the state in tsarist Russia necessitated that the socialist movement had to deal 
with two contrasting and unfavourable alternatives, each fraught with uncertainties. The first 
choice means that the Russian Social-Democrats should start from a rudimentary stage and 
rush the technical and economic forces of change so that the transition to the bourgeois 
stage would take place forcibly, even in the long run; that in and of itself would demand a 
revolution against the pseudo-feudal mode of production, which would only occur by toppling 
the tsarist political order through a strong alliance between the peasants and proletariat. (113) 
If it should opt for this first alternative, the socialist movement had by then to force itself to 
advance towards revolutionary action against official Russia, whether it be clad in aristocratic 
or bourgeois mantle. The second choice left for the Russian Socialists was the immediate 
organisation of a Social-Democracy that would be forced on a society which had not yet 
moved to the bourgeois epoch: it was the latter choice that the Russian socialist movement 
had adoptedand which Luxemburg supported. Such a movement was, of course, insinuated 
by Lenin, and cannot be attributed to the first form of Russian Marxism as evolved with 
Plekhanov, Zasulich, and Axelrod.
Lenins re-reading of Marx and Engels on the basis of the pressing circumstances in 
Russia has been thoroughly addressed in the work of John Hoffman. (114) Hoffman has been 
critical of Lenin, mainly for his suggestion that the particular context of Russia allowed for no 
other alternative but an untimely proletarian revolution. By referring to Lenins idea of the 
necessity of experienceas is shown in The State and RevolutionHoffman argues that 
following from a Marxian logic, Lenin and the rest of the Bolsheviks were compelled to 
embrace a practice in radical tension with their theory. (115) Legitimating the necessity to 
carry out the October Revolution, Lenin condemned the Soviet state to slide towards 
authoritarianism. Lenin was then forced to argue for a revolutionary state significantly 
different from the democratic republic. (116) Hoffman has, I think, usefully pointed out an
underlying cause behind the rise of the authoritarian state in Soviet Russia: the circumstances 
argument. The circumstances argument cannot, however, explain every thing. The 
authoritarian state in Soviet Russia originates more from the experience of the Civil War and 
War Communism. (117) The dissolution of the Constituent Assembly in 1918 was but a 
prelude to what occurred later.
In the early period of the evolution of the socialist movement in its Leninist face, 
where Russian Social-Democracy was on the wane, Luxemburg and other revolutionaries, 
including Trotsky, could only hope for the consolidation of a working class movement which 
would rid the masses of absolutist monarchy. This attitude, being taken by Luxemburg in 
response to Lenins views, was that the Russian socialists had to read the defining difference 
between the Social-Democratic movement in Germany and the one characteristic of Russia. 
Basically Russian society differed fundamentally from that of Germany. (118) It would only 
be a folly to equate the crises of the German and Russian Social Democrats: in Germany the 
bourgeoisie controlled the state; in Russia the state was absolutist and feudal-like, and the 
Russian Social-Democracy was functioning in a medium alien to it. Luxemburg argued that 
it would so much resemble an anachronism to draw a parallel between the present Russian 
situation and that which existed in Germany during the years 1878-90. .. (119)
Lenin himself was self-contradictory while dealing with the two versions of Social- 
Democracy. He, on one hand, believes that the German Social-Democracy is essential for 
Russia, and affirms, on the other, that the particularity of the Russian context demands a break 
with all forms of workers resistance (including that of Germany) and a foundation of a 
particularly Russian experience that must be internationalised: History has now confronted 
us with an immediate task which is more revolutionary than all the immediate tasks that 
confront the proletariat of any other country. The fulfilment of this task.. .places the Russian 
proletariat in the vanguard of the international revolutionary proletariat. (120) More than
being an evaluation of political practice, such a comparison is anxious to emphasise the fact 
that morally and physically both German and Russian workers needed to go through different 
experiences, with a fight against two different monsters. For Lenin, the Anti-socialist Laws 
in Germany were not worse than tsars Russia (121), and the trials awaiting the Russian 
proletariat were neither less severe nor less historically suggestive than those against the 
German working class. On the other hand, Lenin did not see any danger in temporarily 
depreciating the transition to the bourgeois stage of development while carrying out the 
proletarian revolution. He thought so because he could forge the theoretical basis for the jump 
to socialism. The peasantry as a social force, for example, could then be utilised as a 
propulsion for revolution, since, as a majority, it was the practical agent to advance towards 
socialist triumph even far earlier than full industrial proletarianisation could happen. Such a 
conclusion was to respond to the constructive role of the peasants in the 1905 revolution.
Lenins position in this context was against the manner in which the Russian Marxists 
generally had conceived of the struggle for workers emancipation. To a great extent, Lenins 
reinterpretation of scientific socialism on the basis of his new formula of the dictatorship of 
the proletariat and peasantry (1905) was problematic for the rest of the Marxists who still had 
a strong belief in proceeding smoothly to the socialist stage. Trotsky for instance thought that 
Lenins formula was far too untimely, and sought to supplant it through forging his concept of 
permanent revolution in the same year. For many, Lenins formula was not so much a 
question of ideology as was a party and regime legitimacy claim. A political historian might 
well emphasise what Jonathan Frankel described as the possibility of revolutionary Marxism 
to give time to bourgeois democracy.. .to ensure the final defeat of tsarism and to permit the 
Marxist party to transform itself from an underground elite into a mass movement of the 
working class. (122) Lenin himself, on returning to Russia after 1905, became aware of the 
significant role played by the workers who were not entirely unconscious of the Russian
political context. Therefore, he was positively responsive to the demands of the Russian 
proletariat to re-unite with the Mensheviks (123) in order to recover the strength of the 
Russian Social-Democratic movement which had been weakened by the split following the 
Second Party Congress in 1903. (124)
The overall argument raised by Lenin in this respect is an attempt to justify a socialist 
revolution not against bourgeois democracy but autocratic rule. It is worth mentioning that his 
legitimation of the prospect of a socialist revolution in Russia does confirm his justification of 
a revolutionary role of a new type that hardly continues with the Marxian text: a revolution 
not even predicted, let alone theorised, by Marx who had clearly stated that the economical 
emancipation of the working classes is therefore the great end to which every political 
movement ought to be subordinate as a means. (125) Luxemburgs position itself is 
confusing and ambivalent. She herself took different views with regard to Lenins 
programme. Although she was keen not to allow too much freedom for intellectuals to shape 
the workers movement in their fashion, she still had more than a single reason to defend 
Lenins insistence on overlooking the bourgeois element in the Russian context: that was 
mainly because the Russian socialists were not choosers. They were
... obliged to undertake the building of such a [class] organization without the benefit of the formal 
guarantees commonly found under a bourgeois democratic set-up. They do not dispose of the political 
raw material that in other countries is supplied by bourgeois society itself. Like Almighty God they must 
have this organization arise out of the void, so to speak. (126)
Perhaps it was the absence of the bourgeois element which pushed Luxemburg to justify 
Lenins position in relation to the Revolution. He had to take the risk of envisaging a future 
for a Russian state without socio-economic conditions appropriate to the transition to 
socialism.
The particular point of jumping from one stage to an otherwithout having to 
consider varying degrees of difference between Social-Democracy elsewhere and that 
characteristic of Russiawas also the concern of what came to be called Lenins left and 
right opposition. Trotskys 1905 concept of permanent revolution for instance was one of 
the most attractive substitutes to Lenins formula of revolution. Lenins attempts to convert 
the workers struggle against capital into an open struggle against autocracy without a deep 
consideration of the movement of history was Trotskys greatest concern. The concept of 
permanent revolution was rather an assertion of how much Trotsky considered and valued 
the historical necessity of spreading over the Russian Revolution to the rest of Europe, having 
in mind a different formula for the transition to socialism:
[D]emocracy and socialism, for all peoples and countries [represent]...two stages in the development of 
society which are not only entirely distinct but also separated by great distances of time from each other. 
This view was predominant among those Russian Marxists who, in the period of 1905, belonged to the 
left wing of the Second International. (127)
Trotskys development of the concept of permanent revolution with regard to the Russian 
context was in great part divergent from Lenins envisagement of the proletarian revolution 
on the basis of heavy reliance on the peasant question. Probably in considering a different 
formula for the revolution, Trotsky had to think in accordance with what Marx himself 
thought of Russia from the late 1870s until 1882. (128) Marxs view that Russia was 
dissimilar to the rest of Europe so far as revolution was concerned confirms the validity of 
Trotskys intellectual and political position in relation to Bolshevik thinking. Although a 
number of scholars think that Trotsky only followed Marx himself in his theory of permanent 
revolution, it is noteworthy that Marx never had a clear-cut and practical attitude in relation to 
Russia. But Marxs general statements concerning the role of the proletariat in the revolution
show clearly his preoccupation with the permanence of the revolution: .. .it is our interest and 
our task to make the revolution permanent until all the more or less propertied classes have 
been driven from their ruling positions, until the proletariat has conquered state power... 
(129)
In theory, however, Lenin later clearly states in Left-Wing Communism that socialists 
need to go through parliamentary democracy in order to over-rule it; he does not repudiate the 
idea of bourgeois revolution as an indispensable step towards socialist society. For him, it was 
necessary to transcend the very liberal state that the socialists themselves approved of as a 
necessary step towards the popularisation of Marxism and actuation of socialist society. Yet, 
in practical terms he knew, and got in a political morass, that a bourgeois revolution in Russia 
was far from realisable in the short run. In this respect, transcending the liberal state without 
going through it was what made Lenin rely on the agrarian element and forge his concept of 
the dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry, a slogan that became a reminder of the 
specificity of the Bolshevik ideology. (It was later sacrificed to his dictatorship of the 
Proletariat and the poorest sections of society) (130); this was in conflict with the Menshevik 
view of the necessity to forge an alliance with the bourgeois order at first. That was also what 
made problematic Lenins argument for the unity between the proletariat and peasantry. It 
made Lenin adopt the circumstances argument by legitimising his particular view of the 
revolution, party organisation, and the role of the workers (what became later called 
revolution from above, party ultra-centralism, and contempt for the working classes for 
lacking political consciousness.). It was only in his late writings that Lenin resolved such a 
dilemma by articulating the success of the revolution and assuring the Soviet people that 
[s]tate power in Russia has passed into the hands of a new class, namely, the bourgeoisie and 
landowners who had become bourgeois. To this extent the bourgeois-democratic revolution in 
Russia is completed. (131)
2. The Significance of Marx and Engels:
In most of his work, Lenin took pains to forge a definition of revolutionary struggle 
tantamount to Marxs and Engelss approach. But the circumstances and the setting of 
October were particularly unfavourable for a revolution as such. In terms of practice, the 
Revolution of 1917 posed serious problems for most Bolsheviks who preferred to follow the 
commandments of Lenin. That was partly due to the opposition by many opponents to 
Bolshevik policy, and partly to factional struggle within the party itself. (132) Given that most 
revolutions hitherto carried out were merely bourgeois revolutions (with the exception of the 
1871 Commune), as Lenin himself acknowledged, (133) contriving, or even planning, a 
proletarian revolution seemed contingent and uncertain. A proletarian revolution needs 
substituting majority rule for minority rule, the people for parliament. Yet, the bourgeois 
element in the Russian Revolution was, as Robert Daniels argues, somehow artificially 
imposed. The problem Daniels writes is the ridiculously short durationeight months 
assigned to a bourgeois regime in Russia. The Russian Revolution was immature and 
telescoped. (134)
To fathom the nature of the Bolshevik Revolution, it is necessary to realise, I would 
argue, that the Bolshevik seizure of power had from the outset a purely theoretical 
connotation. Everything depended on how Lenin had to theorise the process for such a 
seizure. Lenin certainly was aware of Russias position as a vulnerable nation state, but he, 
unlike Kautsky or Plekhanov, saw that a revolution as such could not be considered as an 
abortive untimely attempt to change society. (135) The then oppressive state as he asserted 
had to be toppled by any sorts of means. What was most necessary in Marxs theory 
according to Lenin was the necessity to smash the oppressive state machine (136) at any 
cost in the hope of liberating the proletariat. Lenins call for rushing the dictatorship of the
proletariat was not without a premise. He based his main argument on a re-reading of the co
founders of communism, mainly in matters concerning time of the revolution and its 
relationship to the state.
The central problem facing Lenin was, it seems to me, his fixation on workers 
conditions in France, especially during the Second Empire. The experience of the 1871 Paris 
Commune was a crowning one for Lenin, and his conception of a working class revolution 
was greatly conditioned by such an experience. Moreover, Marxs attitude to the Commune, I 
believe, was what accounted for Lenins earlier theory of the dictatorship of the proletariat 
and the peasantry. On the other hand, it was in The State and Revolution that Lenin 
capitalised Marxs and Engelss views on the Commune, and forged his full-fledged theory of 
revolution. Apart from the theory which he emphasised in the The State and Revolution, 
Lenin made use of both Marx and Engels in such works as WBD. As an interpreter of the 
Marxian text, he put so much weight on the necessity to understand and put at work Marxism 
in circumstances, albeit inopportune, responsive to a certain revolutionary logic that might 
(with legitimate claims) turn away from the original text. (137) For Lenin, a Russian 
revolution carried out by a united people against a coercive state was not radically different 
from the Commune. Workers and peasants conditions in early twentieth-century Russia 
were not systematically different from the condition of peasants and workers in France in 
1871. The historical necessity of untimely revolution was not against the logic of the 
science of history as founded by the authors of The German Ideology. Russias ancien regime 
resembled France of the second Empire. In Russia, capitalism was not the mode of economic 
organisation, and industrialism could not be achieved in the short run.
Lenin starts out chapter III of The State and Revolution by the following paragraph:
It is well known that several months before the Commune, in autumn 1870, Marx warned the workers 
of Paris that any attempt to overthrow the government would be the folly of desperation. But when, in 
March 1871, a decisive battle was imposed upon the workers and they accepted the challenge when the 
uprising had become a fact, Marx greeted the proletarian revolution with the greatest joy despite the 
unfavourable auguries. Marx did not fall back upon a pedantic condemnation of a premature* 
movement as the notorious Russian renegade from Marxism, Plekhanov, who began in November 1905 
by writing encouragingly about the workers and peasants struggle, but after December 1905 cried out 
just like a liberal: They should not have taken to arms. (138)
Explicit in this statement is the conviction that Marxs position was adjusted by the objective 
circumstances leading to the Commune. This means that Marxs theory about the timing of 
revolution was flexible. It means also that before the Commune Marx had partly overlooked 
the positive outcome of a mass rebellion meant to overthrow the existent oppressive state 
order. For Lenin, Marxs reconsideration of his views on workers agitation in Paris was not a 
wholly unexpected reaction. Nor was it a theoretical position constituting self-betrayal. Marx 
changed his views because he saw the fruitful results of the Commune. What was most 
perplexing was that while the founder of communism, on the one hand, greeted the 
proletarian revolutionalbeit inopportune Plekhanov, on the other, totally failed to follow 
Marxs path. Both the revolutions of 1905 and 1917 happened with unfavourable auguries, 
but that could not be a pretext for condemning mass action against the present government 
which had to be resisted and toppled by all sorts of means.
For Lenin, it was Marx who founded the political legitimacy for the violent overthrow 
of the bourgeois democracy established by the capitalist system. The smashing of the state 
machine by violent means is entirely answerable to the logic of the movement of history as is 
theorised by Marx and Engels. (139) That means that to do historical justice to the doctrine of 
the authors of the Manifesto, one has to avail oneself of the most workable tools to implement
such a justice. In order to adopt a tactic akin to that of the designers of the Paris Commune, 
Bolsheviks had to forge a practice not alien to the reality and circumstances in which the 
proletarian Revolution had to take place in Russia. In this context, revolutionary struggle 
against the ancien regime had to adapt itself to a situation where the workers were neither a 
dominant force nor the majority of the population. It had also to furnish its revolutionary 
spirit with the necessity to act in unfavourable economic conditions. Now the historical 
necessity of a revolt like the Commune was indissociable from the necessity to encourage and 
take part in revolutions like that of 1905 or 1917. Lenin legitimises this position by pointing 
out his new theory of revolution:
He [Marx] regarded die mass revolutionary movement, even though it did not achieve its aim, as an 
historical experience of enormous importance, as a certain advance on the part of the worldwide 
proletarian revolution, as a practical step which was more important than hundreds of programmes and 
arguments. To analyse his experience, to draw tactical lessons from it, to re-examine his theory in the 
light of it: this was the task set for himself by Marx. (140)
3/ The Significance of Peasant Participation in the Revolution:
There is one central issue closely related to Lenins general conception of the 
proletarian revolution. It is the peasant question. In order to adopt a practice in harmony with 
a theory specific to the Russian context, the communists had to think of a formula of political 
power which could include also the majority of the peasants. This is how the revolution could 
impose its popular character; the specificity of peasant participation in the revolt was pivotal 
in Lenins theory of revolution. The importance of peasant participation goes back to the 
years between 1896 andl902. Lenins concern with peasant struggle is illustrated in his To 
the Rural Poor (1903). Having observed the significant results of an insurgence by the 
peasants in southwest rural Russia in 1902, Lenin decided then to consider seriously the
importance of peasant struggle for emancipation. (141) In To the Rural Poor Lenin reflected 
on the revolutionary character inherent in the peasantry. (142) The question of peasant 
violence during revolutionary struggle was purely tactical for Lenin. He could not, of course, 
theorise a premise for legitimating such a violence if he had not observed the efficiency of 
peasants revolt against the Russian aristocracy since 1896. There was however a practical 
question that put grave constraints on Lenins overall theory of revolution: it was the current 
Russian phase of economic organisation which was responsive more to peasant demands. As 
the context allowed a qualitative change of strategy, at least in terms of theory, the question of 
engaging only the industrial proletariat posed serious objective problems for a revolution 
solely carried out by the workers. It was then indispensable that the majority of the working 
population, the peasantry, would take an active revolutionary part in preparing for the 
revolution.
After 1905, Lenin was only in a position that necessitated his unconditional support 
for the peasant question: he partly supported peasant violence and uprisings and could justify 
his constant belief in peasant militancy by the fact that the peasants, after all, needed only 
further political education and a leadership that would guide them towards class 
consciousness. Once they conceived themselves as rural proletariat, they would engage 
politically and ideologically in committed revolt against the conditions that made of them a 
backward class. According to Lenin, the question for the socialists resided in achieving a step- 
by-step peasant consciousness: the first step was, of course, to recover the lands stolen; the 
second to engage peasants in revolutionary level work; the third to give away small farm units 
and prepare for a class transformation from a rural to an industrial proletariat.
However, Lenins emphasis on peasant revolt raised the concern of the Mensheviks 
and other groups. Legitimising peasant violence on a mere suggestion that peasants needed 
only time to become pure revolutionaries seemed to most sceptics to be a Bolshevik venture
the result of which was unpredictable. Another argument that could be raised in response to 
Lenins plans was that, once the peasants took possession of the lands, they would fight for a 
permanent seizure of such lands. Then the efforts for an unconditional help for the peasants 
would seem utterly futile and unworkable; that might well usher in more violence and social 
instability. (143) Moreover, Lenins long-term plan for peasant unity with the workers can be 
interpreted as a measure far from favourable to the peasants, mainly because in expropriating 
the richer fannersthe Kulaksthe poor peasants would only work to provide the cities with 
food and other goods; their unconditional support for an agricultural policy unable to give 
them a comfortable position would mean their impoverishment; Lenins formula can then be 
interpreted as a formula for peasant self-sacrifice; history teaches us here that the peasants in 
Soviet Russia were neither given the revolutionary role promised nor enjoyed a comfortable 
social status.
In theory, the formula of alliance suggested by Lenin was purely circumstantial. It 
followed from his general theory about revolution formulated first in his early writings and 
developed in his The State and Revolution. In late works such as The April Theses the 
necessity of peasant participation in the revolution was still a defining condition dictated by 
Lenin himself. Lenins theoretical argument for the necessity of a proletarian-peasant 
revolution was accentuated in his April Theses. Thesis six clearly expresses the importance 
of the peasant question in Lenins political agenda: The weight of emphasis in the agrarian 
programme to be shifted to Soviets of Agricultural Labourers Deputies, which means that all 
confiscated lands had to be nationalised and poor peasants organised under separate 
Soviets of Deputies of Poor Peasants (144) The point that Lenin struggled to emphasise was 
that without participation of the peasantry preserving the gains of the revolution was an 
unachievable goal, mainly because of the small size of the working class and the fear of a 
counter-revolution. To advance his theory of proletarian-peasant revolutionwhich had
traded under the slogan dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry since 1905 Lenin 
envisaged a proletarian state legitimised by the unconditional support of the peasants. The 
peasants had as a legitimate demand to recover their usurped lands taken over by the Tsar in 
the late nineteenth century; they had to struggle for such a right, and Lenins political project 
could give them every reassurance to restore their properties. For Lenin, a political 
reassurance of the peasants was enough to call upon them to help overthrow, first, the old 
regime, and, second, the transitory bourgeois state that had to be installed once the revolution 
took place.
The circumstances argument was specific in that it drew on perplexing suggestions 
that differed in character from mainstream Russian Marxism as represented by Plekhanov, or 
revolutionary Democracy as represented by the Spartacus Group. (145) This theory, which 
later (20th c) became synonymous with Marx and Marxism, was formulated in the Russian 
context and could gain for itself a constructive theoretical ground peculiar to the changing 
circumstances both in pre-revolution Russia and post-revolution Soviet Union. What is worth 
mentioning in this context is how Lenin used the circumstances argument in relation to 
Marxs and Engelss views of the Paris Commune. He did so in order to draw on a new 
formula for a proletarian revolution. Using his circumstances argument, Lenin could also 
make a strong case by arguing for a necessary alliance between workers and peasants. The 
importance of his early ideas about the necessity of worker-peasant coalition derives mainly 
from the fact that he deployed his doctrinal knowledge of previous Marxist literature in 
formulating an ideological standpoint as regards a socialist revolution. Lenins work from 
1905 up to the eclipse of the Second International was characterised by a hard-line belief in 
the positive role of all peasants in a proletarian revolution. His other work, however 
especially of 1917 and afterwas to exclude what he called petty-bourgeois peasants from 
the circle of worker-peasant struggle for a socialist state. If Lenin opted for a policy wherein
the peasantry was central and deeply entrenched, why should he in later works write off the 
role assigned to the whole peasantry? If Lenin believed that socialism could not be achieved 
unless a bourgeois order be established first, why did he then radically adjust this position in 
The April Theses of 1917? If he changed his views for organisational reasons, who then 
was so much instrumental in such a change? If he partially abandoned his argument for the 
alliance between proletarians and peasants because of a change in political circumstances, 
why did he not advocate Trotskys conception of permanent revolution, although his 
position was akin to that of Trotsky especially in matters concerning a European proletarian 
revolution? (146)
The April Theses marked a new development in Lenins design of the post-revolution 
Soviet state. It set forth the basic structure and function of the proletarian state. Lenins 
decision to abandon his early advocacy of the dictatorship of the proletariat and the 
peasantry for his belief in the dictatorship of the proletariat and the poorest peasantry (my 
italics) was an ideological transformation of great historical importance; it was a 
transformation whose later implications showed how Lenins theoretical position was rather 
constructed by the very circumstances that he wanted to transcend. The April Theses were to 
attest to the practical solution which should be adopted in the Russian context. Such a solution 
presupposed that a movement of the masses does not always take its immediate answers from 
a theory forged in political and social conditions often related to a distant context. What Lenin 
did exactly was, first, to assume and, second, try to convince both the Bolsheviks and the 
Russian people that the peasant question neither constituted a national problem nor prevented 
the revolution. His 1917 partial departure from his peasant argument can be interpreted in two 
ways: (1) he knew that the conflict of interests arising from peasant retrieval of the land was 
an irremediable problem, or (2) found it that such an assumption as dictatorship of the
peasantry was rather too ambitious, and far too unrealistic to realise a socialist state following 
Marxs theory. In view of this, the whole argument for a Commune-like state is contingent.
It was in The State and Revolution that Lenins dictatorship of the proletariat and 
peasantry revealed the widening gulf between the role of the workers and that of the 
peasantry. That gulf was, it seems to me, one of the defining traits of Lenins departure from 
the Marxian text. The theoretical entanglement of Lenins work arises from the very 
contradictions that follow from the characteristic difference of his early and post-1917 work. 
It can be said that his unabashed abandonment of the dictatorship of the whole peasantry in 
favour of only the poorest section had a particularly fruitful implication for Lenins 
exponents: the abandonment could be justified as an ideological necessity which would serve 
rather than damage the peasant cause, since liquidating the rural aristocracy was a primary 
step towards the entire emancipation of the peasant class. Yet, it is quite evident, I would 
argue, that the difference between Marxs and Lenins formulae of dictatorshipproletariat 
and proletariat and poorest peasantrycondemned Lenins theory to become reductive in 
character, mainly for failing to accommodate other categories of the peasantry, and for foiling 
a purely ideological element on proletarian-peasant struggle. The other question is: what role 
could the poorest of the peasantry play in dismantling the old state machine? Although 
assuming that the poorest section in society constituted the majority was a truthful claim, 
Lenin could not deny that the role of that section was not central by any means.
IV/ Towards the Soviet State:
1/ The Late Lenin and the Rejection of Social Democracy:
Archie Brown has recently argued that there exists two Lenins rather than one. (147): 
a Lenin who identified on a centralist argumentas theorised in WBDcalling for a 
revolutionary vanguard and strictly-disciplined Party, and a Lenin who in the State and the
Revolution seems to have revised his political convictions by showing much more orthodox 
and less doctrinaire views. (148) Such an argument bears some truth in its claim that there are 
two Lenins. Yet the concern that may be raised in response to this argument is whether the 
Lenin of WBD differed fundamentally from that of the State and Revolution. True there were 
two Lenins, I would argue, but I think that the existence of two Lenins had to do more with 
WBD and the 1917 April Theses than WBD and the State and Revolution. The Lenin of the 
State and Revolution did continue, as A.J. Polan argues, with that of WBD. (149) While Lenin 
of WBD worked out the early phase of Bolshevism by relying mostly on the role of the Social- 
Democrats to guide the workers towards revolution, the Lenin we find in the April Theses and 
later work breaks chiefly from the theoretical premise of Social-Democracy. He announced 
his rejection of the RSDLP and its supporting international movement, the Second 
International. Such a question concerns the main two stages of the development of Lenin, first 
as the leader of the majority group (Bolsheviks) in the RSDLP, and the second as a prominent 
figure to depart from Social-Democracy altogether.
Lenin learnt the ABC of Marxism from three main sources: (1) the Marxian text (Marx 
and Engels); (2) European working class movements; and (3) Russian Marxism as developed 
with Plekhanov, Zasulich, and Akselrod. Practically, however, it was the specific context of 
Russia which made him both a forceful interpreter of Marxism and an ambivalent interlocutor 
of the Marxian text. It was such a context which also inspired his advocacy of Social- 
Democracy. Social Democracy, the basis of the revolutionary proletarian movement since the 
1880s, was a very misleading concept in relation to the Russian context. Lenin, for our 
purposes, assigned a primary role to this concept in his early work, and related it to the 
success of the German working class movement against Bismarck. Nevertheless, he departed 
from Social-Democracy both as a conception and a practical premise some three years before 
the October Revolution. There were two basic reasons for such a departure. While the first
was organisational, the second was purely technical, as the name social democracy itself 
posed a problem of signification. To treat these two questions in relation to Lenins analysis, I 
quote here a passage from What should be the Name of our Party (1964)
We must repeat that we are Marxists and that we take as our basis the Communist Manifesto, which has 
been distorted and betrayed by the Social-Democrats on its two main points: (1) the working men have 
no country: "defence of the fatherland" in an imperialist war is a betrayal of socialism; and (2) the 
Marxist doctrine of the state has been distorted by the Second International. (150)
Here, two defining facts Lenin criticises in order to justify his departure from Social- 
Democracy: the rise of defencism in the workers movement and the abuse of Marxism by 
the Second International. These were far from local experiences by the Russian working class, 
albeit Plekhanov and the Mensheviks lived the experience in great part. If we take the first 
reason, what would we infer? The assertion the working men have no country does pose the 
question of Marxs and Engelss valuing of the international significance of the workers 
unity against imperialist war. To this extent the very principle of scientific socialism is 
focussed on the slogan workers of the world unite as is broached in the Manifesto. And this 
implies that any consolidation of the economic and political rights of the proletariat should 
follow from this principle. It means that any of the workers parties that does not advance the 
internationalism of the workers struggle should in no way be called Marxist. By defenders 
of the fatherland Lenin means the Marxist trends that trade under what he calls social- 
chauvinism, that is, the very movement which advocates support of the bourgeois 
government in its war against other imperialist countries.
For Lenin, the mongers of defencism were the socialists who had a loose and 
ambivalent conception of the class struggle. They are socialists but not true socialists who 
believe in the international significance of the workers unity: your country wages a war
against another, and you will not show any sympathy with the proletariat of that country. The 
position of the defencists (social-chauvinists) was characteristic of Plekhanov in Russia, and 
others who, in their hurry to gain a favourable position in Vetat (151) had secured for 
themselves a place in the bourgeois government: These people are our class enemies. They 
have gone over to the bourgeoisie (152)
The second fact which compelled Lenin to renounce Social-Democracy was what he 
called bankruptcy of the Second International. (153) The bankruptcy, as it were, was 
caused by the rise of pseudo-bourgeois practices in the Second International. In purely 
political terms, the rise of the Centrist tendency in the social democratic parties (Germany, 
France, Russia, etc) attested to the failure of Social-Democracy to advance its emancipatory 
claims. The Centre consists of people who vacillate between the social-chauvinists and the 
true internationalists. It is a realm of honeyed petty-bourgeois phrases, of internationalism in 
word and cowardly opportunism and fawning on the social-chauvinists in deed (154) While 
the representative of defencism is Plekhanov, the leader of the Centre is Kautsky. (155) To 
this extent, the failure of both the social-chauvinists and Centrists to lead the workers 
struggle brought with it the failure of Social-Democracy as a proletarian movement. In this 
instance, the inability of Plekhanov to remain faithful to scientific socialism and the failure of 
Kautsky to maintain the significance of proletarian revolution condemned Social-Democracy 
in its entirety. Following from this, Social-Democracy became Lenin quotes Luxemburg 
a stinking corpse (156)
Apart from the practical question whether Social-Democracy kept its emancipatory 
promises both in Russia and Germany, Lenin raised the theoretical implication of the name 
social-democracy itself. Here, by referring to Marxian theory of revolution, Lenin wanted 
anxiously to prove that such a label had been erroneous from its inception.
The name " Social-Democracy" is scientifically incorrect, as Marx frequently pointed out, in particular, 
in the Critique of the Gotha Programme in 1875, and as Engels re-affirmed in a more popular form in 
1894 [Engels, Preface to Internationales aus dem Velkstaat (1871-1875)]. From capitalism mankind can 
pass directly only to socialism, i.e., to the social ownership of the means of production and the 
distribution of products according to the amount of work performed by each individual. Our Party looks 
farther ahead: socialism must inevitably evolve gradually into communism, upon the banner of which is 
inscribed the motto, "From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs". (157)
The emphasis on the adverb scientifically in this quotation means that Lenin wants to 
counterpoise Marxs theory of scientific socialism to what he believes to be the unscientific 
claim of Social-Democracy. By doing so, he also emphasises the role of revolution in 
transforming society from one stage of politico-economic development to another. The very 
argument Lenin seeks to advance here is that following the Manifesto there is only one path 
that humanity can follow historically and dialectically: from capitalism mankind can pass 
only (my emphasis) to socialism. According to this analysis, existence of a social democratic 
society is both technically and economically in transgression of the doctrine taught by 
scientific socialism. Therefore, believing that there can be an intermediate stage between 
capitalism and socialism is a completely parochial and mistaken interpretation of Marxism. In 
this respect, Lenins emphasis on what he calls a faulty exegesis was injected by his own 
reading of the German Social-Democracy in the first place and the Russian variant in the 
second: one minimised the role of the world proletariat, and the other reduced revolution to 
petty-bourgeois reformism. Thus, both amounted to a an opportunism which sought to 
depreciate proletarian struggle for emancipation.
2/ The Rejection of the Democratic State:
The label Social-Democracy, Lenin argued, was also a free-floating slogan which had 
to do with the failure of the generation of the Second International to grasp the true meaning 
of democracy. It was Karl Kautsky who hopelessly defended democracy as a category for 
propaganda. (158) It was a category fraught with misleading implications. In whose benefit a 
pure democracy was was the most compelling question in Lenins thinking.
It is sheer mockery of the working and exploited people to speak of pure democracy, of democracy in 
general, of equality, freedom and universal rights when the workers and all working people are ill-fed, 
ill-clad, ruined and worn out, not only as a result of capitalist wage slavery, but as a consequence of 
four years of predatory war, while the capitalists and profiteers remain in possession of the "property" 
usurped by them and the "ready-made" apparatus of state power. This is tantamount to trampling on the 
basic truths of Marxism which has taught the workers: you must take advantage of bourgeois 
democracy which, compared with feudalism, represents a great historical advance, but not for one 
minute must you forget the bourgeois character of this "democracy, it's historical conditional and 
limited character. Never share the "superstitious belief' in the "state" and never forget that the state even 
in the most democratic republic, and not only in a monarchy, is simply a machine for the suppression of 
one class by another. (159)
What is of particular significance in Lenins view here is his critique of democracy as a 
particular form of government. Democracy for him not only constitutes an obstruction to 
freedom and equality but also embodies a form of rule by which a dominant class 
subjugates another. For him, as he analyses it in The State and Revolution, [a] democratic 
republic is the best possible political shell for capitalism, and therefore, once capital has got 
control of this excellent shell... it establishes its power so securely, so firmly that no change of 
individuals, of institutions, or of parties in the bourgeois democratic republic can shake this 
power. (160) Two major reasons make up the complexity and therefore affectedness of
democracy as such. They are capitalist wage slavery, which means exploitation of one class 
by another, and World War I, the war of imperialism. Working class exploitation at home and 
their engagement by their respective governments in the struggle with other proletarians 
constitute the savagery of capitalism and imperialism.
Lenins very insistence on the necessity to resist the superstitious belief in the 
state does highlight the concern that Russian society was in sharp conflict with the existing 
state. That was mainly because the instrument of bourgeois class rule, namely democracy, 
was responsive only to the possessing class, and of very little benefit to the workers. Lenin 
focussed on this conflict by arguing that the democratism of the democratic republic does 
not express the will of the majority. It is always constricted by the narrow framework of 
capitalist exploitation, and consequently always remains essentially democratism for the 
minority, only for the propertied classes, only for the rich. (161) Capitalism and 
democratism reinforce each other only because wealth is solely associated with the very 
class which spreads the power of capital inside the democratic republic and in full response to 
the political power that constitutes the state itself. If the state in a democratic republic is not in 
the hands of the class which owns such forms of rule as democracy it would cease to be 
above society. Therefore, the state is the sum result of the conflict that the struggle between 
wage labour and capital creates. It is for this reason that the proletariat must never, according 
to Lenin, believe in a possible reconciliation between the state and society on a purely 
democratic basis, mainly because the state is a machine for the suppression of one class by 
another. (162)
In response to all this Lenin confirms that the only possible way to terminate 
exploitation and class rule is to eradicate the state. But, for him, it is a folly to speak of a 
simple eradication of the state by totally abolishing it from its inception. There are two 
essential stages leading to the stateless society: 1) violent revolution; and 2) the withering
away of the state. He reached this conclusion in the light of Engels Anti-Duhring. (163) It 
was Engels, in Lenins view, who theorised the necessity to go through the socialist 
revolution and the expropriation of the means of production in the name of the whole 
society, then the state in general...can only wither away (164) By tacitly referring to 
Marxs Critique o f the Gotha Programme (1976) Lenin emphasised the mistakes committed 
by the German Social-Democrats who according to him, and following Marxs critique, had a 
completely erroneous conception of the state. Their slogan of the free peoples state 
reflected a mistaken concept of democracy that misread Marxs and Engels theory. (165) 
Apart from Marxs critique, Lenin emphasised that the Social Democracy of the early 
twentieth century had much more serious anomalies. It represented an utter departure from the 
guiding principles of Marxism. Dialectics, Lenin wrote, are replaced by eclecticismthis is 
the most conventional and widespread phenomenon in present-day official social- democratic 
literature in relation to Marxism. (166)
3/ The Soviet State as a Means for the Withering Away of the State:
Lenins April Theses is probably one of his most expressive texts about the 
envisaged form of the Soviet state. The Theses build on three basic concepts which became 
later the guiding principle for the Bolsheviks: the Soviets, the Communist Party, and the 
Communist International (the Comintern). It can be argued that such concepts are 
indissociable. The soviets are the guiding form of the government that responds to mass 
representation ... the Soviets of Workers' Deputies are the only possible form of 
revolutionary government... (167); the Communist Party represented the revolutionary party 
which would buttress the gains of October at the national level (168); and the Comintern 
attested to the solidarity of the proletarian movement worldwide and its preparation for the 
world revolution: a New International (169) According to Lenin these three components of
the revolution would only be constructive when the proletarian mass movement dispenses 
with parliamentary democracy, the Social-Democratic Party, and the Second International. 
The assertion that the Soviets had to be the sole representative attested to Lenins rejection of 
the parliamentary republic mainly because reformist democracy meant a negation of 
peoples freedom and free will. Transferring state power to the Soviets is a key reminder of 
the proletarian state that is advancing towards its withering away. Lenins argument in favour 
of a revolutionary government presupposes a radical re-reading of the form of political rule 
that should be adopted. This argument rests on the critique of the form of government which 
precedes the Soviets, namely the Provisional Government. Far from standing for the 
proletarian cause, he contends, the Provisional Government had been entangled in the 
legitimation of the imperialist war. No support for the Provisional Government...a 
government of capitalists should cease to be an imperialist government (170). The alternative 
had then to be sought in the Soviets:
But I ask you, is there a country in Europe, a bourgeois, democratic, republican country, where anything 
like these Soviets exists? You have to admit there isn't. Nowhere is there, nor can there be, a similar 
institution because you must have one or the other: either a bourgeois government with "plans" for 
reforms like those just mapped out to us and proposed dozens of times in every country but remaining 
on paper, or the institution to which they are now referring, the new type of "government" created by 
the revolution, examples of which can be found only at a time of greatest revolutionary upsurge, as in 
France, 1792 and 1871, or in Russia, 1905. The Soviets are an institution which does not exist in any 
ordinaiy bourgeois-parliamentary state and cannot exist side by side with a bourgeois government. They 
are the new, more democratic type of state which we in our Party resolutions call a peasant-proletarian 
democratic republic, with power belonging solely to the Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies. 
(171)
According to Lenin, the new revolutionary government follows characteristically from the 
one theorised by Marx and Engels who saw the necessity to move to socialism through the 
tactical adoption of a programme of action dictated by the need for a gradualist transition to 
the socialist society.
For Lenin, the transition here comes in accordance with the foundation of the 
workers state as is first embodied in the Soviets. This transitional state does confirm 
proletarian action towards the dictatorship of the proletariat, being solely the combined 
effort of allying the peasants with the workers through the mediation of the vanguard. Here, 
and, by claiming to be in complete harmony with the historical materialist approach, Lenin 
asserts that a Social-Democratic party becomes fully useless and has to be decomposed and 
replaced by a workers party which combines the struggle of the proletariat with the leading 
role of the intelligentsia. This led him later to declare the demise of the RSDLP and the birth 
of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU 1921-1922). Nevertheless, the formation 
of the CPSU on grounds of unifying the national and international struggle of the workers 
could only function in the presence of an international mass movement that would break away 
with the bourgeois-reformist tendency of the Second International. In this instance Lenins 
departure from the concept of social democracy was the inauguration of a Third International, 
being based on total rejection of bourgeois democracy, something that was most manifest in 
his dissolution of the Constituent Assembly in 1918. (172)
Lenins decision to abolish the Second International and replace it by the Comintern 
was primarily responsive to the character of the October Revolution. This is clearly 
articulated in Marxism and Revisionism (1946) where he basically points out two factors 
standing after the abolition. First was the importance of the Bolshevik Party, and second the 
heroes of the Second International suffered bankruptcy. Lenins rejection of the political 
representation of the Second International was nothing but a rejection of what he called
petty-bourgeois democracy characteristic of the Social-Democratic movement. (173) The 
Communist International had to do with the formation of the Communist Party of the Soviet 
Union (CPSU), the party that practically allies itself to the concept of a workers state, that 
is, a state that is entirely in tune with society, since the dictatorship of the proletariat and the 
poorest peasantry is the most developed form of the harmony between the state and society. 
The basic characteristic of Lenins International was that the workers struggle should be 
primarily injected by the theoretical struggle of professional revolutionaries who had the 
capacity to educate the workers in most matters relating to the party and revolution. Thus the 
first step would begin from one single country (later, socialism in one country with Stalin), 
then spread it out elsewhere.
The importance of Lenins concept of a disciplined communist party is a defining 
principle for establishing the Third International and for the idea of the withering away of the 
state. Lenin, however, was not keen to dictate his own view of the Comintern without taking 
as essential the role assigned to the party tradition at home. Now that a party tradition was 
established (Lenins concern since 1903) in Russia, the working class movement would 
definitely benefit from a constructive relationship between the state and society, since, and in 
principle, there would be very little difference to eradicate once the vestiges of the state 
machine are finally smashed. Yet, what was most paradoxical about the formula of 
revolution and the withering away of the state as thought by Lenin was Lenins very 
vacillation between the necessity of the party as an ideological agent of changeand of 
consolidating the workers stateand the necessity to smash irrevocably the state when its 
constituents (police, army, bureaucracy, etc) are no longer required. The question of freeing 
the workers state from its statist character, as John Hoffman reminds us, was both historically 
and ideologically bound. Lenins workers state derives from a political model, which is 
basically illiberal and authoritarian in character. (174) The specific premise for such an
authoritarian character has something to do with Lenins legitimation of a socialism by 
transcending the practical element of the democratic republic. (175)
The paradox here is of an organisational nature: how can we reach such a position 
the Marxian stateless societywhile the instruments for the change were ideologically 
dictated by the authoritarian trap (in Hoffmans words) at the same time when the rest of 
society was both objectively (socio-economic) and subjectively (education and consciousness) 
bound to a state system emanating from political coercion? Moreover, how can we eradicate 
the state at the same time when the party leadership badly needs the existence of such a state 
in order to legitimise its rule? One of Lenins gravest mistakes in this respect it to confuse the 
roles of the proletariat and the vanguard. (176) In doing so, he confirms that the party will not 
cease existing, and the state will exist as long as the party exists. Therefore, the communist 
state envisaged by Lenin, I firmly argue, will rise as a leviathan whose ultimate aim is to 
serve the party which speaks in the name of the world proletariat. The party will keep 
functioning, mainly because its mission is international, and the state will be kept intact until 
the communist stage is reached. Such a dimension of the state resembles so much the 
leviathan dimension of Hobbess sovereign which will be addressed in the final Part of 
this thesis.
On the other hand, Lenins advancement of a Third International and his standpoint 
against the Second International do raise some cause for concern. The relationship between 
the Comintern and the Communist Party was rather technically and contextually bound; while 
the latter was a party strengthened by the October revolution itself, the former was only a far
fetched utopia, since the promised world revolution would normally necessitate both an 
internationalisation of the class struggle and an adaptable theorisation of the concept of the 
vanguard, a theorisation which would go beyond the national experience of the Communist 
Party. Lenins theory of the leading role of the party is found most wanting, since a world
revolution as he theorised, I would argue, could not happen unless the international working 
class movement be harnessed by the creation of worldwide national parties that would follow 
from a socialist (in the scientific sense) rather than a Social-Democratic experience. It was 
thus unrealistic to conceive of a Communist International while such countries as Poland and 
Austria, for instance, had a relatively small working class. It was for these reasons, and 
specifically for the complexity of the formula of a world emancipation of workers, that Stalin 
later regressed to the concept of socialism in one country, a concept that he had to readapt to 
the most required transformation of Soviet Union into a highly industrialized society.
Lenins withering away of the state thesis also ran into serious difficulty when 
objective circumstances, such as the Civil War, pushed him to retreat to more rigid and 
undemocratic policies like War Communism. Next Part of this thesis will take up such a 
difficulty and shed some light on how Lenins withering away formula was turned into rule 
by coercion, and how Lenin bequeathed the Soviet authoritarian state to his successor, Stalin. 
The following Part will also examine how the Soviet despotic state advanced to its logical end 
(demise) when Gorbachev introduced his famous perestroika and glasnost.
Summary
  Lenins theory of revolution has to do with his adoption of Social-Democracy as early as 
the 1890s. His adoption of Social-Democratic work was also closely associated with his 
critique of economism and trade union consciousness.
 It was in his What is to be Done? that Lenin advanced his Social-Democratic theory and the 
necessity to combine economic and political struggle.
  Luxemburg in particular firmly argues that Social Democracy does not contradict with 
spontaneity.
  In most of his early work, Lenin considered the German Social-Democracy as an example 
to follow. He also emphasised the importance of three forms of struggle: political, economic, 
and theoretical. For him, without such three forms the workers are defenceless.
  Lenin also argued that Party centralism was an essential condition for the success of the 
coming revolution. He was criticised for such a position by opponents such as the Mensheviks 
(Martov, etc.) and exponents like Luxemburg and Trotsky.
  In most of his work, Lenin made use of Marxs and Engels views in the hope of justifying 
his coming revolution. Lenin also modified Marxs dictatorship of the proletariat and turned 
it into dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry. He justified such a modification by 
arguing that the Russian context demanded a reinterpretation of Marxian theory.
  In his late work (April Theses, The State and Revolution, etc.), Lenin rejects Social- 
Democracy and calls for a Communist Party. For him, the democratic republic could not 
represent working-class will, and has to be dismantled and replaced by a soviet socialist 
state. He also argued that the withering away of the state can only occur after the bourgeois 
state is smashed and a workers state established.
Part 2
The Crisis: From the Authoritarian State to the 
Collapse
Introduction:
The development of Leninism into what came to be called Bolshevik thinking poses a 
number of intriguing questions concerning the extent to which the Bolshevik ideology 
remained in harmony with the Marxian text. This, on the other hand, begs the question how 
much socialist was the Soviet state, first after the October Revolution, and second in the wake 
of Lenins death in 1924. This remark evokes also a number of suggestions the most 
important of which is whether socialism as thought by Marx and Engels became the practical 
element of post-Revolution Russia: whether the lessons learnt from the 1918 Civil War forced 
the Bolshevik leadership to think seriously in terms of the Marxism of the 1880s and 1890s 
and seek a form of socialism that would in great part resemble the one long predicted by 
Marx; and whether Stalin, Lenins self-proclaiming heir, fulfilled Lenins promise of the 
workers state.
To a neutral audience the Soviet collapse in 1991 is a fact of history. To an expert, 
however, the collapse could be explained in many ways. First, the Soviet Union collapsed in 
1991 because there is something wrong about its history: it could be that the starting point 
the October Revolutionwas simply wrongly thought and carried out. Second, there was 
nothing wrong with such a revolution but that the political circumstances that followed 
prevented the system from developing properly; or that perhaps Lenin did his best and could 
save the Revolution from failure but his heir, Stalin, spoilt the whole work by deviating from 
what Lenin had preached. To a scholar particularly interested in the life and times of systems 
and ideologies, these questions and observations are much more important than the event 
itself, that is, the demise. The demise is but the symptom, while the crisiswhich is far from 
being the demise itselfis the malady. It is for this purpose that I have chosen to deal with 
what I call the Soviet crisis in this part. This part primarily tends to remind the reader that the
inconsistency of Lenins thinking, which I have partly broached in Part one, led to a 
pathological socialism. This, as I argue in this part, did usher in an authoritarianism which in 
the last analysis turned against the very system and caused its demise. Leninism, the Marxism 
of its time as Stalin suggests, could but give birth to Stalinism as the Leninism of its time. 
This part discusses the crisis of Soviet socialism which began with War Communism, 
mediated by the First Five-Year Plan and Socialism in One Country, and ended with 
Gorbachevs Perestroika.
1/ Roots of the Leviathan:
1/ The Civil War and the New Soviet State:
After the October triumph the most difficult task awaiting Lenin and the other 
Bolsheviks was how to preserve the gains of the revolution and how to keep the support of the 
working classes. Probably the most unwanted scenario that the Bolsheviks least expected was 
that the country would be tom by a civil war. While the nation was still recovering from the 
effects of World War I, at the same time when the Soviet state was still in embryo, the 
vestiges of the ancien regime seem to have been revived in the form of reaction. The forces 
that were once an integral part of dual power (1) and which represented the liberal- 
bourgeois trend in the Provisional Governmentand who now were deemed as parasites 
did not give up hope; nor did they cast their last weapons and look for passive reintegration in 
the then uncompromising Soviet government. The lessons of October did teach them that they 
had to rally round a cause whose defenders were the Kulaks, churchmen, and the rest of the 
groups whose class interests were severely affected by the revolutionary government of the 
soviets. The fact that October represented a new revolutionary order was a direct threat to the 
possessing classes in particular. And since those classes were the social basis of partly the 
bygone Tsarist state, and partly the bourgeoisie that spoke in the name of democracy during
the rule of dual power, the attempts by the Bolsheviks to liquidate them through a 
revolution whose guiding slogan was all power to the soviets were met by a birth of a 
culture of revival which comprised elements from both the ancien regime and the rural 
bourgeoisie. The Russian Civil War of course was mainly caused by those who were anxious 
to resume the old order. (2)
Apart from the fact that the Civil War represented the encounter of hostilities between 
the Bolsheviks and the reactionary groups, it was also fought by the Bolsheviks in the hope 
of anticipating the attempts by outside forces like Britain and France to defeat socialism. 
Where the February Revolution was promising in its scopeand the Provisional Government 
presented a model of democracy that could but please the rest of the democracies 
worldwidethe October Revolution not only threatened the existing democratic state in the 
West but also constituted a new revolutionary spirit representing a political ideology aimed to 
shake the foundations of liberal democracy. It was for these reasons, at least, that such 
democracies as Britain took seriously a socialist country that was trying to advance the 
interest of the world proletariat at the expense of the ruling regimes. It was also for such 
reasons that the great powers unconditionally supported the Whites in the Russian Civil War. 
(3) In the Civil War the Red Army had difficulties on the war front mainly for the support the 
Whites had from both the former officers of the old tsarist regime and European powers. (4) 
Lenins comments on the Civil War did confirm that the October Revolution was in 
danger. The Soviet state had not yet been fully founded and the Civil War seemed to be the 
evil the most destructive of the revolution. (5) Lenins words in the following paragraph 
express clearly the conditions imposed on the Bolsheviks during the Civil War:
Obviously, for the Party of the proletariat, the task of suppressing the resistance of the exploiters 
becomes a crucial issue, because the working masses who side with the proletariat are opposed here by
the united members of the propertied classes armed both with the power of capital, the power of
knowledge and the long-standing, if not age-old, habit and practice of government. (6)
Actually, Lenin was anxious to convey a realistic reading of the difference between 
proletarian experience and that of the propertied classes. The main areas of difference 
concern three basic and significant aspects: the power of capital, the power of knowledge 
and.. .the habit and practice of government To analyse this, one might well argue that Lenin 
implies that the Soviet government was the first in history to experience a form of government 
that is not shackled by the chains of capital, a form of government following from the 
teaching of socialism as was prophetically predicted by Marx and Engels. This was later 
echoed by Stalin in Problems o f Leninism when he proclaimed the coming of the epoch of 
emancipatory Marxism through the revolutionary doctrine of Leninism. (7) By implication 
also, according to Lenin, if the mass of the proletariat did not rally round the Bolshevik 
leadership in fending off such a powerful and more experienced enemy, the masses would 
have to sacrifice their emancipation and revert to the old war of classes in which they had 
long been exploited. In Lenins view, the strong position of the Russian proletariat had to do 
with its significant number as a majority that should not lose its revolutionary achievements 
by succumbing to the reactionary forces. The Russian proletariat, Lenin continues, should 
also avoid cooperating with the Mensheviks and the Right S.Rs [Socialist Revolutionaries] 
who act as...the most brazen-faced counter-revolutionaries, who wage a sharper struggle 
against the Soviet government than the one they had allowed themselves to wage against the 
reactionary and landowner governments...  (8)
The problem of constructing the Soviet state at the time of the Civil War was the most 
perplexing for the Bolshevik leadership in general and Lenin in particular. Constructing the 
basic pillars of the state deeply related to the question of administration which Lenin regarded 
as the most important among other matters of organising government. The Civil War had
imposed an economic situation which pushed Russian society to refresh its sources of income 
and consumption. And Lenin was most conscious of that situation. For him, the Revolution 
was advancing towards the total emancipation of the country, and the conditions of success, 
albeit difficult to grapple with, were already there. While government by peaceful means 
was the best choice, the then situation primarily necessitated uprooting the vestiges of tsarist 
Russia at the same time when the bourgeois elements inherited from the Provisional 
Government were being substantially dismantled. This also necessitated pre-empting the 
dangers coming from the capitalist West:
[T]he transition to the peaceful tasks of governing the whole population irrespective of classes, a 
transition that is taking place in conditions when the civil war is still going on in some places, when 
grave military dangers are threatening the Soviet Republic from both the West and the East, and when 
the war has caused untold havoc throughout the countryit is self-understood that such a transition is 
beset with tremendous difficulties. (9)
Why was that transition a difficult one? It was because the Soviet government had to 
fight on several fronts. Three main challenges presented themselves in the face of the new 
Bolshevik leadership: while militarily it was still engaged in areas outside Russia and had to 
work on defeating the rest of the White forces, politically it had to keep its legitimacy as a 
government of soviets which was dedicated solely to the cause of the working masses by 
fighting reaction from within and imperialist threat from outside, and economically it had to 
conciliate between the promises of socialism and the necessity to apply such slogans as food 
dictatorship (10) For Lenin, these challenges reveal a technical question relating to the best 
method of administering the state. Should the new government rely more on politics and 
ignore economic matters? For Lenin, after the October triumphand due to civil war
circumstancesstate administering had to do more with economic organisation, mainly 
because the transition to socialism necessitated an economic approach to government affairs.
The task of administering the state, which now confronts the Soviet government, has this special 
feature, that, probably for the first time in the modem history of civilised nations, it deals pre-eminently 
with economics rather than with politics... And now... it should be quite clear to us that the task of 
administering the state is primarily a purely economic task-that of healing the countrys wounds 
inflicted by the war, restoring its productive forces, organising accountancy in and control over 
production and distribution, raising the productivity of labour-in short, it boils down to the task of 
economic reorganisation. (11)
According to Lenin, the military and political victory over the bourgeoisie in the 
Civil War should be consummated by an integral re-organisation of the economy on the basis 
of socialist principles. The meaning of Lenins implication here goes beyond the suggestion 
that the Bolsheviks should rethink Soviet economy by adopting temporary solutions relating 
to economic problems of, for example, food production and distribution. Why the problem of 
economic organistaion was also of great importance for Lenin was because the question of 
production did not count as significantly as that of the work force. The Soviet state was in 
embryo, and that was a problem of specific difficulty; the new regime did in no way conceive 
of the nature and function of the Soviet state as a continuation of an old state or even a reform 
of it; the Soviet state was conceived as a revolutionary proletarian Commune the aim of 
which was to realise the classless and stateless society envisaged by Marx and Engels (12) 
Therefore, the form that the economy should assume had to be characteristically different 
from that of the feudal or capitalist forms. As E H Carr commented, the essence of the labour 
policy of war communism was the abandonment of the labour market and of reorganized 
capitalist procedures for the engagement and management of the workers; and this made it 
seem, like other policies of the period, not merely a concession to the needs of the civil war,
but an authentic advance into socialist order. (13) For Lenin, one specific aspect 
characteristic of capitalist states should be done with: the existence of capital and labour, a 
couple most representative of bourgeois society. It was for this reason that Lenin particularly 
focused on specific elements in his approach to the economy. The socialist economy should 
begin with a reversal of what imperialist nations do. In this instance, the slogan dictatorship 
of the proletariat was put at work as regards economic matters. For Lenin, the new situation 
dictated that instead of relying on the workers in boosting the economy, there was a much 
more workable alternative: to conscript the wealthy of the nation who, as a minority, in 
those circumstances had to succumb to the rule of the proletarian majority:
The necessity [of labour conscription of the rich] arises also from the fact that it was precisely the 
wealthy and propertied classes who, by their resistance, both, military and passive (sabotage), mostly 
prevented Russia from healing the wounds inflicted upon her by the war, hampered the countrys 
economic rehabilitation and progress... It was the members of these classes who enjoyed the tribute 
they collected from the working people, especially during the war; it was they who used this tribute to 
evade a task which is the duty of every citizen, namely, that of lending a hand in healing the countrys 
wounds and putting it on its feet again; it was they who used the plundered tribute to retire and entrench 
themselves behind impregnable walls and offer every possible resistance to the victory of the socialist 
principle over the capitalist principle of societys organisation. (14)
In Lenins logic the new rule for running the Soviet state should begin with the liquidation of 
the classes regarded as the enemies of the proletarian state. The liquidation is part of the class 
war waged against the former bourgeoisie, and by far the Kulaks, which, in Lenins words, 
had the parasitic character of living on the interest gained from the tribute. (15)
The Soviet campaign against these classes comes as a revolutionary response 
principally aimed to make Soviet society in tune with the state whose apparatus is no longer 
controlled by a minority. In Lenins eyes such a task stands as most crucial, basically because 
the rich class that had plundered the wealth of the country must itself give in to the rule of
socialism. Yet, liquidation by itself is far from sufficient; the classes liquidated must make up 
for the injustices they had caused in the process of accumulating capital. The task of the 
socialist state therefore was to impose the will of the majority over that of the minority by 
conscripting the wealthy. In a sense, this responds very much to the rule of the dictatorship 
of the proletariat mainly because the minority whose capital accumulation had destroyed the 
country was now judged by history in its Marxian sense, that is, judged by the law of the class 
struggle as was theorised by Marx. In doing so, the Soviet state, Lenin implicitly asserts, 
would but put history back on the right track. Here, Lenin could in a way justify the 
application of the dictatorship of the proletariat on an important level relating to the tasks of 
Soviet government. (16)
The question of Lenins application of the dictatorship of the proletariat has been 
posed by the historian Sheila Fitzpatrick. For her, the validity of this slogan relates to the 
revolution itself. She argues that in carrying out the October Revolution, Lenin, together with 
other Bolsheviks, was in a real quandary: what was meant by their conception of dictatorship 
of the proletariat? If it meant crushing the counter-revolutionary efforts of the old possessing 
classes, the new dictatorship would have to establish coercive organs comparable in function 
to the Tsarist secret police; if it meant a dictatorship of the Bolshevik Party...the continued 
existence of other political parties raised major problems. (17) According to Fitzpatrick, the 
slogan posed serious problems for the leadership. Even if the dictatorship of the proletariat 
was a flexible strategy aimed to allow relative freedom to trade unions and factory 
committees, it posed the problem whether Bolshevik political interests would intersect with 
possible different concepts of workers interests (18) Moreover, that problem of definition 
remained highly perplexing in the context of the Civil War. In that context, the slogan 
dictatorship of the proletariat was significant in the sense that the leadership had an historic 
opportunity to terminate the influence of the well-to-do classes. In this respect, the Civil War,
albeit an unfavourable circumstance, represented such an opportunity. But, proletarian 
dictatorship had, as Lenin himself affirmed, an economic rather than political character. It was 
then for that reason that the strategy followed came with War Communism which presented 
the challenge raised by the Bolsheviks against the possessing classes. Yet, with War 
Communism politics could not be left aside and the Bolshevik leadership subordinated 
economics to politico-ideological ends.
2/ War Communism9 in Perspective:
War Communism had its origin in the belief that ravaged by the Civil War on the 
one hand and capitalist interest on the other the Soviet economy could be refreshed only by 
the nationalisation of industry. Nationalisation, according to the Bolshevik policy, had to do 
with the necessity to introduce the country to an opportune socialist economy. By implication, 
nationalisation would play two fundamental roles: 1) to attack private property and 
expropriate the land exploited by the landed aristocracy, and 2) to control production and 
nationalise capital. These two tasks were important not only in relation to such immediate 
goals as feeding the Red Army and the rest of the nation; they were also important in relation 
to the building of socialism.
In Lenins view War Communism had a double function. The first function had to 
do with the re-organisation of the economy by curbing the accumulation of wealth by the 
possessing classes. This actually necessitated addressing the question of capitalist profit, 
which was important in the sense that the Soviet state had first to liquidate the sources of high 
income for the rich, and second proceed in abolishing once and for all money as a 
transaction value, that is, passing over to the stage of the withering away of money: The 
Soviet government is now confronted with a difficult task, which nevertheless has to be dealt 
with at all coststhe task of combating the resistance of the wealthy, a resistance that takes
the form of hoarding and concealing the proofs of their claim to levy tribute on the working 
people. (19) The resistance of the wealthy, as Lenin thinks, was most dangerous, since it 
did not take a political form but had been tacit. In order to liquidate such wealthy, it was 
necessary to find out how they could levy tribute and accumulate capital. This in itself 
constituted a challenge to the socialist policy adopted during the Civil War. In Lenins view 
the Soviet government had got to forge the means by which the rich kulak, the rural 
bourgeois, and the industrial capitalist could be controlled. The answer to this challenge came 
in the form of what came to be called War Communism, that is, the socialist policy aiming 
to nationalise the economy and introduce the country to socialist economy.
The second function was how to administer the government by exploiting the expertise 
of bourgeois intellectuals and capitalist businessmen
In all spheres of economic and political life we now find a great number of bourgeois intellectuals and 
capitalist businessmen offering their services to the Soviet power. And it is up to the Soviet power now 
to make use of these services, which are definitely necessary for the transition to socialism, especially in 
a peasant country like Russia, and should be utilised on condition that the Soviet government has 
complete ascendancy, direction and control over its new assistants and co-operators (who had often 
acted in defiance of this same Soviet power in the secret hope of protesting it. (20)
The question of recruiting bourgeois intellectuals and capitalist businessmen was actually a 
question of necessity rather than choice. While Lenin emphasised the significance of 
recruiting those intellectuals and businessmen, the Soviet reality emanating from the Civil 
War revealed thattaking into consideration the underdeveloped stage of the revolution then 
and the total absence of a socialist proletarian cultureSoviet power had to educate a new 
generation of socialist intelligentsia and skilled proletarians. But neither the time nor the 
circumstances allowed a cultural revolution at that level. (21) What Lenin labels as a choice
seems to have been contingent on the Soviet context itself, and that could by no means happen 
without primarily relying on the expertise of the former bourgeois intelligentsia. This was one 
of the reasons which during the period of War Communism made the Soviet government 
call for a Soviet Socialist culture that had to begin through the negotiation of a new 
relationship between the state and society, with the latter formally bound up by the rule of the 
former. Government administering then as conceived by Lenin had to negotiate such a new 
relationship on the basis of 'making use of the bourgeois intellectual reserve which the 
country had in hand. Yet, that reserve was not only a complimentary one to do without in 
simple terms. Actually, the experience of War Communism did nothing but reveal the 
unworkability of a Soviet state shorn of the former bourgeois intellectuals and the highly 
skilled labourers who had been once part of the tsarist order.
A good number of scholars have attempted to explain the nature and function of War 
Communism. This issue has partly been raised because of the significance of that period first 
in relation to the Civil War as a crucial stage in Soviet history, and second for its central 
implication as regards the question of the construction of the Soviet socialist state. For Lenin, 
the problem of the organisation of the economy in a period of crisis similar to the Civil War is 
an old problem treated in new forms. Actually, for Lenin that related primarily to the phase 
that communism reached in that specific period. By observing his arguments in the State and 
Revolution, one would argue that for him the stage of socialist economic development akin to 
War Communism is the initial, albeit forced, stage of the development of communism which 
he had elaborated in the State and Revolution. He wrote that in the new phase
[t]he means of production are no longer the private property of individuals The means of production 
belong to the whole of society. Every member of society...receives a certificate from society to the 
effect that he has done such and such an amount of work...Consequently, after a deduction is made of 
the amount of labour which goes to the public fund, every worker receives from society as much as he 
has given to it. (22)
A close reading of this paragraph suggests that War Communism was also about the 
abolition of private property through the integration of individuals in nationalized farm 
units in the countryside and industrial units in the factories. In the countryside, both the kulaks 
and the rural bourgeoisie would be liquidated in favour of the poor peasantry and the working 
class as a whole.
Why was War Communism significant? Fitzpatrick answers this question by 
arguing that it was the instance when centrally directed economy was bom. That meant the 
nationalization of both large-scale ( the decree was issued in the summer of 1918, and by 
autumn 1919 80 per cent of such enterprises had been nationalized) and small-scale 
(November 1920) industries. (2) Nationalisation was important in the sense that, Fitzpatrick 
asserts, a state monopoly on grain was established (24) And that constituted the groundwork 
for the overall policy of requisitioning which the government adopted as early as 1919. Yet, 
was nationalisation itself an ultimate aim of government policy during War Communism.? 
E. H. Carr answers this question by supposing that the nationalization of industry was not 
important in itself, but had significant implications in relation to the economy as a whole. 
Nationalisation was a drastic measure to attempt to administer industry on socialist lines 
(25) This, in Carrs view, was an attempt by Lenin to organise the economy according to 
Marxian principles which would benefit both the poor peasantry and the working masses in 
the industrial cities. Therefore, the argument that War Communism meant nationalisation 
was technically inaccurate, since nationalisation had been but an integral strategy in the 
overall economic policy. What was more important in that respect was the question of 
centralisation to which Lenin himself assigned a defining role in relation to the organisation 
of the economy. The existence of a strong central authority, Carr tells us, made decisions 
more applicable in reality. Closing down inefficient factories in October 1918 was a 
reasonable decision taken by such an authority. This helped the different industrial branches
improve the quality of production. In Lenins words, centralisation was the virtue that could 
spare the country chaos. (26) The question of centralisation highlights another important 
issuethe policy of requisitioning. Most significant in this respect is the fact that during the 
period of War Communism the policy of requisitioning was centrally controlled, and had 
several effects on the general organisation of the economy.
Requisitioning had originated from the period when food dictatorship was declared 
in 1918. It had to do with the problem of scarcity of food when the Civil War broke out. As 
Lars T Lih argued, Grain requisitioning was mainly adopted to enforce a state grain 
monopoly by means of the food supply dictatorship decreed in the spring of 1918. (27) Why 
requisitioning relatively succeeded in the beginning of War Communism can be politically 
explained. For E H Carr the success of this policy had to do with the political defeat of the 
Left Socialist Revolutionaries (SRs) who could no longer keep the support of the majority of 
the peasants. (28) Following from this, the new policy in agriculture was from the start 
dictated by the political triumph of the Bolsheviks, (29) and, in part, the policy of 
requisitioning relatively smoothly succeeded because of such a triumph. On the other hand, 
the success of requisitioning in this respect had to do with an efficient centralisation when it 
came to decision-making. The government entrusted the role of collecting surplus food to the 
trade unions, factory committees, and town and country soviets whose role was to obtain 
grain at fixed prices or requisition it from Kulaks. (30) This resulted later in a fierce 
resistance on the part of the affluent peasants. (31)
Apart from the relative success of grain requisitioning, there was one issue which 
threw the whole Bolshevik economic policy into crisis. It was the manner by which food 
surplus was taken from the peasants. Generally, the way the government dealt with collection 
was somehow problematic, mainly because of two reasons. First, opting for centrally
organised methods of collection meant that the committees or local soviets were allowed to 
apply coercive means to fulfill their aim; such coercive means included forcing some rich 
peasants to sell their produce at a relatively cheap price, or often resorting to armed force to 
collect the surpluses. These methods dictated that the peasants, whether or not wanted it, were 
not choosers; rather, they were obliged to sacrifice the bulk of their produce in order to feed 
the Red Army and die working class. As Fitzpatrick commented,
the necessity of feeding the towns and the Red Army pushed the state to take the peasants produce by 
persuasion, cunning, threats, or force: the state often dealt with grain requisitioning by sending armed 
workers and soldiers brigades: this resulted in strained relations between the regime and the peasantry.
Indeed, Lenin himself tried to legitimise the policy of grain requisitioning by arguing that it 
was more than indispensable to maintain the Soviet economy:
the peculiarity of war communism consisted in the fact that we really took from the peasants all their 
surpluses, and sometimes even what was not surplus, but part of what was necessary to feed the 
peasant, took it to cover the costs of the army and to maintain the workers. We took it for the most part 
on credit, for paper money. Otherwise we could not beat the landowners and capitalists in a ravaged 
small-peasant country. (33)
As a result of the excesses following from requisitioning, both the middle peasants and the 
kulaks reacted with anger to the measures taken. Their reactions took the form of resistance to 
further food collection. One of the responses of the peasants was to object to army service 
(34) More concrete forms of resistance were shown by the Kulaks who either favoured to hide
the surpluses of their produce whenever they were approached by collection committees or 
chose to till only parts of the land supposed to feed their families. (35)
In consequence, Lenin and the rest of the Bolsheviks could crush the resistance by 
stating two facts which were aimed to persuade Soviet society as a whole that War 
Communism was not only a pressing necessity but also a virtue capable of transforming the 
country into a communist paradise. The first response to the resistance was the declaration 
that the Soviet socialist state was fully engaged in fighting the classes hostile to the poor 
peasants and the working class. In part, this was the period of a class war against the vestiges 
of the landed aristocracy and the rural bourgeoisie. In the attempt to destroy the resistance of 
the Kulaks Lenin and the leading Bolsheviks counted on the middle peasantry (36) which, 
in Lenins eyes, had to be won by the Soviet government: we stood, stand, and shall stand, in 
a posture of direct civil war with the kulaks. (37) The middle peasantry, however, must 
categorically be distinguished from the Kulaks. (38)
3/ The Birth of Soviet Authoritarianism:
The question of coercion in the context of War Communism does highlight an 
important matter relating to the degree of success of the socialist policy adopted then. While 
the leadership announced that recourse to tyrannical methods would but amount to a general 
strategy for crushing the reactionary forces and guaranteeing a bright future to socialism, 
the actual practice of coercion did in great part reveal how forced the notion of the 
dictatorship of the proletariat was in the Russian context. Such a practice also revealed the 
excess by which the Bolsheviks treated the question of class. What was confusing in their 
policies was the fact of having to deal with most economic and political questions in class 
terms; this of course made them adopt a rather loose definition of the class struggle, basically 
binding such a definition to what was happening in present day Russia. The necessity to
define everything in class terms cast an unrealistic image on their view of society as a whole. 
It was mainly in response to that definition that the coercive measures were justified: a kulak 
for example remained a bourgeois parasite who should in all sorts of ways be accused of 
supporting the Whites, and then had to be repressed and stripped of his property. In 
consequence, War Communism, although was justified under a humanist cover, was a state 
strategy whose immediate effects on society were devastating; in actual fact its failure 
explains very much why Lenin reverted to a more democratic economic policy, namely the 
New Economic Policy (NEP).
The failure of War Communismas a socialism at workhas been depicted by a host 
of scholars as the failure of a utopia. (39) This puts the question of the validity of war 
communism under scholarly light. Part of the utopia thesis is the implication that if a 
theory becomes a unreaiisable it turns against itself. This means that the practice in whose 
name the theory speaks becomes rather in toted conflict with such a theory, which renders the 
theory itself obsolete and inapplicable in reality. Yet, if it is applied it definitely will lead to a 
counter-productive practice. No wonder then that the rise of coercion in the first place and 
authoritarianism in the second did reveal the problems inherent in Lenins theoretical 
legitimation of a Soviet dictatorship of the proletariat and poorest peasantry.
The Soviet authoritarian system which emerged during the period of nationalisation 
between 1919 and 1921 followed, according to Bertrand Penataude, from war communism 
as a utopia. (40) What explained that utopia, Penataude argues, was that the Bolsheviks 
thought they could break down the traditional isolationist mentality of the Russian peasant, 
transforming him into a citizen of the Soviet socialist state. (41) The fundamental mistake 
committed by the Bolsheviks resided not only in their over-estimation of the role the Soviet 
government could play in introducing and consolidating socialism in Soviet Russia. It also 
resided in the emergence of an uncompromising tyrannical policy during the last days of the
Civil War. As one novelist depicted the situation Penataude tells usthe end of the Civil 
War on the main front did nothing but inaugurate an other era of violence initiated by the 
Soviet state itself. (42) The mistake had to do with the belief that after the triumph of the 
Bolsheviks on the battlefield they had to continue their work by recruiting the Red Army to 
crush any social upheaval meant to resist economic or political measures. This was justified 
by the necessity to advance Soviet society towards communism. In a sense, Penataude argues 
that draconian methods used during the Civil War were continued even in the aftermath of 
the war. (43)
For Robert Tucker, the draconian methods had to do with two main factors: the 
Civil War experience and the militarization of the political culture of the Bolshevik 
movement. These two factors were to determine the structure of the Soviet state later. (44) It 
became a state rather inclined to execute forcibly all decrees and orders: it was geared up to 
resort to coercion, rule by administrative fiat...centralized administration... (45). The 
inclination to violence was in turn fuelled by two fundamental facts: party authoritarianism 
and the Bolshevik leaders hostility to opposition. The draconian methods were most 
manifest during the events at Kronstadt in March 1921 when a peaceful demonstration by 
sailors was relentlessly put down. (46) For Penataude, what happened at Kronstadt was but 
the consummation of the policies of coercion pursued from the middle of 1918 after decreeing 
food dictatorship. As Robert V. Daniels commented, those policies were from the beginning 
contrived because the Bolsheviks hoped that War Communism, for instance, would 
transform Russian society overnight into the communist ideal through force and 
bureaucratic centralization. (47) This, Daniels argues, had to do with the coercive policy of 
grain requisitioning.
Rule by coercion during war communism and after cannot be solely explained by 
the necessity to win the Civil War and introduce socialism. It had a theoretical bearing
inherent in the very nature of Leninism. This means that Lenins theoretical convictions were 
slightly brought to an excess as he tried to put into practice Marxs notion of the dictatorship 
of the proletariat. In Marxs theory, the dictatorship of the proletariat only constitutes the 
transition to the abolition of all classes and to a classless society...  (48) One would definitely 
wonder whether the chief aim of the Bolsheviks during the period of War Communism was to 
pass on to the stage of abolition of all classes. Indeed, in those circumstances of economic 
hardship and political agitation it seemed that the ultimate aim of Lenin and his comrades was 
rather far from fully fulfilling Marxs aspirations. The attempts to collect surplus food and 
monopolise grain production and distribution came with the efforts to liquidate the rural 
bourgeoisie. Yet, such attempts were not without significance in relation to Lenins belief to 
introduce Soviet society to socialism. For Lenin, the class struggle was a defining 
characteristic of a society which had still to grapple with the vestiges of the rural aristocracy. 
Existence of the wealthy classes meant the existence of capitalist interest as was promoted by 
the landed aristocracy for instance. In a sense, fighting in the Civil War had to do with the 
belief in the necessity to win the class war that would lead to the dictatorship of the 
proletariat. That also meant that the dictatorship of the proletariat could only occur by 
dekulakising the countryside, that is, stripping the wealthy classes of their source of interest 
by socialising the land. It was for such a reason that the Bolsheviks sought to apply the slogan 
the aim justifies the means. And since the aim was socialism, the means could even amount 
to mass terror. The belief in terror is best illustrated in Lenins warning that If we are not 
ready to shoot a saboteur and White Guardist, what sort of revolution is that? (49) Of course, 
that kind of terror was self-evident and was a legitimate response to White threat. But terror 
excess had been only revealed shortly before the Civil War was won, when the Bolsheviks 
extended such a terror through grain requisitioning. (50)
The policy of requisitioning, which came along with War Communism, was a 
supposedly significant step towards a developed phase of socialism. Yet, the question is: in 
decreeing War Communism, was Lenin intending to bring in socialism, or it was the power of 
circumstances which led him to announce the new policy? While an answer to this question 
needs further development, the general conclusion that one might well draw is that neither 
War Communism nor the requisition measure were a planned action on the part of the 
Bolsheviks. In practical terms, this might well explain the coercive measures that followed 
from the attempt to collect grain surpluses. Following from this argument the application of 
Marxs theory in this respect seems somehow forced, since, at least given the time factor, 
Soviet Russia was rather unprepared for a transition as such. Even if one is forced to premise 
Lenins justification of coercion on Marxs own text (51), the action by which peasant 
interests were crushed raises some cause for concern. One should by no means forget the role 
of the Cheka (the All-Russian Extraordinary Commission for Struggle against Counter- 
Revolution, Sabotage, and Speculation) in dealing with mass unrest. As Fitzpatrick asserts,
After the outbreak of the Civil War, the Cheka became an organ of terror dispensing summary justice 
including executions, making mass arrests and taking hostages at random in areas that had come under 
White control or were suspected of leaning towards the Whites. According to Bolshevik figures for 
twenty provinces of European Russia in 1918 and the first half of 1919, at least 8,389 persons were shot 
without trial by the Cheka, and 87,000 arrested.(52)
The basic flaw in applying Marxs notion was the supposition that Russia had been in 
unparalleled class war between the rural bourgeoisie and the rest of society, a war that 
necessitated running the state solely on the grounds of a permanent class struggle. This in 
itself constituted the reduction of the role of the state to three main apparatuses: the Red 
Army, the Cheka and the Peoples Commissariat of Food Supply (Narkomprod) (53)
In a more concrete sense, the actual period of coercion, one would argue, began with 
the Bolsheviks depiction of the countryside in class terms; this was the period coinciding 
with the policy of grain requisitioning adopted when the Narkomprod became the strongest 
authority in decision-making in agricultural policy. The position of Narkomprod is crucial in 
explaining the crisis that rose from governmental authoritarian rule. As a central authority, 
Narkomprod could in a short period put the countryside under its absolute rule, thus 
displacing the central role which the Supreme Economic Council (VSNKh) and the 
Commissariat for Agriculture (Narkomzem) for instance had used to play. (54) Actually, the 
policy of requisitioning and the focus on the issue of class might well themselves explain the 
problem of coercion. First, one might argue that the necessity to isolate the Kulaks from both 
the middle and lower peasantry had been central in creating the right atmosphere to carry out 
the policy of requisitioning. At the Eighth Party Congress in March 1919 Lenin expressed this 
class issue by asserting that the proper organisations should rob the kulak, not offend the 
middle peasant, and give to the poor peasant. (55) Second coercion was justified by the claim 
that it was the class nature of the Kulaks which necessitated dekulakisation through 
requisitioning. It was for such a reason that most of the policy directed against grain 
monopoly was aimed at liquidating the kulaks as a class. Even Lenin was keen to treat this 
question theoretically as an extremely important issue. His theory of state capitalism was 
focused on the particular problem of the necessity to control grain produce by the state. (56)
Part of the class war argument, which still had influential resonance after food 
dictatorship was abandoned in 1919, was that united together against the rural bourgeoisie 
the poor peasantry (and by far the middle peasants) and the industrial working class had to 
work together in the hope of applying the dictatorship of the proletariat and peasantry. One 
essential condition for such a class alliance would only be co-operation and concessions. The
middle peasantry in particular should be fully satisfied to sacrifice some of its grain and food 
produce in order to feed the working masses in the factories. On the other hand, co-operation 
should be built on warning against the kulaks and rural bourgeois as class enemies whose 
ultimate aim was to dispossess the rest of society of their sources of income and wealth. But 
why had the Bolshevik leadership opted for such a discrimination between the well-to-do 
peasantry as a whole and the rest of society? An answer to this question came in the form of a 
debate started by Adam Ulam and other scholars. Mainly, there are two opposing arguments 
when it comes to assessing the issue of class and its relation to the rise of coercion in the 
Soviet context. The two arguments are best illustrated in the work of Paul Graig Roberts and 
Adam Ulam. The main question raised in the debate is whether state coercion during the 
period of War Communism was to target the peasantry in the hope of winning the support of 
the proletariat.
The main argument that Roberts raises against Adam Ulam is that the latter focuses all 
too much on the Blosheviks treatment of the workers and the peasants as distinct classes. 
Ulams problem in dealing with this issue in relation to War Communism is that he 
overemphasises the role of politics. For him, the Bolsheviks were in a quandary and could not 
satisfy the workers by more egalitarian means which would also serve the interests of the 
peasantry. The workers in Ulams view were privileged at the expense of the peasantry as a 
whole. (57) Ulam predicates his thesis on the suggestion that the Bolsheviks could not make 
an economic miracle but had to dispossess the peasantry of its land produce in the hope of 
satisfying the workers. In Robertss view, Ulam makes a simplistic conclusion by arguing 
that the Bolsheviks only hope was to win over the working class, and once that goal was 
achieved the Communist Party could then kill War Communism. (58) By implication, 
Ulams interpretation is that in their attempt to apply the dictatorship of the proletariat and 
introduce socialism the Bolsheviks did but create an other class struggle within Soviet Russia.
Roberts argues that Ulams claim is inaccurate basically because the workers were 
still connected with the agrarian population and the policies of war communism were not 
generally popular with the workers. Roberts claim finds full support in Lars T Lihs work. 
Lih argues that the social position of the workers could not allow a hostile stance against the 
peasants: the governments attack on independent grain-purchasing delegations sent by 
individual factories and towns irritated the workers more than they were pleased by the 
opportunity to take grain by force.(59) Moreover, an other argument can be raised against 
Ulams claim is the fact that Lenin himself did assert on many occasions that Soviet Russia 
was dominated by the peasant population. Even when he stressed the proletarian element of 
the coming socialist revolution, Lenin was fully aware of the influence of the peasantry. 
Therefore, the Bolsheviks need not exaggerate the importance of the proletariat. What we 
actually have is a workers state, with this peculiarity, firstly, that it is not the working class 
but the peasant population that pre-dominates in the country, and, secondly, that it is a 
workers state with bureaucratic distortions. (60)
Commenting on the defining characteristics of the workers state, Alex Callinicos 
observed that such a state had been apparently on the verge of being engulfed by mass 
unreststrikes in Petrograd, a bitter peasant rising in Tambov province, and the mutiny of the 
garrison of the key naval base at Kronstadt. (61) In this respect, the argument by Ulam that 
the Bolsheviks main pre-occupation was how to satisfy the workers seems to have been 
contingent on an exaggerated interpretation. Yet, as Callinicos reminds us, abandonment of 
War Communism in favour of the New Economic Policy (NEP) was in great part actuated 
by the need to conciliate the peasantry by material concessions, which led to the departure 
from the excessive policy of grain requisitioning. (62) In conclusion, one would argue, the 
change in government policy did respond less to peasant uprisings than to the general 
discontentincluding the working classthat was caused by War Communism.
II/ Stalins Marxism: A Retrograde Leninism
1/ Stalinist Leninism:
Harold Shukman argues that,
alongside the growth of his power as a General Secretary, official doctrine was transformed from 
Leninism into Leninism-Stalinism; instead of just Lenin, a Siamese-twin figure emerged called Lenin- 
Stalin; the theoretically separate Party and State would be elided into an entity called Party-State...there 
would be no Leninism without its Stalinist interpretation, no Lenin-in-history without the attached 
Stalin... (63)
Shukmans comment here casts light on how important it was for Stalin to liken his character 
and rule to Lenin, partly because Lenins teaching was considered by most Bolsheviks as an 
example to follow, and partly because Stalin needed to argue that while Leninism was the 
Marxism of its time, it had to be complemented by an other form of MarxismStalinism 
which only allegedly continued with the Marxism of the 1880s and 1890s and the Marxism of 
Lenin. Actually, Stalins need to interpret himself as the only heir to Lenin came along with 
his argument that Lenin in turn had been the only heir to Marx.
And so what is Leninism? Stalin asked. (64) This question highlights Stalins 
concern with defining the very ideology which he for thirty years had acted in the name of. 
This question also reminds the reader that since 1924 the Soviet General Secretary had pains 
in forging a form of Leninism that could legitimate his tyrannical policies. Was Leninism an 
application of Marxism, or was it a revival of...Marxism itself?, Stalin continues. (65) 
Stalins answer to this question is dubious, since he thought that such definitions were 
accurate at the same time when they were flawed. While Lenin applied Marxism to Russian
conditions Leninism cannot but be considered an international phenomenon. (66) Although 
Lenin did indeed restore the revolutionary content of Marxism Leninism is a much more 
particular phenomenon, given the novelty of its claims. (67)
Leninism is Marxism of the era of imperialism [my italics] and the proletarian revolution. To be more 
exact, Leninism is the theory and tactics of the proletarian revolution in general, the theory and tactics 
of the dictatorship of the proletariat in particular. Marx and Engels pursued their activities in the pre
revolutionary period...when developed imperialism did not yet exist...But Lenin, the disciple of Marx 
and Engels, pursued his activities in the period of developed imperialism...when the proletarian 
revolution had already triumphed in one country, had smashed bourgeois democracy and had ushered in 
the era of proletarian democracy, the era of the Soviets. (68)
Through this definition of Leninism Stalin provides an explanation for what became then 
dubbed Marxism-Leninism. For him, the history of Marxian thought cannot be 
disaggregated into one Marxism or one Leninism. Leninism is the Marxism of its time, 
mainly because Marxism itself, Marxism as entity, had to be complemented by its match, by 
the ideology of revolution at work. That means Marxism had been the ideology of the time of 
theory, and Leninism the Marxism of the time of practice. While Marxism was the true 
prophesy Leninism was the realisation of that prophesy through the October Revolution. 
While Marxism and Leninism were both timely, the only difference between them resided in 
the tasks they were assigned: one prepared proletarians for revolution, an other led 
proletarians to revolution. (69)
2/ Leninism and Revolution:
The most remarkable feature of Leninism, being a specific form of Marxism, Stalin 
tells us, is its revolutionary character. Leninism is a historical phenomenon whose guiding 
principle was to fight imperialismas a final stage in the development of capitalism. 
Leninism derives its practical element from the deduction that the capitalist system is not a 
static economic system; rather it builds on the principle that capitalism is a developmental 
system of capital monopoly and accumulation which itself gives birth to imperialism (70) 
Such an idiosyncrasy forces the capitalists to compete in the hope of getting more wealth and 
power. This happens nationally. Internationally, on the other hand, the picture is similar but 
much more complex. Modem colonial powers, which are necessarily capitalist nations, will 
endeavour to control the riches (raw materials, etc) of the colonised countries, and monopolise 
their exploitation of those riches. In such an attempt, the need to compete grows dramatically 
and finally ushers in imperialist wars. In Lenins view wars stand as a significant sign 
because they reveal what capitalism is all about: it is a system of a most developed economic 
development whose internal workings would in the last analysis only lead to the destruction 
of the imperialist powers themselves.
In Stalins view this specific feature of capitalism makes it prone to self-defeat and, 
therefore, self-destruction. And Leninism is the actual objective cause which will eventually 
terminate capitalism itself. Leninism is significant in the sense that it had two defining 
historical tasks. It diagnosed the malady, and prescribed the cure. Diagnosis of the malady 
was carried out on a very specific ground: Leninism is the only theory which had identified 
the character of imperialism. (71) Prescription of the cure happened by observing both the 
national and international context: Leninism could successfully rely on a sound revolutionary 
theory forged since WBD and locate the opportune context wherein proletarian revolution had 
to happen.
Imperialist wars like World War I, Stalin maintained, were the very condition of 
possibility of the proletarian revolution worldwide. World War I holds two important truths. 
First, it gathered all [the] contradictions of capitalism into a single knot and... thereby 
accelerating and facilitating the revolutionary battles of the proletariat. (72) How imperialism 
was of great benefit to the Russian proletariat, Stalin asserts, was because it gave birth to 
Leninism. But why Leninism was hosted in the country least characterised imperialist, 
namely Russia? Stalin answers this question by arguing that Russia was the most appropriate 
context for the application of Lenins revolutionary theory. (73) How could that theory be 
applied is a question which has to be answered by primarily observing the fundamental 
characteristics of Tsarism. First of all, Tsarism unceasingly encouraged capital investment and 
the exploitation of the labouring masses by resorting to despotic measures. Second, the role 
that the Tsar played in colonising non-Russian territories such as Turkey and China cannot 
be denied. Third, Tsarism helped Western imperialist powers expand their territorial claims 
by providing them with millions of soldiers. (74) It is for these reasons that proletarians in 
Russia could rely on and rally round Leninism in its mission to rule out the dictates of 
imperialism. (75)
To carry out that historic task, Stalin tells us, Leninism had to push for a three-stage 
revolution. While the first stage concerns the termination of tsarism, the second is about the 
smashing of bourgeois democracy, and the third relates to the establishment of a full- 
fledged proletarian democracy. The three stages celebrated by Stalin were in his view the 
cornerstone of revolutionary work in the context of Russia. In this respect, proletarian 
revolution has to happen at the level of one country first, and then be expanded worldwide. 
The revolution in one country was to pave the way for the international revolution of the 
proletariat. He believed that the revolution in Russia could not but become a proletarian
revolution, that from its very inception it could not but assume an international character, and 
that, therefore, it could not but shake the very foundations of world imperialism. (76)
The three stages preached by Stalin were but a prelude to an imminent world 
revolution whose practical element is the total abolition of the rule of bourgeois democracy. 
After the revolution was carried in Russia, Stalin maintained, the task of preserving the gains 
of such a revolution could not be determined only within the context of Russia itself. Living 
the revolution nationally without its internationalisation would leave the entirety of the 
proletarian movement at the mercy of chance and the malice of the imperialist powers. The 
only way to consolidate what the October Revolution had achieved was
to transfer the struggle to the international arena, to expose the ulcers of imperialism, to prove that the 
collapse of capitalism was inevitable, to smash social-chauvinism and social-pacifism, and finally, to 
overthrow capitalism in their own country and to forge a new fighting weapon for the proletariat...in 
order to facilitate the task of overthrowing capitalism for the proletarians of all countries. (77)
Leninism in this sense is not a revolutionary theory bound by what happens at the national 
level; rather it is a theory that works according to a systematic tactic; it has definite historical 
tasks the aim of which is to prove that the slogan revolution is not a recipe to prepare 
overnight. Revolutionary work, however, means all the tasks mentioned above: to show how 
imperialism works, to be able to explain that the contradictions of capitalism would 
eventually usher in its collapse, to prescribe to the proletariat how capitalism should be 
abolished in one country and, therefore, in all countries.
On the other hand, Leninism as a revolutionary theory of international significance is 
not premised solely on the critique of imperialism and prescription of revolutionary tactics. It 
also rests on the observation, analysis, and critique of the Social-Democratic trends claiming 
to speak in the name of revolutionary Marxism. The essence of Leninism resides also in its
vanguard approach to the flaws of Social-Democratic opportunism and the failure of the 
Second International. As Stalin broaches it, the task of Leninism comes in one defining stage: 
it concerns the critique of the opportunism of the Second International. (78) Actually, as 
Stalin asserts in an earlier work (79), Lenins approach to such issues as Social-Democratic 
opportunism constitutes the essence of Bolshevism itself, since Bolshevik thinking emerged 
basically from the belief that Marxism as a revolutionary theory should not be abused by 
being transformed into a reformist ideology, or be used to legitimate social-chauvinism for 
instance. The fundamental premise for Bolshevik revolutionary work which the parties of the 
Second International resisted in the pre-war period was the question of the of the oppressed 
nations and colonies, the question of liberating the oppressed nations and colonies, the 
question of the paths to be followed in the struggle against imperialism, the question of the 
paths to be followed in order to overthrow imperialism. (80) The opportunists were powerful 
mainly because capitalism had the power to develop peacefully without passing over to the 
imperialist stage, before the catastrophic contradictions of imperialism manifested, and 
before the parties of the Second International could think seriously about revolution. (81) 
What allowed the Bolsheviks to attack the Second International was when capitalism started 
to ripen into its opposite, that is, grow to the extent that it became self-devouring; that 
instance made it easier for the Bolsheviks to overhaul the entire activity of the Second 
International... to examine the entire arsenal of the Second International... (82) That in turn 
facilitated the task of preparing for the proletarian revolution and making Leninism replace 
the Second International. (83) For Stalin the fight against the opportunists of the Second 
International who deny free nations the right to self-determination (84) is but a fight which 
reminds the proletariat all over the world that it is in their hands that the future of free nations 
lies. It is in WBD, Stalin suggests, that Lenin prophetically asserted that the Russian 
proletariat heralded the revolution everywhere. (85)
III/ Totalitarianism at work:
1/ The Nature of the First Five-Year Plan:
Judging Stalin's First Five-Year Plan (hereafter referred to as FFYP) by Lenins War 
Communism seems to cast some validity onto the claim that Stalins economic plans did 
originate from Leninism itself. However, judging it by the New Economic Policy (NEP) 
seems to put into question most of Stalins humdrum propaganda that he was following the 
steps of the father of the Soviet Union, namely Lenin. But judging the Plan by the logic of 
Lenins thinking will certainly render any comparison contingent on the very circumstances 
that Lenin himself treated in different ways. If one should liken one specific economic policy 
to an other, it seems that Stalins FFYP was a sophisticated version of War Communism, 
since in both periods the prevailing argument was how to force socialism onto a society that 
was hardly ready for it; both plans came also as a response to pressing circumstances in which 
society was caught up in a conflict between labour and capital; finally both plans were 
contrived with some degree of coercion, with War Communism being the primitive form. In 
some way, Stalins FFYP was the advanced form of War Communism. (86) Stalin regarded 
War Communism to be an experiment which could be repeated by new means, by regulating 
the market according to state prerogatives, and by adjusting the relationship between the 
peasantry and the state. (87)
The NEP experience, on the other hand, came as an answer to the failure of War 
Communism in accommodating a Socialist state based on the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
The coercion that the policy of requisitioning had ushered in and the rise of an authoritarian 
state ruled by the Cheka and the Red Army did nothing but constitute a betrayal of the 
working classes carried out in the name of the class war whose alleged target was the rich
kulak and the rural aristocracy. When the Civil War ended on the main front and War 
Communism achieved nothing but coercive rule on the part of the government and hostility 
on the part of the workers and peasants, the Bolshevik leadership came to realise that state 
regulation of agriculture resulted in an oppressive state capitalist economy rather than a 
revolutionary socialist one, in an excessively coercive state rather than an emancipatory one, 
and in a proletariat in itself rather than a proletariat for itself
Why Lenin decided to depart from War Communism to the New Economic Policy was 
because the drive for collectivism in agriculture only resulted in a fiasco: first it only 
relatively boosted the economy; and second it did not succeed at the social level, but only 
ushered in hostilities to the regime. The NEP in turn followed from that failure mainly 
because the government decided to increase production by allowing more freedom for 
individual farmers, and by facilitating the work of individual industrialists in the cities. (88) 
The NEP, although initiated in response to such events as the Kronstadt (89), came as an 
answer to the failure of the government to build socialism through such policies as 
requisitioning. In his seminal study of the Bolshevik Revolution, E H Carr elaborates the main 
points of the NEP in 1921. First it was a measure which sought to replace harsh requisitioning 
by a grain tax; second, taxation should be fixed at a level lower than requisition rates; third, 
to fix taxation according to the level of productivity by the peasants, that is, the more the 
cultivator produces the less taxes he pays; and fourth, to give more freedom to the farmers 
in controlling their grain surpluses. (90) The spirit of the new policy, Carr reminds us, was 
that it encouraged individual cultivators to produce more and, thus, break with the peasants 
resistance to land cultivation. (91); the new policy would also encourage profit-seeking 
peasants to benefit from the opportunities offered by the tax in kind.
The NEP was promising in the sense that it could ease the pressure on the cultivators 
who would guarantee an unprecedented improvement of production. The measure as Lenin
himself thought was positive in the sense that it would encourage also the state-controlled 
economy to opt for private trade. (92) Practically the NEP laws and decrees drew heavily 
on the choice to privatise ownership while reserving the right for state intervention whenever 
possible, which, as V. N. Bandera rightly asserted, gave birth to a mixed economy. (93) 
They gave individuals the right to own a number of properties not regarded as a threat to the 
socialist economy. The Civil Code enforced in 1923 prescribed items that could be owned by 
individuals: buildings not municipalized, commercial enterprises, industrial enterprises 
employing hired workers...tools and instruments of production, money...gold...and foreign 
currency.. .property of every kind not withdrawn from private ownership. (94) Further 
legislation in 1924 also allowed other measures such as land leasing (95)
While signs of the NEP show that basically society was relatively content with a 
mixed economy, the explanation why Stalin chose to depart from such a policy resides in both 
subjective and objective incentives. Harrison attempted to present three views in relation to 
this question. First, the NEP became incongruent with any further industrial development; 
second, the NEP could easily be transformed into a much more sophisticated system by 
introducing new industrial developmentwhich later became called the Five-Year Plans; 
and third, it was inconsistent with the extremely rapid industrialization actually undertaken 
from 1928 onwards. (96) Contrary to Harrisons claims, Simon Johnson and Peter Temin 
argued that the decision to abandon the NEP was not solely related to the failure of the NEP 
to bear the weight of the new economic situation which required both mass collectivisation 
and industrialization. Johnson and Temin thought that Stalins departure from the NEP was 
triggered by the macroeconomy and farmers incentives. (97) What worsened the economic 
situation in the late years of the NEP was the lingering inflationary pressure.. .with an annual 
rate of price increase of between 20 and 30 per cent. Such a pressure followed from the 
1924 stabilization of the ruble. Also, the decision by the leadership to introduce restrictions
on private trade did devastate the economic potential of the NEP, which had principally 
been based on the importance of such a form of trade. (98)
This macroeconomic explanation, albeit satisfactory, cannot on the other hand rule out 
other interpretations such as Stalins personal role. Stalins abandonment of the NEP did not 
start when the NEP policies started to fail in 1928 but was rather the result of his own 
criticism of the NEP results in the early 1920s. His attack on that economic policy started at 
the Twelfth Party Congress in 1923 when he observed that the NEP fosters not only Great 
Russian chauvinismit also fosters local chauvinism...It is this same NEP and the private 
capital associated with it that nourish and foster Georgian, Azerbaijanian, Uzbek and other 
nationalisms. (99) For Stalin the NEP combined capitalist elements which would reduce 
workers solidarity to mere nationalistic illusions, which, in his view, would condemn the 
revolutionary aim of the proletariat by chauvinistic claims. Deep down, however, the 
departure from the NEP had its roots in more objective problems, especially the slow growth 
of industrial power emanating from technical problems such as the scarcity, and, in many 
cases, absence of modem means of production. (100) Added to that was the problem of the 
distribution and exploitation of the land by the peasants who were still unable to conceive of 
agriculture in scientific terms (101) The NEP failed to provide the necessary structure for 
maintaining both agriculture and industry. Inefficient and insufficient production caused a 
supply crisis which affected the purchasing power of the peasants. As Moshe Lewin 
commented,
the relationship between industrial retail prices and state agricultural prices was much more 
unfavourable to the peasants than it had been before the war. Industrial products were dear, of poor 
quality and scarce into the bargain. There was constant talk o fthe famine of goods... Prices paid by the 
state for procurements of grain... were low, and often failed to cover the cost of production. (102 )
The decision to abandon the NEP by Stalin directly related to the decision to massively 
collectivise and industrialise the country. For the Stalinist leadership the failure to boost the 
economy during the period of the NEP and the inability to achieve the aims promised since 
the early 1920s could not but speed up the process of collectivising the land in order to 
revolutionise economic growth. Stalin expressed the need to collectivise the land by asserting 
that the solution lies in the transition from small, divided peasant farms to large united farms 
based on the social exploitation of the land on the basis of a new, higher technology. There is 
no other solution. (103) In theory the drive for collectivization, as Stalin explains it, was 
responsive to the need to modernise exploitation of the land, which would improve both the 
quantity and quality of production.
2/ The First Five-Year Plan and National Socialism:
The FFYP was the beginning of Stalins revolution, and what confirms this is the fact 
that among most Bolshevik thinkers of the CPSU it was only Stalin who imposed his 
economic version. Stalins announcement in 1929 that once it accomplished its aims the NEP 
had to be thrown to the devil (104) was but a prelude to the FFYP. (105) By 1928 Stalin 
decided to adopt the Plan (1928-1933) in order to replace the NEP, which he abolished one 
year later. The FFYP years were greatly marked by Stalins implementation of socialism in 
one country whereby he promised to transform Russia into an unrivalled developed 
industrial country. Although the catchphrase socialism in one country meant 
industrialisation at a snails pace (106), to use Bukharins assertion, Stalin
...subsequently gave it an interpretation very different from that of the right-wing leaders [like 
Bukharin], whose position was stigmatized at the end of the 1920s as the Right Opposition. To Stalin 
socialism in one country meant strengthening of the dictatorship and an orientation of the nations 
economy towards preparation for total war. This was to be achieved through breakneck
industrialization, emphasizing heavy industry and arms production, and exploitation of peasant labor by 
means of coercive collectivization... (107)
Apparently, being primarily an economic policy, socialism in one country was a thrust not 
only to force economic development in the country but also to use it as a slogan against its 
designers. Using the economic policies for political reasons was a defining feature that had 
marked Stalin's character since the Lenin years. His manipulation of Zinoviev and Kamanev 
in the early 1920s was a case in point. (108)
Following his new economic plans dictated by the FFYP, Stalin opted also for rapid 
collectivisation of farms as early as 1929. He, however, was not conscious of the social 
consequences that would follow in the long run. He was obsessed with the implementation of 
what was schemed by the FFYP: collectivisation and rapid industrialisation had to take place 
at any cost. As collectivisation was slow in the first two years of the Plan, Stalin took pains to 
speed up the pace of events.
...at the end of 1929 and the beginning of 1930s, Lenins principle of voluntary collectivization [the 
principle on which socialism in one country was based] was violated almost everywhere, and under 
pressure from Stalin and his closest aides. Organizational and explanatory work among the peasants was 
replaced by crude administrative fiat and force directed against the middle peasants and even some of 
the poor peasants. They were forced to join collective farms under the threat of dekulakization. (109)
Thus peasants were left in a quandary: they had either to cede farm units and convert them 
into co-operatives owned by the state, or choose to drift away to the industrial towns and be 
dumped into worse social conditions. So the process of collectivising was a lot worse than had 
been imagined. Perhaps a million peasant households were deported to the slave-labour 
camps of the Gulag Archipelago as a result to dekulakization in December 1929. (110).
The picture of Soviet peasants moved by fear and uncertainty to leave the countryside due to 
collectivisation seemed very much like that when English peasants in the mid-eighteenth 
century had to drift away to the cities because of the Enclosure Movement. The terrible 
consequences of forced collectivisation helped so much rapid industrialisation. In the words 
of Callinicos, ...collectivization, by pushing many peasants out of the countryside, provided 
the new factories with their workforce. ( I l l )  The other link, Callinicos argues, was that 
collectivization allowed the regime drastically to increase grain exports and thereby to 
finance imports of plant and equipment from the West. (112)
In The Making o f the Soviet System (1985), Moshe Lewin came to a brilliant 
conclusion about the structure of industrial Russia and its social and economic effects. He 
identified three social wars characterising the Soviet inter-war years, basically from 1928 
to1930. He argued that the industrial process was hampered basically by three counter
productive wars: one against technicians and the bourgeois intelligentsia between 1928 
and 1931, one against the labour force from 1931 to 1936, and another against Party or non- 
Party cadres. For Lewin, these social wars were a driving cause for the diminutionwhether 
state-led or voluntaryof skilled workers, graduate engineers, and specialised technicians. 
But what plagued most the whole process of production and administrative efficiency and 
competence was the class of state-employed officials who caused entire 
bureaucratization of the industrial, and, thus, economic organization. (113)
Failure of the system to maintain a steady rate of economic growth was caused not 
only by the inability to assimilate in proportionate and reasonable terms the workforce into 
one equal social fabric as envisaged by socialism but also by the miscalculated estimates that 
followed largely from the imbalance between pressing requirements for mass and rapid 
industrialisation and the unfavourable circumstances. Probably, the need for mass 
industrialisation itself did not evolve naturally as a consequence to social needs and demands.
Rather, it was responsive to the pressure of catching up with the West and advancing as 
priority the principle of a world socialist revolution that had to begin at home. This in turn 
was carried out in utter disregard of the very basis of Marxian social theory. Marxs 
theorisation of socialism, it should be noted, starts from a theory of emancipation on how far 
the state is able, in its proletarian character, to emancipate the working classes from the 
class rule dictated by the vestiges of the democratic republic. The primary task of such a state 
is to expropriate private ownership and establish in its place as a permanent order collective 
ownership.
The distinguishing feature of Communism is not the abolition of property generally, but the abolition of 
bourgeois property. But modem bourgeois private property is the final and most complete expression of 
the system of producing and appropriating products, that is based on class antagonisms, on the 
exploitation of the many by the few. In this sense, the theory of the Communists may be summed up in 
die single sentence: Abolition of private property. (114)
The Stalinist model of state reversed the very basic elements of Marxs theory of 
emancipation : socialism is the aim no matter how we achieve it, even if peasants are forced 
off their lands and workers deprived of their wages. This is why the Russian Revolution in its 
Stalinist face was a counter-revolution as Callinicos argued (115) Also, reliance on heavy 
industry produced serious systemic failures reflecting inflationary pressures since the early 
1930s. (116) The organization of a planned economy controlled by an elite of state 
bureaucrats gradually reduced the work ethic among the labouring classes.
It was certainly the drive for abolition of the NEP and its replacement by the FFYP 
in 1929 which reoriented the economic organisation of the Soviet system. Yet, the 
consequences of the FFYP did in many ways resemble those of War Communism. The fault, 
as Igor Klyamkin observed, originated from Lenins single-party system established in the
aftermath of October (117) Moreover, as David Kotz put it, Lenins policies were at the 
origin of Soviet authoritarianism caused primarily by the Civil War. (118) The tyrannical 
practices which emanated from Stalins FFYP had been caused by such very authoritarianism. 
Stalins political and economic measureswhose effect had continued until 1991were 
themselves to spring from the very context of the alleged workers state set by the October 
Revolution. On the other hand, Stalins ideological manoeuvres had always deployed 
Leninism as a medium for propagating Stalins personal plans. The Leninist-Stalinist system 
constituted the crisis of an ideology speaking in the name of Marxism. However, such a 
system was terminated in 1991. It was Michael Gorbachev, the new General Secretary of the 
CPSU who paved the way for the collapse of the Soviet ideology.
IV/ Gorbachev and the End of Stalinism:
1/ the Liberal Democratic Trap:
The disintegration of Soviet-type communism in East-Central Europe in 1989, and the 
actual collapse of the Soviet Union in 1991 disclosed what Leninism-Stalinism had been all 
about. This came first with Gorbachevs attempts to refresh the Soviet economy with the 
NEP-like Perestroika (restructuring), and second with his efforts to provide a conciliatory 
socialism through what came to be known as glasnost (openness). (119) What was most 
remarkable about Gorbachevs rule was the swiftness with which a seventy-year old ideology 
crumbled. Yet, I would argue, that was not but a sign of the pyramidal growth of Leninism- 
Stalinism whose birth was the October Revolution, climax Stalins rule, and denouement 
Perestroika and Glasnost. Why Soviet-type communism became fallible only when 
Gorbachev ascended to the secretaryship of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union is a 
question that has been dealt with in many forms. Yet, it seems to me that the Soviet Union 
had been a state which, by pretending to promote Marxs and Engelss concept of the
withering away of the state did but wither away itself. Gorbachev was not himself the 
conscious designer of the collapse but he happened to act in circumstances which made him 
prepare for the demise of the Soviet system; the history of the USSR tells us a no-secret when 
we read about the Leninist-Stalinist ideology of coercion and terror in thousands of books and 
archives. (120) Most certainly, Gorbachev was the gravedigger of Soviet socialism. He 
started with reform in the hope of refreshing the Soviet economy; he then finished up with a 
revolution certainly not meant. How such reforms were turned into a deadly weapon against 
the socialist sanctuary, and how such a weapon terminated the Soviet system itself is the point 
of our discussion in this section.
Seweryn Bialar attributes the Gorbachev reforms to two main causes: (1) Domestic 
crisis, and (2) international factors. (121) The first aspect, it seems, has its answer not only in 
the immediate historical context of the 1980s where socialisms traditional enemy capitalism 
was overtaking it in ideological global reach but also to the Stalinist mode of economy that 
had followed from the 1960s, and 1970s, and which ushered in the Brezhnev stagnation 
years. So the economic crisis was systemic, and was responsive to a rigid political structure 
that had not allowed for refreshing initiatives. Moreover prevention of such initiative was 
itself a result of the cultural industry that had remained for more than sixty years snared 
within the socialist belief in catching up and surpassing (122) the West in all political- 
ideological spheres. That catchphrase was a translation of how the economy remained in 
shambles:
The social sources of the Soviet systemic crisis can be defined very simply: In the post-Stalin period, 
Soviet society in all its segments and its aspirations has changed very significantly while the antiquated 
political order of a different era has remained largely unchanged. First, the Soviet social system of 
stratification that rewarded power and was indifferent to performance killed the work ethic of the 
population and was counterproductive to modernization. Second, official corruption and unfulfilled
promises led to far-reaching political alienation of the society as a whole from the party and the 
regime... (123)
The question why the Soviet Union collapsed and who hastened the collapse can 
always be addressed, as a legitimate claim, in relationship to Michael Gorbachev. So the 
historical legacy together with the political standpoint of the new Soviet leader were decisive 
factors behind his revolutionary break with the past. To this end, it is significant to ask why 
only Gorbachev among other leaders was conscious of the necessity of political and economic 
reforms, and which historical and ideological facts urged him, or rather pushed him, to 
reconsider the bases whereupon both Soviet political and economic organisations had hitherto 
functioned. His choice to perform systemic restructuring of Soviet economy, and his thrust 
behind political rupture with the legacy of Stalinism, were injected by several circumstances 
that had something to do with the then shaken Soviet global role and position. But that 
reflected to a large extent the crisis of Soviet economy and social policy. My account in this 
respect deals mainly with the factors that led to the Gorbachev reforms, and the reforms 
themselves: their success and failure.
In 1984, shortly before assuming office (1985), Gorbachev declared assertively that he 
and Shevardnadze were in total agreement about the future of their nation:
...[I]t was impossible to live that way. We began looking for an answer to the question: How should we 
live? A concept appeared for the country and the world. For internal problems we call it perestroika. 
And we put forward a simple formula: more democracy, more glasnost, more humanity. On the whole, 
everything must develop so that the person in this society feels like a human being. There you have it 
a simple formula for life. (124)
Gorbachevs mature and workable version of this declaration evolved in full shape in the 
19th Party Conference in June 1988, roughly three years after he had ascended to power. The 
rather romantic tone through which he expressed his views in 1984 was now transformed 
into full-fledged political programme aimed at breaking ties with the old bureaucratic 
tradition set by the Communist Party. In the Conference he made the following statement:
The existing political system proved incapable of protecting us from the growth of stagnant phenomena 
in economic and social life in recent decades...The ever greater concentration of economic-management 
functions in the hands of the Party and political leadership became typical... (125)
By then, Gorbachev started to rethink the status, function, and implications of the Communist 
Party of the Soviet Union. The same views spelled out by Gorbachev in the 19th Party 
Conference were to overlap with his overall conceptions of peace and stability. He expressed 
the same revolutionary concern on his visit to the United States, when he delivered his 
famous speech at the United Nations A Road to the Future on December 7, 1988. No Soviet 
General Secretary before him had ever delivered such an influential speech to an international 
organisation. He addressed three main issues. First, the new global economy: the world 
economy is becoming a single organism, and no state, whatever its social system or economic 
status, can develop normally outside it. (126) Second, the new political condition: 
[f]reedom of choice is a universal principle. (127) Third, the world had now to be redefined 
on demilitarising international relations (128) and democratising human relations. (129) 
In all issues there is only one implication: the world is heading for a New Order and the Cold 
War is about to end. Gorbachev concluded the difference between the order of the past 
(premised on tension and conflict) and the order of the present:
Two great revolutions -  the French Revolution of 1789 and the Russian Revolution of 1917 -  exerted a 
powerful impact on the very nature of history and radically changed the course of world developments. 
Both of these revolutions, each in its own way, gave a tremendous impetus to human progress. To a 
large extent, they shaped the way of thinking that is still prevalent in social consciousness. It is a most 
precious spiritual heritage. But today we face a different world, for which we must seek a different road 
to the future. (130)
In this statement Gorbachev declares that the principles on which the Russian 
Revolution was built are no longer adequate. So it was time for peace to the Soviet people at 
home and in their international relations. The age of revolution according to him is analogous 
to a history of wars being waged almost everywhere... (131) Of the Gorbachev new policies 
on the economic-political agenda the freedom factor was the most promising, albeit limited, 
choice for his people at home. Marshall Goldman described Gorbachevs option for freedom 
as a most unprecedented attempt in the Soviet Union. (132)
The effect of Gorbachevs UN speech at home was gigantic. It was time now for real change. 
In his new political programme, he focused on how political reform could happen and 
succeed. It was to reside in and rest on his famous concept Perestroika (restructuring) which 
would function as a general and organisational framework for the entire idea of reform. David 
Lane defines the term perestroika and sketches its different functions. It is a set of tactics 
aimed at resolving contradictions. Rather than a set of policies, Perestroika is an attitude or 
approach to policies and society...  It is composed of::
1- Individual (and group) self-interest.
2- Glasnost (public criticism).
3- Democracy.
4- Law and control. (133)
The ultimate aim of perestroika was then to attempt to tackle problems relating to the Soviet 
political and economic system. The components of perestroika, as mentioned above, are not 
only indissociable but also vital for the cure of the plagued Soviet system. But how should 
perestroika start to work? For Gorbachev, it would work only in the promotion of 
democracy in the first place. But what does Gorbachev mean by the word democracy? 
Should it be a democracy as theorised in Marxist-Leninist literature, or a democracy in the 
liberal democratic sense? It should be argued that Gorbachevs conception of democracy was 
stamped by both traditions. While, on the one hand, he believed that democracy should be 
framed within the Leninist tradition, he, on the other, took pains to force the liberal 
democratic version therein.
In a more comprehensive sense democracy would only achieve its aims in the presence 
of freedom and humanism. (134) The first step towards a true democratic system, for 
Gorbachev, was to democratise the Communist Party itself, that is, to decentralise and 
liberate it from the administrative shackles which had long prevented Soviet citizens from 
expressing their will with freedom. As he expressed it in his address to the All-Union 
Council of Trade Unions in February 1987, democratisation would be a guarantee against 
repetition of past errors, and consequently a guarantee that the restructuring process is 
irreversible. (135) In the 19th Party Conference, on the other hand, he spelled out the real 
aim: radical reform of Soviet politics. (136) By virtue of the Conference, Stephen White 
tells us, a number of Constitutional reforms were approved in November and December 
1988, and they were to include a full-time working parliament...A constitutional review 
commission was also established. (137) Archie Brown asserted that the most successful 
achievement of this policy was the creation of the system of checks and balances, where the 
separation of powers played a constructive role. This resulted in more political freedom 
expressed basically in the media. The system of checks and balances was revolutionary in the
sense that, as Gorbachev himself asserted, it was 'designed to protect society against any 
violation of socialist legality at the highest state level. (138) By democratising state 
institutions through the system of checks and balances, Gorbachev and his team proved that 
Marxism-Leninism was not an unchallengeable ideology, and that its basic tenets...lost 
their ideological hegemony (139) Decentralisation of the Party, following Gorbachevs 
speech at the Conference, was to be identified with the need to dissolve bureaucratic 
centralism and promote the spirit of cooperation rather than subordination (140)
At the outset, Gorbachevs democratisation of the party did not mean to opt for a 
multi-party system, for that measure would infringe the laws of the socialist ideology itself. In 
the late 1980s, the Communist Party was still considered the leading and guiding force of 
Soviet society and the nucleus of its political system, of all state and public organizations. 
(141) The choices favoured by Gorbachev to carry out his reform through the process of Party 
democratisation rested first and foremost on his belief that [d]emocratization accords with 
the very essence of the Leninist concept of socialism...only through the committed and 
conscious participation of the working people themselves in all of societys affairs it is 
possible to realize socialisms humane goals. (142) On the other hand, Gorbachevs other 
challenge was to communicate the idea that democratisation was also a choice that would 
flourish in connection with the modem, and partly Western, promotion of the concept of 
freedom, since freedom of choice, as he stressed in his UN speech, was an imperative 
ingredient in democracy as a whole. Igor V. Timofeyev has recently argued that Gorbachev 
had opened the door wide for a public debate on the validity of the liberal tradition. The first 
success resides in taking such a debate to the public media where liberal intellectuals could 
express their views without being censored. The second was the appointment of a number of 
intellectuals to managerial posts in the public media. (143) Gorbachevs concept of 
democracy in relationship to the Party did not only mean the unfettering of the party by
assimilating people from all walks of life but also the easing of bureaucratic-command 
structures by allowing more options for people to choose their representatives in the Supreme 
Soviet or other governmental institutions. Lewin expresses such a concern by defending this 
political standpoint: Doubtless, many in the USSR are sceptical. They have already heard 
many times about democratization, about frank talk concerning different woes of daily 
life, about the end to administrative methods. They are used to empty promises and 
insincere slogans. (144)
To this end, Gorbachev was quite aware of the fact that the whole process would be 
difficult, if not impossible, without readjusting the entire political system to fit a novel form 
of government, that is, to fit an institutional framework partly based on the Western liberal 
democratic tradition. Gorbachev eventually followed that formula by adjusting in March 1989 
the legal requirements for the electoral system in general and presidential elections in 
particular. The election formula as envisaged in 1989 and 1990 was to respond to the new 
Soviet constitutional demands that elections had to be direct, universal and secret ballot...as 
in the United States. (145) Electoral commissions would work to guarantee merit and 
unanimity. (146)
The Communist Party was not called into question until 1989. And the press itself was 
concerned about the future and health of the Party. In June 1988 Pravda expressed its support 
and loyalty: We have to understand once and for all that in a socialist society there are no 
political grounds, no social reasons, for the creation of a new, different political party, still 
less for the creation of some kind of body of control above the party. (147) But the dilemma 
facing Gorbachev, and which, probably, was one undeniable factor for the decline of the 
Soviet Union in 1991, was how to assimilate this nostalgic picture of Party priority into the 
set of beliefs that he revealed at his UN speech, and which, in theory, were irreconcilable with
socialist thinking, since the drive for parliamentary politics was ignored and despised by Marx 
himself.
2/ The Crisis and Collapse:
Ironically, Gorbachevs aspirations to structural reform were from the start trapped by 
the dilemma of fusing socialist values with the requirements of global interdependence. 
Gorbachevs focus on parliamentary democracy, which he made his defining slogan in his 
foreign policy, constituted a further departure from the Marxian conception of political and 
democratic organisation. In principle, Marx stresses that parliamentarism is only an outlet 
for communicating the interests of the propertied classes, a political situation that Marx 
finds alienating and inhuman. (148) Thus the expression parliamentary democracy is totally 
new and unsocialist when approached from a purely Marxian point of view. It goes 
without saying that Gorbachevs push for a democratic system was injected by some belief in 
a democracy in its liberal sense. Richard Sakwa asserts that Gorbachevs commitment to 
elements of commune democracy is now accompanied by the proceduralism of liberal 
democracy... (149) Here Gorbachevs venture resided so much in his belief in and advocacy 
of the fusion of communalism as a mode of socialist government with a liberal democratic 
tradition. How can two fundamentally different political ideologies intersect? Marx argued 
that a commune governmentlike the Paris Communecould only be a working, not a 
parliamentary, body, executive and legislative at the same time. (150) So in Marxian logic, 
when a commune system passes off to a stage of separation of powers it ceases to be 
communal. It is displaced in a kind of parliamentarism where the working classes do not 
control all powers, and if they intend to do so they will be divided by the bureaucratic rule 
emanating from parliamentary democracy. In this respect, perestroika itself, as a substantial
prerequisite for democratic change, constitutes a denunciation of the very principles 
advocated by socialism.
The Gorbachev choice to join two contradictory ideological traditions led to the 
pressures form the opposition in 1990 to abandon altogether the ideological prerogatives of 
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Since Gorbachev opened the door wide for a 
debate on the future of the Soviet Union in light of party democratisation, radical factions 
seized the opportunity to form in January 1990 the Democratic Platform, which called for a 
multi-party system parliament. (151) That did not reflect Moshe Lewins predictions, which 
stressed that Gorbachev was very unlikely to allow dissolution of the Party too easily:
But none of the reforms are intended to undermine the political pre-eminence of the party...[S] hould 
the eventual turbulence produce some demands for a multi-party system, the leadership will cite 
national interest to prevent undue weakening, let alone a fragmentation, of the party. (152)
Lewins predictions, being slightly too ambitious, were belied by Gorbachevs measures. 
Failure of Gorbachevs perestroika in achieving political stability was also worsened by his 
desperate return to the hard line position that had marked his predecessors. He resumed the 
Stalinist coercive policies by resisting and putting down strikes in many of Soviet republics, 
including the Baltic. When people in some republics took to the streets to deplore 
Gorbachevs policies and ask for more freedom, he employed the army and police to crush the 
demonstrations. (153)
Failure of Gorbachevs perestroika resided also in his attempts to reform the economy. 
The general setting for his political reform went hand in hand with the policies he 
appropriated in the hope of realizing radical restructuring of economic organisation. In 
carrying out his economic reforms, Gorbachev set out a programme of action whereby he 
could relinquish the complex administrative policies related to central planning, basically to
move to a market economy and, at the same time, retain the socialist tradition; to create a 
consumer economy by reviving co-operatives, and by not allowing too much private 
ownership. It seems that Gorbachevs economic policies were not dissociable from his 
glasnost and democratisation formulae. He had in mind a well-defined recipe for the new 
economic challenge: to get rid of the remnants of the Stalinist system. He declared in 1985 
that the Stalinist years had resulted in a 'grim legacy: a backward economy, strong vestiges of 
feudalism, millions of illiterate people. (154) For him, then the status of Soviet economy did 
not get beyond the pre-industrial phase of economic development. It was then the time to 
double or treble the pace of technological development and industrialisation in order to bridge 
the yawning gap between the West and the Soviet Union. So his focus was put primarily on 
heavy industry.
On the other hand, Gorbachevs drastic measures to save the economy from total 
collapse were initiated as a response to the falling rates of economic growth. Produced 
national income, for example, declined from 5.7 per cent between 1971 and 1975 to 3.6 per 
cent between 1981 and 1985, and gross national product from 7.4 per cent to 3.7 percent. 
(155) Other economic historians revealed that the myth of a socialist economic miracle was 
only a lie; official lies about the phenomenal ninety-fold increase in national income 
between 1928 and 1986 were revealed in 1987 by Grigory Khanin and Vasily Selyunin in 
their article Lukavaya tsifra. (156) In order to push up the reforms, Gorbachev had to 
emphasise two solutions: First, to provide the right policies capable of producing scientific 
and technical progress. (157) Second, to adjust the Soviet mode of economic organisation so 
that it motivates producers, workers and consumers through prices and money as 
incentives. (158) The main objective was also to create a consumer market, which would 
function, relatively, in response to a demand/supply formula. Moreover, such a process would 
include to a large extent privatization of many state-owned sectors as a trigger for better
productivity. (159) However, the whole process would only occur by reducing the effect of 
the bureaucratic structure of central planning (reducing the role of the ministries for example), 
that is, by creating new and less administratively controlled industrial and production units. 
Such a formula was the direct aim of the 1988 Enterprise Law concerning privatisation and 
co-operatives. (160) In practice, the law was to create 19,539 co-operative units by the end of 
1988. (161) The intent of the new law, as Goldman asserts, was to strike at the central 
planning authorities and transfer decision-making power from the centre to the enterprises 
themselves. (162) Also, by virtue of the Law, prices in the private sectors would not come 
under the direct control of the state. (163) The Enterprise Law, being conceived of as a 
fruitful incentive for development, forced a sort of debureaucratization of factories and 
other workplaces, by assigning respectable managerial roles to the working classes, and by 
establishing co-operative rather than conflicting relations between workers and bosses. (164 )
As the Soviet state was also suffering greatly from the lack of a strong hard currency, 
it was the policy of Gorbachev to attempt to create a convertible Ruble by actively 
incorporating Soviet economy in the world market. On paper, the formula was simple: to 
increase its exports to the West and afford to increase its Western imports. (165) The Soviet 
Union was terribly in need to improve its technological potential, and to provide solutions to 
get consumer goods from the West. But due to the dramatic increase in oil prices in 1988, the 
Kremlin was prevented from achieving instant goals.
Although the Soviet economy was slightly invigorated by the measures taken from 
1986 to 1989, Gorbachevs perestroika seems to have failed to achieve its economic aims by 
1990. According to official statistics, only some of the programmes envisaged at the 27th 
Party Congress in 1986 were realised by 1989: For example, produced national income was 
increased by 4.4 per cent. (166) Moreover, the general impression was that by the end of 
1989 the economic situation was relapsing to the pre-Gorbachev period. It is reported that
1990 was even worse: gross national product fell by 2 per cent. (167) By 1991 inflation 
caused Soviet GNP to fall by 15 per cent. (168) It was one of the worst figures of GNP 
decrease in Soviet history. As a result, prices dramatically increased and led to a general 
social discontent; they increased by roughly 5 per cent from 1985 to 1990. (169) Actually, in 
the Gorbachev period signs of the depressed Soviet economy can also be traced back to the 
time of the 27th Party Congress when Soviet budget deficit increased by 32 billion Ruble. 
(170) Goldman ascribes Gorbachevs failure to maintain a good level of budget management 
to the managerial gap resulting from the focus on heavy industry rather than on consumer 
goods. Gorbachevs focus on importing machine tools reduced the import of consumer 
goods, which led to shortages and lost sales tax revenue. (171 )
Having overlooked his ultimate objective of economic reforms, Gorbachev was to 
sustain the most unfavourable results of, first, confusing the requirements of two conflicting 
traditions (socialism and capitalism), and, second, believing that heavy industry and non
state-owned sectors would guarantee the coming of a quasi-market economy. (172) The 
result, as it were, was a more fragmented society, desperately expecting to get its needs from 
vital goods. One result of the shortages of this kind was queues... day and night queues for 
sugar...in some areas, and queues like in the war for bread. (173) Gorbachevs reform was 
not grounded on thoughtful gradual policies. The rush for comprehensive and rapid reform 
had caused him to wander off most of the plans that he had designed. As Goldman rightly 
pointed out, [pjerhaps if he had concentrated on some short-run successes, particularly 
increasing production of food and consumer goods, he could have demonstrated he was 
moving on the right track. (174)
Here it can be argued that Gorbachevs economic policy failed for numerous reasons, 
including: (1) Fusion of socialist and capitalist economies; (2) Inability to reconcile the 
requirements of the market economy with the need for developing the country in the short
run; (3) Failure to actively incorporate Soviet economy in the international market. 
Gorbachev himself admits: We lost control over the financial situation in the country. This 
was our most serious mistake in the years of Perestroika...  (175).
Creating the market is a bit like trying to build a forest. The market, like a forest, is easy to chop 
down...A forest, like a market, is an organic phenomenon, with an infrastructure of insects, animals, 
and underbrush, which serve as forms of supportive life, sources of supply, and servicing systems. 
(176)
In theory, Gorbachev took his nation to an unprecedented era of economic and political 
reforms modelled on Western values. In practice, the reforms were carried out against an 
ideological tradition that still identified Russians. The restructuring of Soviet economy and 
democratizing of Soviet politics pleased the West. The United States would no longer think 
about containment. In the long run, however, such reforms did not bring the expected relief 
within the Soviet Union. The reforms did not endear Gorbachev to the majority of the Soviet 
people, partly because the economic situation kept deteriorating, and partly because the 
attempt to replace the socialist system with a novel and complex system, left an 
unprecedented ideological vacuum.
But what remained politically unclear was Gorbachevs real intention behind the 
reforms. While his visits to the United States were most welcome as a real thrust for 
modelling Soviet politics on western liberal democracy, his actions at home were confused. 
One might well think that Gorbachevs position was very much schizophrenic. He oscillated 
between the mood of keeping up with the West and that of satisfying his people who were still 
enmeshed within the tradition of hostility to the US. (177) On the other hand, as an economic 
reformer, he certainly chose to edge his country into an uncertain economic venture, and as a 
political figure, he conceived of himself as a liberator. But no matter what changes he
performed, Gorbachev did a historic service to the United States: he terminated socialism 
through the help of the United States itself. It should be argued that the US needed Gorbachev 
just as a bonus factor to hasten the collapse of the USSR in 1991. The US was an 
undeniable factor in dissolving the Soviet empire. Their political and economic offensive 
against Soviets had begun roughly five years before the coming of Gorbachev. It was due to 
the Reagan administration that the world order changed: [e] xamining the collapse of the 
Soviet Union outside the context of American policy is a little like investigating a sudden, 
unexpected, and mysterious death without exploring the possibility of murder... (178)
Summary
  The Civil War was mainly caused by the liquidated classes who sought to resume the old 
order.
  During the Civil War and slightly after Lenin was primarily concerned with administering 
the state economically. The Bolshevik leadership sought to make use of rather than liquidate 
the old intelligentsia.
  War Communism was a policy adopted in order to refresh the Russian economy which 
had been badly affected by the Civil War. The ultimate aim of War Communism was to 
nationalise the economy and prepare the country for socialism.
  Following from War Communism a policy of requisitioning was adopted by the 
government. Requisitioning meant mainly state collection of grain surpluses from the richer 
farmers in order to feed the Red Army and the working classes.
  War Communism had devastating effects. It resulted in a class war against the peasants, 
and ushered in a dictatorship against the proletariat.
  After War Communism and the NEP, the Stalinist phenomenon emerged through the 
First Five-Year Plan.
  Leninism-Stalinism was terminated by Gorbachevs Perestroika and Glasnost.
Part 3
Theories on the Crisis: Revisionists against
Totalitarians
Introduction:
Is there an ideological continuity between Marx (and Engels), Lenin, and Stalin? This 
question seems vague and open-ended. However, Sovietologists have attempted to come out 
with reasonably convincing answers since the 1930s. The answers to this question have also 
been fraught with contingencies, uncertainties, and a lot of surmise. On the other hand, most 
of the answers to this question have been based on an evaluation of the nature of the 1917 
Bolshevik Revolution and the Soviet Socialist state which emerged thereafter. As in this 
thesis I attempt to provide my own answer (part 4), I have chosen to start with two leading 
schools of thought concerned with the interpretation of the development of Marxism, 
Leninism, and Stalinism: the Totalitarian model and the Revisionist school. In the present 
work I advance my main argument in response to these two rival schools. (1)
Discussing these schools might well, I would argue, help in elucidating my theory in 
part four that both the October Revolution and the Stalin Revolution are basically leviathan 
revolutions. The first section of this part examines how the totalitarian model has sought to 
study the Soviet system by first contesting that Soviet history has been that of an 
unchallengeable dominance of the state over society initiated by Lenin and continued through 
Stalins revolution from above, and second arguing that there is an incontestable continuity 
between Marx, Lenin, and Stalin. The second section tries to elucidate the main points of the 
revisionist school of social historians. The schools main argument comes as a reply to the 
contested theories of the totalitarian model. It basically premises its overall thesis on the 
claim that Soviet history (especially in its Stalinist face) had not been totally entrenched in the 
absolute dominance of the state over society. There was rather some sort of negotiation 
between civil society and the state system. This, for instance, can be seen in observing the 
influence of several groups, and even the working population, on governmental policy
making. The second claim of the revisionist school is that the alleged continuity between 
Marx, Lenin, and Stalin was only relatively accurate.
The aim behind my elucidation of the two schools in question is to try to show how 
the Soviet system has been subject to interpretations that are in great part based on either 
political scientific surmise or socio-historical investigation. My thesis in Part four of the 
present work will try to give an alternative interpretation of the Soviet system in both its 
Leninist and Stalinist faces. While I agree with some of the arguments of the totalitarian 
model for instances (revolution from above, conflict between state and society), I totally 
disagree with the models continuity thesis argumentMarxism = Leninism = Stalinism. 
My challenge to this thesis is that Leninism-Stalinism was not the ideological expression of 
the Marxian text; nor was it the practical application of Marxs theory of emancipation. The 
Leninist-Stalinist state reflected more the Hobbesean leviathan state which in its authoritarian 
grip constituted a challenge to the very emancipatory claims it advances. Also, while I agree 
with the revisionist school in its claim that society did participate in its own victimisation 
during the rule of Stalin, I totally disagree with the claim of some of its adherents that the 
bureaucratisation of politics did weaken the totalitarian grip of the regime which in its loss of 
control over the centre was emptied of its totalitarian character. In this part I mainly discuss 
the main areas of contention between both schools.
I. The Totalitarian Model and the Continuity Thesis:
1/ Lenin, the Bolsheviks, and the Challenge of the Totalitarian Model:
The prevailing theory in Western academic circles has been, since the October 
Revolution, that of a historiography that looks at Soviet history as the sum result of a 
historically illegitimate revolution against democracy as was partially established by the 
February Revolution. The advocates of such a historiography have ranged from mainstream 
political scientists who advance the theory that Soviet history is but a by-product of Marxs
and Engelss theory of revolution (2) to others who principally premise their argument on the 
hypothesis that Soviet history at workapart from its Marxist origindid spawn a modem 
form of totalitarianism that could compare only to Nazism, and with characteristically new 
forms of political obligation, tyranny, and terror that have been more or less all too simply 
non-existing in any other authoritarian state. (3) Such a prevailing theory has been known as 
the school of totalitarianism, or, more technically, the Totalitarian model. This model 
advances a continuity thesis which basically argues that there is a clear-cut ideological and 
political continuity between Marxism, Leninism and Stalinism. The continuity thesis for 
this purpose is constructed on the accusation by the scholars in question of Lenins thought 
first and the October Revolution second of being solely responsible for what later became 
called Stalinism. The thesis in other words holds that many of the policies attributed to the 
state functioning under Stalins ruleabolition of the NEP, the First Five-Year Plan, intra
party purges, the Great Purges of 1937-1938had roots in the October Revolution and 
Bolshevik thinking, even as it first evolved with Lenins What is to Be Done?
The continuity thesis greatly rests on the justification by the totalitarian model of the 
ideological continuity between Soviet regimes. Such a justification is often bred over by a 
simple observation that without the ideological slogan of a free workers state the regimes 
in question cannot hold their grip on their societies. The slogan of a free socialist society often 
hid the leaders thirst for power and justification of coercion through a politics of 
propaganda meant, as Hannah Arendt once noticed, to brainwash both intellectuals at home 
and the non-totalitarian countries into accepting the official discourse of the state. (4) In this 
instance, the focus on the role of ideology by the totalitarian model basically reveals its 
inclination to study Bolshevism in rather political terms, focusing more on how 1917 was a 
revolution from above primarily carried out by a handful of tyrants. (5)
In his essay The Dark Forces, the Totalitarian Model, and Soviet History. (1987) 
Jerry F. Hough demarcates the difference between two modes characterising the totalitarian 
model. The first is developmental as it describes the Bolshevik Revolution, the NEP period, 
the First Five-Year Plan, and the Great Purges as a phenomenon practically resulting from 
Marxs very theorisation of the class struggle, the revolution, and the dictatorship of the 
proletariat. The second, on the other hand, is operational in the sense that it generally depicts 
Soviet society as a victim of a political elite who after having carried out a revolution from 
above consolidated a state entirely in their service, and consummated their monopoly of 
power by transforming the supposedly workers state into a veritable police machine. (6) 
While the developmental model constitutes the very argument advanced by the advocates of 
the continuity thesis, the operational examines how Marxism at work (Leninism and 
Stalinism) proved true the complementarity of theory and practice, that is, the inevitable 
encounter of an unworkable theory and its practice.
The classical work representing the developmental model is that of famous 
Sovietologists such as Martin Malia and Richard Pipes. (7) The advocates of the operational 
model are such scholars as Robert V Daniels. (8) Although both groups share the claim that 
the relationship between state and society in the USSR can only be comprehended politically, 
they partially differ in locating the nature of the Soviet state (9) Martin Malias text has 
represented the developmental models obsession with demonizing the Marxist project in its 
entirety. In the words of Ronald G Suny, Malia represents the pith of the liberal and 
orthodox interpretation of the Russian Revolution, its Marxian basis, and its post
revolutionary phases. (10) We need to believe, Malia reminds us, that nothing went wrong 
with the [October] Revolution, but that the whole enterprise, quite simply, was wrong from its 
inception (Malias italics) (11) In a different work, Malia argues that during October the 
working class was only used as a social agent for change. The working class did not [itself]
come to power; what came to power was a political and ideological organization, the 
Bolshevik Party. (12) These words reflect most of the pioneering scholarly work written in 
the 1940s, 1950s, and 1960s by a host of political historians whose focus on the 1917 
Revolution was later expressed by Robert Tucker: The Bolshevik regime was in many ways 
a novel phenomenon in Russia. It was not originally a dictatorship of one person...but a 
dictatorship of one party...Lenin was of course the supreme leader and dominating figure... 
(13) The Leninist system, Tucker adds, was basically oligarchical rather than autocratic. 
Soviet politics in the Lenin period were, in their way, a continuing drama of persuasion of the 
ruling minority by its acknowledged supreme leader. (14) Such totalitarian school spokesmen 
as Malia, Tucker (15), and Pipes have been confident that what happened during October 
1917 was rather pre-determined by an ideology of terror the sole designer of which had been 
Lenin himself. Pipes was, as Suny put it, obsessed with the belief that October was a classic 
coup detat engineered cynically by conspirators, led by the cowardly, cruel, unscrupulous 
Lenin. (16)
This view of October and Lenin is reiterated in a large part of the literature produced 
by the totalitarian school whose insistence on condemning Leninism, as Alex Callinicos 
explains, basically comes from the suggestion that the methods used by Lenin and his 
supporters first to achieve then to maintain control of the state brought into being the Stalinist 
system... (17) The advent of conspiracy, mass manipulation, and terror of the First 
Five-Year Plan (18) finds its full expression in the Revolution itself: That Lenins 
revolutionary dictatorship of the Bolshevik Party paved the way for Stalinism, and that the 
later system had much in common with the one it supplanted, is true. (19) Why the Soviet 
totalitarian regimeLenin and Stalinhad to resort to conspiracy, mass manipulation, and 
terror was very much for the sake of maintaining an all too tight totalitarian grip on society as 
a whole. In the words of Hannah Arendt, this is basically related to what she calls 'totalitarian
propaganda and totalitarian organization. (20) While propaganda is the strategy for 'winning 
the masses, (21) and by far preparing for 'indoctrination,' (22) totalitarian organisation 
'translates propaganda lies of the movement, woven around a central fictionthe conspiracy 
of...the Trotskyitesinto a functioning reality, to build up...a society whose members act and 
react according to the rules of the fictitious world.' (23) What mediates between propaganda 
and organisation in totalitarian rule is an extended use of 'terror' the manifestation of which 
comes in the form of a 'total' destruction of 'the one essential prerequisite of all freedom 
which is simply the capacity of motion which cannot exist without space.' (24) Terror as the 
means for knitting together propaganda rules and organisation forms is not rational but 
rationalised, and not legitiamte but legitimated. Arendt argues so by attributing the Soviet 
regime's legitimation of its terror against society to the formal theorisation of "man and 
history" by Marx himself. 'Marx's law of the survival of the most progressive class,' and his 
'class struggle as the driving force of history' are only a catalyst for the development of terror 
under the Soviet system. (25) Marxism's legitimation of a class war as a groundwork for the 
emancipation of mankind does warrant the use of terror as a 'lawful' realization of the law of 
movement':
[T]he chief aim [of terror] is to make it possible for the force of...history to race freely through 
mankind...As such terror seeks to "stabilize" men in order to liberate the forces of...history. It is this 
movement which singles out the foes of mankind against whom terror is let loose, and no free action of 
either opposition or sympathy can be permitted to interfere with the elimination of the "objective 
enemy" of history...of the class... (26)
The responsibility of Lenin himself for the age of terror which began shortly after his 
death has been largely addressed in Richard Pipes work. (27) Pipes work has been 
axiomatic of the liberal orthodox literature which holds both Lenin and the Bolsheviks
responsible for the atrocities against post-revolution Russian society. Overemphasis of the 
evil nature of the Bolsheviks has however made Pipes liable to more than one critique 
published in Russian Review (28) The host of scholars reviewing Pipes regard his account of 
Leninism and the October Revolution as self-generated, and therefore self-defeating, 
conclusions about a phenomenon of history that is particularly practically telling. A reply to 
Pipes long and repetitive The Russian Revolution (1990) came from Peter Kenez who 
maintained that Pipes was only actuated by his firm determination to demonize the 
Bolshevik Revolution. (29) Such a determination, Kenez maintains, has at heart an 
explainable incentive. Pipes was fully absorbed into his accusations and could barely find 
some time or space in his long book to articulate any of the traits characterising the 
Bolsheviks: ...who the Bolsheviks were, how they saw the world, what they thought they 
were doing, and why they ultimately prevailed. (30) In this book Pipes was chained by the 
mainstream political historiography bred over by a belligerent animosity for Bolshevism. As a 
historian primarily concerned with politics Pipes, Kenez reminds us, has nothing to care for 
but dictate a historical understanding of events that is totally dismissive, for instance, of any 
negative role of the White anti-Bolshevik force, the Volunteer Army as a competitor 
whose bloody participation in the Civil War is simply indisputable. The sole explanation 
Pipes struggles to provide is that the Bolsheviks prevailed only because they followed one 
single and linear policy of terror, thus forgetting that in the Ukraine alone one hundred 
thousand Jews were killed largely...by soldiers of the White Army. (31) Thus characterising 
the Bolsheviks as solely demon and terrorist, Pipes does not dissociate Lenin from the 
practice of the party as a whole. Lenin, for his part, was actuated by personal malice to 
conduct the terror himself and be its only designer.
By amassing a range of unreliable literature in accusation of Lenin Pipes, Kenez 
argues, has anxiously, but desperately, attempted to confirm the straightforward line of
Lenins terror by the endless desire for power. Pipes even goes further by trying to 
legitimise his claim that Lenin was only a single tyrant continuing Russias last tsar. (32) He 
finally observes that Stalin and Stalinism were deeply inherent in Bolshevik thinking rather an 
aberration resulting from Lenins policies. (33) In line with orthodox political historians, 
Pipes, in the words of Kenez, only focuses his attention on areas of focus that are ostensibly 
associated with most dictators in history: peoples manipulation by the regime, the regimes 
reliance on foreign assistance (34), and the use of ideology as a cover for power abuse, etc. 
(35) By arguing so, Kenez, I think, has succeeded in pointing to Pipes's "deterministic" 
illusions. Instead of developing a consistent argument pertinent to the debate on the nature of 
Soviet power, Pipes has, in my view, read Soviet ideological history through the prisms of 
tsarist Russia, and with a total disregard of both the historical and ideological backgrounds of 
each regime; he read Soviet Russia's coercion through the exegesis of the liberal ideology; he 
also reduced analytical political historiography to a method of research based primarily on a 
"moralising" tendency.
Pipess oft-celebrated attack on Lenin and the Bolsheviks is best illustrated in his 
Three  Whys of the Russian Revolution (1995). Shortly published after his Russia Under the 
Bolshevik Regime, this work mentions two alleged facts that were behind the triumph of the 
Bolsheviks in 1917, namely ideology and chance. The October Revolution was a classic 
coup detat rather than a popular revolution. (36) For Pipes, there is reason to believe so, 
since Lenin himself paved the way for such a coup by primarily believing in the limited role 
of the workers in carrying out the revolution. Considering Lenins standpoint as regards the 
proletariat, Pipes thinks that Lenins contempt for the workers and his praise of the 
professional revolutionaries (referring to What is to Be Done?, I suppose) was rather a 
negation of any popular basis for the revolution, since the revolution was the work of class 
political consciousness, and the workers, in Lenins logic, were capable of anything but
political consciousness. (37) The defective link between Bolsheviks belief in the revolution 
and their disenchantment of the workers, Pipes tells us, is inherent in Lenins belief [the 
theoretical basis of the Bolshevik party]...that the working class in and of itself is not 
revolutionary. (38) In this respect Lenins revolutionary theory stands on sand and, therefore, 
the Bolshevik party became elitist in the sense that from its inception it was emptied of any 
essence, and became a no-party: the basis of any genuine political party is its popular 
support, but, like the Nazi and Fascist parties, the Bolshevik treated membership as a 
privilege, restricting it to persons who met certain ideological as well as class or racial 
criteria. (39) The drive for centralisation and strict discipline, and the uncouth contempt for 
the masses made Lenin transform ideology into strict policing, where the use of terror was 
sanctified by the alleged need to physically exterminate ones competitors (Mensheviks, 
SRs, etc) (40)
In The Unknown Lenin Pipes also discredits Lenin on the basis of what he discovered 
as documents revealing Lenins tyrannical tendencies. Characteristic of Pipess The Unknown 
Lenin is his renewed interest in reducing Lenin as a source of evil. This book constitutes the 
third part of a trilogy that starts with The Russian Revolution. What is new about The 
Unknown Lenin is Pipess empirical excavation of what Lenin thought and said about a 
number of subjects. Pipes takes as his target all the documents at hand which bore a print of 
Lenin, including letters and official documents. This work continues with the rest in the sense 
that Pipes does not observe then conclude, but rather starts over from drawing conclusions on 
the ground of hypothetical surmise. Pipess ultimate goal is to firmly emphasise that Lenin 
was a dictator, and that he succeeded in paving the way for Stalin. Lenins complicity with 
Stalin, Pipes maintains, can be seen in the fact that there is much evidence of Lenins 
reliance on Stalin, not only in running day-to-day government operations but also in setting 
major policy goals. (41)
The link between Lenin and Bolshevism in light of the theory advanced by the 
"Totalitarian model" highlights also a further link that has been raised by a number of scholars 
representing the Continuity thesis. This concerns the relationship between the Bolshevik 
revolution and what occurred after the death of Lenin in 1924. Jerry Hough thinks that the 
Totalitarian model has been most accurate in depicting Bolshevisms responsibility for the 
revolution and the later rise of the practice known as Stalinism.(42) Hough also assumes that 
the model is totally accurate in asserting the similarity between Bolshevism as left-wing 
ideology and Nazism as a right-wing ideology. (43) He then totally agrees with such 
analyses as, I would argue, Hannah Arendts. For him, [b]oth [Bolshevism and Nazism] 
rested in their appeal on an xenophobic, anti-Western, anti-liberal fanaticism produced by 
extraordinary insecurities among the masses experiencing urban life for the first time. (44) 
Hough goes even further. He reaches another extreme end of totalitarian analysis. For him 
the Khomeini Revolution in Iran was but a late copy of the Bolshevik Revolution: The best 
way for a modem American to understand the Bolshevik Revolution is to see it as the 
Khomeini Revolution of Russian history. (45)
A critical response to the totalitarian model in general and Jerry Hough in particular 
comes from the ardent historian Stephen F. Cohen. Cohen has constantly argued that the 
continuity thesis in general has focused on areas of interest which contradict substantially 
with a positivist study of Soviet Russia. The particular focus on the continuity between 
Bolshevism and Stalinism does in great part distance academic research from the task of 
understanding and explaining history as practice. He writes in Bolshevism and Stalinism 
(1977) that the continuity thesis has a number of weaknesses which prevent Sovietologists in 
general from carrying out objective research: it has largely obscured the need for study of 
Stalinism as a distinct phenomenon with its own history, political dynamics, and social 
consequences. (46) The continuity thesis is bedeviled by its own overemphasis on
Stalinisms inherited political dynamics characteristic of Bolshevism. Quoting Herbert 
Butterfield, Cohen argues that this overemphasis resonates as Whig interpretation of history 
as it wrongly takes the present as a mirror of the past. (47) The causal dynamics according 
to such a historiography is of course the partys ideology: ideology as the fundamental 
constituent of Bolshevik power vis-i-vis the people is viewed by the model as Stalins only 
currency. Bolshevik ideology, namely socialism, Cohen tells us, did not march at the head of 
society and turn into a police machine before it fulfilled some of its emancipatory claims: it 
emancipated as well as subjugated. The Russian Civil War was one instance which impacted 
to a great extent the ideology itself by repealing the ideas and legislation favoring workers, 
women, school children, etc. (48) According to Cohen this was a new ideology structurally 
different from that associated with 1917. (49)
The other failure of the causal dynamics is its emphasis that the theoretical premises 
of Lenins WBD1 found their veritable expression in Stalinism later: WBD? constituted the 
background for the Stalin state. Advancing his claim against the causal dynamics, Cohen 
uses Robert C Tuckers thesis that the Purges of the 1930s for instance were a clear-cut 
departure from Bolshevism both at the organisational and ideological levels as Stalin 
transformed the ruling party from oligarchy to autocracy: the change from an oligharchical 
party regime to an autocratic Fuherist regime... (50) The great Purges, as Stalins one-way 
confirmation of his monopoly of power, officialised the terror, and the party itself and its 
different bodies fell out of favour and became fully subservient to one person. The waning of 
the party, its functions, and its appeal fully confirmed that the line of march of the Bolshevik 
party was swallowed by a devouring monster called Stalin. Here, ideology and the emphasis 
on the partys unity were reduced to the cult of Stalins personality (51)
Although Cohens focus on the Totalitarian model and the continuity thesis is 
constructed on the conviction that studying Soviet history should encompass more than the
accentuation of the regimes abuse of power, etc, a host of other established scholars are 
particularly anxious to show that the role of ideology has determined Stalinism to be 
Bolshevisms offspring, and that the political practice from 1917 to 1923, at least, was a 
rehearsal for the acts of terror that followed after 1929. Another challenge to the continuity 
thesis comes from Robert V Daniels, another important figure in Soviet studies. Danielss 
position vis-a-vis Soviet history and politics can be defined as somehow ambivalent, since 
at least in terms of consistency, he agrees with the totalitarian model in part, while he devotes 
the rest of his thesis to his theory of post-revolutionary dictatorship. (52) In most of his 
workwhich has been seriously attacked by some supporters of the totalitarian model (53) 
his challenge to the continuity between Bolshevism and Stalinism is most clear-cut. The 
Totalitarian model, in Danielss view, fail[s] to explain [Stalinism] except by ideological 
perversity. (54) Stalins departure from Leninism is best illustrated by Stalins intrigue when 
he reshaped the Central Committee of the CPSU to create concentric circles of top officials 
around himself. (55) By doing so Stalinism, Daniels firmly believes, bastardized 
[Marxism] and instrumentalized it as a compulsory state religion with the lies that sustained 
the system and were sustained by it. (56)
In advancing this thesis, Daniels seeks to suggest that the Totalitarian modelwhile 
should be accepted in evaluating Stalinism as a certain form of totalitarian dictatorshiphas 
to be called into question when it comes to investigating the political and social realities 
emanating from Stalinism as a totalitarian system. Suggesting that Stalinism is simply a 
straight continuation of Leninism, the model, according to Daniels, seems to have dictated 
certain historical rules that oblige the researcher to retreat from objective observation of 
political phenomena. This assertion, being characteristic of mainstream Anglo-American 
scholarship, does exclude, Daniels reminds us, further investigation into the nature of the 
Stalinist system. (57) The point for Daniels is simply not a matter of condemnation as is a
question of digging out historical truth through addressing the adequate issues. If one should 
firmly maintain that there was some sort of an ideological link between Lenin and Stalin, such 
an assumption should in turn be premised on an accurate reading of what Lenin intended 
while carrying out the Revolution, and how circumstances, sheer circumstances, played a 
gigantic role in bequeathing certain dogmas to Stalin himself. A satisfactory answer to the 
question whether Lenin paved the way for Stalin, presupposes both theorising the degree to 
which Stalin could arrogate Leninism to his own ideological ends, and the degree to which 
Lenin himself made the mistake of being too immersed in authoritarian practice.
In Danielss view a significant fact in relation to Lenins partial responsibility for the 
practice of Stalinism is that the October Revolution itself was far from an organised 
revolution. It was an accident of history or, as he writes in a different work, a desperate 
gamble, unlikely to succeed and still less to hold out. (58) Viewing the Bolshevik revolution 
as an accident Daniels, however, does not draw a parallel between what happened during the 
Revolution and what happened during Stalins rule. For Daniels, what explains more the 
success of the Bolsheviks in the revolution was both Lenin the man and Lenin the politician. 
Added to this was the objective fact that the Mensheviks, and Socialist 
Revolutionaries.. .were unwilling to lead a revolution against the interests of property. (59) 
In Danielss logic the events of October and the personal role of Lenin do by no means 
explain Stalins terror. What happened during Stalins rule was only explainable by the 
character of the phase in Soviet history that was fully responsive to the nature of the politico- 
ideological practice characteristic of Stalinism. The circumstances factor was decisive in 
bringing about October, and Lenin contributed indirectly to Stalins dictatorship. Yet, in 
Danielss view, such a contribution was but unintentional. Stalin capitalized Lenins early 
attempts to refresh the economy through the NEP by forcing the First Five-Year Plan in 1929. 
Stalins dictatorship was only a chance, Daniels argues, unintentionally prepared by Lenin
when he adapt[ed] the party to circumstances of an ebbing revolutionary wave, a maneuver 
[which] gave his successors an indispensable stake in clinging to the verbal forms of the 
ideology as well as the dictatorship of the proletariat. (60)
To confirm that the theoretical and practical discordance between Lenin and Stalin is 
hard to rebut, Daniels believes that the party dictatorship during and shortly after October was 
partly mandatory and partly untimely. Yet, what was most striking about Stalins rule later 
was the fact of having to carry political practice itself beyond the scope of revolutionary 
practice, thus leading it to a completely new stage of development called, in Danielss words, 
post-revolutionary dictatorship. (61) The specificity of this period is that it constitutes an 
entire break with the form of dictatorship theorised by Lenin and witnessed in 1917 and 
shortly after. Stalins revolution which began with the First Five-Year Plan, Daniels tells us, 
became a counter-revolution from above where cadres decide everything. (62) Stalins 
post-revolutionary dictatorship was consummated by the Great Purges and got off to a stage 
that can be characterised as the functional equivalent of a monarchical restoration. (63) 
Danielss totalitarian paradigm (being characteristically different from the interpretation of 
the totalitarian model) stands as a refutation of the classical belief maintained by orthodox 
Western scholarship that Stalinism was basically a replication of Marxian thought. He 
exposes his rejection of the continuity thesis by suggesting that the central myth of Stalinism 
is that it desperately deceives itself by suggesting that Marxism has been the inspiration and 
the plan that have guided the development of Soviet-style socialism ever since the Revolution 
of 1917. (64) Stalinism in this respect is an ideology that legitimises its abuse of Marxism by 
asserting that every single practice following from the 1917 Revolutionwhether it be 
cloacked in Leninst or Stalinist vestmentwas 'inspired' by Marxism. The illusion of the 
continuity thesis here, according to Daniels, is that it adopts the same logic used by Stalinism 
in legitimating its practices.
2/ Marxism and Bolshevism: the Genetic Link":
The belief that Bolshevism was naturally inclined to inspire a state system based on 
terror has been a fundamental argument preached by adherents to the continuity thesis. This 
has been but one defining facet of those seeking to legitimise their negative view of 
Stalinism. In general terms, however, the continuity thesis is based on a broader question 
relating to Marxism itself. Leszek Kolakowski, for instance, not only clearly suggested that 
Stalinism is a continuation of Leninism. (65) He once noticed that the practice known as 
Stalinism had clear-cut Marxist roots; not that Marx and Engels theorised intentionally a 
society that must succumb to the rule of the totalitarian regime in the name of the dictatorship 
of the proletariat, but that Marxs teaching was only applicable in theory, since the actual 
practice of the Soviet leaders confirmed that his theorys basic values could hardly be 
materialized otherwise. (66) Marxs imagination, Kaolakowski maintains, was incapable 
of stretching as far as to envisage the transition from pre-history to genuine history and to 
fancy a proper social technology which could convert the former into the latter. (67) In 
believing so, Kolakowski asserts that Marxs utopia of a perfect unity of mankind and his 
preoccupation with the noble proletarian cause has reduced the entirety of his thought to an 
all-too-easy convertible theory capitalized later as an ideology of the [Soviet] totalitarian 
regime. (68) Kolakowskis apologia for such a continuity follows, I would suggest, a 
Darwinist line of analysis which maintains that a genetic evolution of Marxian thought 
could only result in a political practice that is entirely alien to the emancipatory claims in 
whose name Marxism speaks. Such an apologia in turn does not stop at the level of depicting 
Marxs inability to see beyond proletarian consciousness or unity of mankind; it rather 
proclaims that Soviet ideology is a strongly simplified, yet not falsified form of the dry
skeleton of Marxism, and that Stalins ideas and most notorious practice were but 
expressions embedded in the Communist Manifesto (69) Kolakowski also suggests that in 
order to keep a strong hold on society the totalitarian regime starts by entirely drowning all 
human activity into the goal of the state. (70)
The question of ideology in relation to Marxism is also addressed by the Russian 
intellectual N.V. Zagladin who thinks that Marxisms crisis resides in the conflict between 
Marxism as a science and Marxism as an ideology. (71) The point for Zagladin is that 
Marxism as a science is constructive in the sense that it helps people better understand social 
and political phenomena. Yet, as soon as communism became a party doctrine, i.e., an 
ideology, there was no longer any place in it for abstract scientific truths, no more than for 
useless knowledge that did not immediately serve the goals of the class struggle. (72) The 
question of Marxisms analytical scopes, in Zagladins logic, lies in what has as yet been a 
yawning gulf between Marxisms ability to depict, and analyse social and economic 
phenomena and its inconsistency as an ideological enterprise. When it is communicated to the 
massesas in the case of Russiaas a doctrine of emancipation, and sells as an ideology of 
class hatred anxious to substitute a new order for the old one it soon turns against its 
humanist and democratic reach. (73) Such a defective link between Marxism as a science 
and Marxism as an ideology finds its utter articulation, Zagladin maintains, in the difference 
between the movements leading elite and the majority of the people. A classic case 
exemplifying this situation was the mistake committed by the Russian Social Democratic 
Party when it adopted Leninist ideas based on the need of the violent seizure of power and 
establishment of a dictatorship in the name of the progressive class. (74)
This accentuation of the straightforward ideological continuity between Marxism and 
Bolshevism was also echoed in the work of Adam B Ulam who in The Unfinished Revolution 
(1960) sought to demarcate the ideological implications of the triumph of the Bolshevik
Revolution. He believed that Marxism was bedeviled by its natural inclination to anarchism 
(75) Anarchism, as an ideological facet constituting the first stage of revolutionary 
transformation, is an imperative constituent of Marxisms strategy to reverse the status quo by 
means of violent revolution. Being a basic characteristic of Marxism, anarchism might only 
be fully comprehended in its evolution. It is part of a theoretical formula that is self
substantiated by the need of the proletariat to carry out its historical mission of first smashing 
the autocratic political machine and then forging the groundwork for challenging the very 
technological structure of capitalism, that is industrialism. (76) According to Ulam the strict 
line of continuity between Marxism and Bolshevism is accounted for by a causal relationship 
which is entirely determined by Marxisms own concern to dictate certain ideological rules: 
...the psychological mechanism instilled by Marxism in its devotees...makes them prone to 
anarchism in the time of revolution, to centralism and inegalitarianism after power has been 
won. (77) The drive for anarchism, being a defining stage in revolutionary Marxism, did but 
turn the Communist Party into a totalitarian party (78) that itself became the state. (79) 
Such a continuity, according to Ulam, did nothing but insure that the inclination to anarchism 
was continued in Stalins age of industrialization and collectivization, which made the 
revolution deviate from its emancipatory promises.
Ulams point of, what I would term, Marxisms genetic anarchism evokes an other 
thesis in relation to anarchism made by John Hoffman in a recent argument. For Hoffman the 
Bolshevik Revolution was but an authoritarian trap (80) which translates in great part the 
inability of the Marxian text to produce a political practice responsive to Marxisms 
egalitarian claims. Marxs theory falls prey to several paradoxes inherent in the very nature of 
Marxian text. In the opening paragraph of his The State: Has the Withering Away Thesis 
Finally Withered Away? (1992) Hoffman makes his point clear:
Marxism appears to be equivocal about the state. On the one hand it rejects the anarchist contention that 
the state should be spontaneously swept away by the the insurgent masses. On the other hand it 
emphasizes...that the state itself is a barrier to human emancipation and must ultimately disappear. 
Hoffmans point here is that Marxism is betrayed by its own logic (82) Marxism is at the 
same time an allegedly anti-anarchist and anti-statist doctrine. In Hoffmans logic, this 
encounter between anti-anarchism and anti-statism in Marxian theory is fraught with a 
paradox hard to grapple with. (83) The problem of this contradiction, Hoffman argues, can 
only be revealed in observing the October Revolution and its aftermath. It is basically then 
when the continuity between Marxism and Bolshevism can be traced in its full. Marxisms 
legitimisation of its own contradictions has been fully exported through Marxian thinking 
itself only to reach its full manifestation at the event of October and its aftermath. In trying to 
bridge this gulf between what their theory envisages and what their practice reveals, both 
Engels and Marx sought to argue that history is also about particular circumstances that 
should be treated by an exceptional practice not necessarily faithful to Marxian theory. (84) 
In the words of Hoffman, failure to surmount the problem of a practice conflicting 
with theory is most manifest in Marxisms inability to confront the thesis of the historical 
petard: [N] theory is as vulnerable as Marxism to the thesis of the historical petard. (85) 
The conception advanced by Hoffmans thesis here is that Marxist theory is simply prone to 
give birth to a flawed practice which, instead of keeping the promise of emancipation, does 
culminate in despotic rule. Focussing on this thesis, Hoffman overstates, it seems to me, the 
case of Marxisms failure to usher in a healthy practice. (86) Hoffman adds that even the 
attempts by ardent defenders of Marxist theory to try to salvage Marxism from the thesis of 
the historical petard have been only relatively sustainable. Alex Callinicoss thesis that the 
collapse of the Stalinist regimes was a vindication rather than a refutation of the classical
Marxist tradition is well-formed and penetrative, but it fails to undo the quandary posed by 
the thesis of the historical petard. (87) Even the classical defense forged by adherents to the 
circumstances argument, Hoffman maintains, is only indicative of how the 1917 Revolution 
was but a desperate attempt by the Bolsheviks to adapt untimely events to the logic of 
Marxisms theory. (88) Such an adaptation, Hoffman contends, formed the basis for an 
authoritarian practice the result of which was the suppression of the Constituent Assembly. 
(89) Having been a theory legitimated by Marxisms designers themselves the circumstances 
argument did condemn not only Lenins revolution but the entirety of the emancipatory 
project which was later undermined by Stalin in 1930 when he violently consolidated the state 
through crushing what he called the enemies of the people (90) Elsewhere Hoffman suggests 
that the gulf between theory and practice in Marxism not only led to an authoritarian state but 
also confirmed the close connection between Marxism and tyrannical rule. Adopting a logic 
used by Joseph Femia for this purpose Hoffman writes that there is essentially a genetic link 
between Marxism and despotism. (91)
The question of the genetic structure of Marxisms history has been constantly 
challenged by Daniels who, although shares many of the views advanced by the totalitarian 
model such as the concept of terror and ideology, thinks that determining the lineage of bad 
ideological genes should not be the concern of the scholarly work relating to Marxism. What 
is important for him is to find out how much the practice was able to realize the theory, and 
how one should primarily trace and assess the degree of putting at work socialism and 
Jacobinism by Marx, Marxism and the Russian revolutionary heritage by Lenin, and 
Marxism-Leninism by Stalin. (92) Daniels criticism of the totalitarian model in this respect 
appears in his reply to George Enteen,
The question of Marxist ideology is my main area of disagreement with Enteen, as it is with what I
might call the straight-line school of ideological determinism maintaining that Marxism brought about
Leninism and Leninism brought about Stalinism...Lenins roots reached more into non-Marxist sources 
than into Marx...Stalin had some roots in Lenin, but there were other influence on him and in the ways 
he used Lenins words and ideas. (93)
Danielss point of contention in this respect is that while Marx theorised, as a guiding slogan, 
the necessity of the proletariat to grow with its own class consciousness and prepare for the 
revolution with maturity, Lenin was indeed chained by his thesis that the workers were 
incapable by themselves of class political consciousness, and had to get it from without.
II/ Revisionist Perspectives:
1/ Revisionists against Totalitarians: Responses to Responses:
The partial opening of the archives for Western social historians in the late 1970s and 
early 1980s was a gratifying answer to why Stalinism had been brutal and ferocious. Access 
to an open range of archives after the Soviet collapse has also confirmed the suspicions about 
the biased and unworkable conclusions drawn by a number of political scientists who saw, 
and still see, the Stalin revolution only as a revolution against society. (94) This seems to have 
been Sheila Fitzpatricks argument when she, and other revisionist historians, started to write 
Soviet history afresh after the opening of the archives.
[S]ocial history...was virtually impossible to write within the totalitarian framework. 
(95) This assertion by Sheila Fitzpartrick constituted the premise for the conflict between the 
totalitarian model and the revisionist historians. The hot debate started by Fitzpatrick and 
other revisionists in the 1980s had been preceded by a revisionist literature since the late 
1950s with scholars such as Alex Inkeles and Raymond Bauer. (96) While the aim of such a 
literature had been to shed new light on the contribution of Soviet society to the political life 
of the 1920s, 1930s, and 1940s, Fitzpatrick, together with a host of historians, preferred to
revisit the main meaning of the Stalin revolution by suggesting a revolution-from-below 
thesis. This means that Fitzpatricks main concern was not only to negate the early attempts 
by political scientists to heap the blame for the age of terror on solely Stalin and the 
Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Her main concern was that political terror, social 
instability, poverty, and the purges had had a mass basis. For her, although the Stalin 
revolution basically had roots in all such aspects mentioned above, Stalinism was not state 
practice from above against society from below; it was rather the sum result of the interaction 
between politics and social participation. (97)
Therefore, Fitzpatricks new perspectives, as she pleased to call them, constituted a 
fresh look in Soviet history characteristically different, for instance, from modernisation 
theory as had been pioneered by the Harvard Interview Project. The 1980s came also as a 
strong blow against the old historiography centred on regime studies, the power of 
ideology, and the state/society debate. Actually Fitzpatricks conflict with the old 
historiography has been only part of an overall reaction by earlier revisionists to the 
totalitarian model. (98) The conflict resulted primarily from the revisionists growing 
suspicion about the methods of research used by the totalitarian model. The revisionists chief 
concern has been what they think to be the failure of the school of totalitarianism to conceive 
of history in its socio-historical sense. Such a concern has been reared by the belief that the 
totalitarian model was bedevilled by its  inherent political bias and its inappropriateness to 
contemporary Soviet reality. (99)
According to Fitzpatrick, the novelty in research orientations concerning Soviotology 
came from a new cohort of historians who, considering the Soviet reality as particularly 
idiosyncratic, could forge new theses capable of fathoming the internal workings of the Soviet 
system (100) By suggesting so, however, Fitzpatrick exposed the new cohorts novel research 
orientations to severe criticism from both political scientists and social historians. The
responses to her new orientations were single-mindedly focused on two main aspects in her 
work: overemphasis on social history, and her ambivalence while dealing with totalitarian 
models argument of revolution from above. (101) On the other hand, the main reason why 
scholarly work in the field of Soviet studies has led the so-called school of ideology to 
accuse Fitzpatrick and her cohort of subjectivity has been Fitzpatricks own 
overemphasised claim for scholarly objectivity
In New Perspectives on Stalinism (1986) Fitzpatrick signalled out a new approach to 
the Stalin revolution in particular, focusing on novel work by a young generation of social and 
political historians who she labelled the new cohort. The young generation, as Fitzpatrick 
earnestly reminds us, is a host of social historians, who in seeking to reinterpret Soviet history 
and politics by giving primacy to the theme of social participation in politics, went as far as to 
declare that the older generation of political scientists was incapable of sparing scholarship 
the excessive preoccupation with politics and ideology. (102) The chief achievement of 
the revisionist historians, Fitzpatrick claims, was their ability to make use of material 
evidence as was gained through their access to the Soviet Smolnesk archive. (103) For her, 
there are mainly three premises through which the social historians claim to novel 
scholarship can be justified: the totalitarian models erroneous conceptualisation of the 
relationship between state and society (104), the models neglecting of the validity of social 
mobility (105), and its biased view that Stalins revolution was a revolution from above. 
(106)
As far as the first premise is concerned, Fitzpatrick asserts that the models approach 
to the relation between the Soviet state and society fails to see beyond the states victimisation 
of society and societys passive resistance to the state. In her view, this approach entailed 
the supposition by the totalitarian model that the Soviet state was actuated by the vilest of its 
intentions to use the Communist Party as an agent of mobilization and reinforce its dictates
with police coercion and terror (107) The model goes even further in depicting Soviet society 
to be an undifferentiated whole in relation to the functioning of the totalitarian state. (108) 
The job of the new cohort, Fitzpatrick thinks, was to methodically disaggregate society into 
constituent parts: their concern would be to analyze society by avoiding two analytical 
frameworks: the totalitarian framework which focuses on the conflict between the state as a 
monolith and society as an undifferentiated whole, and the Stalinist-Marxist framework 
which rests on the division of Soviet society into working class, peasantry, and 
intelligentsia, the third being a stratum not a class. (109) The revisionists attack of the latter 
view, Fitzpatrick adds, can be traced back to Leon Trotskys view of Soviet society. (110) 
Trotsky made a significant contribution to social history by suggesting that social hierarchy in 
the 1930s had undergone significant transformation. Such a transformation occurred through 
the emergence of the bureaucracy as a new stratum which acquired a ruling character. (Il l )  
The new cohort added a new element to Trotskys original contribution. They asserted that 
bureaucracy itself was [so] hierarchical that the higher-ranked bureaucrats had distinctly 
different interests from those of the lower-ranked ones. (112) Not only the bureaucracy was a 
highly divided stratum. The working class and the peasantry could also be atomised into 
different strata of specific class character. One, according to Fitzpatrick, might well 
distinguish between skilled and unskilled laborers, new workers (fresh from the village) 
and old ones...convict, semi-free, and free labour to be found on the new construction sites 
(113)
The second premise that Fitzpatrick addresses is the theme of social mobility. The 
models other failure was to understand Soviet society as a static society totally controlled by 
the organisational and managerial functions of the state. In her view, the nature of Soviet 
society in the Stalin reign is difficult to study, mainly for the high social mobility associated 
with the regimes focus on mobilisation: high mobility created new socio-economic terms for
the developing Soviet society. This implies that the class nature of such a society was being 
determined by the changing position of the different strata: peasants' migration to urban 
places, the transformation of the 'old working class into a modem white-collar and 
managerial stratum, the deportation' of the Kulaks and their downward mobility into urban 
workers, World War II and demobilization (114) were all factors behind the unprecedented 
transformation in the structure of society. (115) Social mobility had a political as well as a 
social basis: political coercion of the regime created involuntary social mobility 
(dekulakisation, liquidation of nepmen, etc); spontaneous social mobility in the 1930s' posed 
unsolvable organisational obstacles which were met by further coercion embodied in, for 
example, the 1932 passport law. (116) Moreover, what urged coercion on the part of the 
regime was not popular resistance, as the totalitarian model claims, but specifically the 
problem of mobility: in short imposing internal passports by the regime was not responsive to 
the regimes desire to segregate between citizens as was responsive to the growing 
necessity for creating a workable medium of state control over its organisational structure.
(117)
The third premise Fitzpatrick highlights is how the revisionists (in response to her 
initiative) became revolutionary in their understanding of the Stalin revolution. Unlike the old 
and orthodox view that Stalins was a revolution from above, the new cohort have suggested 
that, while the initiative was politically and ideologically made from above, the actual 
revolution was triggered from below, with society massively contributing to the making.
(118) What is new about Fitzpatricks formula of a revolution from below is her assertion that 
workers, peasants, newly promoted cadres, and particular interest groups clearly, but not 
necessarily self-consciously, participated in the Stalin revolution. In this sense, the major 
focus of the new cohort is the extent to which workable scholarly conclusions can be drawn 
from real life experiences of Soviet people; this, as she argues, might well overshadow the
totalitarian models claim for objectivity drawn from general observations about the 
regimes policy and laws. (119)
Fitzpatricks thesis in New Perspectives on Stalinism was somehow re-echoed, but 
not blindly reproduced, in the work of the new cohort. (120) Part of the revisionists logic is 
the claim that even Stalins role in the self-appointed Communist Party was not clear-cut, and 
that Stalin seems to have been relying on others decisions. This point was over-emphasised 
in the work of J. Arch Getty who considered the Bolshevik leader no more than a moderate. 
Besides, there is an other attitude which Getty shares with Gabor Ritterspom in this context. 
(121) It is their view that the Soviet government as a centre was in actual fact emptied of its 
centrality and hegemonic functioning. Yet Getty, as will be mentioned in a following 
section of this part, goes further in his claim. He thinks that the role of the centre vis-a-vis the 
local districts was greatly weakened by the lack of co-ordination, and mismanagement. (122) 
Ritterspom does not go as far. (123) He rather points to a governmental system disabled by 
the careerism of the topmost state apparatus. (124) In suggesting so, the revisionists in 
question openly suggest that the Soviet state as a chief decision-maker did fail to 
accommodate its prerogative as a power that acts from above. Therefore, both chaos and 
mismanagement (Getty), and careerism and system disability (Ritterspron) made the 
regime act in response to influential social forces.
Critical responses to New Perspectives on Stalinism came from learned scholars 
who consider many of the theoretical premises of the revisionists problematic, but who 
equally emphasise the validity of some of the concepts defended by revisionist social 
historians in particular. (125) Before getting to the debate opened by Fitzpatricks article, one 
would argue that her position itself remains highly controversial, mainly for three reasons: 
first, she is inclined to range herself between the old cohort and the new one, which means 
that she would often feel obliged to defend new revisionist projects by necessarily reducing
pre-archive research endeavours (126); second, her over-emphasis on the role of Sovietologist 
social historians overshadows the role of politics in the negotiation between civil society and 
the state; and third, squaring off her scholarly choices with the above/below (state or society) 
debate confines revisionist research in general to the state/society conflict. It was for such 
reasons that one of the critical responses to Fitzpatricks position came from Roberta T. 
Manning, a revisionist who thinks that Fitzpatrick
[o]verlooks the fact that social historians of pre-revolutionary Russia...have never neglected politics 
and stand in the forefront of current of social historians to include the state. Since we were exposed to 
the social history of pre-revolutionary Russia as graduate students, we are not likely to abandon the 
study of politics as a matter of little concern to social historians. (127)
Fitzpatricks inclination to depart from the study of politics, in Mannings logic, condemns 
research in the field of Soviet studies to be fully reliant on and conditioned by the study of 
society, being wrongly conceived as a detached subject of enquiry capable of approaching and 
analysing without considering the role of the state. Such a separation between the state and 
society would in the last analysis dismiss political terror, for example, as a subject not 
within the interest scopes of the social historians. (128) What is most problematic concerning 
Fitzpatrick, Manning tells us, is her inability to point out clearly the dominant part in the 
relationship. Fitzpatrick focuses pretty much on the either-or proposition, thus leaving little 
or no room for a third space that might shed some light on the interaction between both. 
(129) What raises some cause for concern in Fitzpatricks suggestion is her retreat from her 
original belief in the dominant role of society over that of the regime. Her regression to 
Tuckers formula of revolution from above (130) does reduce her from-below claim to a 
cipher, and reveal as impractical her leaving-aside politics formula. (131) What Manning 
suggests in this respect is that revisionist work in relation to Soviet history, although should
repudiate the totalitarian models one-sided and one-dimensional scholarly orientation, cannot 
follow strictly Fitzpatricks revisionist recipe which by fighting excess with excess stands in 
conflict with its own research interests. It is true here, I think, that the revisionists might be 
advancing a theory in conflict with their own research paradigms when they tend to 
"unconsciously" 'destalinise Stalin. Yet, it would be an exageration if one suggests that the 
ultimate aim of revisionist work is to acquit Stalin of his crimes.
An other important response to Fitzpatrick comes from Arch Getty who, although
baptised as a new cohort member, does not feel entirely comfortable in the new position 
Fitzpatrick chooses him. Getty, while congratulating Fitzpatrick on certain constructive 
aspects in her work, shares Mannings concern about her regression to Tuckers argument in 
the second part of her article. He dismisses as myopic her attempt to reduce the state/society 
conflict to a conflict between a scholarship that tries to assert the revolution-from-above claim 
and another that is anxious to champion the revolution-from-below thesis:
It is, then, surprising and disappointing that...she resurrects the old bipolar state-society model in the 
form of Revolution from Above or Below and tries to force revisionist scholars into one or the other 
camp. With obvious (and to me inexplicable) relief, she manages to conclude that most of the 
revisionist work fits Revolution from Above (132)
Fitzpatricks either-or position, Getty exclaims, seem[s] forced, since, at least in terms of 
consistency, she is the only social historian who regresses to the ungrounded argument of 
initiative from the regime. (133) Peter Kenez, for instance, shares Gettys and Mannings 
view about Fitzpatricks ambivalence in relation to the nature of the Stalin revolution. While 
her claim that too much politics involved would spoil the social historians objective promises 
remains a valid claim, her oscillation between the below/above positions is self-defeating. 
(134) This, as Kenez contends, begs the question whether Fitzpatricks revisionism is
pertinent to the overall debate. Paradoxical is her attack on the historians who, she thinks, rely 
heavily on the state-intervention argument; not less paradoxical is her belief that the 
revolution-from-above thesis holds good. (135) In Kenezs view, however, Fitzpatricks 
apologia for a research method that includes as well as excludes the sphere of politics echoes 
the ambivalence of the entirety of the revisionist project.
The new cohort equally run into difficulties while trying to de-Stalinise Stalin, that is, 
while trying to acquit Stalin of the responsibility for the terror. (136) Kenez subjects the 
revisionists to four critical points. First, their argument of a chaotic and disorganised Soviet 
government is at best only repetitive of Fainsods argument in his book Smolensk Under 
Soviet Rule. Their acquittal of the regime of its crimes by suggesting the consent of the 
governed as a pretext is a curiously absurd (my italics) and unscholarly conclusion. 
(Mannings work as example) (137) Second, explain[ing] mass murder as the outcome of 
factional struggles within the leadership is shorn of material evidence. (Ritterspoms and 
Gettys works) (138) Third, the social-support theory advanced by the revisionists is totally 
erroneous (Lynne Violas work as example) (139): society responded positively to 
government initiative mainly because the Bolsheviks...knew how to mobilize a crucially 
important segment of the population. (140) Four, the revisionists fall short of a feasibly clear 
method of approach in their studies. They make observations without providing sensible 
explanations for them. Neither Gettys Origins o f the Great Purges nor Mannings 
Government in the Soviet Countryside have convincingly shown what revisionism is all 
about. (141). Fitzpatricks point, on the other hand, is found wanting by its very claim for 
objectivity. (142)
One of the intriguing responses to Fitzpatricks New Perspectives... was Alfred G 
Meyers. A key proposition in Meyers response is his assertion that in dealing with social 
history one should in no way forget that this research paradigm is but part of political history.
Stalin cannot be said to have relied on the masses or in league with some social actors against 
society itself. (143) The revisionists are apologists for Stalins terror when they believe that 
Stalin was not as much in control as the totalitarianism school asserted... (144) They are 
obsessed with presenting] a view of historic events from below and have neglected to treat 
the mass desertions to the enemy in the early months of the war... (World War II) (145) On 
the other hand, Meyer calls the entirety of the revisionist project in question by suggesting 
that their work was a no novelty, and thus their pride of discovery was rather an 
exaggeration. (146) Stephen Cohen made the same point against the new cohorts case. He 
argued that their attempt was a contribution to the debate but not a contribution to knowledge 
about Soviet history. The totalitarian models blinkered obsession with the Kremlin, he 
contends, had been attacked first by political scientists... a few sociologists and historians. 
(147) Cohens major concern in his response to Fitzpatrick is what he believes the new 
cohorts total oblivion to Stalins terror: in all of their publications to date, the terror is 
ignored, obscured, or minimized in one way or another. (148) The theme of terror according 
to him was overshadowed by the revisionists preoccupation with the social manifestations of 
politics (149). Being somehow all too absorbed in this research paradigm, Fitzpatricks social 
historians do not seem to have moved away from the very one-dimensional model which they 
criticised, namely the Totalitarian model. For Cohen, terror was part of social history only 
because it was a pervasive coercive tool deeply associated with everyday life, and was an 
essential part of almost everything else. (150) For him, Fitzpatrick, to her discredit, was all 
too immersed in social history to realise the political weight and significance of the theme of 
terror. Cohen's criticism of Fitzpatrick in particular , and the new cohort in general, seems to 
be a strong argument, mainly because in considering "terror" the new cohort overlook the 
interaction of social history and politics.
2/ Participatory Bolshevism:
The early attempts by both Soviet and Western scholars, journalists, historians, and 
politicians to praise the Bolshevik Revolution were not without significant contribution to the 
debate about the nature and validity of that revolution. (151) Yet, their inclination to appraise 
the revolution in congratulating terms did misguide research orientations in the field of Soviet 
studies.
Whether the Bolshevik revolution had a mass basis is still a question fraught with 
intricacies related mainly to differing interpretations. The Western social historians whose 
focus on social mobility and interest groups in the Soviet Union has gained so much fame for 
the school of revisionism have also been keen to reinterpret the nature of the October 
revolution by questioning the main theoretical tools used by the political scientists. One of the 
most significant studies in this respect has been Ronald Grigor Sunys work. (152) In his 
Toward a Social history of the October Revolution Suny studies such a question by firstly 
arguing that the revolution was hardly possible without the massive participation of the 
working class and the peasantry. (153) The overthrow of the tsar, Suny confirms, 
accomplished by workers and soldiers in Petrograd was the product of a largely spontaneous 
action by thousands of hungry, angry, and war-weary women and men who had lost all 
confidence in the government of Nicholas II. (154) Such a hostility to Nicholas II was not to 
materialise into militant practice without the political activism of the Bolsheviks whose 
radical action inspired the workers in the metal industry and in St Petersburg, and whose 
clear engagement with the events eclipsed the role played by the Mensheviks and the Social 
Revolutionaries (SRs) (155) Quoting L Haimson for this purpose Suny is anxious to argue 
that the Bolshevik leaders were capable of winning the majority of labor organizations by 
preventing the Menshevik liquidators from creeping in. After dual power (coalition
between Provisional Government and the Soviets) was established the majority of the 
Petrograd workers became gradually aware of the fragility such a dual power presented. The 
failure to follow a workable political agenda was revealed by the shaky unity between an 
elitist Bourgeois government and an incapable socialist minority represented mainly by the 
Socialist Revolutionaries (SRs) and the Mensheviks. (156) In the words of Sheila Fitzpatrick 
the coalition could be sustained only as long as both parties retained their primary 
engagement of having to cooperate with one another as different classes. For particularly 
this reason, such a co-operation was somehow unrealistic, since by the summer of 1917...the 
shaky consensus of February had been seriously undermined, and the middle ground of 
democratic coalition started to crumble. (157)
The role of the Bolsheviks in breaking ties between the Provisional Government and 
the Petrograd Soviet is undeniable. It was not until Lenin wrote the April Theses, Fitzpatrick 
argues, that the leading role of the Provisional Government was repudiated. (158) It was then 
when the July 1917 demonstrators slogan of all power to the soviets was crystallised by 
being inscribed in the Theses, and by constituting an invitation to a working class war against 
the Bourgeoisie. (159) The class war, as Suny reminds the reader, started with such slogans 
by demonstrators as Down with the Ten Capitalist Ministers. (160) The alleged leading role 
of the Bolsheviks in the 1917 February Revolution is illustrated in History o f the Communist 
Party o f the Soviet Union (1939): While the Bolsheviks were directly leading the struggle of 
the masses in the streets, the compromising parties, the Mensheviks and the Socialist- 
Revolutionaries, were seizing the seats in the Soviets and building up a majority there. (161) 
Popular support for the March Revolution, according to the official historiography of 
the Bolshevik party, had to do with the revolutionary work done by leading Bolsheviks like 
Lenin who, although exiled, could mobilise the masses for the sake of throwing the old order. 
In many terms, one would argue, this would somewhat explain the dramatic increase of
Bolshevik Party members from 24,000 in February/March 1917 to 350,000 in October. (162) 
The view expressed in History was later articulated by a host of scholars and commentators 
who, although many of whom were Westerners, praised the October Revolution as the 
beginning of a new, revolutionary, and egalitarian epoch. (163) From March to October 1917 
the Bolshevik leadership served as an incentive for a popular overthrow of the Bourgeois 
government. How and why that happened has been a matter of a unceasing dispute between 
the school of totalitarianism and the revisionists. The totalitarian model ranges from 
interpretations that explain October by the sheer personal will of Lenin to interpretations that 
consider the revolution as an accident of history. Yet the revisionists base their reading of the 
revolution on the theme of the participation of several groups in policy-making. (164)
Reading the Russian Revolution from a different angle, Stephen Kotkin has asserted 
that it started rather as a coup and then became a revolution in the process:
[T]he coup was transformed only after the fact into a qualitatively new revolution that was 
simultaneously participatory and coercive... What needs to be explained is not just the Bolshevik coup 
but also the far more remarkable fact that the Bolsheviks held power, re-formed a state, and regathered 
much of the empire. That was the October Revolution. (165)
Yet, Kotkins view here does not overshadow his firm conviction that the Bolsheviks were 
from the start actuated by tyranny in carrying out their so-called world-historical 
mission (166) Kotkin even goes further in questioning the validity of the social historians 
project of rereading the October revolution as social history. He firmly maintains that the 
demise of the Soviet Union in 1991 has made serious fissures in the structure of the social 
historians project. This can be explained by Sunys article Revision and Retreat in the 
Historiography of 1917 which constituted a defensive retreat from the dominant 
(revisionist) historiography of the Soviet system. (167)
3/ Chaotic Stalinism:
The main question which has caused more contention between the totalitarian model 
and the revisionist school is definitely the nature of the Stalin Revolution. The question 
whether Stalins Russia was basically a totalitarian state is probably the most significant in the 
long debate between the two schools. While political scientists have ceaselessly insisted on 
the totalitarian character of the Stalin state, most revisionists have sought to find areas of 
research that would confirm the opposite. Not only social history is important in this respect; 
political history is equally telling. Some revisionist historians have been anxious to show that 
the functions of the Communist Party, the Central Committee, the local councils, and the 
soviets were to attest to the non-totalitarian character of the Soviet regime. This point was 
carefully addressed by Arch Getty.
Gettys conclusion about the term totalitarianism stands probably as the most 
challenging of all among the views of the revisionists of his generation. Getty not only 
repudiates the very theoretical premise whereupon the totalitarian model standsthe 
Bolshevik party as a totalitarian partybut also believes that from the moment of its 
emergence until its crystallization into what came to be called the Great Purges, the Stalinist 
system was neither responsive to a totalitarian apparatus nor productive of a totalitarian 
regime. What governed first the revolutionary Bolsheviks in 1917 and second the system 
dubbed Stalinism was only chaotic, irregular, and confused administration. (168) Soviet 
Russia was greatly impacted by political conflicts between several groups: The confusion 
and disorder in local party membership files and the inefficient fulfillment of cultural 
directives served to augment and protect the powers of local officials. The less the center 
knew about local affairs, the less it could intervene and control them... (169) In Gettys 
logic, this was what might well confirm that dictatorship in the Soviet Union reflected very
little a totalitarian grip on society. The role of inefficient and clumsy bureaucracy was also 
indicative of the states inefficient control over the bureaucracy. (170) According to Getty, the 
Stalinist system did suffer from grave deformities in organisation and the center was capable 
of very little control over the different districts. This actually had to do with the split in the 
Partys unity by conflicts between factions, strata, and key personalities... (171) Getty 
forges his theory against the totalitarian claim mainly by clearly referring to the school of 
totalitarianism as being a theory monolithically concerned with Stalin as the sole designer of 
the political scene in the Soviet Union.
Stalin did not initiate or control everything that happened in the party and the country. The number of 
hours in the day, divided by the number of things for which he was responsible, suggests that his role in 
many areas could have been little more than occasional intervention, prodding, threatening, or 
correcting...He was an executive and reality forced him to delegate most authority to his subordinates, 
each of whom had his own opinions, client groups, and interests. (172)
Here Gettys primary assertion is that in the attempt to disaggregate Stalins tasks into those 
done by himself and those delegated to others, one might well reduce the concerns of the 
school of totalitarianism to a cipher. Such an assumption led Getty even to question Stalins 
contribution to the Great Purges. (173)
Actually, Roy Medvedev made a similar point in 1971. He posed an important 
question: How, in spite of the monstrosity of his crimes, did Stalin manage to retain not only 
his power but also the respect and trust of the majority of Soviet people? It is an unavoidable 
fact that Stalin never relied on force alone. Throughout the period of his one-man rule he was 
popular. (174) Medvedev tackles this seemingly perplexing paradox by suggesting that 
Stalins rise to the position of a god had determined his popularity. His personality cult did
eclipse the character and personality of other party leaders. This determined his triumph 
politically and worked as an incentive for Soviet people to canonise his cult. (175) Gettys 
supposition that the Soviet totalitarian system was only a false name for a wrongly-conceived 
reality was also echoed by Robert Tucker in 1961. Commenting on a paper presented by 
Brzezinski (176), Tucker was keen to avoid the term totalitarian while describing Soviet 
authoritarianism or dictatorship. (177) Tucker bothered little to call the Soviet system a 
conservative or modem totalitarianism as Brzezinski or others did. (178) His concern was 
to debate the failure of having to equate Soviet Russia with Nazi Germany and Fascist 
Italy. The totalitarian models chief mistake in doing so was to divert peoples attention away 
from a thorough knowledge of the true nature of the Soviet system. (179) Believing that the 
term totalitarian was all too vague and exhausted to describe the Stalinist system, Tucker 
suggested that scholarship needed a base-concept that is at once wider in range or generality 
than that of totalitarianism and at the same time more concretely descriptive of the 
phenomenon. The new concept, Tucker asserts, is the concept of movement- 
regime...being an abbreviation for revolutionary mass-movement regime under single-party 
auspices. (180) While Tuckers focus in this respect is not chiefly on the Stalinist regime, 
his concept of movement regime (he thinks) serves both to clarify the nature of the Soviet 
system and to adequately compare it with other systems of similar nature. (181) It is for this 
reason, as he tells us, that adherents to the totalitarian model were not conscious that the 
concept of totalitarianism failed to perceive that the regime-systems dealt with were not 
totalitarian systems per se but novel forms of authoritarianism (182)
Tuckers concept of authoritarian movement-regime sheds some light on the 
scholarly reactions the totalitarian model received from revisionists, whether they be social 
historians, political historians, political scientists, or other. Gordon Skillings work, for 
instance, has contributed so much to the issues raised by the revisionist school in this
direction. His expertise in the question of interest groups has helped explain why the 
concept of totalitarianism is somehow an exaggeration of the role of the state vis-a-vis 
society. In viewing the role of social groups in influencing state decision-making, Skilling has 
observed that the Stalin system was rather only partly totalitarian. (183) He even goes further 
by adopting Andrew Gyorgys suggestion that an appropriate word to describe such states as 
the Soviet one is partilatarian, which means that at worst the form of government 
characteristic of those states came as an excess of party power over the rest of society. (184) 
Skilling argues also that the persistence of the concept of totalitarianism in Soviet studies has 
long been influenced by the Cold War syndrome which condemned research scopes in that 
area of study to be fully understood in black and white terms. (185)
III/ Stalins Russia: Revisionist Literature at Work:
1/ Stalinism and the Family:
This sub-section addresses the controversial relationship between the Stalinist regime 
and the Soviet family as is approached by a number of social historians. The issues discussed 
in this sub-section are meant to show how the Stalinist regime did count greatly on the family 
question in the hope of controlling Soviet society as a whole. While in theory Stalinism 
promised to guarantee freedom and prosperity what emerged was only a fragmented family 
threatened by divorce, poverty, and childrens delinquency. The position of women was also 
worsened by a labour market which gave them only menial and low-paid jobs. This section, 
therefore, deals mainly with the significance of the family in general and women in particular 
in relation to the Stalinist state. Like the rest of the constituents of society, the family was 
used by the state as a propaganda tool which could legitimate the regimes perfect control of 
society. On the other hand, women in particular were part of the political propaganda which 
the Stalinist system sought to use and abuse in the hope of winning the masses. The family
question arises as most important in this respect because one of the most engaging promises 
that the Bolsheviks set for themselves was how to turn the victimised Russian society into 
an illuminated one guided by the emancipatory premises of a classless society where every 
family would identify itself as inseparable from socialist unity.
To the scholars concerned with the social history of the Soviet Union, the issues of 
divorce, abortion, womens employment and upward mobility presented not only a socio
economic problem to reckon with. Such issues had also to do with a defining relationship 
between the regime and a very delicate section of society, namely women. It is for this reason 
that the scholars dealt with in this sub-section are not in total agreement when it comes to an 
evaluation of the socio-economic status of women and the role played by the state in 
maintaining a healthy Soviet family. The respective concerns of the scholars in question 
reflect a considerable gulf between their research results. This mainly relates to the scholars 
areas of interest and whether they think that the unhappiness of the Soviet family for 
instance derives primarily from government policies.
The significance of family stability in relation to the Stalinist system was emphasised 
by Vera Alexandrova who thought that the Soviet family benefited greatly from government 
legislation. (186) She suggests that most of the problems such as divorce, poverty and 
disintegration of the family did not reflect a failure of the Soviet state to protect the family. As 
an apologist for the Soviet state, it seems to me, Alexandrova also heaps the blame for the 
disintegration of the peasant family not on the political system but the structure of Soviet 
society itself. Such a society, Alexandrova believes, remained greatly chained, especially in 
the first decade after the Revolution, by its pre-revolutionary gendered structure. (187) 
Husbands abandonment of wives was caused not by the new laws legislated by the 
revolutionary government, but by the legacy of tsarist Russia. This made it too difficult for the 
Soviet government to negotiate permanent solutions for family problems. Alexandrova thinks
that if the Soviet family was unhappy the state could not be scolded for such a situation. The 
main cause for family unhappiness could only be explained by the social ascent of one of its 
members. (188) And because most of the time it was the husband who benefited from social 
ascent, peasant women in particular were socially condemned to suffer from the repercussions 
of their husbands rise to a better rank. Alexandrova did not blame the legal system for 
womens unhappiness. The decrees... brought about equality for women and facilitated 
divorce. (189) But she considered that this inconvenience was a misleading sign about the 
health of the Soviet family: the 1917 revolution, like every great revolution [was] 
accompanied by a gigantic upheaval, raising the people from the bottom to a higher social 
position. (190) Therefore, upward mobility, which followed from a gigantic upheaval, can 
only be interpreted as a benefit to all the family, but women were particularly unfortunate 
mainly because of the highly gendered structure of society. What was to blame in 
Alexandrovas logic was rather the social legacy of pre-revolution Russia which for historical 
reasons condemned peasant women in particular to remain reserved, shy, and non-self- 
assertive. For instance, Catherina, a peasant woman, Alexandrova maintains, was abandoned 
by her husband who, actuated by his social ascent, had to find for himself a much more 
"civilised" woman in the city. (191) A further suggestion Alexandrova made, and whereby 
she seemed apologetic for the Revolution and its political implications, was that, once capable 
of grasping rightly and correctly the laws and decrees of the new state, women could do the 
work of men and even choose freely the right men to go out with. The story of Gleb and his 
wife Dasha was a good illustration of this. (192)
The question of political propaganda in relation to the family concerns also other 
aspects such as the right to divorce. Vera Sandomirsky thinks that issues like divorce were 
closely associated with a new relationship between the state and citizens. For example, 
government policy in the 1930s was particularly strict and uncompromising: the only time
when divorce could take place was once one spouse proved a bad citizen who amounted to 
the 'unworthy citizen.' (193) A good man or woman then could only be judged according to 
the values of the socialist state which, in the eyes of the regime, had to protect individuals by 
preventing them from promoting the values of individualism characteristic of bourgeois 
society. This, as Sandomirsky asserts, could only occur when citizens would possess the best 
Soviet qualities. (194) In Wendy Z Goldmans view, such a discourse was part of an 
ideological propaganda whose aim was to convince citizens to reject the libertarian 
commitment to individual freedom which conflicted at large with socialist principles. In 
other words, this has also to do with the general cultural context which emanated from the 
drive for collectivisation and industrialisation during the First Five-Year Plan. (195) 
According to Goldman, the Stalinist regime was to approach the problems of divorce and 
abortion from a purely ideological standpoint: a socialist society is conservative in the 
sense that it must reject individual freedom as wrongly conceived by the liberal democratic 
values (196) As Sandomirsky argues, the promotion of the alleged collective well-being came 
with those measures like the abortion decree of 1936, which, in the eyes of the regime, sought 
to establish and preserve family responsibility and save Soviet society from the evil of the 
free love era of the 1920s. (197) And such a responsibility was as an essential ingredient in 
socialism.
The other important issue in relation to the Soviet family is that of employment and 
mobility. The issue in question can be considered as most significant mainly because it did 
not only relate to the transformation of the Soviet family after the Revolution but also to the 
importance of employment and mobility as a discourse used by the Stalinist regime to 
promote its picture as a guardian of society. Some historians argue that womens employment 
and mobility had less to do with the alleged revolutionary decrees passed in favour of women. 
Womens social mobility did reflect the inability of the Soviet government to guarantee the
well-being of the Soviet family. Sheila Fitzpatrick in particular has argued that the number of 
women entering the labour market in the 1930s affected both the stability and the future of the 
Soviet family. While economically the Soviet family benefited from additional income, 
socially it suffered from many problems relating to women's mobility. (198) The main cause 
for concern in Fitzpatricks view was that womens employment was not a voluntary initiative 
on their part. Generally, it was the industrial city which in a great part pushed women to enter 
the labour marketfamily problems were also a direct cause for such a mobility: the rising 
rate of divorce or husbands abandonment of the peasant household had to do with that. (199) 
In Fitzpatricks words 10 million women were obliged in the 1930s to enter the labor 
market due to husbands low income, divorce, etc. Therefore, for Fitzpatrick, the economic 
conditions of the Soviet family were basically the cause of the social problems from which 
most families suffered. In this sense, the governments economic policy can be said to have 
contributed to those problems. And one of the devastating results was divorce: bringing up 
children became a heavy burden for millions of husbands who simply chose to abandon their 
wives; nevertheless, many of the divorcee often chose to remain in the same apartment for 
money problems. (200)
Having been obliged to enter the labour market women had also to sustain the 
economic repercussions socially. The direct result of this was that women had to accept a 
division of labour which, by far, forced them to accept minor posts and lower payment. As 
Donald Filtzer has argued, the degree of womens mobility socially was technically and 
economically controlled by a division of labour whose basic aim was to channel [them] into 
the lowest-skilled and worst-paid jobs where they had little prospects for promotion. (201) 
Yet, this does not mean that women were officially conceived as a social stratum to sacrifice 
in the hope of encouraging and promoting industry and economy; nor were they conceived in 
comparative terms with men. (202) The dominant rhetoric was that like men women were
only part of the labour force constituting the proletarian economy that in the last analysis 
would usher in the building of socialism.
Womens static mobility, as I would term it here, was mainly caused by the failure 
of collectivisation economically, which had its grave social repercussions on the female 
workers themselves. This would to a large extent weaken some revisionist claims that the 
Soviet family was an active partner of the Soviet state. Women were obliged to go out for 
work first because they were needed as a cheap labour, and second because they had 
opportunities to improve their families standards of living. (203) But another result of 
womens static mobility was its direct impact on family stability as Goldman thinks. 
Moreover, womens absence from the city household during hours of work diminished the 
supervision of children who as a result of the crowded apartments where they lived had to 
spend many hours in the streets. This phenomenon caused to a great extent the emergence of 
little crime among schoolchildren. (204) The conclusion here is that forced by the thrust of 
industrialisation and modernisation the Soviet state in the 1930s in particular was off at a 
tangent in treating the family question: on the one hand, it sought to fill the vacuum of labour 
shortage by recruiting an army of women workers; on the other it had to call for the 
preservation of the family as a basic unit by passing laws and decrees against divorce and 
abortion at the same time when womens overwork and the necessity to be constantly present 
at work caused the disintegration of the Soviet family.
2/ The New Intelligentsia and Mobility:
In her The New Leadership Generation Sheila Fitzpatrick asserts that
...Stalin did (Fitzpatricks italics) have a special interest in the new cadres. He believed them to possess 
specific qualifications which were essential for Soviet leadership, and he also believed that the old 
cadres lack of such qualifications exposed the regime to manipulation by its present and potential
enemies. During the First Five-Year Plan, Stalin initiated a program through which over one hundred 
thousand workers and Communists from the factories and apparats were mobilized and sent to higher 
technical schools. As a result of the Great Purge, this group received dramatic promotions into positions 
of industrial government, and party leadership. It has remained a core group in the Soviet political 
leadership up to the present day. (205)
Here the issue of mobilisation, according to Fitzpatrick, played a gigantic role in deciding the 
future of the regime. While the regime meant to preserve its own political structure through 
the advent of a new generation that functions in a completely novel form, it was upward social 
mobility that guaranteed stability to such a regime. (206) Elsewhere, Fitzpatrick calls this a 
cultural revolution initiated as early as the 1930s. (207) The cultural revolution argument 
has also been reiterated by other revisionists such as Getty. (208) The new generation derived 
its strength and ability from the training it acquired from cadres and experts trained by the 
tsarist regime. (209) Fitzpatrick traces the cultural revolution (emergence of a new 
revolutionary Soviet intelligentsia and a conscious proletariat) to the Shakhty trial of 1928. 
(210) The trial revealed that the epoch of bourgeois intelligentsia came to a halt, and that a 
technical as well as cultural revolution was to take place in order to substitute for the old order 
a new proletarian one. The cultural revolution came with large scale social purges initiated in 
1928, continued into the 1930s, and became later called a class war. (211) The cultural 
revolution created its official form through the foundation of organisations such as the 
Komsomol (the Communist Youth League), the Communist Academy, and RAPP (the 
organisation of proletarian writers). (212) Those organisations played a decisive role in 
campaigning against the right and left opposition. (213) The cultural revolution also resonated 
as a proletarian mission that aimed to rule out the vestiges of bourgeois culture. Moreover, the 
process of the cultural revolution, on the other hand, had to bear an essential proletarian
element crucial for achieving socialism. It was for this reason, according to Fitzpatrick, that 
the term proletarianisation had a specific importance in the discourse of the government:
The objectives of the cultural revolution in education were the proletarianisation of schools and 
universities by selective entrance and purging of socially-alien students...In scholarship and the arts 
the objective was proletarianization through subordination to communist, proletarian 
organizations...then proletarianization of culture meant politicization and extension of party control. 
(214)
Proletarianisaion in this sense meant an exclusive cultural task the ultimate aim of which was 
to bring into harmony the peoples aspirations to equality and the states endeavour to 
establish a fully socialist order.
The instance of proletarianising all aspects of life went along the necessity to uproot 
the vestiges of the old bourgeois order. But how could that be realised? The answer to this 
question came in the suggestion that there was a class war going on between the formers on 
the one hand and the proletariat and peasantry on the other. In the regimes logic the Shakhty 
events of 1928 came to confirm the treason of the old intelligentsia, as 55 engineers and 
technicians from Shakhty were accused of acts of hostility and conspiracy against the 
country. (215) This was followed by a veritable attack on what Pravda described as liberal 
culture-mongering: We will unbendingly forge the armour of socialist culture...which must 
be an impenetrable wall protecting us...from alien class influences, bourgeois degeneration, 
petty-bourgeois wavering and blunting of revolutionary vigilance in the face of the more 
cultured class enemy. (216) These words were a prelude to the class war which continued in 
various forms until 1932. For Stalin and his men the class war was started by the enemies of 
the people who had to be liquidated by promoting a proletarian culture. But which classes, 
groups, organisations, or parties were by large considered enemies of the people? As Donald
Filtzer points out, alongside the Shakhty conspirators, a number of enemies of the people 
was declared: the Toiling Peasant Party (1930), the Industrial Party (1930), and the so- 
called Union Bureau of the Central Committee of the Menshevik Party (1931)... (217) 
Apart from such parties there were other less politically active enemies of the people that the 
regime warned against. Fitzpatrick dubs them as the formers, that is, tsarist bureaucrats, 
former bourgeoisie, former nobles [including Kulaks] (218), and the new NEP bourgeoisie. 
(219)
Central to the cultural revolution of the late 1920s and early 1930s was the 
establishment of a new technological, economic, and political order whose ultimate aim was 
to replace the formers by the two main classes capable of building socialism and leading the 
country to communism, namely the working class and the peasantry. In Stalins theory, which 
was clearly articulated in Article One of the 1936 Constitution, the new intelligentsia (cadres, 
intellectuals, experts, professionals, etc) was only a stratum and was bound to a socialist 
state of workers and peasants (220) Thus such an intelligentsia had a leading role regarded 
as an unconditional service to the working class and the peasantry. (221) This was mainly 
because the new intelligentsia was no longer regarded as an extension to the old onewhich 
was now withering awaybut a technically independent stratum recruited primarily from the 
ranks of the industrial and agrarian proletariat. (222)
The Cultural Revolution meant that the First Five-Year Plan constituted both a 
revolutionary orderwhose defining features were a new Soviet man and a new Soviet 
cultureand revolutionary break with the past. The revolutionary order was premised on 
strategically approaching the questions of the economy, politics, and culture by first forcibly 
opting for a large scale industrial and agricultural revolution. This demanded, as Stalin 
himself asserted, that the working class must create its own productive-technical 
intelligentsia, capable o f standing up for its own interests in production, as the interests o f the
working class.9 (223) Moreover, the creation of a productive-technical intelligentsia' from 
the ranks of the proletariat needed a huge mobilisation of labour created under circumstances 
dictated by the process of industrialisation. In the words of Donald Filtzer, creation of the new 
intelligentsia demanded a new streamlined education and training courses [which] prepared 
these people to assume their new positions. (224)
The new intelligentsia played two major roles. One concerned the foundation and 
management of the new industrial sectors, and another related to the collectivisation drive. 
The contribution of the new intelligentsia to industrialisation was significant in the sense that 
the rise of cadres from the ranks of the proletariat played an economic as well as a social role. 
As industrialisation was nurtured by a tone of political revolution meant to lead to socialism, 
any attempt, as Stalin explained it at the Sixteenth Party Congress in the Summer of 1930, to 
reduce the rate of development of our industry was a crime against socialism committed by 
agents of our class enemies. (225) The only way to realise a socialist order had to happen 
according to an accelerated pace of industrialisation. This practically led to a situation where 
only cadres decide everything (226) Yet, the cadres in question were part of the new logic 
forged by Stalin who following a principle which had long guided Bolshevik practice 
expected the elite of technicians, engineers, and other experts to lead the socialist cause of 
the proletariat. (227) The starting point for the Stalinist regime was to send at least ten 
thousand Communists to engineering and other colleges between 1928 and 1931... (228) 
Later in 1930 this was followed by a large inclination to forming students in technical 
education. (229) During industrialisation education of cadres was decisive in work 
orientations within different industrial sectors. In 1930-33 for instance some 660,000 
Communist workers were estimated to have ascended from rank-and-file positions to white- 
collar employment (230) This can be explained by a remarkable 92 per cent increase in 
industrial workers, and 293 per cent increase in building in 1932. (231)
Alongside mobilisation in industry, building, and other sectors, labour mobilisation in 
agriculture was crucial to government planning in relation to collectivisation. The role of the 
new intelligentsia in the rural areas was revolutionary in the sense that an army of industrial 
skilled labourers, engineers, and experts was mobilised to contribute to the modernisation and 
socialisation of Soviet agriculture. One of the crucial steps the regime took was to mobilise 
what came to be called the 25,000ers in the hope of strengthening the collective farm system 
by experience and expertise. (232) The 25,000ers, being mainly recruited from the 
intelligentsia, were first called in in the winter of 1930. Lynne Viola argued that the 
25,000ers participation in collectivization and the initial organization of the collective farms 
was designed to serve as a breakthrough policy to enable the regime to implement the 
momentous transformation of agriculture and peasant life which took place at this time. (233) 
This according to Viola was also aimed at revolutionising and modernising the methods of 
land management and land tillage. The main task of the newly mobilised workers was to 
collectivise the farms by a process of dekulakisaion, and to reorganize peasant agriculture by 
bringing the industrial revolution to the countryside. (234) Dekulakisation meant a rather 
uncompromising policy of socio-economic cleansing of the pseudo-feudal agrarian 
structure of Soviet countryside. It meant the struggle with and elimination of both the 
economic order established by the local kulaks and its base structure as was vested in the 
supportive religious authority of churchmen (235). The role of the 25,000ers to collectivise 
farms went hand in hand with the regimes propaganda to uproot the religious legitimacy of 
the kulaks. In brief, the 25,000ers were instrumental in winning for the regime the class war 
by expropriating the means of production exploited by the kulaks as a dominant class. (236) 
Reading dekulakisation from a strictly political standpoint, Boris I Nicolaevsky argued 
in 1951 that the communist state of the 1930s and 1940s was actuated by its ideological 
defect to liquidate not only the kulaks but also the peasantry as a class. (237) This argument
in turn does overshadow the regimes claim of fighting for the cause of the peasants in the 
face of the private farm. This also conflicts with the view (by the revisionists) that 
dekulakisation was popular. A relatively thorough study of the kulak was made by Moshe 
Lewin in 1985. (238) According to Lewin there was hardly any thorough characterisation of 
the term, and most definitions were basically context-related: some would characterise the 
Kulaks as those who eat up the commune; during the NEP period Lenin described the 
Kulaks as the peasant entrepreneurs. Later they were dubbed as rural bourgeoisie and 
village capitalists. Roughly two years before the First Five-Year Plan the Kulak was 
identified as devourer of the m/r (village council) and a skinner alive; by the time of the 
First Five-Year Plan it was called the capital usurer and even a representative of 
commercial capital. (239) Lewins study of the different interpretations of the Kulak 
confirms that the attack on this stratum (largely dubbed as an enemy class by the 
Communist Party officials, Bolshevik leaders, and even a host of political scientists and 
historians) came in the form of a campaign of both historical and ideological importance. 
Dekulakisation then was not the outcome of the immediate decisions made up by the Stalinist 
regime. It had resonance both within the official Bolshevik ideology of the necessity of war 
against the peasant entrepreneur and within the official Stalinist discourse as was spelled out 
by Communist leaders as Bazarov and Sukhanov. (240)
In Marxist-Leninist logic elimination of the Kulak as a class was legitimate in its own 
right, given the destructive role the Kulak would play in further stratifying the countryside. 
Yet the class war implied in the process of liquidating the Kulak by the Stalinist regime 
did pose the problem of land distribution and management when expropriation was taking 
place. In trying to liquidate the Kulak the regime, relying basically on violent methods, not 
only had to deal with the social consequences of such a liquidation but also had to carry out 
extensive collectivisation by forcibly creating new farm units capable of comprising large
numbers of peasants. (241) The instance of sacrificing the private farm to the state meant that 
instead of dealing with the Kulak directly the poor peasants had to work in state-owned farms 
largely controlled by state-employed managers and technicians. This in turn meant that the 
peasant had to deal with a bureaucratic structure whose administrative intricacies were 
completely incomprehensible to him. On the other hand, there was an objective problem 
which caused social malaise in the rural areas. The process of rapid collectivisation was so 
excessive that it, in Violas words, caused massive policy violations in the countryside and a 
wave of peasant discontent. (242) In an interview published in Pravda (September 1988) the 
Russian historian Viktor Danilov and the economist N. V. Teptsov asserted that the 
collectivisation process was inevitable for a country which based its policies on socialist 
reform of agriculture. Yet, according to them, what was excessive about that process was the 
implementation of solid collectivisation in two or three years and by whatever means. 
(243) Why that posed a grave problem was because no objective conditions could justify the 
violence against the peasantry that was committed in the Stalinist implementation of 
collectivization and dekulakization. (244) The defect of such an implementation was 
confirmed by the 1931-2 famine which was caused not by bad grain harvests but primarily by 
the administrative mismanagement of the Stalinist leadership. (245)
The break with the past as a second facet of the First Five-Year Plan was also decisive 
in giving some credibility to the regimes claim of the cultural revolution. The break, as the 
revisionist school understands it, was primarily based on an entire rupture with the Bourgeois 
element by which the Soviet government had constructed and given legitimacy to the Soviet 
state in the aftermath of the October Revolution. But the break with what came to be called 
Bourgeois culture only relatively terminated the regimes reliance on the expertise of the old 
cadres and experts. The break in other terms meant, as Fitzpatrick puts it, the 
proletarianisation of the intelligentsia. To proletarianise meant to educate, recruit, and
promote to the ranks of the new intelligentsia a large number of working people. It is for this 
reason, Fitzpatrick tells us, that the regimes insistence on the necessity of proletarianisation 
had had a tone of a civilising task. This traded in the form of slogans such as the Radiant 
Future and out of backwardness. (246) The new discourse of a civilising task came with 
two defining and interrelated elements: building socialism and modernisation. (247) While 
socialism was the aim, modernisation was the means. Modernisation was a key stage in the 
development of Soviet society into a socialist one. It had to do with industry and the 
introduction of industrial innovation into the rural areas. The Bolsheviks
had a clear idea that the key to building socialism was economic development and modernization. As 
prerequisites of socialism, Russia needed more factories, railways, machinery, and technology. It 
needed urbanization, a shift of population from the countryside to towns, and a much larger, permanent 
working class. It needed greater popular literacy, more schools, more skilled workers and engineers. 
Building socialism meant transforming Russia into a modem industrial society. (248)
In short, the Bolsheviks needed an industrial revolution so much akin to the English 
industrial revolution in the 19th century, but with the intention to achieve socialism rather than 
capitalism. (249) Although modernisation meant an illuminated socialist society bred over by 
modem industry and technology, the argument by a host of historians in favour of 
modernisation theory fails, as Filtzer reminds us, to see how the promotion of industry was 
basically replete with inherent deformities and inefficiencies the result of which was the 
emergence of class struggles within such a society. (250) While modernisation was the 
promising form of industrialisation and collectivisation, it remained valid only in its 
immediate connotation as a propulsive method for economic change. Its social implications 
were far less encouraging and promising. In Filtzers words modernisation of the Soviet 
economy meant by far the impoverishment of Soviet society by the industrialisation drive,
which in government discourse was an impoverishment for the sake of achieving the goals of 
socialism. (251) The class struggle and liquidation of all classes threatening socialisation had 
to be carried out by Soviet citizens who in having to sacrifice their material well-being would 
in the end achieve the socialist society promised. As Filtzer puts it, the regimes rhetoric of 
heightened class struggle was the primary cause of the impoverishment that resulted from 
rapid industrialisation and collectivisation. (252)
The break with the past constituted also a class war against the very peasants and 
workers said to emancipate. The break did not only mean the unabashed departure from the 
technical and professional hegemony of bourgeois intelligentsia but also the creation of a 
new knowledge elite the ultimate aim of which was to control the working masses by a 
process of managerial and administrative routine. This in itself constituted a new elitist 
attitude towards the proletariat and the peasantry. Jerry Hough summed up the new sort of 
control which resulted from the First Five-Year Plan by pointing out the concept of 
edinonachalie or one-man management. (253) Hough explains such a concept by relating it 
to the relationship between lower decision-makers in Soviet government and state policy
making. Lower managers perform their duties in accordance with the principle of 
edinonachalie (one-man management and control)...These managers, according to one 
authority, enjoy the right of decision for all questions within the jurisdiction of their 
organization. (254) Filtzer describes edinonachalie as an increased centralization of 
managerial authority, which confirmed that the regimes policy did nothing but 
dramatically weaken the unity of the working class by undermin[ing] its cohesion and 
solidarity... (255) The principle of edinonachalie inaugurated a new phase of the class 
struggle wherein the working class became a working class in itself. And the rhetoric of the 
proletarianisation of the intelligentsia revealed only a racialisation of social class by the
Soviet regime. Such a racialisation in turn ushered in the emergence of what became known 
as privileged groups.
3/ Privileged Groups:
Proletarianisation of the intelligentsiawhich the revisionists believe was a feature of 
Stalinismserved as a pretext to cleanse specific strata and classes which had been relied on 
technically and economically from October 1917 to the beginning of the First Five-Year Plan. 
Yet, instead of serving as a total strategy for achieving the promised socialist society, 
proletarianisation only paved the path for an elitism whose aim amounted at best to the 
creation of new strata of specific class character which transformed the Soviet Union into a 
veritable stratified society. One of the repercussions of the stratification process was the 
emergence of privileged groups whose political and economic influence was beyond 
belief.
While privileged groups in Soviet society cannot simply be conceived as a new 
social class, it might well be argued that such groups were new strata which in the last 
analysis can be approached in class terms. Privileged groups in the Soviet context of the 
1930s and 1940s were the groups which emanated from the Stalin cultural revolution initiated 
during the First Five-Year Plan. (256) In his The New Inequality Mervyn Matthews points 
out the groups which were privileged most in Stalins Russia:
As for the most privileged groups, it is relatively easy to distinguish between them on the basis of the 
type of favour which they received. The specialists employed in state enterprises were rewarded mainly 
by high salaries. Party and state officials were kept with much stricter salary limits, but were included in 
favoured supply categories during the time of great shortage, and enjoyed administrative advantages 
denied to others. Military officers were visibly set apart and enjoyed benefits on a steadily growing 
scale. Members of the creative intelligentsia...were given some significant, if secondary, privileges...
A close look at Matthewss classification of these groups informs the reader that the number 
of those receiving permanent favours was extremely limited to Party or party-related 
positions while the rest of civil society had to struggle for the minimum of rights. 
Moreover, as many observers have put it, the distribution of favours was socially manifest in 
the remarkable standards of living of such groups. As is shown in the preceding section of this 
part, housing and the purchasing power of the majority of the population were even far below 
official projections and expectations. Decent housing was limited to a minority of upper 
classes. (258) The existence of privileged groups in Stalins USSR did constitute a negation 
of both the Marxian concept of a society without classes and the principle of the legal 
equality of all Soviet citizens which was inscribed in the Stalin Constitution of 1936. (259) 
Inegalitarian legal procedures weakened the Stalinist ideologists claim of a Soviet society 
that was advancing towards classlessness. The contradiction between claim and practice, 
Matthews tells us, was revealed by the elitism of a Communist Party whose guiding rules 
were inherent in Leninism itself. By crowning itself as the only leader of Soviet society, the 
Party condemned its very emancipatory promises. (260) Privilege was also camouflaged by a 
widespread and unlimited government censorship on statistics relating to the national 
distribution of income...elite life-styles or material privileges... (261) The contradiction 
between claim and practice, I would argue, begs the question whether interest or pressure 
groups in the Soviet system had any role in adjusting government policies concerning the 
question of privilege.
The idea of why privileged groups emerged strongly during Stalins secretaryship is 
also related to the new thinking which emerged through the First Five-Year Plan. The role of 
the intelligentsia was pivotal in determining the character of new active groups which later 
became of special importance, and acquired the status of privilege. In his famous 1929
December Speech Stalin argued that passing on to the socialist phase of development required 
the massive recruitment of Soviet-minded technicians and experts for the work of socialist 
construction and training new Red technicians and Red experts from among the working 
class. (262) As Alex Inkeles noted in 1950, the need to promote heavy industry did 
encourage a social stratification on the basis of skill and specialty. Stalin, Inkeles argued, 
severely attacked.. .wage equalization and began a movement for personal incentive based on 
differential awards. (253) He on the other hand insisted that the qualified technicians had to 
be shown greater attention and solicitude by enlisting their cooperation...creating suitable 
conditions for them... (264) Skilled workers, for their part, had to be promoted to higher 
positions and to payment of higher levels of wages. (265) According to Inkeles, the policy of 
creating a new intelligentsia, together with highly qualified technicians and workers, resulted 
in the economic estrangement of some classes and the emergence of completely new strata in 
society: ...ten social-class groups could be distinguished for purposes of sociological 
analysis. (266) For Inkeles the system of social stratification might well be explained by the 
upward occupational mobility created by the governments need to industrialise and 
collectivise the economy. (267) Yet such a sort of mobility did not mean that the different 
strata had a fixed economic status. Although the existence of ten social groups reflected grave 
economic problems an appreciable number of workers and peasants had incomes on the 
average higher than those of large segments of the white collar group and in some cases 
equaling the incomes of many individuals in the general and even in the superior 
intelligentsia. (268)
Privilege for some groups, Inkeles reminds the reader, was sanctioned under official 
covers like the Stalin Prizes. Qualifying for those prizes was practically restricted to a 
minority of people who could prove their competence in the fields of science, politics, etc. 
(269) Fitzpatrick for example argues that privilege given to artists for instance was often a
strategy to deflect possible popular resentment of privilege away from Communists. (270) 
Other types of privilege were granted on the basis of a persons service and loyalty to the 
regime. Individuals who benefited from those privileges were widows and heirs of prominent 
Soviet officials, scientists, and artists. (261) In Everyday Stalinism Sheila Fitzpatrick points 
out two main classes benefiting from privilege, namely Communist officials and the 
intelligentsia. (272) Generally, privilege was related to access to goods, services, and 
apartments, mainly because Stalins Russia in the 1930s was in time of shortages. This in 
turn made particular groups like party and industrial administrators benefit from special 
elite stores called GORT.(273) Such stores were so exclusive that even people who had 
money, but enjoyed no privilege, could not have access to. (274) Privilege was even extended 
to other areas like housing: New elite housing was also provided in the first half of the 1930s 
by turning existing buildings into cooperatives for the use of personnel in various government 
agencies like the Central Committee, the OGPU, the Red Army, the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, and the Ministry of Heavy Industry. (275) The drive for privilege had two direct 
repercussions: first, the rural areas were particularly raged by the privilege enjoyed by the 
officials of the urban soviets; second, the people who enjoyed privilege in the cities would 
think that they did not belong to a privileged upper class, but that was part of their natural 
mobility from one proletarian status to an other. (276) Fitzpatrick (borrowing Pierre 
Bourdieus concept) describes such a practice as a misrecognition about privilege. (277) 
For her, Stalin made his contribution to misrecognition of privilege by appropriating the term 
intelligentsia. He ascribed to the elite of new leaders with broader knowledge the cultural 
superiority of academicians. Such an elite was privileged not because it was a ruling class, but 
because it was cultured in a backward society. (278)
Summary
  The  Totalitarian Model premises its main argument on the continuity between Marxism, 
Leninism, and Stalinism. It advances such a continuity by supposing that the link between 
Marx (and Engels), Lenin, and Stalin was basically ideological, and that both the 1917 
October Revolution and the Stalin revolution of the 1930s were inspired by the Marxian text 
itself.
  The totalitarian mainstream tend to demonize Lenin because he is thought to have been 
the designer of a classic coup detat.
  The totalitarian model also argues that, like Nazism and Fascism, Bolshevism was a 
fanatic ideology having to do with anti-Western and anti-liberal propaganda.
  Some totalitarian model scholars like Leszek Kolakowski and Adam Ulam think that the 
relationship between Marxism-Leninism and Stalinism was genetically determined.
  The Revisionist social historians call in question most of the findings of the totalitarian 
model.
  The main concern of the Revisionists is that the totalitarian model disregards the 
importance of social history in the Soviet Union.
  The Revisionists also argue that Sovietologist political scientists exaggerate the conflict 
between state and society during Stalins rule.
  For Sheila Fitzpatrick and her new cohort, the Stalin revolution occurred from below 
rather than above, mainly because government policy-making was largely influenced by such 
groups as the upwardly promoted strata.
Part 4
The Forgotten Crisis: the Leviathan Revolution
Introduction:
In part three of this thesis I have discussed some of the findings of the two main 
schools of thought concerned with interpreting the nature of the 1917 October Revolution and 
the Stalin Revolution of the 1930sthe Totalitarian model" and the "Revisionist school." In 
the present part, however, I display my own interpretation. In this part I seek to address a 
forgotten crisis. By forgotten, I mean a hitherto undiscovered, unexplored, and even, 
unpredicted crisis, which crippled the Soviet Union for more than half a century. To me, this 
crisis was caused exclusively by a Soviet ideological practice which had very little to do with 
Marxian theory. The Soviet crisis has been forgotten because of a misleading 
historiography that argues for the continuity of Marxian theory and the Soviet state model. 
Such a historiography is disseminated by such scholars as Adam Ulam and Martin Malia. (1) 
In this part I would like to argue that the crisis and, then, collapse of the Soviet ideology 
reflected very little the Marxian idea of revolution and emancipation. Marxian arguments such 
as aim of revolution, revolutionary role of the proletariat, social significance of the individual, 
and the withering away of state were all too easily dismissed from Soviet political practice; 
they were just the aura of official ideological propaganda aimed at serving the elitism of top 
party officials, and the primacy of the Central Committee.
The Soviet state depended very much on leviathan-like actions against aberrant 
individuals; Soviet citizens were subjugated by the same despotic social link, which Hobbes 
sanctions in his Leviathan. If one observes the authoritarian state which emerged after the 
1917 Revolution, and the totalitarian state which came out of Stalins rule, one is seriously 
reminded of Hobbess sovereign. Hobbess sovereign is permitted to use even the sword to 
make and keep social peace. In using the sword, such a sovereign is prone to abuse his power 
and turn into a monster: Hobbess sovereign is an authoritarian who might well become 
tyrannical and totalitarian. Being sovereigns in the Hobbesean sense, Lenin and Stalin did
epitomise such an authoritarianism-totalitarianism. The one (Lenin) paved the way for the 
other (Stalin) and the consequence was a state against the workers instead of a workers 
state.
My concept of forgotten crisis is, in political-philosophical terms, about the direct, or 
indirect, relationship between Hobbess state theory and Soviet state experience: how Soviet 
politics was modeled on a mode of state repressive in character; how the political character of 
Soviet state was an end in itself rather than a transitory condition paving the way for the 
withering away of the state as such. In the last analysis, the ultimate aim of this part is to 
repudiate the concept that the demise of the Soviet Union amounts to a final liberal 
democratic triumph over Marxism as a political ideology. In what follows I will attempt to 
demonstrate how Lenin and Stalin were to establish, maintain, and secure a state model 
Hobbesean in character.
1/ The Forgotten Crisis:
1/ A Reflection on the Continuity Thesis":
In my view, the Continuity thesis has addressed two central issues relating to
Marxism. First, it rightly points to the organic continuity between Lenin and Stalin. The 
adherents to the continuity thesis have succeeded in arguing that Stalinism is based on the 
'adoption and conversion' of Leninism. Stalinism converted Leninism by transforming it from 
party dictatorship to a one-man dictatorship, from "War Communism" to the First Five- 
Year Plan, and, most importantly, from authoritarianism to totalitarianism. Second, the 
adherents to the Continuity thesis have wrongly argued that Lenin and Stalin continued with 
Marx. In this section, I treat this second issue.
By observing the history of Leninist thoughtas displayed in Part Iand the way 
Lenin used Marx's and Engels's texts to validate his theory of revolution, one would call in 
question the whole suggestion that Marx and Lenin were on the same theoretical and practical
track. The crucial question here is where one can locate Leninism in Marxian thought: while 
we speak of the practice known as Leninism, do we mean it is Marxism by other means, or 
the Marxism of its timeas Stalin observed? (2) Yet, if we believe that Leninism is the 
Marxism of its time, one is forced to adopt Lenin's very thesis as exposed in The State and 
Revolution in order to justify other contexts. This means that reading Marxism through what 
Lenin himself proclaims poses a perplexing problem: if one observes the Paris Commune, one 
would also argue, following Lenin's logic, that Proudhanism and Blanquism were also the 
Marxism of their time, since experiencewhich Lenin celebrates in The State and 
Revolutionconstitutes the practical element of Marx's theory of revolution, and since such a 
theory can itself be read through the prisms of experience; applying Lenin's logic here means 
that 1871 did only differ in degree from 1917, and that what counts more is 'experience' and 
not when or where such an experience occurs. Believing Lenin on the basis of his 
proclamations and arguments is hardly a scholarly investigation, mainly because engaging in 
an analytical and explanatory task requires measuring up such very proclamations and 
arguments against what Marx and Engels themselves advanced. It is worth arguing here also 
that the slogan Marxism-Leninism as a concept has to do with a theoretical assessment of 
Lenin's ideas and practice on the basis of his own allegation that the October Revolution was 
a proletarian revolution in Marx's sense of the word; it has also to do with the belief that "War 
Communism" was a period of "Socialism" at work. Equally, Lenin's writings on the workers' 
state and the eventual withering away of the state are also instances on which the conflation 
"Marxism-Leninism" is based. According to me, the link between Marx and Engels on the 
one hand, and Lenin on the other, was a link substantiated and legitimated through Lenin's 
theory and not through the Soviet practice itself; this is mainly because Lenin's theory of 
revolution adopted Marxian theory on the basis of few exceptions made by Marx or Engels: 
such exceptions include Marx's praise of the Paris Commune despite its untimely occurrence,
and Marx's and Engels's celebration of the assassination of the tsar in 1881 by the Populists. 
Therefore, the equation of Marxism and Leninism seems to be premised on a practice 
supposedly in tune with Marxian theory.
The other problem relates to the equation Marxism = Leninism = Stalinism. What I 
aim to convey here is that the continuity between Marxism, Leninism, and Stalinism is far 
from accurate. Whether Lenin in his canonical defence of Marx and Engels proved to be 
practically faithful to their teaching remains highly debatable; and whether Stalin was the true 
guardian and custodian of Marxism is also a question fraught with many complexities. In his 
political life, Stalin kept struggling to show that even in diverting the Marxian text through a 
certain ideological manoeuvre he was but doing historical justice to scientific socialism. 
Lenin, in turn, struggled to the full to convince both his opponents and proponents that his 
theory of revolution was a revolutionary theory of very significant character, a theory whose 
conception of both pre-Revolution and post-Revolution Russia had been stamped by a 
Marxian logic. Both his early development of a Russian Social -Democracy and late rejection 
of it attest to how much ambivalent and irresolute he was. Both his focus on the necessity of 
the democratic state and the need to dismantle such a state (dissolution of Constituent 
Assembly in 1918 for instance) did prove his untimely application of Marxs and Engelss 
theory of revolution. Stalin, for his part, only transformed party dictatorship into an absolute 
one-man dictatorship.
The equation Marxism = Leninism = Stalinism is found wanting by its very suggestion 
that the link between the three categories is 'genetic.' The genetic link has been addressed by 
such authors as Adam Ulam and John Hoffman. These authors clearly tend to overstate 
Lenins belief that he was the true follower of Marx, and that, as a self-proclaimed disciple, he 
was the genetic heir to the Marxian lineage. The question one should pose here is who 
proclaimed the link, and whether Marx or Engels had a clear definition of who should be a
true claimant to the lineage. If one bases Lenins genetic link to Marx on Lenins very theory, 
then much doubt should be cast on Lenins claims. If one bases such a link on the experience 
of October and its aftermath, one is also obliged to question many of the premises of this 
claim, since Soviet reality during Lenins rule did reflect a political practice that was in many 
ways alien to Marxism. First, Ulams argument of Marxs genetic anarchism for instance (3) 
derives from his belief in the causal relationship between Marx and the Marxists. Ulam 
furnishes this inaccurate thesis by presupposing that Marxism is internally bedeviled by an 
ideological systemic flaw which pushed Lenin to anarchism during the revolution, and 
Bolsheviks to centralism and inegalitarianism later. Ulam thinks that anarchism, 
centralism, and inegalitarianism were characteristic of the Soviet state only because the theory 
that inspired such a practice was itself based on anarchistic and inegalitarian premises. Ulams 
point, it seems to me, does in great part read the relationship between Marxism and 
Bolshevism through the prisms of the Soviet political reality and not vice versa. By observing 
the centralist nature of the Soviet statewhich was at the origin of inegalitarian practices 
Ulam prefers to interpret Marxs link to Lenin not by approaching their similarities and 
dissimilarities but by taking Lenins very words and his self-proclaimed Marxism as the true 
yardstick for measuring the nature of the relationship. This means that in his observation of 
Soviet reality Ulam looked at Marxian theory more in its psychological reach than in its 
practical element. For him, there was a Marxian psychological mechanism inspiring Soviet 
political reality.
Second, the view advanced by Hoffman that no theory is as vulnerable as Marxism to 
the thesis of the historical petard seems also to be particularly problematic. The historical 
petard thesis presupposes that Marxian theory was necessarily conducive to a flawed 
practice. This theory, which Hoffman champions in his work, intentionally attempts to read 
Marxs theory through both Soviet practice and collapse. For if theory is only to be judged
through practice, Hoffman asserts, then a Marxist theory in conflict with Marxist practice is 
a Marxism which has turned against itself. (4) Hoffmans problem in this context is to 
believe unquestionably that the Bolshevik state was a Marxist practice, and that the Soviet 
collapse reflected the crisis of the Marxian ideology. Hoffman makes this conclusion by 
observing that the socialist societies as historical realities were proved flawed firstly when 
the 1989 revolutions took place, and secondly through the Soviet collapse itself. (5) The 
Soviet collapse for him constituted a premise whereupon the historical petard thesis can be 
validated, since the whole Marxist projectfrom 1917 to 1991seemed but a system whose 
practice was in sharp conflict with its emancipatory claims. Hoffman also suggests that a 
reading of Soviet Marxism on the basis of Marxs very theory of historical materialism is 
problematic. This is because such a reading cannot salvage Marxian theory from the crisis 
generated by the practice (Bolshevism) that it had inspired. For Hoffman, holding history 
itself and not Marxism responsible for the Stalinist dictatorship is but an analytical attempt 
by a few Marxiststhat overshadows the alternative analysis made by the thesis of the 
historical petard. In Hoffmans view, Marxs historical materialist method therefore cannot 
utilise the logic of its own historical analysis in order to criticise the very system it had 
generated, namely the Soviet state. This means that Marxian theory is in no way capable of 
advancing a critical assessment, and even a possible refutation, of the very practice emanating 
from it. For Hoffman, this task should rather go to the thesis of the historical petard, since 
Marxian theory slides over the problematic relationship between theory and practice. (6)
Hoffmans argument against the defenders of the analytical capacity of Marxian theory 
(Callinicos, etc.) has, it seems to me, overlooked the strength of the historical materialist 
method. Hoffman, I argue, has committed such a mistake mainly because he has failed to see 
that Soviet Russia under Stalinismbeing an ideology which intensified rather than 
terminated the class strugglewas a veritable class society. Such a class society could but
prove that Marxs theory of emancipation, as Callinicos confirms (7), was betrayed by the 
Stalinist regime. In focusing too much on the analytical capacity of the historical petard 
thesis, Hoffman, I believe, has not realised that Stalinism (and equally Leninism) was a 
practice that Marxists can approach and define by using Marxs historical materialist method: 
really existing socialism was a class socialism whose leviathanist character resided first in 
the authoritarian state which emerged from the 1917 Revolution, and second in the totalitarian 
order established by the Stalinist regime.
2/ Leviathanism and Autholitarianism:
The defining concept which underlies my thesis in this part is "leviathanism" or 
autholitarianism. This concept, however, is not without theoretical basis. It is closely related 
to two significant concepts having to do with the description of the Soviet system by political 
scientists, historians, etc. The two concepts in question are authoritarianism and 
totalitarianism. Before discussing what I mean by Leviathanism, I think it is essential here 
to broach the meaning of these two categories. Being essentially concepts often contrasted 
with democracy and liberalism, authoritarianism and totalitarianism are often taken as 
categories depicting the political systems which advance the interests of the state at the 
expense of the governed. In general terms, however, these two concepts are often conflated 
and hardly addressed as implying different meaning. Even in scholarly debate there has been 
little attention as to the defining difference between such terms. Some critics argue that 
authoritarianism and totalitarianism are not totally dissimilar, with the latter being an extreme 
form of the former. (8) This means that in kind the two concepts do hardly differ, and that it 
is an overstatement to use them as two completely differing analytical tools. The concept of 
authoritarianism in particular has been paid very little attention. Even in introductory 
glossaries to political theory concepts, the word authoritarianism is only mentioned in
passing. In his A Glossary o f Political Theory, John Hoffinan provides a sketchy definition of 
authoritarianism. "The term authoritarianism/ Hoffinan writes, "captures the uncomfortable 
link between the authority of the state, and erosion of free choice that the state implies. (9) 
It means that an authoritarian system is by definition anti-liberal. For Hoffinan, this term is 
problematic mainly because of the paradoxical nature of the term authority itself. Authority 
means the co-existence of "consent and "constraint. And it becomes more problematic once 
approached in relation to the state, mainly because the latter is identified on "force, and force 
is necessarily conducive to a problematic relationship between the state and "individuals (10) 
Moreover, authority rests greatly on "legitimacy which "can be based upon an irrational 
support of an elitist leader... (11) Adorno et al identify authoritarianism as a purely 
psychological matter. It reflects a personalitysuffering from an "authoritarian 
syndromewhich tends to follow unquestionably the power of convention, think in rigid 
categories, be preoccupied with dominance and submission, believe that wild and 
dangerous things go on in the world, etc. (12) Therefore, authoritarianism is a political 
behaviour which has primarily a psychological bearing that makes an individual, and more 
generally a group, predisposed to fascism. (13)
Basically, I think that an authoritarian system is a political system which uses political 
power as a means to control society through state legitimacy claims. In such a system the state 
makes use of its ruling right in the hope of controlling the governed, and often resorts to 
coercion as a means to achieve an alleged social stability and peace. An authoritarian 
system often has ideological ends which, in the eyes of the ruling elite, are but in the benefit 
of society as a whole. During the Russian Civil War, the Bolshevik leadership for instance 
used the slogan socialism as an ideological label meant to emancipate society from both 
tsarist and bourgeois elements. An authoritarian system, as Daniel Levy once asserted, 
generally rests on rationalization, exclusion, and coercion. (14) While rationalization
denies socio-political demands..., exclusion forces important groups out of the policy
making process, and coercion aims to quash democratic expressions of strength such as 
elections, demonstrations, protests, and strikes. (15) In my view, these three categories were 
characteristic of the state which sprang from the October Revolution. War Communism, as 
it were, was to rationalise the economic measures taken against the peasantry as measures 
meant to introduce socialism to the country. In its entirety the working class was excluded as 
immature and unconscious of its historical role, and could not actively contribute to state 
administering. The job was left to the professional revolutionaries. Most of the protests 
only to mention the Kronstadt eventswere put down by an oppressive state machine led by 
the Cheka and the Red Army.
The second concept to define in this section is totalitarianism. A classic work that 
addresses the defining characteristics of totalitarianism is Arendts The Origins o f 
Totalitarianism. According to Arendt, the totalitarian system rests on its demand for total, 
unrestricted, unconditional, and unalterable loyalty of the individual member. (16) As a 
system of perfect control, totalitarianism, Arendt argues, follows first and foremost from the 
ability of the political regime to exercise a fascination by which the masses are enthralled, 
and through which the regimebeing essentially propped by mass supportmaintains an 
ultimate control of society. Mass support comes as a natural result of a political ignorance 
most characteristic of the masses who form the majority of those large numbers of neutral, 
politically indifferent people who never join a party and hardly ever go to the polls. (17) Of 
course, mass support, Arendt adds, is conditioned by an entire social atomization through 
the creation of new classes and nationalities. (18) An atomised society is a catalyst for a 
totalitarian government which in Stalins time for instance meant first the liquidation of the 
national soviets and their replacement by a firmly centralized party bureaucracy,(19)
second dekulakisation, and third 'the liquidation9 of the party bureaucracy itself (20) and 
substituting for its role that of Stalin.
The concept of totalitarianism has been a central analytical tool since the late 1930s. It 
has mainly been associated with the "totalitarian model99 whose findings I discuss in Part III 
of this thesis. Brzezinski9s work reflects the definition given by the totalitarian model. (21) 
The totalitarian regime rests on the dynamic need to subordinate society wholly to its power.9 
(22) I think this does not contradict with Arendt9 s definition which implies that total social 
control is inherent in the totalitarian regime's or movement's drive for ultimate political 
control. The description of a modem political system as totalitarian does not please some 
political scientists who think that the use of the term in contexts such as Stalin's Russia is 
simply erroneous. (23) Although some of the leading scholars as Tucker and Hoffinan 
question the validity of this concept, I think that the "totalitarian model has provided a valid 
definition. To build on such a definition, a totalitarian system, I would argue, is a system in 
which the ruling dictator regulates the relationship between the state and society so that the 
former totally submits to the power of the latter. In this system civil society is conceived as an 
inseparable part of the state which uses its governing prerogative to guarantee ultimate control 
of individuals and their public and private activities. The defining feature of the totalitarian 
state is that the party and the movement which speak in the name of the people would submit 
fully to the "whims, personal plans, and ideological convictions of one person. Indeed, this 
specific feature is what distinguishes totalitarianism from authoritarian mle. The totalitarian 
regime also relies on a "protection/obedience rhetoric: failure of individuals to obey the mle 
of the state will definitely disqualify them from state protection, can even lead to their 
accusation of conspiracy,9 and ultimately ushers in trials, confessions, and purges. On the 
other hand, the totalitarian leadership aspires to full bureaucratisation of politics, constantly
advances and champions such slogans as enemies of the people, and depends greatly on 
propaganda in order to mobilise the masses.
In what follows I turn to the term I have coined in order to describe the Soviet system 
in its Leninist-Stalinist version: it is Autholitarianism (or Leviathanism). By 
autholitarianism, 1 mean a state system determined by both authoritarian and totalitarian 
practices. In other words, an autholitarian state, I argue, is a state characterised by an 
authoritarian use of force, and progresses to a stage of development where such a force comes 
to concentrate total rule in the hands of one or several persons who act in total disregard for 
society. For this reason, I believe that the Soviet state had such a leviathanist feature, being 
the sum result of an authoritarian Leninism and totalitarian Stalinism. My use of such 
concepts is closely related to the category "leviathan" as is theorised by Thomas Hobbes. Yet, 
the point I make in this respect is that in his Leviathan Thomas Hobbes was by no means bent 
on theorising a totalitarian state that would subordinate civil society. Hobbes, one dares say, 
had a formula for state rule anxious to keep social peace and stability. Yet, this formula is 
found wanting by Hobbess inability to predict how much a ruler even in the most democratic 
states might well abuse the power given to him by his people and break the covenant signed 
with the subjects. This means that there is no guarantee that a ruler elected democratically for 
instance would not atomise and subordinate society. The authoritarian state which Hobbes 
champions may easily degenerate into totalitarian rule. By the same token, the proletarian 
state envisaged by Lenin was easily converted into Stalinism.
In this part, I mainly argue that the Soviet state started as an "authoritarian" system 
from the October Revolution to the period of "War Communism"legitimated by the 
Marxian theory of the "dictatorship of the proletariat." It therefore degenerated into a 
totalitarian state where society was fully devoured by the sword of the Stalinist leviathan. In 
theory, the logic of a necessary authoritarian Soviet state as Lenin argued, I believe, was quite
justifiable, mainly because it did not contradict with Marx's theory that a workers' state starts 
primarily on an authoritarian premise which would protect the gains of the revolution once it 
occurs. In Marxian theory, the dictatorship of the proletariat, being the defining tool of the 
revolutionary authoritarian state, means imposing the will of the proletarian majority over 
that of the bourgeois minority: this is the ultimate aim which would guarantee the transition 
from socialism to communism and the classless and stateless society thereafter. As Marx 
himself argued,
The proletariat will use its political supremacy to wrest, by degrees, all capital from the bourgeoisie, to 
centralize all instruments of production in the hands of the State, i.e., of the proletariat organized as the 
ruling class; and to increase the total of productive forces as rapidly as possible. (24)
As a concept, authoritarianism" did not itself pose a problem. It was concomitant with the 
revolution because it was needed. On the other hand, Lenin's concept of the "dictatorship of 
the proletariat and peasantry" did not itself pose such a problem; this is mainly because in his 
theory of revolution Lenin focuses on the coercive role played by the revolutionary proletariat 
and peasantry once the revolution occurred; even his confusion between the role of the 
proletariat and the party can be justified as a necessary tactic aimed at adapting Marxian 
theory to the Russian context which was predominantly peasant. What was problematic in 
Lenin'sand equally Bolshevikstrategy was the decision to apply the "dictatorship of the 
proletariat and peasantry" during the Civil War and through the policy of War Communism; 
why the problem was acute then was because such a dictatorship meant the very 
impoverishment of the peasants and the justification of this impoverishment by the necessity 
to pass on to the socialist stage; the new authoritarian state was authoritarian against the very 
class said to be the heartbeat of that state, namely the peasants. Uprooting the kulaks and the 
rural aristocracy had to happen by making the poor peasants suffer and sacrifice their
agricultural produce through such practices as requisitioning. The Soviet authoritarian state 
was then not problematic in itself but in the way it contrived its practice.
On the other hand, I believe that the birth of the Soviet authoritarian state during 
Lenin's rule was at the origin of the Stalin "totalitarian state." As Ronald J. Hill put it, the 
Soviet system was genetically deformed at birth and evolved...into a brutal dictatorship 
under Stalin... (25) This does not necessarily mean that Lenin intended to create a state that 
would devour civil society; Lenin, it can be said, was chained by unfavourable circumstances 
and his own particular theory of revolutionprimacy of the party, etc. The birth of 
"totalitarianism" in Soviet Russia had to do with a reversed application of the "dictatorship of 
the proletariat" during the Civil War; it had to do with an excessive use of force against the 
toiling peasants and workers. Stalin's totalitarian rule had to do with the adoption of a policy 
similar in kind tobut different in degree from"War Communism." It was the First Five- 
Year Plan whereby large-scale collectivisation was made. The cultural revolution 
(dekulakisation, etc.) (26) which coincided with the drive for collectivistation and 
industrialisation was also a defining feature of the totalitarian state. Moreover, the great 
Purges of the late 1930s did consummate the job of the all too devouring Soviet leviathan. In 
my view, the two specific featuresauthoritarianism and totalitarianismcharcterising the 
Soviet state constituted an autholitarianism or "leviathanism" whose defining feature 
constituted both authoritarian and totalitarian traits. By arguing so, I mainly try to convey that 
the Soviet leviathan state is based on a practice which can be approached by grappling with 
Hobbes's 'leviathan' theory. Hobbes's theory is based on the argument that an authoritarian 
state ruled by the 'sovereign' had the prerogative to reconcile individuals' interests and keep 
order and peace even by 'coercive' means. To me, Hobbes's authoritarian 'sovereign' is prone 
to become 'totalitarian' once he is obliged by circumstances or personal "whim" to use power 
beyond what the 'covenant' with his subjects allows. State 'coercion' is rather a loose concept
fraught with differing interpretations, and can be used in legitimating power abuse in the 
name of a necessary authoritarian order; this is how Stalin, for instance, moulded that concept 
and abused power in the name of socialism.
3/ The Ideological Basis for Autholitarianism:
Apart from the suggestion by the totalitarian model that Soviet society was
ruthlessly bound by a politics of ideological obligation inculcated by the regimes in question, 
the drive for the totalitarian system in Soviet Russia was, I would argue, inherent in the very 
nature of socialist rule theorised at first by Lenin. Here however, the question of the degree of 
tyrannical rule by the Bolshevik party is only relatively important when addressed in a wider 
framework encompassing the real basis of Soviet-type totalitarian rule. Here, moreover the 
debate over the liability of the Soviet state to become tyrannical due to certain circumstances 
should not overshadow the real scholarly concern of both political scientists and historians. In 
general terms what happened in the pre-revolutionary, revolutionary, and post-revolutionary 
phases of Russia should, I firmly think, be universally approached in relation to a general 
theory that must be capable of telling why such phenomena in history as totalitarianism 
should happen to exist in the first place. This would require more than studying the immediate 
context of Soviet and extra-Soviet politics and society. It is basically a purely theoretical 
problem that within a comprehensive framework scholars must approach, and draw 
conclusions from.
The question of why authoritarianism is prone to degenerate into totalitarian rule can 
be answered both by drawing conclusions from state experiences like that of Soviet Russia, 
and supposing a priori that in practical terms every authoritarian theory for state rule must 
finally result in a totalitarian system in practice. Although this supposition seems to be an 
over-generalisation of theory and practice in relation to the comparison between 
authoritarianism and totalitarianism, the reality of every rule based on authoritarian ideas does
not betray or belie the supposition in question. Consider for instance most of the countries 
governed by Islam as a political ideology. Consider also the Western right-wing nationalist 
parties such as Frances liberal conservative Front National. The subject of our discussion 
here is in no way the degree of the political and historical validity of Marxs authoritarian 
dictatorship of the proletariat, since in Marxs and Engelss logic such a dictatorship was 
meant to stand as a transition to a more developed stage. For Marx and Engels, such an 
authoritarianism would in the first place guarantee the smooth (albeit sometimes with 
violent means) transition from capitalism to socialism and from socialism to communism. 
Whether Marxian theory in this respect is fully applicable to all contexts, and whether such a 
theory necessarily leads to the withering away of the state and social justice is not my concern 
in this part. My main concern here is whether Lenins authoritarianismbred over by his 
overall theory as first came with WBD?, and later crystallised into the October Revolution, 
and War Communismconstituted the basis for the Stalinist totalitarian state which started in 
1929 with the First-Five Year Plan. My response to this problem posed here is that I totally 
disagree with the host of scholarsrepresented for example by Pipess postulatewho 
believe that Lenin himself was a totalitarian statesman who bequeathed his totalitarianism to 
Stalin. Yet, I agree with the side of the totalitarian model which advances the thesis that 
Lenins authoritarianism was inescapably convertible into totalitarian rule. The question why 
the latter argument was accurate can be answered by observing Lenins very theory of the 
party, his contempt for the masses and his clear-cut elitist understanding of the revolution.
II. Hobbess Totalitarianism^
1/ Joseph Vialatouxs Thesis and the Critics:
One of the most pertinent theories in relation to Soviet state rule, I would argue, is
Joseph Vialatouxs. As early as 1952 Vialatoux successfully identified Soviet Marxism to be 
based on a genuinely Hobbesean statism based on a totalitarian worldview. (27) 
Vilalatouxs idea, it seems to me, is important in the sense that it was the first to approach the 
link between Hobbess politico-philosophical theory of the state and an ideological practice 
which seems to have been the concrete form of that theory. His main argument is that the 
Soviet state had an inherent Hobbesean component, that is, a state practice injected by a 
totalitarian theory of the state. Vialatouxs argument about the relationship between Hobbes 
and Soviet totalitarianism is significant in the sense that it does not draw a direct link between 
them, but rather confirms that such a relation is between abstract theorisation and concrete 
political history:
Hobbes is not the ancestor of the concrete totalitarian states. He is rather something quite different; he is 
the abstract theoretician (Vialatouxs italics) of statist totalitarianism and, undoubtedly, the purest and 
most logical theoretician one can encounter...(28)
Explicit in Vialatouxs assertion here is the suggestion that while Hobbes should not be 
regarded as the forefather of modem totalitarian states, he is the unconscious apologist for 
totalitarianism. (29) Vialatoux distinguishes between two kinds of totalitarianism; an indirect 
abstract one versus a direct concrete other. But the question is: how does Hobbesean theory 
relate to totalitarian practice? Does the unconscious apologist' influence totalitarian states 
indirectly? What is the point of intersection between Hobbess theory of totalitarianism and a 
totalitarian practice whose theoretical background is not supposed to be Hobbesean? More 
importantly, how can one rationalize the link between Hobbess formula for a forced
leviathan state and the Lenin-Stalin formulae for a forced workers state? The other important 
question is: if we believe there is a link of some sort, will one read Soviet totalitarianism 
through Hobbess leviathan theory or vice versa? (30) Vialatoux anticipates this question by 
writing that it is the concrete political history of the totalitarian state which urges an 
attention to be paid to the existence of abstract totalitarianism in the history of ideas. (31)
Vialatoux rationalises the link between Hobbess leviathan theory and Soviet state 
practice by asserting that the theoretical premise for the leviathan state is closely akin to the 
Soviet state:
What Hobbes values most is the fact that the authentic totalitarian statism is a naturalism, that the 
authentic naturalism is a materialism, and that the authentic materialism is a pure 
mechanism...Scientific socialism [on the other hand]...is actuated by a mystical prophetism and by a 
mythology in whose absence, undoubtedly, nothing of the communist movement will ever be left. (32)
Complex as it stands this assertion by Vialatoux highlights two significant aspects in the link 
between Hobbess state theory and socialist theory. The Hobbesean formula of state is based 
on the supposition that the leviathan state should be premised on a natural rather than 
artificial social contract, and that such a natural birth of the state is a concretely perceivable 
biological reality. The logic of scientific socialism, on the other hand, approximates to 
Hobbess formula: the Soviet state is the state of a new man historically produced by a new 
mode of production, and the state which necessarily responds to a historical and dialectical 
materialism. (33) Moreover, according to Vialatoux, what confirms rather than refutes the 
close link between both systemsHobbess city and Soviet stateis the fact that the 
difference between Hobbess individualist theory and socialist communtarianism does not 
amount to a conflict. Although the one premises its worldview on the transformation of the 
individual into the inter-individual and the other on the social individual, they both argue, in
principle, against spiritual man and the philosophy of the spirit. Therefore, both Hobbes 
and the Soviet state agree that man must be depersonalised and absorbed into the state. 
(34) Following from this logic, Hobbess merit, Vialatoux firmly puts it, is to have formed a 
solid basis for the logic of totalitarianism. (35)
Joseph Vialatoux argues that Hobbesean state power is premissed on an economic as 
well as political prerogative. First, sovereign power ('one man or assembly of men') is the 
"'sword of justice"', that is, the ability to punish.' In Vialatoux's view, giving the 'sword' to one 
person means giving him 'all the power of the City' (the nation). The sword in turn will be 'the 
sword of war.' On the other hand, and by implication, such very sword will dictate how every 
secondary power is distributed'the power to judge...to nominate officers, ministers.' (36) By 
virtue of this power, the sovereign, Vialatoux suggests, will only have 'the right to everything.' 
(37) By definition, Vialatoux asserts, Hobbes's sovereign is permissible to act 'above every 
civil law* mainly because the social contract signed with individuals 'emanates' from the 
sovereign himself (38) Following Hobbes's theory, 'absolute power' is an essential 
characteristic of every ruling sovereign, since the civil lawswhich are but a reflection of the 
natural lawsmight well be used by the state uncontrollably. As a matter of fact, Vialatoux 
concludes, Hobbes's state theory makes 'every political regime absolutist'; moreover 
'government form does not change the essential nature of the state, which at origin is 
absolutist.' (39) Second, sovereign power has got an economic dimension. Vialatoux argues 
that Hobbes 'offers the State the total command of national economic life.' The most defining 
feature of such a command is that economic life is guided by 'absolute statism within the City' 
In modem time, Vialatoux adds, there are examples of this command like that of 'state 
socialism or national socialism.' (40) In absolutist economies the 'pact' between the sovereign 
and the ruled stipulates that in order to preserve their economic interests individuals have to 
depend on the will of the leading state which is the only body capable of generating 'economic
phenomena like production, exchange...1 (41) For Vialatoux this was the basis for justifying 
totalitarian rule in Soviet Russia.
One of the few critical responses that Vialatouxs book has ever received is from the 
distinguished thinker, Carl Schmitt, author of The Leviathan in the State Theory o f Thomas 
Hobbes (1996). Schmitt rejects any link between Hobbes and Bolshevism. He strongly 
disapproved of Joseph Vialatouxs assertion in La Cite de Hobbes that Soviet Russiaand 
other totalitarian systems like fascismfollowed from the state paradigm designed by 
Thomas Hobbes. (42) Schmitt took pains to defend Hobbes leviathan as a harmless and vital 
formula for social peace and stability. Hobbes used the image [of leviathan], Schmitt 
contends, without horror and without reverence. (43) Schmitt also explains that the very 
basis whereupon one should place a leviathan state is the moral obligation of man to a 
guardian political power.
If protection ceases, every obligation to obey also ceases, and the individual once more regains his 
natural freedom [state of nature]. The relation between protection and obedience is the cardinal point 
of Hobbess construction of the state. All one-sided conceptions of totality [like the one appropriated by 
Vialatoux] are incompatible with this construct. (44)
Although Schmitt successfully identifies the necessary link between a protective leviathan 
state and obedient individuals, he seems to be wandering off the real concern highlighted by 
Vialatoux. He offers rather simplistic answers to Hobbes political-philosophical conjectures; 
he reduces the state theory advanced by Hobbes to a simple give-and-take recipe, you protect 
me and I will obey you blindly. Probably, Schmitts arguments against Vialatoux were 
injected by the very state-centrism he advocated in his political work. George Schwab points 
out a significant motive behind Schmitts monolithic views. Schmitt, Schwab argues, was 
pushed by his belief in the consolidation of a strong state that would promote and protect the
values of liberal democracy. (45) Schmitt went as far as to launch an open attack on the 
political parties that opposed' an omnipotent state. (46) For this reason, I think, that 
Schmitts understanding of Hobbes remained fettered by the narrow political context in 
Germany. Helmut Schelsky, for example, debunked Schmitts opaque picture of state rule by 
identifying his relationship to the German state. He was an authorised traditional bourgeois 
liberal (47) who spoke in favour of a strong state in order to protect life and property. (48) 
Schmitt dismissed Vialatouxs major points on Hobbes because he was thinking and, by the 
same token, acting according to a ready-made state-centric logic that had something to do 
with the Nazi state itself. Conspicuously, and truly George Schwab, in his introduction to 
Schmitts book reminds the reader that Schmitts political mind, although was not of direct 
influence on Hitlers Germany, partly identified with Hobbes rigid state theory:
What remains of Schmitts state theory is...authoritarian in form and content, a theory that he 
developed before Hitlers conquest of power. At the helm of the power apparatus of Schmitts state 
stood a sovereign. With the help pf the other pillars of the state, the army and the bureaucracy, the 
sovereign was responsible for ensuring domestic order and tranquillity so that citizens could live their 
lives free from fear of physical harm. (49)
Actually this picture described by Schwab is an irrefutable reminder of Bolshevik political 
organisation that is traceable to Bolsheviks break with Social-Democracy before the October 
Revolution. It is the same picture that was characteristic of Leninism itself. But probably the 
sole difference between Leninist state theory and that of Schmitt, for instance, is that while 
the latter was directly influenced by Hobbess statism, the formerbelieving himself to be 
employing Marxian scientific socialismwas only unconsciously opting for a Hobbesean 
authoritarian state theory. It should be noted in this respect that on paper Bolsheviks in
general and Lenin in particular took pains to repudiate state-centrism, and held the belief that 
what they were introducing to Russia was revolutionary socialism.
Analysing the undeniable benefit of a leviathan state set up by a Commonwealth rule 
Hannah Arendt shows also the danger of overestimating the role of political power in 
organising the relationship between state and society. Hobbess picture of an emancipated 
liberal manwho is permissible to prosper thanks to the spirit of honest competition with 
other mencan in the last analysis make society relapse in the natural condition against 
which Hobbess state theory itself was forged. (50) The main problem, Arendt thinks, is that 
the age of the bourgeoisie constitutes an unabashed challenge to Hobbess concept of power. 
In theorising a morally sanctioned premise for material competition between individuals, 
bourgeois society is solely defended by the law emanating from the all too omnipotent state 
which in turn legitimises poverty in the sense that the spirit of competition has got its own 
natural selection whereby the prosperous have proved useful, and the poor useless. (51) This 
according to Arendt what would throw Hobbess state theory in a quandary:
Hobbess Commonwealth is a vacillating structure and must always provide itself with new props from 
the outside; otherwise it would collapse overnight into the aimless, senseless chaos of the private 
interests from which it sprang. Hobbes embodies the necessity of power accumulation in the theory of 
the state of nature, the condition of perpetual war of all against all...This ever-present war 
guarantees the Common-wealth a prospect of permanence because it makes it possible for the state to 
increase its power... (52)
What Arendt asserts here is that the state in Hobbess thinking cannot maintain its control of 
individuals if it fails to accommodate a legitimate continuity for its rule; the thrust of 
protection that the leviathan is capable of asserting can only work in the presence of other
hostile states threatening the stability of the state in question, and the presence of continual 
threat of individuals to one another, which requires anticipation by the state. So for a 
Commonwealth to perpetuate its condition of power accumulation it has to sort out the 
problems which emanate from allowing a chance for bourgeois society to produce paupers, 
criminals, prostitutes, etc. Here Hobbess problem is mainly theoretical as he challenges the 
Commonwealth with the same weapon said to have been efficient in controlling the war of 
every one against everyone: he allows individuals to resume their private interests if the 
Commonwealth fails in guaranteeing their prosperity and security.
2/ Implications of Hobbes's Formula for Peace:
Hobbes forges his state theory by offering a strong prerogative to state power. This 
goes with his belief that individuals must do away with the innate physical and behavioural 
constraints that prevent them from attaining peace and security. The need for both political 
and civil stability necessitates tight control on individuals natural condition deriving from 
individuals self-generated push for self-protection. Hobbess starting point in theorising an 
intact model of society is couched in his concern about an innocuous human condition 
conducive to safety and stability. The means for achieving such a society would be 
comprehensible and workable only if his hypothesis gets assimilated and put at work. That 
means Hobbess solutions that follow from his analysis of the human condition in its natural 
status cannot be realised unless his method is deciphered.
Hobbes starts his Leviathan by supposing that humans are endowed with certain 
exceptional physical and psychological traits that mark them off as fundamentally different 
from other species. Men are united by their faculties of Sense (53), Imagination (54), 
Speech (55), Reason (56), and Passions (57) He proceeds in asserting that men are 
characterised by a Naturall Power, which resides in the eminence of the Faculties of Body,
or Mind: as extraordinary Strength, Forme, Prudence, Arts, Eloquence, Liberality, Nobility. 
(58) These faculties, Hobbes contends, might well turn out to be counter-productive. Natural 
physical and psychological equality between humans is the basis for the emergence of 
tension and conflict. Hobbes calls this the Naturall Condition of Mankind. (59) In such a 
condition, individuals are equal in kind but different in degree: ...there bee found one man 
sometimes manifestly stronger in body, or of quicker mind than another... (60) The 
difference in degree is the focal point from which Hobbes starts investigating the emergence 
of tension between individuals. It is at this very point where men become divided into strong 
and weak, wicked and innocent, and good and evil. However, Hobbes argues that there are no 
definite grounds whereupon a final decisionof who will remain constantly strong or weak 
can be determined. Strength and weakness, and good and evil depend greatly on the differing 
strategies that individuals often opt for: For as to the strength of body, the weakest has 
strength enough to kill the strongest, either by secret machination, or by confederacy with 
others, that are in the same danger with himselfe. (61)
However, here rises as unequivocal Hobbess belief that equality between human 
beings is a unifying characteristic. And the paradox in this context amounts to an equation: 
men are equal because they share the same traits; by the same token, they are unequal because 
of differences in their strength and intelligence; however, in the final analysis, they should be 
considered equal since the weak might outsmart the strong by means of machination or 
confederacy. Simply, the equation is: equal = unequal = equal. Accordingly, assimilation of 
this equation makes every man think that he can achieve the same objectives desired by 
others. Hence the rise to the conflict of interests. The conflict of interests ushers in envy, 
competition, and eventually wars:
From this equality of ability, ariseth equality of hope in the attaining of our Ends. And therefore if any 
two men desire the same thing, which nevertheless they cannot both enjoy, they become enemies; and 
in the way to their End...endeavour to destroy, or subdue on an other. (62)
Thus equality in body and mind evokes the drive for anarchy, that is, the uncontrollable 
situation where individuals passions and competition will lead to the war of everyone 
against everyone (63) Self-protection of individuals becomes the sole imperative requirement 
which cannot be fulfilled in a condition of peace. Hobbes argues that, following this 
requirement of self-protection, ...there is no way for any man to secure himselfe, so 
reasonable, as Anticipation; that is by force, or wiles, to master the persons of all men he can, 
so long, till he see no other power great to endanger him... (64) It follows from this that the 
process resulting from the natural condition of men develops into an incessant war of 
destruction. Theoretically, the natural condition means the following: equality begets threat, 
threat begets anticipation, and anticipation begets anarchy. Every single stage induces further 
insecurity. Anticipation of threat, as a legitimate response, may itself, in specific 
circumstances, amount to an unrivalled threat. In such a case anticipation becomes wittingly 
strategic, just a pretext for invasion and conquest. It can stand as threat because there be 
some, that taking pleasure in contemplating their power in the acts of conquest, which they 
pursue farther than their security requires. (65) So, according to Hobbes, mans aspiration to 
get security and self-protection might constitute a further step towards insecurity. This occurs 
because the push for self-protection by pre-emption blinds men to how far they should 
advance their demands for security: It follows, that in such a condition, every man has a 
Right to everything; even to one anothers body. And therefore, as long as this naturall Right 
of every man to every thing endureth, there can be no security to any man... (66)
Proceeding from this logic, Hobbes engages in theorising a political formula for 
individuals security and peace. He starts from the civil status of individuals themselves, only 
to come up with a theory of state premised mainly on an envisaged form of consensus. His 
recipe for a human government incorporates two conditions: First, individuals must form a 
protective body based on their will to protection. Second, the only channel to protection is 
obligation to the Lawes of Nature (as Justice, Equity, Modesty, Mercy...). (67) Therefore, 
individuals will cannot be consolidated without abiding by the rules of the natural laws. It 
means that, in the process of peace making, individuals are obliged through their wills to obey 
the values offered by nature. Moreover, the necessity to obey the natural laws emerges as a 
response to individuals will to self-protection. As Sommerville puts it: so we can have no 
adequate motive for obeying natural law if it does not in fact promote our preservation. (68) 
In thinking so, Hobbes advances a positive give-and-take formula where the need for self
protection stresses obedience to use-values of the natural laws.
Basically, it is the formula of protection/obedience which underlies Hobbess recipe 
for peace and security, and it is such a formula, I would argue, which renders the Hobbesean 
worldview problematic, mainly because of the binding contract which he suggests. It is in 
response to such a formula that Hobbess leviathan state emerges. In my view, Hobbess 
theorisation of a leviathan state is at the origin of the statism he advances in such works as De 
Cive and Leviathan. The need for investigating state systems that follow from Hobbess 
theory can only be satisfied through a sketch of his statist theory itself. As my task in this part 
is restricted to demonstrating to which extent Hobbess leviathan can influence such absolutist 
state systems as Stalinism, I will be little concerned about Hobbess interest in religious 
concepts, and about his employment of religion as basis for his overall theory. In this context, 
my engagement in the debate about Hobbess theory focuses mainly on what is purely
political in his work. The ultimate concern, however, is to try to approach Soviet 
totalitarianism through the authoritarian basis provided by the Hobbesean theory of the state.
Hobbes state theory is first and foremost premised on the prerogative of the laws of 
nature.' The natural condition of man, being confined to desire and war, does invoke 
necessity of a political solution of some sort, a solution primarily meant to terminate the 
aggressive tendency of our naturall Passions that carry us to Partiality, Pride, Revenge, and 
the like. (69) To this end, the laws of nature constitute a medium for pre-empting destruction 
therein. They stand as values, which determine the use-value of peaceful co-existence, but 
also stand as values that make individuals obey a specific political power. In De Cive, Hobbes 
contends that the law of nature always and everywhere obliges. (70) In this context, it is 
very important to add that the laws of nature do not contain a necessarily forcible formula. 
They are only morally binding. The laws of nature, as David Gauthier asserts, are not 
themselves obligatory. (71) They become so only when individuals will-to-protection calls 
for a protective political power. Paradoxically, however, Hobbes implies that the natural laws 
are obligatory by other means: He suggests that individuals in their natural condition are 
determined to destroy one another, and that they are definitely always anxious to buttress 
their security somehow. In the final analysis, they oblige themselves by themselves in the 
hope of insuring self-preservation.
It follows that the great demand for establishing peace through obedience to the 
natural laws necessitates a greater effort on the part of contracting individuals. Once they 
show willingness to obey, they have to search for a political framework to communicate their 
willingness. It rises as necessity to transfer their will from mere theoretical and verbal grounds 
unto a much more comprehensive institutional framework. The framework would be a 
consistent form of institutionalised state power that individuals themselves choose as a 
protective body. It comes in the shape of a Covenant, that is, a social contract capable of
preserving citizens self-interests. M Goldsmith argues that in Hobbess sense a covenant or 
pact does include a promise, the promise to perform, but it also includes a transfer of the right 
to that performance... (72) Accordingly, the right to performance implies that the covenant 
represents much more than an agreement or an accord. It is a formula for co-existence. It 
resides in individuals choice to and drive for investing their hopes and aspiration in a 
Common Power, to keep them in awe, and to direct their actions to the Common Benefit. 
(73) For Hobbes, on the other hand, the Common Power aims at liberating men from their 
inborn enmity. It is the finall Cause, End, or Designe of men...in the introduction of that 
restraint upon themselves...is the foresight of their own preservation...of getting themselves 
out from that miserable condition of Warre... (74) Following this logic, individuals would 
acquire a new condition of peace predicated on a political consciousness. They would cease 
being a group of individuals chiefly moved by their destructive passions, and disunited by 
enmity and war. By virtue of their consciousness, they, as Goldsmith comments, would 
incorporate themselves into a political society. (75)
Therefore, individuals might well consign their will to the power of a ruler, that is, to 
one Man (Monarchy) or an Assembly of Men (democracy). They must reduce all their 
Wills, by plurality of voices, unto one W ill... (76) Hobbes calls the Common Power a 
Commonwealth. (77) In this sense, the social contract in the Hobbesean sense derives from 
the need for constructing a necessary covenant that implements individuals political 
obligation to state rule. The power transferred to a Commonwealth through a covenant is 
sanctioned by virtue of individuals agreement to force peace in all sorts of ways. If they 
should infringe the Sovereigns lawswhich emanate from the laws of natureindividuals 
would be kept at bay by the same state prerogative that they have allowed in the first place: 
And Covenants, without the Sword, are but Words... (78) But covenants must also be
answerable to individuals in relation to their guardian. Both are partners and both are 
contractarians. Rulers are also obliged to preserve the bonds constituting the contract. (79)
Hobbes commonwealth/sm is based on his veneration of what he calls a 
LEVIATHAN.. .that Mortall God, to which wee owe under the Immortal God, our peace and 
defence... (80) Therefore, in Leviathan Hobbes contends that individuals natural tendency 
towards war must be subjugated to a sovereign who employs his authority to enforce the law. 
Law making and law enforcement are essentially the responsibility of the sovereign who 
thanks to his acquired political power is capable of reinforcing all possible formulae of peace 
and security in civil society. Leviathan rule, as, firstly, a socially sanctioned political practice, 
and as, secondly, a safe road to an overall state rule, will not stand intact if the chosen ruler 
fails to maintain and continue the power granted to him. This means that the contract made 
between individuals and ruler does not come at work in healthy shape unless it is capitalised 
by the ruler, and made an irreversible priority. In this context, Hobbess political- 
philosophical formula has to do with his conception of state "authorisation", which 
constitutes, according to him, a departure from the state of anarchy to the state of organised 
rule. Authorisation dictates the need for citizens to obey the rational rule of the state. In De 
Cive Hobbes asserts that the need for people's security justifies the painful means used to 
achieve such a security. (81) Individuals should authorise a powerful ruler to act on their 
behalf and guarantee their protection. The ruler therefore guarantees that his subjects would 
live peaceably amongst themselves, and be protected against other men. (82)
The issue of "authorisation" is a significant concept which is directly connected to my 
approach to the influence of Hobbess leviathan formula on Soviet Bolshevik rule. Hobbes's 
leviathan idea stands as a source for rule by coercion, as the ruler may abuse the political 
power he is authorised. But Hobbess thrust in consolidating an omnipotent leviathan state is 
always legitimated by his seemingly logical argument against mans ruthless natural
condition. Thus, a leviathan is a ruler rationally permissible to anticipate individuals 
natural condition by means of universal consensus that stands in entire harmony with the rule 
of law. The new condition of humankind would in the final analysis produce two political 
categories, namely the subject and the Sovereign: the ...SOVERAIGNE, and said to have 
Soveraigne Power, and every one besides, his SUBJECT. (83) On the other hand, the degree 
of a sovereigns success is essentially measured by how much politicised the relation between 
sovereign and subject is. A sovereigns rule can only work in the presence of political 
authority over subjects. And the covenant, or contract, is self-sustained only when it assumes 
such a political shape, that is, when the sovereign is authorised to guide the subjects. Hobbes 
calls the politicised relationship a Politicall Common-wealth, or Common-wealth by 
Institution... (84)
In Hobbess political philosophy the issues of authorisation, political power, and 
political obligation are the condition of possibility of social stability and continual peace. 
However, Hobbess state theory which follows from such issues is not infallible. In practice, it 
stands in sharp conflict with freedom and democracy. It might well be used as a pretext to 
justify a state-centric system of some sort. Hobbess state theory is plagued by its own over- 
ambitious premises. Probably, the weakest link in this theory arises basically from the identity 
that he assigns to state power. The state in his conception is contingent on how far the ruler as 
leviathan pushes for the use of coercive means to uphold the law. And, probably, the only 
difference between human natural condition and the new condition theorised by Hobbes 
resides in the transition from individual/individual violence to state/individual violence. 
Under the new condition violence becomes an institutionalised form of rule, and is 
transformed into rationalised tyranny. In this respect, Hobbesean theory advances a statism 
that forms the basis for the appearance of state-centric theories and practices. David Gauthier
pinpoints the weak and, often, self-deceiving grounds of the leviathan state theory. It is a state 
greatly hoist with its own petard.
In basing his later political theory on authorization, Hobbes provides himself with a serious problem in 
explaining the basis of the sovereign right to inflict punishment on the subjects. Hobbes begins by 
failing to notice the problemby supposing that, in owning all the actions of the sovereign, the subjects 
therefore own the acts whereby they are punished. (85)
Gauthier here demonstrates how the theoretical standpoint of Hobbes is self-contradictory. It 
means that the dialectical logic advocated by Hobbes in his Leviathan, or even in De Cive, 
fails to maintain the legitimising arguments of political obligation and power. Hobbess 
theoretical problem has to do with the inability to resolve such a self-contradiction. Gauthiers 
contention here is that "no man can be supposed to authorize another to punish him, or kill 
him. (86) What is more, authorisation constitutes a premise that might well usher in a 
totalitarian monster rather than an egalitarian system.
Gauthier criticises another Hobbesean argument. He argues that while individuals 
obedience to the sovereign is justified (and obligatory) through his supposed protection of 
them, it poses a serious problem when the sovereign calls for blind obedience without a 
justified cause for obligation. (87) This rises mostly when the sovereign engages in acts 
violating the bonds of the covenant, like serving his private interests, or waging unjustified 
wars on foreign nations. Simply, this means that obligation to the sovereign can be counter
productive. The sovereign can use his institutionalised political power and his prerogatives to 
abuse the very cause for which he is elected. Accordingly, political power might amount to 
acts of oppression often justified in the name of protection. Thus when protection induces 
blind obedience, it remains totally enmeshed within self-legitimation; it might well speak in
the name of protection and peace, but might also usher in an immutable departure from these 
values. As Gauthier argues,
[t]he Hobbesian sovereign is in the position of the Bonapartist Emperor or Nazi Fuhrer. All Hobbesian 
governments are, in effect, plebiscitary democracies...We can reasonably suppose that the up-to-date 
Hobbesian sovereign would not rest his position on an assumed act of authorization, but would demand, 
and of course receive, repeated plebiscitary endorsements of his right to rule. If the sovereign is 
iniquitous, God may punish him, but the subjects can complain of no justice. (88)
To this end, one is often reminded of the outcome following from Hobbes theory of leviathan 
rule. Undoubtedly, it does not provide a convincing social justice recipe. It fails to reconcile 
individuals aspirations to security and the means appropriated by the sovereign to realise the 
envisaged goals.
In this respect, Hobbess theoretical premise contradicts sharply with John Lockes for 
instance. John Lockes theory is in great part against the authoritarian dimension of the state 
as theorised by Hobbes. Locke does posit his state theory more on conciliatory socio-political 
solutions than on deterministic assumptions. He contends that, generally, the state of nature 
is not... essentially a state of war. (89) Moreover, he thinks that the right of the sovereign in 
ruling over his subjects becomes self-negating when political power is transformed into an 
"ideological" tool for repression. In his Second Treatise o f Government, Locke rebuts any 
practice stemming from an absolutist justification of state power:
...[S]o tyranny is the exercise of power beyond right, which nobody can have a right to. And this is 
making use of the power any has in his hands, not for the good of those who under it, but his own 
private separate advantage. When the governor, however entitled, makes not the law but his will to rule,
and his commands and actions are not directed to the preservation of the properties of his people, but 
the satisfaction of his own ambition, revenge, covetousness, or any other irregular passion. (90)
Locke's work here contradicts sharply with that of Hobbes. Lockes state theory reveals for us 
the destructive outcome of a theory like Hobbes's; Locke basically discloses the abuse of 
political power when power is established as an end in itself, as a configuration of tyrannical 
rule.
3/ Leviathan as basis for Soviet State Repression:
Hobbes concept of leviathan, an all too invincible political power, or a 
Commonwealth, derives from his conclusion that men are continually in competition for 
Honour and Dignity...and consequently amongst men there ariseth on that ground, Envy and 
Hatred, and finally Warre... (91) Leviathan is therefore, that Mortall God to which wee 
owe...our peace and defence...he hath the use of so much Power and Strength conferred on 
him, that by terror thereof, he is inabled to forme the wills of them all... (92) For Hobbes, this 
thrust legitimises rule by domination. State power over individuals, being inherent in the 
Mortall God, is justified by Hobbess claim that individuals are plagued by a deadly conflict 
of interests: And...if any two men desire the same thing, which nevertheless they cannot 
both enjoy, they become enemies; and in the way to their End...endeavour to destroy, or 
subdue one an other.(93) The primary task of the leviathan state lies in its prerogative to 
act by all possible means, whether peacefully or by force, to uphold the law, and individuals 
as subjects in forced agreement are not permissible to encroach on any of the bonds 
constituting their contract. If they should do so, they must sustain punishment and repression. 
(94) Here, state repression stands in favour of individuals themselves; they must defer to a
stronger guardian in order to gurantee their integrity in civil society. The need for a power 
to protect individuals from one another rises as a necessity not an option. Hobbess protection 
formula rises principally as an attempt to make man sacrifice his destructive desires and 
adopt a peace formula through a commonwealth, that is, an all too powerful ruler or 
sovereign. The ultimate aim of this formula is the alleged emancipation of the individual 
from his inborn enmity, mainly because his humanity stands both as a physical and moral 
obstacle to a conscious self-criticism. Following this line of argument, Hobbes tends to 
premise his theoretical contention on mans state of nature. (95)
In this part I argue that the logic of Hobbesean state theory might well be appropriated 
by any state-centric system justifying a political repression of some sort, be it authoritarian or 
other. Hobbess state theory is a solid political-philosophical basis for the construction of a 
totalitarian state. What is dangerous about a state system following from the concept of 
leviathan is the tacit, or, more clearly, the unconscious adoption of a repression formula that 
such a system is anxious to reject. The practice that follows from a Hobbesean repression 
theory, so to speak, would in the last analysis constitute an irreversible departure from all 
theoretical premises that speak in the name of freedom and democracy. In this respect, the 
task of this part is to demonstrate how the Russian Revolution ushered in this very formula, 
how such Bolsheviks as Lenin and Stalin were only moving far away from Marxs teaching. 
(96) Therefore, this thesis is an attempt to prove how Lenin and, particularly, Stalin, were 
trapped by the very ideological logic against which they worked, adopting a state theory 
Hobbesean in character while speaking in the name of emancipatory Marxism.
III/ Soviet Autholitarianism:
1/ The Face of October: the use and abuse of Marx:
In Marxs argument, the end of class rule would amount to the end of all forms of 
state. (97) This seems also to be the argument of post-revolution Russians. After October, 
Lenin and the Bolshevik Party invoked Marxian theory into legitimising their political 
practice. The October Revolution was supposed to serve the working classes and transfer 
political power to their hands. Commenting on the promising Soviet state, Bukharin wrote in 
The ABC o f Communism (1969): Soviet power is the realization of the dictatorship of the 
proletariat, organized in its Soviets as the ruling class, and, with the aid of the peasants, 
crushing the resistance of the Bourgeoisie and the Landlords. (98) Before addressing the 
leviathan element in both Lenin and Stalin, I start in this section with some reflections on the 
October Revolution. My analysis in this context is theoretical. In the following I seek to 
approach the essence, form, aims, implications, and practice of October.
1.1- The Essence:
By "essence" I mean the nature and characteristics of the Revolution. Here I begin 
with highlighting the physical charcteristics of such a revolution: what it was and what 
circumstances made of it a revolution. It should be noted that the 1917 Russian Revolution 
was not primarily against tsarist Russia as was against the February Revolution which had 
established a democratic government based on the alliance of the Provisional Government and 
the Petrograd Soviet 'dual power.' (99) It was also a revolution against both the democratic 
form of government (established by the Provisional Government) and the vestiges of the 
tsarist autocracy which had survived in part after the first months of the Revolution. But was 
it a working class revolution? Russian society in 1917 was still predominantly peasant. (100) 
And most Russian population was poor, uneducated, and unconscious of its role as an agent of
social and economic change. Political circumstances themselves did not allow much change. 
There was no proletariat in the Marxian sense of the word. Russian society was not fully 
industrial and the economic mode of production was not capitalist. The dilemma facing the 
Bolsheviks, and which the Mensheviks were aware of, was how to carry out the revolution 
while both economic organisation and class structure in society were far from being ideal for 
a radical change modeled on Marx's theory of revolution.
Lenin could surmount the dilemma by adjusting Marx's original theory and adapting it 
to the Russian context. His theoretical argument was to reduce Marx's concept of dictatorship 
of the proletariat to Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the Poorest Peasantry (April Theses). 
By allowing such a structural change Lenin ultimately reduced role of the proletariat to almost 
no role. As class, the industrial proletariat was no longer the most important agent for change. 
It follows from this that Lenins theoretical legitimacy was based on two arguments. First, he 
believed that the proletariat was not a majority and that a proletarian revolution per se was 
unthinkable. Second, he argued that even if the proletariat had been a majority, it could not be 
assigned a revolutionary role without being supported by the professional revolutionaries. 
The revolutionaries were, of course, the political leadership constituted by the Bolsheviks. But 
in the last analysis the Bolsheviks stepped out of the dilemma by replacing the revolutionary 
role of the proletariat by their role. The practical quandary of the Bolsheviks was caused by 
the uncertainty of the success of the revolution; this was later proved by the threat following 
from the Civil War. It is for such reasons that the Bolshevik Revolution could not have a 
"pure" proletarian element.
1.2- The Form:
This concept is to show us how proletarian and peasant support for the Revolution did 
not necessarily make it a proletarian revolution. The form of October was an elitism that had
begun long before 1917: its context can be traced back to the historical divorce between 
Bolshevism and Social-Democracy. But how was October an elitist revolution? The 
Revolution did usher in a single-party state where the political leadership controlled every 
sphere of social life. It was a working class revolution but not in the benefit of working men. 
Bolshevik theoreticians such as Bukharin believed that if given leadership to carry out the 
revolution, the proletariat would drown the whole process long before the Revolution starts to 
gain any success. Opposing the time and context of October, Rosa Luxemburg criticised 
Lenin for the wrong steps which led to the absence of democratic liberties(lOl) Thus the 
form of the Revolution was determined by the Bolshevik "circumstances argument" (as 
argued by John Hoffman). The circumstances argument was based on the assumption that the 
Russian revolution was inevitable, but inevitable in a way different from Marxs main 
theory that the whole process is far more complex than a mere decision to carry out an elitist 
revolution in the name of the proletariat. Inevitability of the revolution is primarily wrought 
by the extent to which man has arrived at a stage allowing a revolutionary change. For Marx, 
it is the "materialist conception of history" which underlies mans capacity and readiness to 
make a revolution; revolution is far from a forced action on the part of the working class; 
revolution is rather historys self-conscious occurrence through the active will of men dictated 
by reality at a juncture where such men have realised how much the productive forces and 
human social intercourse are crucial for the coming revolution:
[The materialist conception of history shows] that not criticism but revolution is the driving force of 
history... that history does not end by being resolved into self-consciousness as spirit of the spirit, but 
that in it at each stage there is found a material result: a sum of productive forces, an historically created 
relation of individuals to nature and to one another...a mass of productive forces, capital funds and 
conditions...It shows that circumstances make men as much as men make circumstances. This sum of 
productive forces, capital funds, and social forms of intercourse... is the real basis of what the 
philosophers have conceived as substance and essence of man...These conditions of life, which
different generations find in existence, decide also whether or not the periodically recurring 
revolutionary convulsion will be strong enough to overthrow the basis of the entire existing system. And 
if these material elements of a complete revolution are not present (namely , on the one hand the 
existing productive forces, on the other the formation of a revolutionary mass, which revolts not only 
against separate conditions of society up till then, but against die very production of life till then, the 
total activity on which it was based), then, as far as practical development is concerned, it is absolutely 
immaterial whether the idea of this revolution has been expressed a hundred times already, as the 
history of communism proves. (102)
1.3- The Aim:
The alleged aim of October was to put an end to tyrannical rule and make political 
power serve the interests of the working classes. Therefore, the political revolution already 
achieved would be only a means for contriving an overall socialist revolution whereby all 
class rule is abolished. It was Bukharin again who defined the aim of the coming revolution. 
The aim depends on the kind of state the Bolsheviks aspired to. The state can either be 4 a 
parasitic apparatus or productive apparatus. (103) While the first state category is basically 
bourgeois, the second is proletarian, a state owned and managed by the majority of the 
population, a non-autocratic state. (104) The [bourgeois] State is the organization of force, 
that is the expression of the domination of one class over another class or over other classes. 
(105) Proletarian state, however, stands as an ultimate accomplishment of the values of 
human freedom and democracy. It is, on the other hand, an irrevocable eradication of the class 
structure that follows from the bourgeois state. Bukharin pointed to the aim of the proletarian 
state:
The Soviet [State] Power realizes a new, a much more perfect type of democracyproletarian 
democracy. The essence of this proletarian democracy consists in this, that it is based upon the 
transference o f the production into the hands o f the workers, thus depriving the bourgeoisie of all
power. In proletarian democracy, those who formerly constituted the oppressed masses, and their
organizations have become the instruments of rule. (106)
The clear implication of Bukharin's message is that the aim of the Russian Revolution was to 
terminate all bourgeois coercive rule, all class antagonisms; the present Soviet society was 
free from the laws of economic organisation which would expect obsequious consent on the 
part of the proletariat. The basic truth about the 1917 October Revolution was that it 
emancipated the masses of working men from the chains of the rural aristocracy and the 
bourgeois class. Here Bukharin takes pains to ascertain that the proletarian sheep have 
ultimately subverted the class rule imposed by the bourgeois wolves. (107) By this very 
norm, the revolutionary role of proletarians resides in reversing the logic of historical 
development.
Yet, once one observes the state system which emanated from the October Revolution, 
the argument raised by Bukharin loses its logical legitimacy. By 1918, the ultimate aim of the 
Revolution was to make both peasantry and proletariat provide blind obedience to the Soviet 
state. In Lenin's and Stalins time, a characteristic feature of the general crisis was the 
subjugation of individuals will. The irony of this fact is that Marxs argument for the 
emancipation of the working classes through the dictatorship o f the proletariat is transformed 
into an enslavement through a dictatorship against the proletariat. Marxs original theory 
encompasses a formula of rule mainly emphasising the will of the proletariat to engage in a 
radical break with bourgeois rule and traditional ideas (108) The implication of this, in 
Marxs logic, is to raise the proletariat through the revolution to the position of the ruling 
class, to win the battle of democracy (109) Since the revolutionary state is nothing but a 
proletarian state at work, all forms of organisationsocio-economic, political, etcmust 
succumb to the rule of the new revolutionary class which should in the last analysis retain
state power until all conditions of 'political power cease to exist. (110) After 1917, Lenins 
theory that proletarian consciousness can only amount to syndical consciousness (111), and 
his contempt for working men, constituted a theoretical prerogative for a monolithic party rule 
which was a departure from the defining Marxian concept of a revolutionary proletarian state.
In Marxs writing there are at least three instances confirming his valuing of the role of 
the working class in a revolutionary order. First, in The Holy Family, for example, he insists 
on the revolutionary role of the self-conscious working men in abolishing private property; 
'the proletariat...is compelled to maintain itself, and thereby its opposite, the condition for its 
existence, what makes it the proletariat, i.e. private property. (112) Second, Marx emphasises 
the crucial role of the working class to control the productive forces and act in total freedom 
in relation to production relations; only the proletarians of the present day... are in a position 
to achieve a complete and no longer restricted self-activity, which consists in the 
appropriation of a totality of productive forces and in the thus postulated development of a 
totality of capacities. (113) Finally, in his analysis of the role of a revolutionary proletariat, 
Marx draws practical conclusions from the experience of the Paris Commune;
the whole sham of state mysteries and state pretensions was done away [with] by a Commune, mostly 
consisting of simple working men, organizing the defence of Paris, carrying on war against the 
praetorians of Bonaparte, securing the supplies for the immense town, filling all posts hitherto divided 
between government and police, and prefecture, doing their work publicly, simply under the most 
difficult and complicated circumstances... (114)
The actual experience of the October Revolution reveals that the three instances 
emphasised by Marx were absent to a large extent from the logic governing the Soviet state. 
What was theorised by Lenin in WBD1 simply found its full expression in the state system 
which followed from the Revolution. The Communist Party was given priority and the
working class was not assigned the same roles theorised by Marx. In Marxian theory, the 
party organisation cannot be justified by circumstantial logic, or by pressing conditions, given 
that the mass of the Russian population was attracted to the emancipatory programme of the 
Bolsheviks and not to pro-liberal Kautskyans (or even Mensheviks) for instance (115) First, 
with Lenin the party was given ultimate control over citizens; second, with Stalin, the 
authoritarian trap, led not only to consolidation of statist character of the one single-party 
rule but also to a crisis of the moral link between state and citizens. My contention here is that 
both aim and implication of 1917 did distance the working classes from their revolutionary 
historic role of achieving at a first stage a workers state, and, then, a classless society.
2/ Lenins Marxism and the limits of What is to be Done?:
Arguing against the mainstream critique of Lenin, Tom Freemanan uncritical 
advocate of Lenins theory of revolutionwrote in 2004 that
Lenins declarations on consciousness from outside then were not a formula for a new elite, which 
broke with Marxs aim of working class self-emancipation. They were rather part of an argument for a 
historically interventionist approach to realising that aim, directed against the deterministic approach 
inherent in revisionism, and in particular its Russian variant Economism. (116)
By arguing so Freeman is, it seems to me, echoing an apologia for a Marxism without Marx, 
an apologia which sees that in its full scope Marxs writing had rather been a project open to 
more than one application. The Marxian text seems, by suggesting so, to stand on sand, a text 
which allows fundamentally different applications depending on the context for revolutionary 
action. Taking too seriously the question of volunteer interventionism of political agency, 
Freemans view comes to confuse the premises of political history and the social contexts to
which they are related. It argues that whatever the social basis of the working class is the 
professional revolutionaries must always play a leading role. Self-action and emancipation 
of the proletariat is only conceivable in the presence of an intelligentsia whose role is to 
introduce the bulk of the workers to theoretical knowledge and guide them towards social 
democratic consciousness. In my view, Freeman does exaggerate Lenins ability to adapt 
Marxs emancipation theory to different contexts. What Lenin did was to distance the 
revolutionary masses from the intellectual elite by making the latter superior to the former.
On the other hand, in making distinction between a necessary Leninist interventionist 
approach and a deterministic one, Freeman also sheds some light on the particularity of 
Lenins theory of revolution which, I would suggest, reduces social action on the part of 
proletarians to a will-to-obey formula. According to Freemans emphasis, the masses have to 
re-conceive their revolutionary role by basing their action not on their spontaneous 
socialism inherent in their direct engagement with the conflict between the accumulation of 
capital and wage-labour but on following a certain formula of struggle wherein the 
proletarian instinct, to use Engelss words, is lost to Social Democratic education, as Lenin 
himself argued in WBD1 As a starting point, Lenins theory of revolution is hardly dissociable 
from his particular view that proletarian class consciousness comes from outside. His 
emancipation formula derives from the belief that class consciousness is primarily not a 
defining characteristic of the working class; the working class by itself is capable only of 
trade union consciousness at best. Syndical consciousnessbeing in purely Marxian sense 
the basis of worker consciousnessbecomes with Lenin a paralysing constraint on any 
eventual attainment of political consciousness. (117) This is, it seems to me, what made Lenin 
stand Marxs theory of emancipation on its head. Lenin's treatment of trade unionism in 
WBD? was an attempt to strip Marx's view of the workers of every single value. Lenin's
mistake in this respect was to misread Marx's theory about the political role which the trade 
unions could play. This can be proved by Marx's very comments on such a question:
Apart from their original purposes, they [trade unions] must now learn to act deliberately as organizing 
centres of the working class in the broad interest of its complete emancipation. They must aid every 
their efforts...aim at the emancipation of the downtrodden millions. (118)
The question of working class consciousness in Leninist literature is of course too 
open to interpretation to beg a thorough account here. Yet, given that the suggestion in this 
respect is to dig further in Marxist literature to know which Leninof 1905-1907, 1917, or 
1921was much more faithful to Marxian theory, the question of consciousness was also the 
very premise whereupon Lenin had wrongly addressed the validity of trade unionism for 
instance. Contrary to Freemans logicwhich stands on a "blind" justification of Lenin's 
veneration of the partythe defence of Lenin is hardly valid if one supposes that Lenin's 
WBD, for example did not constitute the authoritarian basis for Bolshevik thinking. In this 
respect, there is little doubt that such schools as the Totalitarian Model (119) for example 
are not right when they trace Soviet authoritarianism to Lenin's thinking.
Lars T. Lih ( 2003) has recently argued that WBD? as a book of historical significance 
has been severely attacked not for its conjectural structure but for the practical solutions it 
suggests. If we should believe this claim, it is then of almost no avail to firmly believe that 
WBD, for example can by itself show the real degree of Lenins application of the Marxian 
text. However, and as Lih shows, the fact that WBD? posed a problem both inside Russia and 
elsewhere cannot be wholly circumvented, given the roaring critique received from for 
example the Borba Group (David Borisovich Riazanov in particular) or such revolutionary 
figures as Martov, Trotsky, Luxemburg and Kautsky. (120) This means that WBD? as a text
poses a theoretical quandary as to the degree of its continuity with the textual substance of 
The Communist Manifesto for instance.
The question of (discontinuity with the Marxian text brings us back to Lenins 
legitimation of his critique of economism as is forged in WBD1, and to whether his attack on 
the economists had to do with his contempt for trade union politics; this also sheds some light 
on whether he poorly considered the role of economics as theorised by Marx and Engels. 
Such a question also brings to attention the instance of reducing the contributive role of the 
working-class and its replacement by that of the political vanguard. It is my argument here 
that Marxs praise of the Russian revolutionary movement did not have a direct influence on 
Lenin, since, at least in organisational sense, Marx had praised and encouraged the Populist 
movement (121) whereas Lenins interest in revolutionary activity was fuelled more by the 
Black Repartition Group (Plekhanov, Zasulich, etc.) (122) Following from this, I should also 
add that Lenins conception of a Russian Revolution was practically influenced more by 
Russian Marxism (Plekhanov, etc): the influence of Marx and Engels was only in the way 
they saw the Paris Commune as a heroic act. Lenin's fixation on the Commune is inherent in 
his belief that the 1917 Revolution was the true realisation of the promises of the Commune, 
and that there was hardly any difference between both experiences. The October Revolution, 
'in different circumstances and under different conditions, continue[s] the work of the 
Commune and confirm[s] the genius of Marx and Engels.' (123) It should also be noted here 
that Lenin's assessment of the Commune experience was rather equivocal and curious. As 
john Hoffman maintains, Lenin had a two-faced view of the Paris Commune: 'In 1905 Lenin 
had criticized the Paris Commune for confusing "the tasks of fighting for a republic with 
those of fighting for socialism"...In 1917, however, the Commune was now presented as a 
model for the future socialist state... (124)
3/ The Leviathan Revolution
In What Time is it in Russia's History, Tucker observes that ...whatever was said 
about Soviet power having been established by the October Revolution, what de facto 
emerged was a new line of tsars under another name, starting with Lenin. (125) In my view, 
Tucker's point here is important not because he compares the Bolshevik regime with the 
tsarist autocracy, but because he emphasises the fact that 'Soviet power' did mean anything 
but working class power. The notion of a popular revolution cannot be applied to Soviet 
reality, mainly because the Soviet state was not the "Soviet workers' state" as envisaged in 
The State and Revolution. Tucker's point highlights the devastating effect of what had been 
conceived as the "dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry." The 'new line of tsars 
under another name' was a condition wrought first by Lenins fight for a classless society 
structurally based on the necessity to keep the party strong and united, and, second, by his 
belief that the conditions of Russia could not allow the working classes and peasants to 
assume a vanguard position in politics. The new state emanating from the 1917 Revolution 
was but the application of Lenin's very thesis that it is no longer the proletarians but certain 
intellectuals in our party who need to be educated in the matters of organization and 
discipline. (126)
The omnipotence of the repressive Soviet state was responsive to Bolshevik thinking 
that the proletarian class was not wholly involved in the class struggle in Tsarist Russia. 
Russian society was predominantly peasant and both working men and peasants were 
historically still all too unconscious of their active role as agents of social change. The 
working class character of the revolution, the Bolshevik designers maintained, was 
unmistakably Marxian, and, as Bukharin asserted in the ABC o f Communism, the revolution 
could only be conceived as a 'confirmation' of Marx's prophesy that the workers would have 
their own 'socialist order,' and their own 'state':
Marxism foretold the war, Marxism foretold the period of revolutions and the whole character of the 
epoch we are going through, Marxism foretold the dictatorship of the proletariat and the rise of a 
Socialist order... The Revolution has proved the great destroyer o f fetishes...The Revolution has 
destroyed one State and built another: it has practically invaded this sphere of reality, and has 
ascertained the component parts of the State, and its functions, and its personnel, and its material 
appendages, and its class significance...The Revolution has completely confirmed the theoretical 
teaching of Marx on the State. (127)
Confirming the construction of the new state and marrying its destiny to the dictatorship of 
the proletariat had an implication that the Russian Revolution was mainly about a substitution 
of a state for an other. Bukharins theoretical premise was based on a forced statism which, 
under the pretext of preserving the revolution, led to omnipotence of the Bolshevik party 
under Lenin and an age of terror under Stalin. (128) Bukharin's argument for the continuity 
between Marxism and Bolshevism was belied by the very reality of the Soviet state: it was 
socialist only by name. This was even confirmed by Lenin's very inconsistency while treating 
the results of the Bolshevik Revolution. In the "April Theses" he asserted that 'it is not our 
immediate task to "introduce" socialism, but only to bring social production and the 
distribution of products at once under the control of the Soviets of Workers' Deputies.' 
(Thesis eight) In 1918 Lenin confirmed that achieving 'Socialism' was only a matter of a few 
months. (129) One year later, he warned that 'we cannot establish a socialist system at the 
present time. It will be well if our children and perhaps our grandchildren will be able to 
establish it.' (130) Following from this, Bukharins glorification of the new state as a 
realisation of Marxism reveals clearly how inconsistent and contradictory the Bolsheviks 
themselves were.
The other problem one might well raise resides in defining the relationship between 
Lenin's state-centric tendencies and his envisagement of socialism. Lenin's argument in favour 
of a future socialist state was in sharp conflict with his belief in a necessary powerful state 
which can fight reaction and 'capitalist encirclement.' If socialism should be achieved through 
fortifying state control of society, such very socialism would be impossible once state power 
is concentrated in the hands of the minority. In actual fact, this what happened during the 
Civil War, and especially when "War Communism" was still in effect; even the NEP break 
could not take state power away from the hands of Lenin and other topmost leaders like 
Kamnev, Zinoviev, and Stalin. Minority rule and abuse of power after 1918,1 firmly argue, 
was the main problem with Lenin's conception of power. His belief that the party must do the 
job while the rest of society is told to wait and see is the very source for the birth of an 
elitist notion of power where the sovereign decides everything. On the other hand, the 
authoritarian element inherent in party dictatorship condemned Lenin's formula of a socialist 
state to depend on an exclusive theory: achieving socialism became an exclusively party role. 
In other words, Lenin's argument for party dictatorship in order to 'liquidate' the forces of 
reaction for instance constituted a justification for tyrannical rulepracticed by the minority. 
His position here is far from reflecting the Marxian approach to socialist society. In Marx's 
view, the condition of socialism dictates that 'collective property' determines and controls 
minority representation of the majority. (131) Therefore, the political leadership is but a 
'representative' of the majority: it acts on its behalf and not in its place.
It was the argument of Lenin in 1902 that the revolution was needed in order to 
terminate the Tsarist authoritarian system. (132). However, when Bolsheviks took power in 
1917, they were trapped, as John Hoffman argues, by the very logic against which they had 
worked: an 'authoritarian state emerged' (133) Bukharin theorised that the need for a state in 
Russia would not amount to repression and loss of individual freedom. For him, the
revolution ushered in a state that had no state character, a state with no governing body. But 
if Bukharin was right in his argument, why did Lenin then decide to dissolve the Constituent 
Assembly in 1918? Why did the Bolshevik party continue to rule most uncontrollably both in 
Lenins life and after? Why was authoritarianism "institutionalised" into a totalitarian state 
form whose results were such events as the Stalin Purges of the late 1930s?
Trotskys views in this respect are very significant. For Trotsky, the elitism of Lenins 
party organisation was at the origin of the fragmentation of the unity of proletarians 
themselves. The process of reducing the proletariat to mere servants of the Revolution made it 
impossible for the Bolsheviks to unite under one single revolutionary doctrine, for the task of 
revolution is in the last analysis a constructive socialist task. It is the argument of Trotsky that 
[t]he group of professional revolutionaries was not marching at the head of the conscious 
proletariat, it was acting.. .in the place of the proletariat. (134) For Trotsky, the danger comes 
mainly from the role assigned to the Partys intellectuals, who transformed the achievements 
of October into a sanctioned elitism, an elitism that, I argue, would amount to a leviathan role 
where the majority of people are sacrificed by a dictatorial one-party state. In Trotskys 
conception, what rises as an outcome is a bureaucratic-command state wherein the total socio
political structure is reversed sharply: the class of workers was drowned by the rigid party, 
and the party by the Central Committee. (135)
Rosa Luxemburg for her part explains Lenins schizophrenic position by pinpointing two 
different historical functions of the Bolshevik party. In its incipient phase, it had basically had 
a proletarian character: [t] he party of Lenin was the only one which grasped the mandate and 
duty of a truly revolutionary party and which, by the sloganAll power in the hands of the 
proletariat and peasantryinsured the continued development of the revolution. (136) But 
after the Revolution it was turned into an elitist and repressive apparatus. She claimsby 
arguing against Lenins abolition of the Constituent Assembly in 1918that Bolsheviks after
the Revolution were trapped in the authoritarian formula of allowing freedom only for the 
supporters of the government, only for the members of one party. (137) One can observe in 
this context that the elitist character of post-Revolution Bolshevism distanced it from its 
theoretical substance, namely Marxs theory of revolution.
The other problem with Lenin's conception of 'the workers' state' has to do with his 
perception of the task of the proletariat once the revolution occurred. In conceiving of the role 
of working class, Lenin was inclined to approach the question of proletarian political 
participation by constantly signposting the indispensable role of the "professional 
revolutionaries." Lenin had to base his trust in working class participation by focussing on the 
degree of workers' ability to consolidate socialism through peaceful organisation and cultural 
work (138). Yet, Lenin's demand was often chained by a reality in which Bolsheviks 
desperately had to reconcile the peasantry and workers on the one hand, and defend the Party 
itself from factionalism on the other. Lenins focus on cultural work constituted a challenge 
to an actual, or even potential, proletarian power, because after the Revolution the issue of a 
proletarian culture was seriously put on the agenda of the Communist Party programme: 
proletarians could not get political power without education and class-consciousness. Trotsky 
himself identified the extent of a proletarian culture.
After the conquest of power and after almost six years of struggle for its retention and consolidation, 
our proletariat is forced to turn all its energies towards the creation of material existence and of contract 
with the ABC of cultureABC in the true and literal sense of the word... (139)
Trotskys suggestion was an expression of how distanced was the proletariat from the notion 
of the 'workers' state.' This, in turn, gave every pretext for the Communist Party to exert total 
monopoly of power. Such monopoly was also strengthened by Lenins concept that the party
was the only possible apparatus for buttressing the gains of the proletarian revolution. This 
brings us to the conclusion that, as Robert Tucker once observed, Lenins conception of party 
'organization' was what made him stand Marx on his head:
Unlike Marx, who tended to think that history itself would make the revolution, Lenin based all his 
thinking on the premise that revolutions have to be organized. His theory and practice of revolutionary 
party construction not only shaped the organization of Communist movement everywhere, it also 
radiated far and wide into nationalist and fascist. (140)
Lenin justified state control of power after the October triumph as continuation of the 
revolutionary tradition the Paris Commune had established in 1871. (141) It was in the State 
and Revolution that Lenin envisaged a Soviet Commune state as an ideal model for 
proletarian rule. (142) The relative success of the Paris Commune was a driving incentive for 
Lenin. However, in practice, except perhaps for the NEP, Lenins model of state had failed to 
realise the political aspirations of the working classes. By 1918 the promised "commune 
state" seemed to rely on a divided and often conflicting leadership; it was turned into a statist 
order whose elitism ushered in a minority dictatorship breaking chiefly from Marx's concept 
of the dictatorship of the proletariat. (143) What marked most the post-Revolution Lenin state 
was its deployment of Marxs positive views of the Commune to justify, in all sorts of ways, a 
mode of state oppressive in character. In The State and Revolution, Lenin used Marxs views 
in the hope of legitimating an unpropitious revolution. He wrote that Marx regarded the mass 
revolutionary movement, even though it did not achieve its aim, as an historical experience of 
enormous importance, as a certain advance on the part of the worldwide proletarian 
revolution, as a practical step was more important than hundreds of programmes and 
arguments. (144) Basing his argument on Marxs own revision of The Communist Manifesto
on the basis of the relative success of the Commune (145), Lenin used such a revision in order 
to justify his own conception of revolution. He even used Marx's correspondence in the hope 
of validating the claim for an "untimely" revolution; he quoted Marxs letter to Kugelmann in 
which Marx expressed the courage of the Commune to smash the bureaucratic-military 
machine instead of simply transfer[ring] it from one set of hands to another. (146) Lenin 
capitalised Marxs support for smashing the state by asserting that, like the epoch of 1871, 
the epoch of the first great imperialist war in 1914 necessitated a proletarian revolution.
Nevertheless, Lenin developed this belief by observing that Marx did only succeed in 
pointing to the necessity to replace the smashed state machine. (147) Marx did by no means 
indulge in the utopia of trying to explain the means of accomplishing the tasks. (148) 
The epoch of the second Industrial Revolution (1850-1900) did not allow Marx to provide 
ready-made explanations. In Lenins view, Marx prescribed the remedy without dictating it. 
In other words, Marx made abstract theories and expected the experience (Lenins italics) 
of the mass movement to provide the answer to the question as to what specific forms this 
organization of the proletariat as the ruling class would assume... (149) The Paris 
Commune, Lenin wrote, was one of the most significant instances which showed clearly to 
Marx how "experience", only experience provided the answer. By believing so, Lenin, I 
would argue, seems to have read Marx as he pleased and not as Marx should be read. (150) 
Contrasting utopia to experience Lenin seems to have forged a new position in 
understanding Marxs text; he implicitly asserted that one should understand Marxs theory 
through the prisms of experience, mainly because the latter might well prove Marxs abstract 
answers right. In thinking so, Lenin also seems to suggest that the theoretical Marx of the 
age of capitalism can only be supplemented by the practical Marx of the age of imperialism, 
namely Lenin. By implication the Communist Manifesto was the document which described
the necessity to do away with the state, and The State and Revolution was the practical 
document guaranteeing replacement of the bourgeois state by the workers state. (151)
This was the premise of the Lenin Revolution, which Stalin capitalised later after 
abolishing the NEP in 1929 only to turn it into a one-man dictatorship. In this context, the 
structure of Soviet political leadership was contingent on, I would argue, a legitimacy theory 
that amounted to a veneration of a leviathan state (as theorised by Hobbes) perceivably 
inherent in the legitimation of state power over citizens. Hobbess theory that individuals 
must give in to the will of a Sovereign Power is re-echoed in the Lenin state, which dictates 
authority of Bolshevism over the masses. (152) Such an authority implies that, if measured 
up against state power, individuals must give in to the rule of the Party elite and the decisions 
made by the Central Committee. Lenins leviathan revolution, as it were, follows from this 
very principle: state power through consolidation of the Party. On the other hand, Bolshevism 
amounts to the rule of the one Assembly of men. (153) What is more, Lenins argument for 
an invincible Bolshevik Party has to do with Hobbess theoretical legitimation of the necessity 
of a commonwealth. Lenins commonwealthism, in turn, was formulated in connection with 
his belief that the Soviet state was the medium for uniting proletarians: The most pressing 
and topical question for politics today is the transformation of all citizens into workers and 
employees of one big syndicate, namely the state as a whole. (154) That belief led, as 
Tucker argues, to ...the dictatorship of popular Russias self-appointed organ of 
consciousness, the Bolshevik Party. (155)
By the early 1920s Bolsheviks overlooked an essential Marxian teaching: when the 
state has ignored basic individual rights, society, as Engels puts it, becomes ...entangled in 
an insoluble contradiction with itself... (156) Soviet society after the revolution was 
characterised by a yawning gulf between Bolshevik cadres and the mass of proletarians and 
peasants. On paper, as David M Kotz thinks, political power was held by the soviets...But
in fact all power was held by the Communist Party. (157) Hobbess concept of a Covenant, 
or individuals forced agreement to obey the state and carry out its obligations does not 
contradict with this formula, which under the pretext of protection forces individuals to follow 
state rule or perish. It follows that the form of political obligation under whose auspices the 
practice of the Lenin state took place was premised on the very moral obligation that Hobbes 
sanctions in Leviathan. Therefore, in a state system as such individuals are forced to function 
in blind conformity with the rules of political power. For them, the process becomes a moral 
commitment. In the Bolshevik state, individuals were urged by a very similar political 
discourse to obey their guardians, the elite of Bolshevik cadres. Several events attest to the 
repressive link that Bolshevism produced after the Revolution. Callinicos argues that the 
workers state (which Lenin spoke in the name of) was also a state apparently on the verge 
of being engulfed by mass unreststrikes in Petrograd, a bitter peasant rising in Tambov 
province, and the mutiny of the garrison of the key naval base at Kronstadt. (158) Those 
events were to spring from a state system incapable of changing the appalling conditions of 
the peasants and workers. According to Jordan, the Kronstadt event was to plague the body 
of the party with cancer. (159) The Lenin Revolution grew into a leviathan-Party state, .. .a 
totalitarian monster, as Sakwa thinks, that has swallowed up both the individual and 
society. (160) It also spawned one of the most dehumanising ideology in human history, 
namely Stalinism.
4/ Stalin as Leviathan:
Stalins revolution from above differed from Lenins Leviathan Revolution in degree. 
Yet, it was its natural offspring. While Lenins Revolution was the authoritarian basis, the 
Stalin Revolution was its totalitarian form. Stalin followed the Bolshevik line of thought 
from which he had risen as a potential leader in the hope of consolidating his position as the
most appropriate heir to Lenin among party comrades. By this very norm, he used his 
ideological affiliation and commitment to the Party to advance a tacit separatism from other 
Party cadres, only to construct his aura as saviour, guardian, and protector. Robert 
Daniels brilliantly describes the Stalin position as cunningly conciliatory between the past and 
the present:
If each instance of the postrevolutionary dictatorship is unique, was distinctive to die Russian case and 
to Stalins personal role? The most unusual feature in its time, though it has been replicated in 
subsequent Communist revolutions, was...the organizational and ideological continuity that Stalin 
maintained between the revolutionary era and his own regime. He himself came out of the apparatus of 
the party revolutionary extremism, and made this apparatus the foundation of his post-revolutionary 
rule. At the same time Stalin insisted on the formal observance of the revolutionary ideology, now 
designated Marxism-Leninism, which played a key role for him to use the doctrine for these purposes 
because he commanded the power to reinterpret its meaning as he chose, to make it serve the radically 
changed social structure over which he presided. (161)
Stalin was able to make use of the state-centric tradition, which the Party leadership 
established after Revolution. He was part of the order initiated by such Party theorists as 
Bukharin. In 1925 he was criticized for being ...the total prisoner of this political line, the 
creator and genuine representative of which is Comrade Bukharin. (162) My focus on 
Stalins characteristics as a Bolshevist constitutes my concern with his late emergence as an 
unrivalled dictator, to be compared only to despots like Hitler. In this context, I think, Stalin 
evokes the image of an all too omnipotent monster that amounts to the picture of a leviathan 
who has relentlessly abused his authority. Stalin's penetrative capacity and intelligence 
resided in how he could use in his own favour the factionalism that had bedevilled the Party 
leadership since the 1917 Revolution. What is more, from the mid-1920s his political tactics
could softly pervade and violate the Party organisation designed by other party leaders, 
including Trotsky. The manoeuvre was carried out in full shape through pro-Stalin members 
like Zinoviev and Kamanev. (163)
Party members such as Zinoviev were to believe in and defend Stalin as genuine 
guardian of the Party structure that Lenin had long sought to preserve. (164) The Stalin-led 
faction was anxious to distance Trotsky from Party leadership. Zinoviev, as Medvedev 
contends, dismissed Trotskyism as myopic and reductive: whoever wants to build the Party 
in alliance with Trotsky, in collaboration with Trotskyism, which openly opposes Bolshevism, 
such a person is abandoning the fundamentals of Leninism. (165) But when he buttressed his 
position at the top of the Party, after Lenins death, Stalin started to gradually depart from all 
Party prerogatives, including the economic policies designed by Lenin and Bukharin. The 
First Five-Year Plan in 1928 was a first step in his departure. (166) And his dissolution of the 
NEP in 1929 completed the process. Stalin ignored the achievements of the NEP in the mid- 
1920s. For Bukharin, for instance, the NEP formed the cornerstone for an expected transition 
to full-fledged socialism. Bukharins most distinctive contribution as leader of the Right, 
Callinicos asserts, was to argue that NEP should become a permanent framework of building 
socialism, even if this meant industrialization at a snails pace. (167) The NEP for 
Bukharin was a tactical maneuver to be pursued only until the inevitable change of 
conditions which would make victory possible... (168)
Towards the early 1930s Stalin started to deploy the Party as a medium for sanctifying 
a new form of rule, namely the one-man rule formula. He transformed power from the one- 
party system.. .to a one-person system, the ruling party to a ruling personage. (169) On paper, 
Stalin did not disown priority of the party. He invoked it in justifying the Great Purges of the 
1930s, and in carrying out forced collectivisation. He performed his departure from Leninism 
on the ground of his conspiracy theory argument. What followed from that argument was
his alleged historic responsibility to protect, first, Bolshevism, and second, the Soviet Union 
itself. The "conspiracy theory" argument was structurally based on one famous belief that 
Stalin had always maintained and defended: We have internal enemies, we have external 
enemies. This comrades, must not be forgotten for a single moment. (170) Stalin had 
maintained that belief from the early 1920s, and had held it more as a reaction against 
criticism than as a grounded evidence of a real threat against the Party or the USSR. In 
response to Lenins sharp criticism that he was too coarse and unable to manage the General 
Secretary position, Stalin argued in a misleading way: Yes, I am too coarse, comrades, in 
dealing with those who coarsely and treacherously destroy and splinter the party. (171) Later, 
in 1929, when he abolished the NEP, Stalin focused on a discourse of protection and 
obedience. He used a protection formula to force citizens obedience to the state and 
vindicate his dictatorial political and economic measures. By adopting such a political stance, 
Stalin only moved away from Marxs teaching on political power. For Marx, social consensus 
and the will to peace are constructed on the will of individuals, not on their subordination. 
What Stalin did was, to use Daniels words,  to transform Marxism in a system of ideological 
false consciousness in the original Marxian sense of the word. (172)
I think that Stalins idea of internal and external enemies might to a large extent be 
traced in the theoretical justification on which Hobbes theorises his state model. In Hobbess 
theory, the relationship between citizen and citizen on the one hand, and citizen and the state 
on the other is based on a covenant dictating state protection of individuals in return for their 
obedience. Stalins protection formula did not escape such a Hobbesean logic. It was 
legitimated through the consolidation of the leviathan element of the state. If one reads 
Stalins protection formula through Hobbess state theory, one would find a striking affinity 
between the Soviet General Secretary and the author of Leviathan. The following paragraph
clearly reveals how Hobbess leviathan forms the "unconscious" (173) ideological premise for 
a Stalin paternalist repressive state:
The only way to erect such a Common Power [leviathan], as may be able to defend them from invasion 
of Forraigners, and the injuries of one another, and thereby to secure them in such sort, as that by their 
owne industrie, and by the fruites of the Earth, they may nourish themselves and live contentedly; is to 
conferre all their power and upon one Man, or upon one Assembly of men, that may reduce all their 
Wills, by plurality of voices, unto one Will...and therein to submit their Wills, every one to his Will, 
and their Judgements to his Judgement. (174)
In forging this essence for the common power, Hobbes seeks to establish a social link 
answerable to the political order of the day, that is an all too invincible monarch, or ruler; a 
leviathan state apparatus. This social link forces individuals to get rid of their reciprocal 
enmity only under the rule of the sovereign who provides protection. Their obedience to the 
state would also guarantee their protection against foreign enemies.
Stalin did use the same protection/obedience formula by asserting that the Soviet 
people were still fragile and therefore in need for a strong state to protect them.. In Mastering 
Bolshevism (1937), he pointed out the internal' and 'external' enemies against whom he would 
protect the Soviet population. They were the Trotskyites and the Capitalists:  First, the 
wrecking and diversive spying work of the agents of foreign countries, among whom the 
Trotskyites played an active role, affected to some degree or other all or almost all our 
organizations, both economic, administrative, and Party. (175) Stalin even deployed the 
Central Committee as an ideological and administrative authority to pile up reports against 
what he called the Trotskyite-Zinovievite group. As a reaction to the murder of Kirov 
(member of the Stalin-led faction) the Central Committee reported in 1936:
Now when it has proved that the Trotskyite-Zinovievite scum unite all the most bitter and the sworn 
enemies of the working people of our country...in the struggle against Soviet power...all our Party 
organizations, all members of the Party must understand that the vigilance of the Communists is 
necessary in every field and in all situations. (176)
Most of such reports were made by the February-March 1937 Central Committee 
plenum. It was Central Committee Secretary A. A. Zhdanov who insured the success of the 
reports. (177) Much of what came in the reports was about "hidden" enemies within the party 
itself. Such enemies did of course have an organisational structure: they were either followers 
of Trotsky, Kamnev, or Zinoviev. For this reason, Stalin believed that it was in no way 
sensible to depart from the coercive practices used during the Civil War. (178) State power 
was needed to guarantee the liquidation of 'enemies of the people.' In principle, the recourse 
to vengeance and purges was in sharp conflict with the dictates of the new Soviet Constitution 
drafted by the Extraordinary Eighteenth Congress of Soviets in December 1936. (179) The 
new Constitution did emphasise the degree of individual freedom guaranteed by the Soviet 
government. Yet, the practices of the Soviet secret police revealed the yawning gulf between 
what the new Constitution promised'freedom of conscience, speech, press...' etc. and 
what Stalin himself committed as a General Secretary in the late 1930s. (180) On the one 
hand, he declares that 'our principles do not permit us to shed the blood of old party members, 
however, weighty their sins.' (181) On the other, however, he only dealt mercilessly with his 
old Bolshevik comrades and friends. Party leaders like Zinoviev and Bukharin even reached 
the point where they had to 'confess non-existent crimes' (182) and beg Stalin from their cells 
for pardon and acquittal: 'I have reached the point,' Zinoviev writes, 'where I sit and stare at 
your portrait in the newspapers, and those of the other Politburo members and think: my dear 
ones, look into my heart, surely you can see that I am no longer your enemy...that I have
understood everything and am ready to do anything to deserve your forgiveness and your 
leniency.' (183) Very similar words were pronounced by Bukharin after his arrest. He 
addressed his old friend "Koba"as he nicknamed Stalinwith, expressions of 'true 
devotion.' 'I acknowledge myself to be entirely yours'; 'I would be ready to carry out any of 
your demands.' (184) These confessions and expressions of devotion to the Soviet despot 
revealed the desperation of those who had once been influential and leading party members. 
They knew that their fate had already been determined, and whatever loyalty they displayed 
they would not be spared.
These events evoke many questions of significant implications: was not the new 
Soviet Constitution the ''covenant'' Stalin signed with both party and non-party members in 
order to protect them against any violations of civil liberties? Did not his breach of the 
contract amount to an ideological and political abuse of the doctrine of socialism itself? Did 
not his practice against the alleged 'enemies of the people' present a pretext for suppressing 
the whole society? Did not the late 1930s Purges constitute the leviathan element in the Stalin 
state which, by basing its rule on tyranny, departed entirely from its emancipatory claims? 
Such questions also lead to an equally important conclusion. Stalin's attempts to indoctrinate 
the Soviet people against opposition attested to how both socialism and the alleged 'workers' 
state became ideological instruments in the hands of one person, a dictator. The rule of the 
new state did but confirm how much the supposed 'workers state' was tightly and tyrannically 
policed. In the words of Catherine Merridale, [w]hile the majority of the population may 
have accepted much of the rhetoric about enemies and the danger of opposition...it 
remained outside the party and the Communist belief system. (185)
It is worth mentioning that the Stalin 'totalitarian state' had seeds in the authoritarian 
state established in the aftermath of the October Revolution. It is, however, important if one 
reminds the reader that while Leninism was partly responsible for the omnipotent Stalin state,
Lenin himself did in no way intentionally envisage such a totalitarian future for the supposed 
Soviet socialist state. In his Purges, Stalin chose to start with those enemies who had much 
more assertive roles right after the Revolution occurred. His attack on Trotsky, for instance, 
was historically justifiable. In this respect, Lenins views in 1922 and 1923 had a gigantic 
impact on Stalin. Lenin was quite conscious of the conflicts between Party cadres, but he was 
specifically conscious of the Trotsky-Stalin tension. He also openly favoured Trotsky:
Comrade Stalin, on becoming General Secretary [of the Central Committee], concentrated enormous 
power in his hands, and I am not sure he always knows how to use his power carefully enough. On the 
other hand, Comrade Trotsky is distinguished not only by outstanding abilities...Personally, he is, 1 
daresay, the most capable member of the present Central Committee. (186)
But that wets not the only reason for Stalins hostility to Trotsky. He also knew that Trotsky 
was a potential successor to the Party leadership. And he knew that Lenin no longer trusted 
him as a reliable General Secretary: ...I suggest to the comrades that they think of a way of 
transferring Stalin from this position and assigning another man who differs from Comrade 
Stalin... more loyal, more polite...less capricious, and so on. (187) The words pronounced 
by the Soviet leader did confirm the danger that the Soviet people would face once Stalin 
remained the CPSU's General Secretary. Lenin's fears proved to be based on a realistic 
reading of the future Soviet despot. If one observes the 1930s Great Purges against topmost 
Communist Party leaders like Bukharin, one is quickly reminded of Lenin's words quoted 
above. Lenin's open favouring of other party leaders to Stalin, it must be said, was one of the 
reasons behind Stalin's condemnation of, for example, what he called the Anti-Soviet Bloc of 
Rights and Trotskyites. On the other hand, one might well argue that the formula whereby 
Stalin adopted and ensured Stabilisation of Soviet society was based on a self-sanctioned
prerogative to make such a very society act against those alleged 'enemies of the people.' 
(188) Moreover, Stalin's purges were rationalised within an economic framework. The 
rationale was that since the Soviet people needed to prosper, they had to guarantee political 
stability through acting against the enemies of socialism. The drive for Collectivisation and 
industrialisation was then the rationale legitimising the purges for instance. As a result, 
massive collectivisation and the dekulakisation of society were thought to have adverse, but 
necessary, economic consequences. In rationalising such consequences, Stalin even went as 
far as to relinquish Marxs theory: 'Equalization...levelling the requirements and the 
individual lives of the members of society...has nothing in common with Marxism, with 
Leninism. (189)
Stalin worked out his aura as liberator through the issue of transition from socialism 
to communism. ( (190) That was the ideological framework on which he based his future 
policies, including the economic and the social. Under the shield of those policies, he carried 
out the 1930s brutal show trials. And he consolidated his personality cult by dumping Soviet 
society into most enslaving processes of collectivisation and industrialisation. What followed 
from the cult that he established was a class society that he himself designed. Stalin's 
rationalisation of his cult, however, was masked by an apparent self-denial and 
misrecognition which he constantly celebrated. He began by promising at the Second 
Congress of the Soviets to ensure putting at work all Lenins commandments. (191) By 
doing so, he sought to arrogate Lenin to the promotion of his own cult. Particularly 
paradoxical and misleading was Stalins letter to the Bolshevik M. Shatunovskii in 1930:
You speak of your devotion to me. Perhaps that phrase slipped out accidentally. But if it isnt an 
accidental phrase, Id advise you to thrust aside the principle of devotion to persons. It isnt the 
Bolshevik way. Have devotion to the working class, its party, its state. Thats needed and good. But 
dont mix it with devotion to persons, that empty and needless bauble of intellectuals. (192)
The words spelled out in response to Shatunovskiis confession, as Robert Tucker tells us, 
were belied by the official ossification of the Soviet state into one single path towards 
Stabilisation, which was inaugurated through the official celebration of his [Stalins] fiftieth 
birthday in 1929. (193) The letter reveals the difference between what Stalinism really was 
and what it pretended to be. The search for a position above society made Stalin then create 
his own world of power in which ideology and politics hardly translated Lenins concern 
about the foundation of the workers state. Following from the solidification of his personality 
cultwhich later traded under such slogans as Thank you Comrade StalinStalin 
proceeded since the early 1930s by creating a Soviet state responsive to his non-Marxian 
codes. As Hannah Arendt shows:
[H]e first undermined the national Soviets through the introduction of Bolshevik cells from which alone 
the higher functionaries to the central committees were appointed...The Bolshevik government then 
proceeded to the liquidation of classes...The liquidation of the middle and peasant classes was 
completed in the early thirties...The next class to be liquidated as a group were the workers...It took 
Stalin about two years from 1936 to 1938 to rid himself of the whole administrative and military 
aristocracy of the Soviet society. (194)
The Stalin years were characterised by a huge gulf between the New Class and the 
masses, the new class which was reflected in Stalins repudiation of the goal of 
egalitarianism and in his enumeration of the three strataworkers, collective farmers, and 
the toiling intelligentsia within the nominally classless society of socialism. (195) The 
1940s were not particularly different from the late 1920s, and the 1930s. Stalin as leviathan 
became the sole decision-maker in the Soviet state where he could transform his country from 
a potential workers state into an absolute police state. Indeed Stalinism had stamped the
post-Stalin Soviet state with an irrevocable political-ideological failure that eventually 
terminated the Soviet system itself. Even if one holds to the belief that Hobbes, in theorising 
leviathan rule, set the democratic basis for such a rule, it is hard to believe that Stalin kept 
faithful to this basis. The first measures taken by Stalin was to break the bonds of the 
"covenant between the Soviet state and society set shortly after October.
Summary
  The Continuity Thesis mainly argues that Marxism = Leninism = Stalinism. This 
equation follows from the belief that the relationship between the three categories is genetic.
  The Continuity thesis is based on conjectural rather than archival findings
  I argue that there is a forgotten crisis in Soviet Russia, and that the Soviet system was 
autholitarian (authoritarian-totalitarian). In advancing this thesis, I also argue that Soviet 
autholitarianism was akin to Hobbesean leviathanism.
  I take my main argument from Joseph Vialatoux who thinks that Hobbes was the abstract 
theoretician of statist totalitarianism. Joseph Vialatoux, however, was seen by the critics as 
misinterpreter of the Hobbesean text.
  Hobbess sovereign might well turn coercive rulethe swordinto absolutist totalitarian 
rule. As sovereigns in the Hobbesean sense, Lenin and Stalin were to epitomise such a 
totalitarian rule. Lenin was the authoritarian who paved the way for state totalitarianism under 
Stalin.
  Soviet practice reflected very little Marxs theory of revolution: the dictatorship of the 
proletariat, for example, was turned into a dictatorship against the proletariatWar 
Communism, the First Five-Year Plan, the Purges, etc.
  Very few instances show Lenins faithfulness to the Marxian text. Marxs praise of the 
Paris Commune was a defining example: the Paris Commune experience was used and abused 
by both Lenin and Stalin in the hope of legitimating the practices of the Soviet tyrannical 
state.
  Like Hobbess sovereign, Stalin even used a protection/obedience formula in order to 
guarantee subjugation of Soviet society. He did that by forging his famous conspiracy 
theory, and by pointing to the threat of the enemies of the people.
Conclusion
In this work I have argued that the rise of Leninism as an authoritarian ideology was at 
the origin of Bolshevik thinking in general, and even greatly impacted the Stalin revolution of 
the 1930s. I have also argued that Lenins and Stalins Marxism was a Marxism which 
substantially lacked the defining features of Marxs revolutionary theory of emancipation. In 
my view, Lenins departure from Marxian theory had so much to do with the consolidation of 
the authoritarian state which emerged from the Civil War. The authoritarian state, on the 
other hand, did not keep its emancipatory promises and soon degenerated into a totalitarian 
system whose designer was Stalin himself. It is also my argument that the conflation 
authoritarian-totalitarian has offered a new concept I have dubbed autholitarian.  This new 
concept signifies the Leninist-Stalinist state system which emerged shortly after the October 
Revolution with War Communism, continued through Stalins collectivisation drive in the 
late 1920s, and was consummated by the Great Purges of the late 1930s. My other argument 
is that Soviet state autholitarianism was but some form of a Hobbesean leviathanism which 
had a strong basis in Hobbess theorisation of an all too omnipotent sovereign.
Why such a communist sovereign failed to liberate society from class rule and state 
rule is a question which can be understood by grappling with the very nature of such a 
sovereign. The Bolshevik sovereign started as a promising ruler fighting for a workers 
state, but only ended in turning such a state against the workers themselves. The same 
sovereign took his legitimacy from Marxism as an ideology for human emancipation. Yet, in 
using the sword he decided to make use of Thomas Hobbes rather than Karl Marx. Whether 
he did that consciously has not been my concern here, but what should be clarified is the 
fact that the Soviet autholitarian sovereign used his political prerogative with excess and 
justified it by quoting from Marx and Engels. The use of force to enforce socialism was not 
problematic in itself, since the spirit of the dictatorship of the proletariatin Marxs 
viewdoes not contradict with the use of force; what was problematic was the use of such a
force against the majoritypeasants and workers. Marxs dictatorship of the proletariat was 
reversed. It was reversed first through War Communism, the Kronstadt, etc., and second 
through Stalins so-called cultural revolution.
Just like Hobbess sovereign, the Bolshevik ruler was far from infallible; this is mainly 
because the need to use the sword against society became an end in itself. For Stalin, 
freeing individuals from the desire to own private property necessitated freeing them from 
the will to control their lives; Soviet citizens had to accept the sword of the leviathan mainly 
because that sword was allegedly in the benefit of society as a whole. The Soviet leviathan 
then was in no way accountable for the atrocities committed in the attempt to protect society 
from its own self. In other words, the Soviet leviathan reflected Hobbess obsession with 
freeing human society from the state of nature. For Hobbes, freeing individuals from the 
state of nature necessitated reduc[ing] all their Wills...unto one will..., and in constituting 
such a new will they no longer act as self-conscious individuals who control their fate; the 
Hobbesean sovereign is then prone to degenerate into a tyrannical ruler whose ultimate aim is 
to serve his own interests rather than caring for the majority.
The similarity between Hobbess sovereign and the Bolshevik autholitarian evokes 
then an interesting point in relation to scholarship in the field of Soviet studies. This thesis has 
tried to argue that Soviet political history can be approached from a political-philosophical 
perspective, mainly because the natures of the October Revolution and the state which 
emerged thereafter did not reflect a purely Marxian character. The way in which the October 
Revolution was conceived, and the manner through which the Soviet state was founded had to 
do with a Hobbesean state theory: in order to act against greed and the desire to possess, the 
Soviet leviathan used state coercion, consolidated the state as such, and created a proletariat in 
itself. It was Hobbess concernand not Marxsto establish a strong and omnipotent state 
which keeps individuals in awe. Believing that the relationship between Hobbess statism
and the Soviet state is evident, 1 have also argued that many of the political scientists have 
wrongly conceived of Soviet practice; their equation Marxism = Leninism = Stalinism is 
simply wrong, mainly because Soviet reality was not a practical reflection of Marxian theory, 
and the alleged classless society had been only verbally achieved.
Adopting the political-philosophical method, I have then tried to explain why Lenin 
put Marx on his head, and how Stalin's revolution from above was a revolution against 
Marxism itself. Yet, such a method is not an attempt to entirely rebut the findings of the 
Totalitarian model which, in my view, has contributed so much to Soviet studies: the 
models defining concepts such as revolution from above are simply impossible to ignore. 
The Revisionist school for its part has successfully shed light on most of the inconsistencies 
of the Totalitarian model and has taught us that understanding political history through 
socio-cultural reality is an indispensable task.
In dealing with the main themes of this work, I have also thought of further research 
which this thesis cannot reasonably take. By adopting the political-philosophical approach, I 
will in a future work study the defining differences between Marxs and Hobbess views on 
human nature and the state. In this thesis, I have been concerned more with the Hobbesean 
character of the Soviet state.
Notes
Notes to Introduction:
1/ In this part I have preferred not to treat the Soviet state practice under both Khrushchev and 
Brezhnev because this period is not the focus of my concern.
2/ Eric Hobsbawm (1997) On History, London, Abacus, p. 319.
3 /Ibid., 320.
41 In dealing with these three schools, I rely heavily on the work of Chris Ward, especially his 
Stalins Russia (1999) Arnold Publishers.
5/ See especially R. H. McNeal (1963) The Bolshevik Tradition, New Jersey, Prentice Hall.
6/ Chris Ward, Stalins Russia, pp. 26-7.
7/ Cited in Ibid., p. 26.
8/ See especially Lewin (1985) The Making o f the Soviet System London, Metheun & Co. Ltd 
and E H Carr (1963) The Bolshevik Revolution, London, MacMillan.
9/ For totalitarian literature, see the present work, pp. 284-292.
10/ For Revisionist literature, see the present work, pp. 292-304.
Notes to Part 1:
1/ V.I. Lenin (1969) Our Programme in Selected Works, London, Lawrence and Wishart, 
p.34.
2/ The economist whom Lenin criticised sharply was Edward Bernstein. Bernstein 
represented the Russian variant of revisionism. His main work is entitled Evolutionary 
Socialism (1972), New York, Schocken Books.
3/ V.I. Lenin What is to be Done?, New York, International Publishers, 1943, p.73.
4/ Ibid., pp.32-3. Actually, Marxs position was that the class struggle had primarily an 
economic character and working class emancipation necessitated strikes, combinations, etc. 
Therefore, Lenins contempt for the trade unionism was groundless in purely Marxian 
terms. ( for a discussion of this point, see Alex Callinicos, The Revolutionary Ideas o f Karl 
Marx (1995) London, Bookmarks.)
5/ Sheila Fitzpatrick (1994) The Russian Revolution, Oxford University Press, p.27.
6/ V.I. Lenin What is to be Done?, pp.26-30
7/ Fitzpartick argues that until 1917 the Russian peasantry still formed 80 per cent from 
population (Fitzpartrick, The Russian Revolution, p. 15)
8/ As a social Historian, Fitzpartick asserts that Lenin committed a mistake by supposing that 
pre-revolution Russian working class was not politically conscious: ... the empirical 
evidence of the period from the 1890s to 1914 suggests that in fact Russia's working class, 
despite its close link with the peasantry, was exceptionally militant and revolutionary.. .the 
workers showed considerable solidarity against management and state authority, and their 
demands were usually political as well as economic. (Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution,
p.20)
9/ Charles Elliot, Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg and the Dilemma of the non-Revolutionary 
Proletariat Midwest Journal o f Political Science, Vol.9, No.4 (Nov., 1965), pp.328-329.
10/ By the early 1890s Lenins work was not only aimed at making the workers conscious 
about the danger of reformism as came with the legal Marxists, for example, but also at 
dictating to them that unorganised struggle like that which led to the 1896 textile strike would 
be futile. For Lenins views that the Narodniks and Mensheviks had a devastating effect on 
the workers and peasants, see Lenin (1977) Collected Works, Vol. 25, Moscow, Progress 
Publishers, pp. 17-42.
11/ V. L. Lenin, What is to be Done?, p. 32. For a discussion of this point, see Frances 
Bennett Becker Lenins Application of Marxs Theory of Revolutionary Tactics American 
Sociological Review, Vol. 2, No.3 (June., 1937), pp.354-5.
12/ V. L. Lenin, Our Programme in Selected Works, p.35.
13/ V. L. Lenin, What is to be Done?, p. 41. For a discussion of spontaneity, see Frances 
Becker, Lenins Application of Marxs Theory..., p 360. Unlike Lenin, Luxemburg, was 
very much in favour of spontaneity. For her, the revolutionary process can only be 
nurtured by the spontaneous movement on the part of the workers and not by the 
predetermined, mechanically-executed inventions of any specific leaders... (Cited in 
Elliot, Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg..., p.332. For Luxemburgs criticism of the centralising 
tendency of Lenins political programme, see her The Russian Revolution and Leninism or 
Marxism (1961) The University of Michigan Press, pp.81-108. Charles Elliot argues that 
Luxemburg got off to a wrong position when she criticised Lenin for isolating the masses 
from the party: Rosa Luxemburg was quite wrong. For Lenin was infinitely flexible in his
tactics...she remained inflexible and intransigent...to the very end of her life. (Lenin, Rosa 
Luxemburg..., p.333)
14/ Becker argued that Lenins praise of Social-Democracy was only a tactical measure. 
(Becker, Lenins Application of Marxs..., p.362.)
15/ Becker, Lenins Application of Marxs.. p.360.
16/ Lenin, What is to be Done, pp.63-7.
17/Ibid., p.76.
18/Ibid.
19/ See Becker, Lenins Application of Marxs..., p.360.
20/ See Marxs letter to Bolte, 23 Nov. 1871 in Marx (2000) Selected Writings, Oxford 
University Press, p 636.
21/ For Engels, sectarianism was characteristic of the Proudhon schools of socialism' which 
thanks to the Paris Commune '... has now vanished from French working-class circles.' The 
Blanquists were equally part of such school mainly because 'they started out from the 
viewpoint that a relatively small number of resolute, well-organized men would be able...not 
only to seize the helm of state, but also by a display of great, ruthless energy, to maintain 
power until they succeeded in sweeping the mass of the people into the revolution and ranging 
them round the small band of leaders.' (Engels Introduction to The Civil War in France 
(1970) Peking, Foreign Language Press, p. 14.)
22/ Marxs Letter to Bolte in Selected Writings, p 636. In a letter to Schweitzer (p.635), Marx 
also attacked Lassale with regard to his views on the working class movement. Like 
Proudhon, Lassale 'instead of looking into the genuine elements of the class movement for the 
real basis of his agitation, he wanted to prescribe the course to be followed by this movement 
according to a certain doctrinaire recipe.'
23/ V. L. Lenin, What is to be Done?, p. 22.
24/ Tom Freeman, Was Lenin a Marxist in What is to be Done? 1 Studies in Marxism, No. 
10(2004), p. 17.
25/ Bemsteinism is a term which describes the socialist theory of Edward Bernstein1850- 
1932who was a leader in the German Social-Democratic Party. Towards the 1890s 
Bernstein suggested that socialism could be gained by reform rather than revolution.
26/ See Isaac Deutscher (1957) Russia in Transition and Other Essays, New York, Coward- 
McCann, pp. 162-4.
27/ See Marxs letter to Vera Zasulich in Selected Writings, pp. 623-7. In the letter, Marx 
confirms that the case of Russia is different from that of the European context where Capital
was written. For a thorough discussion of Marxs personal relations with the Russians, see 
Henry Eatons Marx and the Russians Journal o f the History o f Ideas, Vol. 41, No.l (Jan.- 
March 1980), 89-112; for a discussion of Marxs theory of revolutionary practicedifferent 
forms (gradualist or violent) of the overthrow of capitalismsee Shlomo Avineris response 
to Alan Gilbert in How to save Marx from the Alchemists of Revolution, Political Theory, 
Vol.4, No.l (Feb., 1976), 35-44.
28/ K. Marx and F. Engels (2002) The Communist Manifesto, London, Penguin Books, 
p. 196.
29/ In the 1870s Marxs health was seriously weak. A lingering severe lung inflammation, 
being at the origin of his death in 1883, prevented him from working properly or 
concentrating on the Russian context. For a view on how Marxs health prevented him from 
working efficiently, see Stedman Joness notes to The Communist Manifesto, pp. 260-261 
30/ See Stedman Joness notes to The Communist Manifesto, pp.260-261nl0.
31/ Lenin, What is to be Done?, p. 83.
32/ Lenins citation of passages from Engels work can be found in other works other than 
What is to be Done?. In The State and Revolution for instance he resorts to Engelss and 
Marxs writings on the relationship between state and society and the possible means to 
smash the bourgeois state (Lenin (1992) The State and Revolution, London, Penguin Books: 
see particularly, pp.37-59). See also Lenin (1964) The State in Collected Works, Fourth 
English Edition, Vol. 29, Moscow, Progress Publishers, pp.470-488.
33/ By 1903 the experience of Russian Social-Democracy was short-lived. As Lenin himself 
clarifies this point in What is to be Done?, before 1898 there had been no assertive Social- 
Democracy in Russia (p. 166), and the only trends of revolutionary resistance were either 
reactionary and violent (agrarian Populism) or represented by a rather theoreticaland 
impracticalRussian Marxism whose aim was to wait for the transition to Bourgeois 
democracy in Russia before any revolution would occur.
34/ German Social-Democracy took the form of a revolutionary socialist party in 1875 
when the Social-Democratic Workers Party or the Eisenachers (founded in 1869 and led by 
Liebknecht and Bebel) and the Lassallean General Association of German Workers (led 
essentially by Hasselmann and Hasenclever) convened a congress in Gotha and united under 
the Socialist Workers Party of Germany. In his Critique o f the Gotha Programme (1976) 
Marx severely criticised the common programme of the new party. He disapproved of two 
main aspects: first, he thought that the Eisenachers made concessions to the followers of 
Hasselmann, and argued that their definition of labour and equality for example were
erroneous; second he argued against the programmes definition of the state. (K Marx (1976) 
Critique o f the Gotha Programme, Peking, Foreign Languages Press, pp. 8-33)
35/ For a view that Lenin was following Marxs doctrine to the letter, see Tom Freeman, 
Was Lenin a Marxist.. pp. 1-24.
36/ V. L. Lenin What is to he Done?, p. 29. Basically, Lenin took this position from Engelss 
declarations. (What is to be Done?, pp. 29-30)
37/ For Marxs views on the necessity of knowledge and organization, see his letter On 
Violent Revolution to Hyndman, 8 Dec. 1880, in Selected Writings, pp. 642-3.
38/ Cited in V. L. Lenin What is to be Done?, p. 29.
39/Ibid., pp. 29-30.
40/ Lenins insistence on theory here does depend on his interpretation of the Russian context 
in the first place: Russian Social-Democracy was far too embryonic to lead to the phase of 
revolutionary politics in the short run.
41/ V. I. Lenin (1921) Left Wing Communism: An Infantile Disorder, Detroit, Michigan, 
The Marxian Educational Society, p.30.
42/ Cited in Deutscher, Russia in Transition..., p. 162.
43/ Cited in Ibid, p. 163. For the historical significance of the assassination of the Tsar, see 
Fitzpatrick, the Russian Revolution, p. 25.
44/ See for example Lenin Our Revolution in Collected Works, Vol.33, Moscow, Progress 
Publishers, pp. 476-80. Lenin uses Marxs attitude in The Civil War in France (letter to 
Kugleman) to justify his own views of October.
45/ Lenin, What is to be Done?, p. 30.
46/ Cited in Ibid., p. 29.
47/Ibid.
48/ K. Marx and F. Engels, The Communist Manifesto, p. 234.
49/ Lenin, Our Programme in Selected Works, p.36.
50/ Engelss Introduction to The Civil War in France, p. 12. In a letter to H Schluter, 1895, 
Engels confirmed that the socialist instinct in itself was a basic requirement but not the end 
of the road to socialism. Socialist instinct might make the masses amount to nothing but sects 
and no party. (K. Marx and F. Engels (1971) On Britain, Lawrence & Wishart, pp. 537-38.) 
51/ Engelss Introduction to The Civil War in France, p. 12.
52/Ibid, p. 13
53/ Lenin, What is to be Done?, p. 26.
54/Ibid., p.79.
55/Ibid., p. 26.
56/ Cited in Elliot, Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg..., p.311.
57/ Andrzej Walicki, Alexander Bogdanov and the Problem of the Socialist Intelligentsia 
Russian Review, Vol. 49, No. 3 (July., 1990) p. 296.
58/ On the influence of Kautsky and Bebel, see Leszek Kolakowski (1978) Main Currents o f 
Marxism: Its Rise, Growth, and Dissolution, Oxford, Clarendon Press, pp. 381-511. On the 
influence of Plekhanov on Lenin, see Left Wing Communism: an Infantile Disorder, p. 28; 
see also Walicki, Alexander Bogdanov..., p. 295.
59/ Ronald J. Hill argued that Lenins adaptation of the Marxian text was a major 
evolutionary adaptation reflecting the specific conditions of the Russian working class in the 
years of Tsarist oppression. (R. J. Hill (1992) (ed.,) Communist Politics: an Evolutionary 
Approach in Beyond Stalinism: Communist Political Evolution Frank Cass, p.8.
60/ Fitzpatrick argues that until 1917 the working class was formally still indissociable from 
the peasantry, that the close connection between the urban working class and the rural 
proletariat had been characteristic of Russian society until the beginning of the revolution. 
(Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution, pp. 18-20.)
61/ In principle, Lenin was not different from Marx on this point, but Marx and Engels 
commented on the Russian context only in light of what was happening in the 1870s, and 80s 
when the tsarist autocracy was still powerful. Marxs and Engels validation of violence in 
Russia was wholly compensated for by the need to smash the existing political order. For an 
account of Marxs and Engels views, see Isaac Deutscher, Russia in Transition..., pp. 162-6. 
62/ See Lenin Left Wing Communism: an Infantile Disorder, pp. 21-5.
63/ J. Stalin (1946) (ed.,) Some Questions Concerning the History of Bolshevism in 
Marxism and Revisionism International Publishers, pp.52-64.
64/ V. I. Lenin (1946) The Fight for a Marxist Party in Marxism and Revisionism, p. 22.
65/ V. I. Lenin, What is to be Done?, pp. 76-77.
66/ See Lenin (1964) A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social Democracy in Collected 
Works, Vol. 4, Moscow, Progress Publishers, p.285n6.
67/ See Ibid.
68/ For an account of Lenins exile, see The Letters o f Lenin (1937) (ed.), New York, 
Harcourt Brace and Company, p. 18.
69/ Ibid. In the period of 1897, in exile, Lenin wrote a series of articles in criticism of the 
Narodniks (The Letters o f Lenin, p. 18)
70/ For Plekhanovs rejection of Narodism, see Deutscher, Russia in Transition..., pp. 162- 
71/ Leopold Haimson argues that Lenin was influenced by the development of the early ideas 
of Russian socialismespecially concerning those aspects which related to the separation 
between spontaneity and consciousnessincluding that of Plekhanov. (Leopold Haimson, 
Lenins Revolutionary Career Revisited Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian 
History Vol.5, No.l (2004), pp.56-7.)
72/Ibid., pp. 62-64.
73/ Becker, Lenins Application of Marxs..., p. 354-355.
74/ Until 1914 Lenin was still not entirely in discordance with Social-Democracy and the 
Second International. It was World War I, he contended, which revealed the real bankruptcy 
of the Social-Democrats.
75/ Lenin argues that these two questions are of significant and decisive importance: while the 
first basically concerns the political significance of the division of our [Social-Democratic] 
Party into majority and minority, the second concerns basically the new Iskra's position 
on organizational questions... Lenins ultimate aim behind highlighting such two questions is 
to reveal that the [Bolshevik] majority is the revolutionary, and the minority the 
opportunist wing of our Party. (Lenin (1978) One Step Forward, Two Steps Back, Moscow, 
Progress Publishers, pp. 7-8.)
76/ Here Lenin treats the position of Iskra in relation to the question of organisation. For this 
same point, see Lenin (1946) Opportunism in Questions of Organisation in Marxism and 
Revisionism, pp. 175-205; for Lenins theorisation of the relationship between the proletariat 
and intelligentsia, see Igal Halfin, The Rape of the Intelligentsia: A Proletarian Foundational 
Myth, Russian Review, Vol.56, No.l (Jan., 1997), 90-109.
77/ Cited in Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution..., pp.89-90.
78/ This particular issue was one of the main causes of Lenins struggle with the Mensheviks. 
Martov, the leading Menshevik, maintained that a party member should be one who 
recognizes the Partys programme and supports it by material means and by regular material 
assistance under the direction of one of the party organizations. : Martovs definition was 
first adopted at the Second Congress, but later Lenin gained control of the Central Committee 
and Iskra because many of the Menshevik delegates were absent. In 1905 the Third Party 
Congress changed the definition of the Party membership from the formulation of Martov to 
that of Lenin: the Mensheviks were absent. Lenin accused Martovs definition of serving the 
interest of bourgeois intellectuals, who fight shy of proletarian discipline and organization.
(Elliot, Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg..., p.329 and p.331.) The party organisation, as seen by 
Lenin, had been treated heavy-handedly by Russian-Social-Democracy which, even in its 
most developed forms (1898), was already preparing for its own demise: The formation of 
the party in the spring of 1898 was the most striking [moment of Russian social democracy] 
and at the same time the last act of the Social-Democrats in this period. (Lenin, What is to be 
Done?, pp. 166-67). Actually Karl Kautsky favoured Martovs position. For a discussion of 
this point see Lars T. Lihs How a Founding Document was Found, or One Hundred Years 
of Lenins What is to be Done?, Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History, 
Vol.4, No.l (Winter 2003), p.15.
79/ See Elliot Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg..., p. 331. Lenin replied to Luxemburgs accusations 
by supposing that she mocked the Second Party Congress, and that her objections to 
centralization in the Russian Social Democratic Party were but  a vulgarization of Marxism, 
a perversion of the true Marxist dialectics, etc. (Cited in Elliot Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg..., 
p.337.)
80/ Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution..., p 94.
81/Ibid, p. 91.
82/ Leon Trotsky (1904) Our Political Tasks, London, New Park, p.56.
83/ Ibid., p.77. Trotskys views against Lenin were changed towards the end of his life. In his 
Stalin (1968) Trotsky argued that the key to the dynamic problem of the leadership is in the 
actual interrelationships between the political machine and its party, between the vanguard 
and its class. (Trotsky (1968) Stalin: An Appraisal o f the Man and his Influence, London, 
MacGibbon and Kee, pp. 61-2.) For an account of Trotskys changing views, see Knei-Paz 
(1978) The Social and Political Thought o f Leon Trotsky, Oxford, Clarendon Press, p.228.
84/ Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution..., p. 87.
85/ Ibid, p. 86.
86/Ibid, p.92 
87/Ibid, p.93 
88/Ibid., p. 87.
89/ K. Marx (1964) The Class Struggles in France, New York, International Publishers, p. 18. 
90/ L. T. Lihs How a Founding Document was Found..., p. 6.
91/Ibid.
92/ Ibid, p.48. In order to confirm that WBD was but a historical document having very little 
to do with Leninism or Bolshevism, Lih argues that Lenins closest peopleNadezhda. K. 
Krupskaia, Grigorii. E. Zinioviev, Lev. B. Kamnev, his sister Anna Ilinichna Ulianova, and
othershad probably had a better picture of WBD which only defined a plan for wide 
revolutionary work and pointed to a definite task, pp. 24-5.
93/ In their work such scholars misinterpreted Lenins writing on such aspects as the role of 
the professional revolutionaries and the nature of WBD, with the latter being for them a 
founding document of Bolshevism, pp. 5-6.
94/Ibid, p. 7.
95 Ibid, p. 23.
96/ The development of party centralism in What is to be Done? was, I would argue, was one 
of Lenins first attempts to depart from Marxs theory of revolution and the coming workers 
state. Such a centralism had, as I understand it, two central implications: 1) it was an 
exclusive theory which reduced the role of the working class to a cipher; and 2) it formed the 
basis for the authoritarian state founded in the wake of the October Revolution.
97/ For a definition of authoritarianism, see the present work, pp. 203-5.
98/ Lenin, The State and Revolution, p.43.
99/Ibid., p. 37.
100/Ibid, pp.44-45.
101/ Lenin, Left Wing Communism..., pp. 17-19.
102/Ibid., p. 16.
103/Ibid.
104/Ibid., p. 17.
105/ Kolakowski for example justifies Lenins position by arguing that Marxs position itself 
had been schizophrenic on many occasions, and that the authors of the Manifesto were off at a 
tangent when it came to such questions as revolution.
106/ In the Preface to the English Edition of 1888 to The Communist Manifesto (p.202) 
Engels emphasises the necessity of workers emancipation by themselves.
107/ T. Lihs How a Founding Document was Found..., p. 23. He also suggests that even 
Trotsky championed the leading role of the intelligentsia: I affirm that the Russian 
proletariat...is not yet able...to give lessons in discipline to its intelligentsia (Cited in Ibid,
p. 18.)
108/ See Marxs reply to Bakunin in Selected Writings, pp. 606-608.
109/ Marx and Engels, The Communist Manifesto, p.234.
110/ Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution..., pp.78-9.
111/Ibid., pp.81-88.
112/Ibid., p. 82.
113/ The tsarist political order was responsive to the landed interestin a manner akin to the 
position of the Tories in 19th c England as was described by Marx and which took its 
legitimacy from the vestiges of medieval economies favouring an aristocratic form of society 
114/ John Hoffman (1992) The state: Has the Withering Away Thesis Finally Withered 
Away? in Beyond Stalinism, London, Frank Cass, pp.87-96.
115/ Ibid., p. 92. In Hoffmans view, Marx and Engels themselves were responsible for the 
theory of circumstances, (pp. 87-92)
116/Ibid, p.92.
117/1 study the effect of the Russian Civil War on the future Soviet state in Part three of this 
thesis, pp. 87-100.
118/ Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution..., p. 81.
119/Ibid.
120/ Lenin, What is to be Done?, p. 30.
121/Ibid.
122/ Jonathan Frankel, Lenins Doctrinal Revolution of April 1917, Journal o f 
Contemporary History, Vol. 4, No. 2 (Apr., 1969), p. 118.
123/ Charles Elliot argues against this argument. He maintains that in contrast to Rosa 
Luxemburg, Lenin had no desire in uniting the Bolshevik and Menshevik wings of the 
RSDLP. His entire policy was based on the maintenance of this split. (Elliot, Lenin, Rosa 
Luxemburg.. pp.335-6.)
124/ For a discussion of this point, see Haimson, Lenins Revolutionary Career Revisited, 
pp. 63-65.
125/ K. Marx (1974) Provisional Rules of the International in The First International and 
After, London, Penguin Books, p. 82.
126/ Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution..., p. 83.
127/ L. Trotsky (1962) Permanent Revolution and Results and Prospects, London, New Park, 
pp.7-8.
128/ See T. Shanin, Late Marx and the Russian Road: Marx and the Peripheries o f 
Capitalism, New York, Monthly Review Press, pp. 102-103.
129/ K Marx and F Engels, Address of the Central Committee of the Communist League 
(March 1850), in Selected Writings, p.306. For a discussion of this point, see Alex Callinicos 
(1995) The Revolutionary Ideas o f Karl Marx, London, Bookmarks, p. 209.
130/ Lenin (1964) The Tasks of the Proletariat in the Present Revolution, in Collected 
Works, Vol. 24, Moscow, Progress Publishers, p.22.
131/ Lenin (1964) The Class Character of the Revolution That Has Taken Place in 
Collected Works Vol. 24, Moscow, Progress Publishers, p. 57.
132/ For factional struggle within the Bolshevik party see Lenin, Left Wing Communism..., 
pp.29-31. For Kamnevs and Zinovievs opposition to armed revolt was a case in point: see 
Robert V. Daniels The Bolshevik Gamble, Russian Review, Vol. 26, No. 4 (Oct., 1967), 
p.337.
133/ Lenin, The State and Revolution, pp. 33-36.
134/ Daniels, The Bolshevik Gamble, p.332.
135/ Lenins view of revolution was closely related to two stages in his work: the first had to 
do with the importance of the peasant question in making the revolution happen (the 
revolution was only possible in the alliance between the workers and the peasants because for 
him Russia was predominantly rural and the peasantry could play a gigantic role in 
revolutionary work); the second was mainly focussed on his concept of the dictatorship of 
the proletariat and the poorest section of the peasantry forged in his late political work. For 
Lenin, carrying out the revolution immediately even in inopportune conditions stood as a 
historical necessity. That was of course because Russia had very specific features and was 
not, as Marx himself asserted (The Communist Manifesto: Preface to the Russian Edition of 
1882, p. 196), similar to the rest of the West. This standpoint was relatively accurate since 
Marx and Engels themselves praised the Narodniks for their agrarian socialism and even for 
assassinating Alexander II.
136/ Engels in Anti-Duhring and Marx in Critique o f the Gotha Programme reiterated the 
necessity to do without the state altogether. In the State and Revolution Lenin made use of 
these works in the hope of legitimating the necessity of smashing the state machine.
137/ In What is to be Done?, he expressed such an understanding by altering altogether the 
role of the workers in revolutionary struggle; the struggle for attaining unassailable power had 
to be accounted for by the re-definition of workers historical role (in Marxs sense).
138/ Lenin, The State and Revolution, p. 33.
139/Ibid., pp. 18-20.
140/Ibid, p. 33.
141/ See Esther Kingston Mann, Lenin and the Challenge of Peasant Militance: From 
Bloody Sunday 1905 to the Dissolution of the First Duma, Russian Review, Vol. 38, No. 4 
(Oct., 1979), p. 434.
142/ Lenin (1964) To the Rural Poor in Collected Works, Vol. 6, Moscow, Progress 
Publishers, pp. 361-432.
143/ In the period of War Communism many of the peasants were hostile to, and earnestly 
resisted, the requisition measures taken by the Bolsheviks. For an account of peasant 
responses to the policy of requisitioning, see Part three of this thesis, pp. 100-101.
144/ Lenin, The Tasks of the Proletariat in the Present Revolution in Collected Works, p23. 
145/ The Spartacus Group was a group of exiled Socialist-Democratic revolutionaries which 
consisted of, among others, Luxemburg and Liebknecht.
146/ For Lenins position vis-a-vis Trotskys concept of permanent revolution, see Daniels 
The Bolshevik Gamble, pp. 331-40.
147/ See Archie Brown (2004) (ed.) The Demise o f Marxism-Leninism in Russia, Palgrave 
Macmillan, pp.2-3. See also Tom Freeman Was Lenin a Marxist...?, pp.17-18 
148/Ibid.
149/ Cited in Ibid., p.3.
150/ Lenin (1964) What Should be the Name of our Party in Collected Works, Vol. 24, 
Moscow, Progress Publishers, p. 84.
151/ Lenin argued that the representatives of social-chauvinism internationally included 
Plekhanov, Potresov, Breshkovskaya...Chernov and Co. in Russia; Scheidemann, Legien, 
David and others in Germany, Renaudel, Guesde, Vandervelde in France and Belgium; 
Hyndman and the Fabians in England. (The State and Revolution, p. 3)
152/ Lenin (1964) The Situation within the Socialist International in Collected Works, Vol. 
24, Moscow, Progress Publishers, p. 74.
153/ For this point, see for example Left-Wing Communism..., p. 22-3.
154/ Lenin, The Situation within the Socialist International, p. 76.
155/ Ibid, The chief leader and spokesman of the "Centre" is Karl Kautsky, the most 
outstanding authority in the Second International (1889-1914), since August 1914 a model of 
utter bankruptcy as a Marxist, the embodiment of unheard-of spinelessness, and the most 
wretched vacillations and betrayals. This "Centrist" trend includes Kautsky, Haase, Ledebour 
and the so-called workers' or labour group in the Reichstag; in France it includes Longuet, 
Pressemane and the so-called minorities (Mensheviks) in general; in Britain, Philip Snowden, 
Ramsay MacDonald and many other leaders of the Independent Labour Party, and some 
leaders of the British Socialist Party; Morris Hillquit and many others in the United States; 
Turati, Treves, Modigliani and others in Italy; Robert Grimm and others in Switzerland; 
Victor Adler and Co. in Austria; the party of the Organising Committee, Axelrod, Martov, 
Chkheidze, Tsereteli and others in Russia, and so forth. (The Situation within the Socialist 
International pp. 76-7)
156/ Lenin, The Tasks of the Proletariat in the Present Revolution, p. 26.
157/ Lenin, What Should be the Name of Our Party, p. 84.
158/ Lenin (1974) Democracy and Dictatorship in Collected Works, Vol. 28, Moscow, 
Progress Publishers, pp. 368-372).
159/ Ibid., pp. 369.
160/ Lenin, The State and Revolution, p. 14.
161/Ibid., p. 78.
162/ Actually, Lenin took such argument from Engels who in the his introduction to Marx's 
The Civil War in France wrote that '[i]n reality...the state is nothing but a machine for the 
oppression of one class by another, and indeed in the democratic republic no less than in the 
monarchy.' (The Civil War in France, p. 17)
163/ Lenin, The State and Revolution, pp. 16-21.
164/Ibid., p. 18.
165/ Ibid., p. 19 
166/ Ibid, p.20
167/ Lenin, Thesis 4 in The Tasks of the Proletariat in the Present Revolution, in
Collected Works, p.23
168/ Lenin, Thesis 9 in Ibid., p.24.
169/ Thesis 10 in Ibid.
170/ Thesis 3 in Ibid., p.22.
171/ Lenin (1977) First All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers and Soldiers Deputies 
in Collected Works, Vol. 25, Moscow, Progress Publishers, p. 17.
172/Inl918 Lenin decided to dissolve the Constituent Assembly mainly because, for him, it 
presented an obstacle to the transition to socialism.
173/ Lenin, Marxism and Revisionism, p. 24.
174/ Hoffman, Beyond the State, Cambridge, Polity Press, p. 138.
175/Ibid., pp. 137-8.
176/ This can be seen especially in The State and Revolution.
Notes to Part 2
1/ Dual power resulted from the February Revolution. It signifies the alliance between the 
Petrograd Soviet and the Provisional Government in the post-revolution period. By April 
1917, it became a rather loose concept mainly because the respective interests of the Soviet 
and the Provisional government were in constant conflict. By July 1917, however, dual 
power seemed useless and finally collapsed when the workers marched and cried out the 
slogan All power to the soviets.
2/ Contrary to this argument, Fitzpatrick thinks that the Russian Civil War was primarily 
caused by the Bolsheviks themselves. She asserts that the Civil War was not an 
unforeseeable act of God for which the Bolsheviks were in no way responsible. On the 
contrary, the Bolsheviks had associated themselves with armed confrontation and violence in 
the months between Februaiy and October 1917; and, as the Bolshevik leaders knew perfectly 
well before the event, their October coup was seen by many as an outright provocation to civil 
war. The Civil War certainly gave the new regime a baptism by fire, and thereby influenced 
its future development. But it was the kind of baptism the Bolsheviks had risked, and may 
even have sought. (Fitzpatrick (1994) The Russian Revolution, Oxford University Press, p. 
3/ See Ibid., p. 74.
4/ Ibid, p. 75. For the intervention of external forces in the Civil War, see Richard Pipes
(1994) Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime, London, Fontana Press, pp.63-73.
5/ In 1914, Lenin and other Bolsheviks like Zinoviev asserted that imperialist war must be 
transformed into civil war. (Cited in Victor Serge (1972) Year One o f the Russian 
Revolution, London, The Penguin Press, p.57.)
6/ Lenin (1971) The Immediate Tasks of the Soviet Government in Collected Works, Vol. 
42, 2nd English Edition, Moscow, Progress Publishers, pp.682-3.
7/ See Joseph Stalin (1976) The Foundations of Leninism in Problems o f Leninism, Peking, 
Foreign Languages Press, pp. 1-15.
8/ Lenin, The Immediate Tasks.. p. 683.
9 /Ibid.
10/ Food dictatorship was a policy decreed in 1918 in adverse Civil War conditions. It was 
an attempt to allow the Soviet government collect surpluses of grain and other harvests from 
the richer peasants in order to feed the Red Army and the working classes. Such a policy 
failed and was abolished in 1919 after it had reduced the regimes popularity.
11/ Lenin, The Immediate Tasks..., p. 684.
12/ State administering, as Lenin envisaged, means taking care of the states business by 
organising an institutional framework that would guarantee that capitalist interest is constantly 
put at bay, and that scientific socialism is correctly put into practice. It was for this reason that 
the Soviet socialist state had to function in response to an economic rather than political 
agenda.
13/ Cited in Paul Craig Roberts, War Communism a Re-Examination, Slavic Review, Vol. 
29, No. 2 (Jun., 1970), p. 243.
14/ Lenin, The Immediate Tasks..., p. 685.
15/ Fitzpatrick argues that the Civil War was seen by Bolsheviks as a class war, both in 
domestic and international levels: Russian proletariat against Russian bourgeoisie; 
international revolution against international capitalism. (Fitzpatrick, The Russian 
Revolution.)
16/ Lenins definition of the dictatorship of the proletariat in this context approximates to 
Bukharins overall analysis of the role and function of the proletarian state in the aftermath of 
the revolution. For Bukharin, socialist economy responds first and foremost to the form of 
rule the proletarian state takeswhich in great part takes its form from the dictatorship of the 
proletariat; it had to be a state wherein the proletariat [is] organized as the state power. (N. 
I. Bukharin (1982) Selected Writings on the State and the Transition to Socialism, Armonk, 
M. E. Sharpe, p. XL) In this instance, the socialist state structure cannot be organized in its 
proletarian element unless one basic condition for its success is satisfiednationalisation of 
the economy, (p. XL)
17/ Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution, p.68.
18/Ibid., p.69.
19/ Lenin, The Immediate Tasks..., p. 686 
20/Ibid., p. 687.
21/ The foundation of a proletarian culture seemed a task that could only happen in the long 
run. The primary condition was not only to forge such a culture with regard to the Soviet 
context, but also, and most importantly, through an application of Marxist theory as appeared 
in the Communist Manifesto: Marxism has won its historic significance as the ideology of the 
revolutionary proletariat because, far from rejecting the most valuable achievements of the 
bourgeois epoch, it has, on the contrary, assimilated and refashioned everything of value in 
the more than two thousand years of the development of human thought and culture. Only 
further work on this basis and in this direction, inspired by the practical experience of the
proletarian dictatorship as the final stage in the struggle against every form of exploitation, 
can be recognised as the development of a genuine proletarian culture. ( Lenin (1965) On 
Proletarian Culture in Collected Works, Vol. 31, 4th English Edition, Moscow, Progress 
Publishers, pages 300-301). For Lenins view that socialist culture should be related to the 
belief in the party as the vanguard, see his Workers in Education and Socialist Culture 
Collected Works, Vol.29, 4th English Edition, Moscow, Progress Publishers, pp. 532-539. 
22/ Lenin, The State and Revolution, p.83.
23/ Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution, p.79.
24/ Ibid, p.80
25/ E. H Carr (1963) The Bolshevik Revolution 1917- 1923, London, Macmillan, p. 175.
26/Cited in Ibid., p.179.
27/ Lars T. Lih Bolshevik Razverstka and War Communism, Slavic Review, Vol. 45, No. 4 
(Winter., 1986), p. 673. For this point, see Bertrand M. Patenaude, Peasants into Russians: 
the Utopian Essence of War Communism, Russian Review, Vol. 54, No. 4 (Oct., 1995), 552- 
28/ E. H. Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution, pp. 147-148.
29/Ibid., p. 148.
30/Ibid.
31/Ibid., p. 149.
32/ Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution, p.81.
33/ Cited in Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution, p. 150.
34/ Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution, p.78.
35/ Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution, p. 150.
36/ The middle peasantry was tactically used by people like Nikolai Osinskii who believed 
that it in order to develop the agricultural system the state needed to regulate agricultural 
production. Some scholars like Patenaude note that the scheme of agricultural organisation 
could only be carried out feasibly by militarizing the economy through the help of the 
middle peasants. The middle peasant, Patenaude quotes Osinskii, is coming to realize that 
agricultural production is a state matter which the state can and must regulate and organize 
and that only state intervention will prevent an otherwise inevitable crisis and will preserve, 
consolidate and develop farming. (Osinskiis italics) (Patenaude , Peasants into Russians..., 
p. 564)
37/ Cited in Carr, The Bolshevik Revolution, p. 163.
38/ Lenin also asserted that [t]he party makes it its task to separate the middle peasantry from 
the kulaks, to win it over to the side of the working class by attentive consideration for its 
needs, struggling against its backwardness by measures of ideological persuasion, and at all 
by measures of repression...and making concessions to it in the choice of means of carrying 
out socialist transformations. (Cited in Ibid.)
39/ Fitzpatrick, for example, argues that there was a wildly impractical and utopian streak in 
a great deal of Bolshevik thinking during the civil war One defining element of such a utopia 
is that Bolsheviks cannot be said to be laboratory assistants, but were in great part 
revolutionary enthusiasts. (The Russian Revolution, p.83). For Fitzpatrick, Lenin and other 
Bolsheviks did have the illusion that the economic policies of War communism reflected 
Russias advance towards communism. Two significant aspects reflected such a utopia: 1) 
They thought that the Poles would recognize the troops as proletarian brothers; 2) and they 
confused rampant inflation and currency devaluation with the withering away of money. 
(p.84)
40/ Bertrand M. Patenaude, Peasants into Russians..., pp. 552-570.
41/Ibid., p. 553.
42/ Novelist name Lurii Libedinskii.
43/ Patenaude, Peasants into Russians..., p.552.
44/ The two factors constituted what I call in Part 4 of this thesis the Soviet Leviathan state 
45/ Cited in Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution, P 71.
46/ Patenaude, Peasants into Russians..., p.552.
47/ Cited in Paul Graig Roberts, War Communism..., p. 263.
48/ K. Marx, Selected Writings, p.372.
49/ Cited in Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution, p. 76.
50/ For a discussion of this point, see, for example, Callinicos (1991) The Revenge o f History, 
The Pennsylvania State University Press, pp.26-7.
51/ See Marx and Engels, The Communist Manifesto, p. 243.
52/ Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution, p.76.
53/ For a thorough discussion of the role of the Peoples Commissariat of Food Supply, see 
Patenaude, Peasants into Russians..., pp. 552-570.
54/ Ibid., p. 553.
55/ Cited in Ibid., p. 557.
56/ Lars T Lih Bolshevik Razverstka..., p. 673.
57/ Graig Roberts, War Communism..., pp. 244.
58/ Cited in Ibid.
59/ L. T. Lih, Bolshevik Razverstka.. . p. 675.
60/ Cited in Callinicos, The Revenge o f History, p. 27.
61/ Ibid. For a discussion of this point, see Graig Roberts, War Communism..., p.245.
62/Ibid.
63/ Harold Shukman (2003) Redefining Stalinism (ed.,) London, Frank Cass, p.3.
64/ Stalin, The Foundations of Leninism in Problems o f Leninism, p. 2.
65/Ibid.
66/Ibid.
67/ Ibid., p.3 
68/Ibid.
69/Ibid.
70/ See Lenin (1982) Imperialism the Highest Stage o f Capitalism, Moscow, Progress 
Publishers, pp. 83-93.
71/ Stalin, The Foundations of Leninism in Problems o f Leninism, pp. 4-6 
72/ Ibid., p. 6.
73/Ibid.
74/Ibid., pp. 6-7
75/ Actually this explanation might well elucidate Lenins legitimation of an inopportune 
(untimely) revolution in Russia as I broach in Part I of this thesis. Basically this can also work 
as a justification of the fact that the circumstances in Russia played a decisive role in making 
Leninism assume the responsibility for the revolution.
76/ Stalin, The Foundations of Leninism in Problems o f Leninism, pp. 8-9.
77/Ibid., p. 9.
78/Ibid., pp. 11-9.
79/ V. I. Lenin and J. Stalin (1946) Marxism and Revisionism, New York, International 
Publishers, pp.52-64.
80/Ibid., p.57.
81/ Stalin, The Foundations of Leninism in Problems o f Leninism, pp. 11-12.
82/ Ibid, p. 13.
83/ Ibid, pp. 13-4
84/ V. I. Lenin and J. Stalin (1946) Marxism and Revisionism, p.57.
85/ Ibid., pp.59-60.
86/ Some scholars like Robert Himmer think that Stalins Socialism in One Country was 
strongly inspired by War Communism. (Himmer, The Transition from War Communism to 
the New Economic Policy: An Analysis of Stalins Views, Russian Review, Vol. 53, No. 4 
(Oct., 1994), p.516n3.)
87/ See, for example, O. A. Narklewicz, Stalin War Communism, and Collectivization, 
Soviet Studies, Vol. 18, No. 1 (July., 1966), p. 22.
88/ For this point, see, for example, Herbert J. Allison, The Decision to Collectivize 
Agriculture, American Slavic and East European Review, Vol. 20, No. 2 (Apr., 1961), p. 189. 
89/ For a view that the Kronstadt uprising constituted the spark for a new working class and 
peasant order, see Ruth Fischer Background of the New Economic Policy, Russian Review, 
Vol. 7, No. 2 (Spring., 1948), pp.29-33. See also V. N. Bandera, the New Economic Policy 
as an Economic System, The Journal o f Political Economy, Vol. 71, No. 3 (Jun., 1963), p. 
265. Actually in 1922 Lenin expressed his satisfaction with the social stability that NEP had 
introduced: The peasant risings which formerly, before 1921, were so to speak, a feature of 
the general Russian picture, have almost completely disappeared. (Cited in E. H. Carr, The 
Bolshevik Revolution, p.295.)
90/ Carr., The Bolshevik Revolution, p.281.
91/ Ibid., pp.282-283.
92/ For a discussion of this point, see Lars T. Lih Political Testament of Lenin and Bukharin 
and the Meaning of Nep, Slavic Review, Vol. 50, No. 2 (Summer., 1991), pp. 243-4.
93/ V. N. Bandera, The NEP as a New Economic System, p. 268.
94/ Cited in Ibid., p. 266.
95/Ibid., p. 267.
96/ Cited in Simon Johnson and Peter Temin, the Macroeconomics of NEP, The Economic 
History Review, Vol. 46, No. 4 (Nov., 1993), p. 750.
97/ Johnson and Temin, The Macroeconomics of NEP, p.751 
98/Ibid.
99/ Cited in Himmer, The Transition from War Communism to the New Economic 
Policy..., pp. 516-7.
100/ M. Lewin, The Immediate Background of Soviet Collectivization, Soviet Studies, Vol. 
17, No. 2 (Oct., 1965), p. 162.
101/Ibid.
102/Ibid., p. 164.
103/ Cited in H. J. Allison, The Decision to Collectivize Agriculture, p. 191.
104/ Cited in Calvin B. Hoover, The Fate of the New Economic Policy, The Economic 
Journal, Vol. 40, No. 158 (Jun., 1930), p. 186.
105/ For the significance of First Five-Year Plan to Stalin, see M. Lewin, Immediate 
Background of Soviet Collectivization, pp. 178-182. See also the same article for the 
immediate effects of the First Five-Year Plan on the peasantry in 1928-1929, pp. 182-184.
106/ Cited in Callinicos, The Revenge o f History, p. 28.
107/ R. C. Tucker (1971) The Soviet Political Mind, New York, Norton & Co, p.57.
108/ Roy Medvedev (1972) Let History Judge, London, Macmillan, p.43.
109/Ibid., p.87.
110/ Callinicos, The Revenge o f History, p.30.
111/Ibid., p.32.
112/Ibid.
113/ Moshe Lewin (1985) The Making o f the Soviet System, London, Methuen and Co. Ltd, 
pp.242-43. For a discussion of this point, see H. Arendt (1976) The Origins o f 
Totalitarianism, London, Harcourt Brace & Company, pp. 318-23.
114/ K. Marx and F. Engels, The Communist Manifesto, p.235.
115/ Callinicos, The Revenge o f History, p. 40.
116/ Lewin, The Making..., p. 243.
117/ Callinicos, The Revenge o f History, pp.64-65.
118/Kotz, 1997, p.19
119/ In the Demise o f Marxism-Leninism in Russia Archie Brown et al argue that the basic 
ideological solidity of Marxism-Leninism was shaken by the new thinking following from 
Gorbachevs famous perestroika and glasnost. The authors single-mindedly assert that the 
Stalinist system (officially Marxist-Leninist) was systemically all too fragile to stand the 
liberal axioms of freedom of speech, enfranchisement, the market economy, and republic 
sovereignty (Archie Brown et al (2004) The Demise o f Marxism-Leninism in Russia, 
Palgrave Macmillan.)
120/ Vincent Jauvert has recently interviewed some of the remaining closest people to Stalin 
who survived his terror. The survivors interviewed have confirmed that Stalin was not only 
blood-thirsty but also sought to destroy Soviet society as a whole. (Vincent Jauvert, Les 
Demiers Secrets de Staline, Le Nouvel Observateur, No. 2177 (July/August 2006), pp. 6-15.
121/ Bialer, Seweryn. (1995) Domestic and International Factors in the Formation of 
Gorbachev Reforms in A. Dallin (ed.), The Soviet System: From Crisis to Collapse, 
Colorado, Westview Press, pp.28-35.
122/Ibid., p.32.
123/Ibid.
124/ Cited in Marshall Goldman (1992) What Went Wrong with Perestroika, New York, W. 
W. Norton and Company, p.84.
125/ Cited in David Lane (1992) Soviet Society under Perestroika, London, Routledge, p. 57.
126/ Michael Gorbachev (1990) A Road to the Future, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Ocean Tree 
Books, p. 13.
127/Ibid., p. 18.
128/Ibid., p. 30.
129/Ibid., p. 31.
130/ Ibid., pp. 14-5.
131/Ibid., p. 15.
132/ Goldman, What Went Wrong..., p. 12.
133/ Lane, Soviet Society, p. 13.
134/ Richard Sakwa (1998) Soviet Politics in Perspective, London, Routledge, p. 142.
135/ Stephen White (1993) After Gorbachev, Cambridge University Press, p. 29.
136/Ibid., p. 29-30.
137/ Ibid., p. 30.
138/ Archie Brown (2004) The Rise of Non-Leninist Thinking about the Political System in 
A. Brown (ed.), The Demise o f Marxism-Leninism in Russia, p.22. Brown also argues that the 
Gorbachev reforms were at first system-adaptive and brought in very little change. They 
became system-transformative only in the summer of 1988 when fundamental restructuring 
occurred. One of the measures adopted was the election of presidents in the Soviet 
republics, a prelude to the election of Yeltsin as President of the USSR in 1991. (p.23)
139/Ibid., p. 24-25.
140/ White, After Gorbachev..., p. 40.
141/ From Article Six of the Soviet Constitution (Cited in Lane, Soviet Society..., p. 59.)
142 / Lane, Soviet Society..., p. 65.
143/ Igor V. Timofeyev (2004) The Development of Russian Liberal Thought since 1985 in 
A. Brown (ed.), The Demise o f Marxism-Leninism in Russia, p.53. For Timofeyev, the chief 
areas of interest in which liberalism was truly expressed were individualism, perestroika, 
and glasnost. All three areas touch on the necessity to negotiate a smooth transition from 
exclusive and compulsory socialist communtarianism to the liberated individualwhose 
freedom is an essential constituent of the stability of society (pp. 53-60)from party 
dictatorship to political pluralism (pp. 60-76), and from bureaucratic-command socialism to 
free enterprise, (pp. 60-76) Nevertheless, Timofeyev argues that the unity of the three 
components was objectively in need for practical solutions. The main difficulty facing post- 
Soviet Russians did not lie in introducing liberal thinking but in the necessity to reconcile 
between the requirements of liberalism and the vestiges of communism in a society in 
transition.
144/ Moshe Lewin (1988) The Gorbachev Phenomenon: A Historical Interpretation, London, 
Hutchinson Radius, p. 126.
145/ Lane, Soviet Society..., p. 61.
146/ Ibid., p.66.
147/Cited in Ibid., p. 75.
148/ Marx, Selected Writings, p. 585.
149/ Richard Sakwa (1990) Gorbachev and his Reforms: 1985-1990, New York, Phillip 
Allan., p. 143.
150/ Marx, Selected Writings, p. 587.
151/ Sakwa, Gorbachev and his Reforms..., p. 182.
152/Lewin, The Gorbachev Phenomenon, p. 133.
153/ Goldman, What Went Wrong..., pp. 224-25.
154/ Cited in White, After Gorbachev, p. 103.
155/Ibid., p. 104.
156/ Alec Nove The Rise of Non-Leninist Thinking on the Economy in A. Brown (ed.), The 
Demise o f Marxism-Leninism in Russia, p.44.
157/ White, After Gorbachev, p. 107.
158/Lane, Soviet Society..., p. 38.
159/Ibid.
160/ Goldman, What Went Wrong..., p. 118.
161/ Lane, Soviet Society..., p. 39.
162/Goldman, What Went Wrong..., p. 118.
163/ Lane, Soviet Society..., p. 39.
164/ White, After Gorbachev, p. 112.
165/ Taylor Naylor (1988) The Gorbachev Strategy, Lexington, Lexington Books, p. 145.
166/White, After Gorbachev, p. 120.
167/ Lane, Soviet Society..., p. 49.
168/ Goldman, What Went Wrong..., p. 229.
169/ Lane, Soviet Society..., p . 49.
170/ Goldman, Marshall. (1995) The Effort Collapses, in Alexander Dallin (1995) (ed.), 
The Soviet System: From Crisis to Collapse, Colorado, Westview Press, p. 339.
171/Ibid.
172/ In response to a question posed by my supervisor, Stephen Hopkinswhether or not 
Gorvachev intended to rescue the political system from the political morassI think that, 
true, Gorbachev was doing his best to rescue the political system. But one would also 
contend that whether or not he intended the rescue, he only finally transformed the morass 
into destruction.
173/ Lane, Soviet Society..., p. 126.
174/ Goldman, What Went Wrong..., p. 230.
175/ Cited in Goldman, The Effort Collapses in Alexander Dallin (ed.), The Soviet 
System..., p. 340.
176/Ibid., p. 345.
177/Goldman, What Went Wrong..., p. 19.
178/ Peter Schweizer (1994) Victory: The Reagan Administration's Secret Strategy that 
Hastened the Collapse o f the Soviet Union, New York, The Atlantic Monthly Press, p. xii.
Notes to Part 3
1/ Basing my argument on a politico-philosophical reading of the Soviet system, I will try in 
part four of the present work to argue against basic premises of the political historians. I will 
direct my criticism against mainly the continuity thesis: Marxism = Leninism = Stalinism.
2/ Jerry F. Hough argues that there are two basic models in the school of totalitarianism: the 
developmental model and the operational model. While the first seeks to prove that the 
actual ideology of the Soviet state came as a result of the development of Marxian thought 
into Bolshevism, the second is concerned with the study of the totalitarian regime at work.
(Hough, The Dark Forces, the Totalitarian Model, and Soviet History Russian Review, 
Vol. 46, No. 4. (Oct., 1987), pp. 397-403.)
3/ See Hanah Arendt (1976) Totalitarianism in Power in The Origins o f Totalitarianism, 
New York, Harcourt Brace & Company, pp. 389-459. See also Richard Pipes (1995) Why 
Did the Bolsheviks Triumph in Three Whys o f the Russian Revolution, London, Pimlico, 
pp. 38-9. The study of the Soviet totalitarian system has itself not only drawn the attention 
of scholars to consider the socialist experience, its promises, achievements, and failures. It 
also generated new sub-disciplines within political science and history; we now speak no 
more of interpretations of the Soviet experience as such but of interpretations o f 
interpretations, that is, enquiries on the way Soviet state authoritarianism for instance was 
interpreted by classical historians and mainstream political historiography.
4/ Arendt, The Totalitarian Movement in The Origins o f Totalitarianism, pp.341-364 
5/ For the concept of revolution from above, see Revolution from Above (1977) in Robert 
C. Tucker (ed.) Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation, New York. See also Steve F 
Cohens Stalins Terror as Social History Russian Review, Vol. 45, No. 4 (Oct., 1986), pp. 
375-6.
6/ Hough, The Dark Forces, the Totalitarian Model, and Soviet History, pp.397-8.
7/ Richard Pipess most influential works include, The Russian Revolution 1899-1919, 
London, the Fontana Press, 1992: see especially The October Coup, pp. 439-505, and 
Building the One-Party State, pp.506-565; Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime 1919 1924, 
London, Fontana Press, 1995: especially, Reflections on the Russian Revolution, pp. 490- 
512. The work of Martin Malia includes, among other well-informed works, The Soviet 
Tragedy: A History o f Socialism in Russia, 1917-1991, New York, The Free Press, 1994.
8/ One of Danielss most influential works is Trotsky, Stalin, and Socialism, Boulder, 
Westview Press, Inc., (1991); for a more thorough account of how the October Revolution 
was carried out and how the Bolsheviks seized and retained state power, see Daniels (1968) 
Red October, London, Seeker and Warburg.
9/ For a discussion whether the violence associated with the Russian Revolution had an 
ideological (Marxian) basis or historical (Russias history) basis, see Peter Holquist, 
Violent Russia, Deadly Marxism? Russia in the Epoch of Violence, Kritika: Explorations in 
Russian and Eurasian History, Vol. 4, No. 3. (Summer 2003), pp.227-252. For an argument 
that the Soviet totalitarian system had both ideological (Marxian) and historical (Russias 
past) origins, see Leszek Kolakowski (1977) Marxist Roots of Stalinism in Robert C. 
Tucker (ed.) Stalinism, p. 293: To say that genes (inherited ideology) were entirely (my
italics) responsible for the actual shape of the child would obviously be as silly as to state that 
this shape is to be exclusively (my italics) accounted for by environment, i.e., contingent 
historical events.... The focus on the genetic link between Marx and Lenin can be traced in 
the work of Victor Serge. Seeing Lenin as the great epoch-making leader of his time Serge 
argues that Lenins book on October, On the Road to Insurrection was a vital work.. .a model 
of revolutionary dialectics that ranks with the Communist Manifesto, to which it forms...a 
necessary compliment. He also adds that Lenins doctrine of insurrection approximates to 
that of Karl Marx. (Victor Serge, Year One o f the Russian Revolution, London, Allen Lane 
The Penguin Press, 1972, pp.62-63.) Others like Leonard Schapiro emphasise the interaction 
of genetic and environmental factors behind Lenins revolutionary tendencies. By the end 
of the 1890s Lenin was first making himself master of the works of Marx. These, and the 
classic of Russian nineteenth-century radicalism, as well as the work of Plekhanov 
influenced Lenin and his circle of like-minded believers in Marxism. (Leonard Schapiro 
(1985) 1917: Russian Revolutions and the Origins o f Present Day Communism, London, 
Penguin Books, p.24.)
10/ Ronald Grigor Suny, Revision and Retreat in the Historiography of 1917: Social History 
and its Critics, Russian Review, Vol.53, No.2 (Apr., 1994), p. 168
11/ Cited in Ibid. An importnat work by Martin Malia is The Soviet Tragedy...(see especially 
chapter 4 "A Regime is Bom," pp. 109-138).
12/ Martin Malia, The Soviet Tragedy..., p. 100; for a thorough view of how the Bolshevik 
Party came to control political life in the aftermath of the Revolution, see Proletariat or 
Party? in The Soviet Tragedy, pp.98-108.
13/ Tucker (1971) The Soviet Political Mind, New York, Norton & Co, p.211.
14/ Ibid., p.212; for a view whether the Soviet system was an oligarchy or dictatorship, see 
Robert G Wesson, The USSR: Oligarchy or Dictatorship? Slavic Review, Vol. 31, No. 2. 
(Jun., 1972), pp.314-322; for a view that Stalinism was a modem, rather than conservative, 
form of dictatorship, see Zbigniew Brzezinski, The Nature of the Soviet System, Slavic 
Review, Vol. 20, No. 3. (Oct., 1961), pp. 351-368.
15/ Some scholars like Sheila Fitzpatrick maintain that Tuckers position has also been 
influenced by some revisionist views: see Fitzpatrick, Politics as Practice: Thoughts on a 
New Soviet Political History, Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History, Vol. 5, 
No. 1 (2004), pp. 30, 33.
16/ Suny, Revision and Retreat..., p. 173. For a discussion whether the February revolution 
had a mass basis, see Stanley Page, The Role of the Proletariat in March 1917:
Contradictions within the official Bolshevik Version, Russian Review, Vol. 9, No. 2. (Apr.,
1950), pp. 146-149. In this article Page argues that the official Bolshevik statement of the 
positive and self-initiated militancy of the workers in the March 1917 Revolution was 
basically a gross lie aimed at misleading millions of people around the world. Such a lie is 
clearly revealed through the declaration by the Central Committee in 1938 that the [March] 
revolution was victorious because its vanguard was the working class which headed the 
movement of millions of peasants clad in soldiers uniform demanding peace, bread, and 
liberty. It was the hegemony of the proletariat that determined the success of the revolution. 
(p. 146) Page argues that with no other possible hope to legitimate the so-called workers 
revolution, the Central Committee could at best only validate its claims by quoting Lenins 
assertion that the revolution was made by the proletariat. (Cited in Ibid)
17/ Alex Callinicos, (1991) The Revenge o f History: Marxism and the East European 
Revolutions, The Pennsylvania State University Press, p.21.
18/ Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind, p. 178. Paradoxically, Tucker states in the same book 
that the drive for conspiracy was un-Leninist in character, (p.56)
19/ Ibid., p.6. For Tuckers view that Stalins practices were akin to those of Peter the Great, 
see Tucker (1997) A New Peter the Great in Robert V. Daniels (ed.,) The Stalin Revolution: 
Foundations o f the Totalitarian Era, New York, Houghton Mifflin Company, pp.219-233.
20/ Arendt, The Totalitarian Movement in The Origins o f Totalitarianism, pp.341-388 
21/Ibid., p.341.
22/ Ibid, p.343.
23/ Ibid., p.364.
24/Ibid, p. 466.
25/Ibid., p. 463-4.
26/ Ibid., p.465. For the idea of extensive terror against society (Jews, peasants including 
Kulaks, see Michal Reiman, The Formation of Stalinism in Robert V. Daniels (ed.,) The 
Stalin Revolution, p.50; see also pp.56-57 for how social terror, while not being necessarily 
political, was politically contrived: As a social instrument, terror could not be aimed 
narrowly, at particular persons. It was an instrument of violent change, affecting the living 
and working conditions of millions, imposing the very worst forms of social 
oppression...[P]olitical repression [however] only supplemented social repression. (p.56); for 
a seminal study of Soviet anti-Semitism, see William Korey, The Origins and Development 
of Soviet Anti-Semitism: An Analysis Slavic Review, Vol. 31, No. 1. (Mar., 1972), pp. 111- 
27/ See for example, Pipes (1996) The Unknown Lenin: From the Secret Archives. Armais of 
Communism. New Haven: Yale University Press.
28/ See Peter Kenez, The Prosecution of Soviet History: A Critique of Richard Pipes The 
Russian Revolution, Russian Review, Vol. 50, No.3 (Jul., 1991), pp.345-351; also The 
Prosecution of Soviet History, Vol. 2, Russian Review, Vol.54, No.2 (Apr., 1995) pp. 265- 
269; see also Alexander Rabinowitch, Richard Pipess Lenin, Russian Review, Vol.57, No.l 
(Jan., 1998), 110-113.
29/ Kenez, The Prosecution of Soviet History: A Critique of Richard Pipes The Russian
Revolution
30/Ibid., p.346
31/Ibid., p.347.
32/ Ibid., p.348: for a view that the October Revolution was a break with the past rather than a 
confirmation of it, see Hough, The Dark Forces...,  p.401.
33/Ibid., p. 351.
34/ This is also revisited in Pipes Three  Whys  o f the Russian Revolution; see also The 
Unknown Lenin, p. 16.
35/ Kenez, The Prosecution of Soviet History: A Critique of Richard Pipes The Russian 
R evolution349-50.
36/ Pipes, Three Whys o f the Russian Revolution, p.32.
37/Ibid., pp. 35-6.
38/Ibid., p. 35.
39/ Ibid., pp. 38-9.
40/ Ibid., pp.41-2. For a thorough analysis of the relationship between Leninism and 
Bolshevism, see Moshe Lewin (1985) Leninism and Bolshevism in The Making o f the 
Soviet System: Essays in the Social History o f Interwar Russia, London, Methuen & Co. Ltd, 
pp. 191-207.
41/ Cited in Rabinowitch, Richard Pipess Lenin, p.l 11.
42/ Hough, The Dark Forces...,  p.401.
43/Ibid.
44/Ibid.
45/ Ibid. Viewing the October Revolution in such a way, Hough, it seems to me, has made a 
serious mistake by equating a revolution earned out in the name of Islam and grounded 
primarily on a religious prerogative with a revolution characteristically transcendental of 
religion and particularly hostile to modernity mainly in its western cloak. The difference
between the Khomeini Revolution and that of the Bolsheviks, I think, is that while the former 
sought to reject modernity in its entirety because it contradicted with Islam as a political 
ideology, the latter, for its part, did not reject modernity in principle but only sought to 
experience it as a necessary stage leading to the demise of capitalism itself and the 'withering 
away of the state. The other mistake which Hough commits in this respect is to believe that 
Lenins rejection of the West means a rejection of the technological basis for capitalism, 
that is, industrialism; Lenin for our purposes, like Marx before him, at least theoretically 
considered both in his early and late work Western capitalism and the bourgeois revolution as 
temporary, but necessary stages for the progress of humankind towards socialism, (see section 
2 part I of this dissertation) Houghs attack on Lenin as an enemy of democratic 
parliamentarism (p.402) seems to have been reliant on a simplistic and dismissive reading of 
Lenins basic work.
46/ Cohen (1977) Bolshevism and Stalinism in Robert C. Tucker (ed.,) Stalinism, p. 4.
47/ Ibid., p. 14.
48/ Ibid., p. 16.
49/ Ibid.
50/ Ibid., p. 17; see also Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind, pp. 173-9.
51/ Here I think that Cohens treatment of Stalin is somehow misleading, mainly because he 
avoids referring to Stalinism as a cult. He rather prefers the expression Bolshevik cult. For 
the Stalin cult, see Tucker, The Rise of Stalins Personality Cult The American Historical 
Review, Vol. 84, No. 2 (Apr., 1979), pp. 347-366; see also Roy A. Medvedev, The Social 
Basis of Stalinism and Nikita Khrushchev, the Cult of Personality, in Robert V Daniels 
(ed.,) The Stalin Revolution, pp.236-8 and pp. 196-207; for the difference between the Stalin 
cult and the Lenin cult, compare the above-mentioned articles with Nina Tumarkins 
Religion, Bolshevism, and the Origins of the Lenin Cult, Russian Review, Vol. 40, No. 1 
(Jan., 1981), pp. 35-46.
52/ See Robert V. Daniels (1991) Stalinism as Postrevolutionary Dictatorship in Trotsky, 
Stalin, and Socialism, Boulder, Westview Press, Inc., pp.121-135.
53/ See for example Lewis Siegelbaum, Robert V. Daniels and the Longue Duree of Soviet 
History, Russian Review, Vol. 54, No. 3 (Jul., 1995), pp. 330-340.
54/ Daniels, Thought and Action under Soviet Totalitarianism: A Reply to George Enteen 
and Lewis Siegelbaum, Russian Review, Vol. 54, No. 3. (Jul., 1995), p.345.
55/ Ibid.
56/ Ibid., p. 350.
57/Ibid., p.346.
58/ Daniels, the Bolshevik Gamble, Russian Review, Vol. 26, No. 4. (Oct., 1967), p. 337. In 
Towards a Social History of the October Revolution, Suny asserts that the accident 
argument has been advanced not only by Daniels but also Sergei P. Melgunov. In Sunys 
words, this might well be called the  conservative-accidentalist interpretation of the October 
revolution, (pp.39-41): ...The uprising had become an obsession with Lenin. The Bolshevik 
seizure of power, once the title of Melgunovs book, was made by Lenins will alone. The 
revolution had no real mass basis, apart from the support it had from the sailors of Kronstadt 
and Helsinki and the Russian public was completely absent on that tragic day. According to 
Suny, Daniels, unlike Melgunov, did not deny wholly popular support for the revolution. He 
only dubbed it a galloping chaos, a veritable orgy of democracy, and a wild gamble. In 
The Revenge o f History, Callinicos refutes the accident thesis (p.22) by arguing that 
...it just seems wrong to regard the 1917 Revolution as an accident. This interpretation 
leaves out of account the extent to which the entire European state-system was thrown 
into a general crisis towards the end of the First World War. In some ways the most 
striking episode in this crisis was not the Russian Revolution itself but the succession 
of upheavals that convulsed the most advanced European Power, Germany, for almost 
five years, from the Revolution of November 1918 which overthrew the Kaiser to the 
Communist Partys abortive attempt to seize power in October 1923 in the wake of the 
Great inflation of that year.
59/ Daniels, The Bolshevik Gamble, p. 338.
60/ Cited in George Enteen, Robert V. Danielss Interpretation of Soviet History, Russian 
Review, Vol. 54, No. 3 (Jul., 1995), p.319. For a similar argument, see Callinicos, The 
Revenge o f History, p.21.
61/ Here compare Danielss concept with Tuckers concept of post-revolutionary revolution 
in The Soviet Political Mind, p. 8.
62/ R. V. Daniels, Trotsky Stalin, and Socialism, p. 129. For the concept of counter
revolution from above, see Robert V. Daniels (1997) (ed.), The Stalin Revolution: 
Foundations o f the Totalitarian Era, New York, Houghton Mifflin Company, pp. 143-207.
63/Ibid., p. 131.
64/ Cited in Enteen, Robert V. Danielss Interpretation..., p. 318.
65/ The sociologist Zagorka Golubovis criticised Kolakowskis position for being blind to 
basic differences between Lenin and Stalin: Stalinism against Socialism in Robert V. 
Daniels, The Stalin Revolution, p.282.
66/ L. Kolakowski, Marxist Roots of Stalinism, p. 287.
67/Ibid.
68/Ibid.
69/Ibid., p.292.
70/Ibid., p. 285.
71/ N. V. Zagladin, Stalinism and Totalitarianism in Robert V. Daniels, The Stalin 
Revolution, p.264.
72/Ibid., p.265 
73/Ibid.
74/Ibid., p.266
75/ Adam B. Ulam (1960) The Unfinished Revolution: An Essay on the Sources o f Influence 
o f Marxism and Communism. New York, Random House, p. 191.
76/Ibid., p. 191-2.
77/Ibid., p. 194 
78/Ibid., p. 195 
79/ Ibid., p.203
80/ John Hoffman, Has Marxism a Future? Leicester University Discussion Papers in 
Politics, No. p91/l (Sep., 1991), pp. 7-9. See also his The State: Has the Withering Away 
Thesis Finally Withered Away? (1992) in Ronald J. Hill (ed.,) Beyond Stalinism: Communist 
Political Evolution. Frank Cass & Co. Ltd,, pp. 92-96.
81/ Hoffman, The State: Has the Withering Away Thesis ...? p. 84.
82/ For a thorough discussion of this point see also Has Marxism a Future?, p.2; for the idea 
that Marxism is betrayed by its own anti-statist premises, see Hoffmans Beyond the State
(1995) Polity Press, pp. 140-144.
83/ It seems to me that in terms of theory Marxism is clear about its methodical and 
intentional inconsistency. Let us observe that Hoffmans argument in this respect is erroneous 
in two respects. First, no single reader of the Marxian text, I would suggest, can deny that 
both Marx and Engels did on some occasions congratulate anarchist revolutionaries on their 
illegal but wholly legitimate violence against the state: the anarchism of the Blanquists at 
the time of the 1871 Paris Commune is a case in point (see Frederick Engels introduction to 
The Civil War in France (1970), Peking, Foreign Languages Press, pp.12-13); Marxs support 
for the assassination of the tsar in 1881 is also a good example. Lenin also was clear about the 
question of anarchism when he confirmed the fact that the Bolsheviks do not at all disagree
with the anarchists on the question of the abolition of the state as an aim. (See Lenin, (1992 ) 
The State and Revolution, London, Penguin Books, p.55)
One might well notice here that measured against his overall theory, Marxs support for 
anarchism was only circumstantial and bound to certain events. Second, the problem posed by 
Hoffman that it is in Marxisms nature to call upon the proletariat to emancipate themselves 
from the state does in no way confirm that Marxism is ambivalent or contradictory about the 
question of abolishing, smashing, or crushing the state. Principally, Marx in most of his 
political writing does not suggest that the state should wither away by means of unorganised 
practice, mainly because, in principle, organized revolutionary struggle against the autocratic 
or bourgeois state does not imply anarchist struggle therein. ( Engels Anti-Duhring brilliantly 
explains this phenomenon)
84/ Hoffman, The State: Has the Withering Away Thesis ...?, pp.87-92
85/ Hoffman, Has Marxism a Future? p. 2.
86/ Hoffman, The State: Has the Withering Away Thesis ...?, pp. 88-9.
87/ Cited in Hoffman, Has Marxism a Future?, p.4.
88/ Hoffman, The State: Has the Withering Away Thesis ...?, p.92.
89/ Ibid.
90/ Cited in Ibid., p. 95
91/ Cited in Hoffman, Beyond the State, p.130.
92/ Daniels, Thought and Action under Soviet Totalitarianism.. p.346.
93/ Ibid.
94/ After 1991, a completely novel historiography emerged with the pioneering work of 
Stephen Kotkin. See especially his Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as Civilization, University 
of California Press, Ltd, (1991), and 1991 and the Russian Revolution: Sources, Conceptual 
Categories, Analytical Frameworks, The Journal o f Modern History, Vol. 70, No. 2 (Jun., 
1998) Among those who responded to Kotkins work, we find Robert V. Daniels in Does the 
Present Change the Past? The Journal o f Modern History, Vol. 70, No. 2 (Jun., 1998), pp. 
431-435.
95/ Sheila Fitzpatrick, Politics as Practice..., p. 30.
96/ See Ibid.
97/ See Fitzpatrick, (1999) Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life in Extraordinary Times: Soviet 
Russia in the 1930s, Oxford University Press, pp.3-4; for Kotkins contribution to the debate 
through his concept of participatory totalitarianism, see Astrid Hedin, Stalinism as
Civilization: New Perspectives on Communist Regimes, Political Studies Review, Vol. 2, 
No. 2 (Apr., 2004), pp. 166-170.
98/ See for example the work of E. H. Carr, Moshe Lewin, and Stephen F. Cohen.
99/ Fitzpatrick, New Perspectives on Stalinism, Russian Review, Vol. 45, No. 4. (Oct., 
1986), p. 357.
100/ The new cohort include mainly J Arch Getty, Gabor Ritterspom, and Roberta T 
Manning. But generally, revisionist social and political historians whose work Fitzpatrick 
often cites include Stephen F. Cohen, Moshe Lewin, E. H. Carr, Robert C. Tucker, Michal 
Reiman, Frederic J. Fleron, Raymond Bauer, Alex Rabinowitch, Jerry F. Hough, Gordon 
Skilling, Franklin Griffiths, Sarah Davies, etc., For a thorough discussion of their work, see 
Fitzpatrick, Politics as Practice..., pp. 30-34.
101/ This actually started as early as her publication of New Perspectives on Stalinism.
102/ Fitzpatrick, New Perspectives..., p. 358.
103/Ibid., p. 367.
104/Ibid., pp.358-9.
105/Ibid., pp.364-7.
106/Ibid., pp. 367-373.
107/Ibid., p.358.
108/ Ibid., p359.
109/Ibid., p.361.
110/ For a thorough discussion of Trotskys position vis-a-vis Stalinism, see Henry 
Reichman, Reconsidering Stalinism, Theory and Society, Vol. 17, No. 1. (Jan., 1988), pp. 
67-70.
111/ Fitzpatrick, New Perspectives..., pp.361-2. Here Fitzpatrick refers to Lewins work 
the Social Background of Stalinism in Making, pp. 258-285; Actually Trotsky's criticism of 
bureaucratism was also shared by Lenin himself. In 1919, Lenin asserted that 'a bureaucratic 
attitude to the work, or inability to help the starving workers, will be severely punished, to the 
point of shooting.' (cited in Volkogonov (1991) Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy, London, 
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, p.557) Lenin's warning, however, was very little influential, 
especially during the years of "War Communism." As Volkogonov put it, during War 
Communism '[n]ew elements of state structure came into being, new intermediable, 
coordinating, connecting links, and so on. The system was growing at an alarming rate under 
Lenin, absorbing a considerable amount of energy and resources to ensure its own proper
functioning.' (p.557) Lenin was also enraged by the growing shape of the bureaucracy and 
saw that it was necessary to get rid of'bureaucratic rats.' (p.558)
112/ Fitzpatrick, New Perspectives..., pp.361-2;
113/ Here Fitzpatrick shares Stephen Cohens argument that convict laborers were the 
lowest-ranked stratum in Stalins USSR: New Perspectives..., p. 362nll. She also asserts 
that the Kolkhoz had a top stratum of white-collar workers...a middle stratum of skilled 
blue-collar workers.. .and, at the bottom, the rank-and-file Kolkhozniki..., p.362.
114/ It is noteworthy that womens mobility during WWII was at its highest, mainly to bridge 
the gap of labour shortage left by mens participation in the war.
115/ Fitzpatrick, New Perspectives..., p.365.
116/Ibid., p.366.
117/ Ibid; a further claim Fitzpatrick defends is the regimes success in indoctrinating 
citizens: the argument that indoctrination played a two-fold role: while the regime could 
through indoctrinating citizens guarantee its control of society, particular citizens were in 
need for maintaining their new social status, and were to accept indoctrination as part of the 
new give-and-take formula. New Perspectives.., pp.366-7.
118/ Alec Nove, responded to this point positively. He agrees with Fitzpatrick that social 
changes in Stalins Russia were not only reflections of the tyrants whim; they had a 
genuinely popular resonance and a basis in Russian political culture. He equally emphasises 
the validity of the social mobility claim. Alec Nove, Stalinism: Revisionism Reconsidered, 
Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, (Oct., 1987), p.412.
119/ Fitzpatrick, New Perspectives.., pp.367-8.
120/ See for example, J. Arch Getty, Origins o f the Great Purges: The Soviet Communist 
Party Reconsidered, 1933-1938, Cambridge, 1985, and Gabor T. Ritterspom, The State 
Against Itself: Socialist Tensions and Political Conflict in the USSR 1936-1938, Telos, No. 
44, (Fall.,1979), pp.87-104.
121/ In discussing this point, I rely heavily on Kotkins valuable critique of revisionist work 
in Magnetic Mountain, pp.539nl9, 540n20, 540n21, 541n22, and 541n23.
122/ Alec Nove questions Gettys suggestion that some party leaders as Kirov and Ezhov 
could take political decisions without Stalins orders. (Nove, Stalinism: Revisionism 
Reconsidered, p.416.)
123/ Fitzpatrick cites Ritterspoms words on the Great Purges: the struggles of 1936-1938 
were unleashed by popular discontent with the arbitrariness, corruption and inefficiency of the 
mling strata. Fitzpatrick, New Perspectives.., p.372.
124/ Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain, p. 540n21
125/ Most responses to Fitzpatricks article came in the same Russian Review issue (1986). 
They include Stephen F. Cohens Stalins Terror as Social History, pp. 375-384, Peter 
Kenez, Stalinism as Humdrum Politics, pp. 395-400, Alfred G. Meyers Coming to Terms 
with the Past...and with Ones Older Colleagues, pp.401-408. For Alec Noves response, see 
note 57.
126/ Fitzpatrick belongs to the two generations of social historians, and has strengthened her 
old position by archival work in the 1980s and 1990s. She believes that the new archives 
explored strengthened the early claims (1950s, 1960s, and 1970s) by social historians that 
Soviet Russia was also controlled by social forces.
127/ Roberta T. Manning, State and Society in Stalinist Russia, Russian Review, Vol. 46, 
No. 4. (Oct., 1987), p. 408. Other scholars argue that in her study of Stalins Russia 
Fitzpatrick considers political history as important as social history: Henry Reichman, 
Reconsidering Stalinism, p.72. Considering this debate, I think that Fitzpatricks position is 
not always clear. Although, she is primarily a social historian, she often conflates social 
history and politics. In some of her writings like The Russian Revolution (1994) her position 
is basically that of a historian. In other works, however, the conflation of political history and 
social history is clear-cut. Her Everyday Stalinism (2000) is a case in point Her position is 
revealed in her definition of the term "Stalinism":
Stalinism often connotes an ideology and/or a political system. I use it here as a shorthand for the 
complex of institutions, structures, and rituals that made up the habit of Homo Sovieticus in the Stalin 
era. Communist Party rule, Marxist-Leninist ideology, rampant bureaucracy, leader cults, state control 
over production and distribution, social engineering, affirmative action on behalf of workers, 
stigmatization of "class enemies," police surveillance, terror, and the various informal, personalistic 
arrangements whereby people at every level sought to protect themselves and obtain scarce goods, were 
all part of die Stalinist habit (pp.3-4)
128/ Ibid.
129/Ibid., p. 409.
130/ For a discussion of Tuckers point, see Reichman Reconsidering Stalinism, pp.64-7. 
131/ Roberta T. Manning, State and Society in Stalinist Russia, p. 409.
132/ Getty, State, Society, and Superstition, Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, (Oct., 1987), p. 
133/Ibid.
134/ Kenez, Stalinism as Humdrum Politics, Russian Review, Vol. 45, No. 4 (Oct., 1986), 
p. 396.
135/Ibid., p. 396.
136/Ibid., p. 397.
137/Ibid., p.397.
138/Ibid., pp.397-8
139/ See Lynne Viola (1987) The Best Sons o f the Fatherland: Workers in the Vanguard o f 
Soviet Collectivization, Oxford University Press.
140/ Kenez, Stalinism as Humdrum Politics, p. 398.
141/ Ibid., pp.398-9 
142/Ibid., pp.399-400.
143/ Meyer, Coming to Terms with the Past.., p. 402. As Nove puts it, Fitzpatrick herself 
had illusions about what she calls informal social negotiation between Stalin and the 
peasants: in 1933 millions had died of famine and peasants were incapable of producing 
because they were not fed. (Nove, Stalinism: Revisionism Reconsidered, p.414.)
144/ Meyer, Coming to Terms with the Past.., p. 404.
145/ Ibid., p. 405.
146/ Ibid., p. 407.
147/ Stephen F. Cohen, Stalins Terror as Social History, p. 376.
148/Ibid., p. 378.
149/Ibid.
150/ Ibid., p. 384. A similar point was raised by Nove. He argued against the revisionists 
unrealistic belief that terror only affected a segment of society. (Nove, Stalinism: 
Revisionism Reconsidered, p.417.)
151/ For an account of positive views on the Russian Revolution, see Robert D. Warth, On - 
the Historiography of the Russian Revolution, Slavic Review, Vol. 26, No. 2. (Jun., 1967), 
pp. 247-267.
152/ See in particular Suny, Revision and Retreat...,165-182 and Toward a Social History 
of the October Revolution, The American Historical Review, Vol.88, No 1 (Feb., 1983), 31- 
153/ Suny, Toward a Social History of the October Revolution, p.34.
154/Ibid
155/ Ibid., pp.34-5.
156/Ibid., p.39.
157/ Sheila Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution, p.43.
158/Ibid., pp. 50-1.
159/Ibid., p.51.
160/ Suny, Toward a Social History of the October Revolution, p.38.
161/ History o f the Communist Party o f the Soviet Union (Bolsheviks), Short Course. 
Moscow, 1939, p. 177.
162/ Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution, p. 52.
163/ Robert D. Warth, On the Historiography of the Russian Revolution, pp. 247-267.
164/ See note 94.
165/ Kotkin, 1991 and the Russian Revolution..., p. 397.
166/ Kotkin, Magnetic Mountain, p. 11.
167/ Kotkin, 1991 and the Russian Revolution... pp. 385-6.
168/ J. Arch Getty, (1997) Forging the Totalitarian Party in Robert V. Daniels (ed.), The 
Stalin Revolution, p. 190.
169/Ibid.
170/Ibid., p.191.
171/Ibid.
172/Ibid., p. 193.
173/ Kotkin has asserted that although Gettys position vis-a-vis the totalitarian school is 
revolutionary in its own right, it amounts to an all too dismissive underestimation of the role 
of Stalin in the Great Purges: {Magnetic Mountain, p.539nl9)
174/ Roy Medvedev (1997) The Social Basis of Stalinism in Robert V. Daniels (ed.), The 
Stalin Revolution: Foundations o f the Totalitarian Era, New York, Houghton Mifflin 
Company, p.236.
175/ Ibid., pp. 236-7.
176/ Robert C. Tucker, The Question of Totalitarianism, Slavic Review, Vol. 20, No. 3, 
(Oct., 1961), pp. 377-382. Zbigniew Brzezinskis article to which Tucker refers is The 
Nature of the Soviet System published in the same Slavic Review issue, pp. 351-368.
177/ Tucker, The Question of Totalitarianism, p. 378; the main idea expanded by Tucker in 
this review is elaborated in The Soviet Political Mind, pp. 3-19; Moshe Lewin made a similar 
point by arguing that the whole social matrix was then breeding just this: authoritarianism. 
Lewin, Grappling with Stalinism in Making, P.311 
178/ Tucker, The Question of Totalitarianism, p. 378.
179/ Ibid; for a different interpretation which focuses on basic similarities between Stalins 
Russia, Nazi Germany, and Fascist Italy, see N. V. Zagladin, Stalinism and Totalitarianism 
in Robert V. Daniels (ed.), The Stalin Revolution, pp.262-276.
180/ Ibid., pp. 378-9; see also The Soviet Political Mind, p.7.
181/ In Tuckers view the other systems are mainly Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and single
party systems of the nationalist species. Tucker, Soviet Political Mind, p.6. Sheila Fitzpatrick 
has argued that Tuckers point in this sense emphasises his concern with political culture, 
which embodies new approaches to the theme of ideology by treating it away from the old 
canonical-texts approach. Fitzpatrick, Political as Practice..., pp.32-3.
182/ Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind, p.7.
183/ Gordon Skilling, Interest Groups and Communist Politics, World Politics, Vol. 18, No. 
3. (Apr., 1966), pp. 435-8.
184/Ibid., p. 436.
185/Ibid., p. 437.
186/ Vera Alexandrova, The Soviet Family, Russian Review, Vol. 5. No. 2. (Spring, 1946), 
pp. 74-5.
187/Ibid., p. 74.
188/Ibid.
189/ Ibid.
190/Ibid.
191/ Ibid., pp. 74-6.
192/ Ibid., pp.75-6: According to Alexandrova, the story of Gleb and his wife Dasha was 
simply a story of a Soviet woman who could assert her femininity on revolutionary modem 
grounds, and through negotiating a much more assertive gender identity with her husband. 
Actually, for a number of (non-revisionist) scholars the question of gender was extremely 
important in confirming the states domination of society: Susan E. Reid, for example, has 
argued that representation of gender in Soviet art during the Second and Third Five-Year 
Plans articulated relationships of domination in Stalinist society. Using female characters to 
stand for the people as a whole, painting and sculpture drew on conventional gender codes 
and hierarchy to naturalize the subordination of society to the Stalinist state and legitimate the 
sacrifice of womens needs to those of industrialization. (Susan E. Reid, All Stalins 
Women: Gender and Power in Soviet Art of the 1930s, Slavic Review, Vol. 57, No. 1 
(Spring., 1998), p. 133.)
193/ Vera Sandomirsky, Sex in the Soviet Union, Russian Review, Vol. 10, No. 3. (July.,
1951), p. 203; see the same article for the idea of Free Love in the 1920s, pp. 199-201. 
Sandomirsky argues that the free love era ended by the mid-1930s, and was replaced by the 
Stalinist Virtue: a Soviet citizen cannot simply love someone without criticism, without 
political and moral watchfulness. Our Soviet citizen can no longer love only because of a 
natural drive. He wants his beloved to be worthy of his feeling, to possess the best Soviet 
qualities. pp.201-202. She also asserts that the right to divorce became synonymous with 
good or bad citizenship: you have the right to ask for divorce only when your partner 
proves to be an unworthy Soviet citizen, pp. 203-4; for marriage, sex, and divorce, see Kent 
Geiger and Alex Inkeles The Family in the U.S.S.R, Marriage and Family Living, Vol. 16. 
No. 4. International Issue on the Family (Nov., 1954), pp.401-402.
194/Ibid., pp. 201-2.
195/ Wendy Z Goldman (1997) Revolution and the Family in Robert V. Daniels (ed.), The 
Stalin Revolution, pp. 172-3; see also Sandomirsky, Sex in the Soviet Union, pp.201,203-4. 
196/ For an early scholarly study of the conflict between Russian conservative values and 
modernity, see Sandomirsky, Sex in the Soviet Union, pp. 199-209.
197/ Sandomirsky, Sex in the Soviet Union, p. 201.
198/ Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism, pp. 139-163.
199/ For womens occupational mobility, see Geiger and Inkeles The Family in the 
U.S.S.R, pp.399-400.
200/ Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism, pp. 143-147.
201/ Donald Filtzer, The Mobilization of Labor in Robert V. Daniels (ed.), The Stalin 
Revolution, p. 103.
202/ Geiger and Inkeles, The Family in the USSR, p.403. In a different work, Inkeles 
writes: women came to represent a significant proportion of the skilled workers in Soviet 
industry. Their advance in fields requiring higher training was even more impressive. 
Between 1928 and 1938 the proportion of women in the universities increased from 28 per 
cent to 43 per cent... The effect of this upward movement was reflected in the fact that they 
constituted 40 per cent of all specialists in the Soviet Union before the war. The shifts in the 
rural regions were no less striking, as large numbers of women assumed positions of 
responsibility and skill on the collective farms. Inkeles, Social Stratification and Mobility in 
the Soviet Union: 1940-1950, American Sociological Review, Vol. 15, No. 4. (Aug., 1950), 
pp.468-469.
203/ Goldman, Revolution and the Family, pp. 163-4.
204/Ibid., pp. 166-7.
205/ Sheila Fitzpatrick, The New Leadership Generation in Robert V. Daniels (ed.), The 
Stalin Revolution, p.81.
206/ For an opposite view, see Lewin, the Making, (p.34): The 1930s was an era of great 
mobility, but for too many the direction was down, not up. Whole classes were created or 
grew, while others disappeared. Cadres were educated and promoted in massive numbers, 
while other masses of cadres were destroyed. Professional training was impressive, but the 
majority of the working class were still working with their bare hands.
207/ For Fitzpatricks view on the cultural revolution in Soviet Russia, see Culture and 
Politics Under Stalin: A Reappraisal, Slavic Review, No. 35, No.2 (Jun., 1976) pp. 211-231. 
In this article Fitzpatrick is primarily interested in debating the concept of culture in Stalins 
Russia by supposing that the dominant view of culture in Western scholarship was both 
created and dominated by the totalitarian model between 1946 and 1953. She also argues 
that such a dominant view was myopic in its claim that the Communist Party had full control 
of culture in general. One of her most significant arguments in this essay is that the general 
medium of culture in society was a point of intersection, or rather inevitable encounter, 
between the old intelligentsia and the party: As party values penetrated culture the cultural 
values of the old intelligentsia were penetrating the party. (p. 213.) For Fitzpatricks more 
specific views on cultural revolution in Stalins time, see The Russian Revolution, pp. 141-47, 
Everyday Stalinism, pp. 106-107, The Cultural Revolution in Russia: 1928-1932, Journal o f 
Contemporary History, Vol. 9, No. 1. (Jan., 1974), pp. 33-52; Cultural Revolution 
Revisited, Russian Review, Vol. 52, No. 2. (Apr., 1999), pp.202-209.
208/ Arch Getty points out the First Five-Year Plan as cultural revolutionagainst 
capitalism, bourgeois values: see Forging the Totalitarian Party, p. 188.
209/ Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism, pp. 5-6.
210/ The Shakhty trial took place in 1928. It was basically a trial against a group of so-called 
bourgeois engineers from the Shakhty region of the Donbass accused of conspiracy with 
external forces against the stability and peace of the Soviet Union. With the trial, it is said, the 
Stalin Cultural revolution began; for a discussion of this point, see Fitzpatrick, The Russian 
Revolution, p. 122 and Everyday Stalinism, pp. 5-6.
211/ Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism, pp. 118-122.
212/ Fitzpatrick, Cultural Revolution in Russia: 1928-32, p.35.
213/ Ibid., p.37.
214/Ibid., p. 36.
215/ Ibid., pp. 39-40.
216/ Cited in Ibid., p. 42.
217/ Filtzer, The Mobilization of Labor, p. 103.
218/ Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism, pp. 116-7.
219/Ibid., pp. 118-122.
220/ Cited in Jay W. Stein, The Soviet Intelligentsia, Russian Review, Vol. 10, No. 4. 
(Oct., 1951), p.283.
221/ Jay W. Stein, The Soviet Intelligentsia, p. 283.
222/ For a discussion of this point, see Ibid., pp.283-284.
223/ Cited in Fitzpatrick, The New Leadership Generation, p.85.
224/ Filtzer, The Mobilization of Labor, p. 101.
225/ Cited in Hiroaki Kiromiya, Industrialization and Class War in Robert V. Daniels (ed.), 
The Stalin Revolution, p.68.
226/ Cited in Fitzpatrick, The New Leadership Generation, p.81.
227/ Fitzpatrick,  New Leadership Generation, p.84.
228/Ibid., p. 86.
229/Ibid., p.87.
230/Ibid., p.88.
231/ Filtzer, The Mobilization of Labor, p.99.
232/ For a thorough discussion of the 25,000ers, see Lynne Viola, Collectivisation as 
Revolution in Robert V. Daniels (ed.), The Stalin Revolution, pp. 108-113.
233/Ibid., p. 108.
234/Ibid., p. 109.
235/Ibid., p. 112.
236/Ibid., pp. 114-5.
237/ Boris I Nicolaevsky, The New Soviet Campaign Against the Peasants, Russian 
Review, Vol. 10, No. 2. (Apr., 1951), p. 82.
238/ Lewin, (1985) Who was the Soviet Kulak?, Making, pp. 121-141; for a definition of 
the term Kulak, see also Fitzpatrick, Deportation and Exile in Everyday Stalinism, 
pp. 122-24, and Collectivization in The Russian Revolution, pp. 135-139; see also Kotkin, 
Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as Civilization, pp.81-82.
239/ Lewin, Who was the Kulak? pp. 122-4.
240/Ibid., p. 124.
241/ See Nicolaevsky, The New Soviet Campaign ..., p.81.
242/ Viola, Collectivisation as Revolution, p. 110.
243/ Viktor Danilov N. V. Teptsov, Collectivization: the Results in Robert V. Daniels, The 
Stalin Revolution, p. 128.
244/Ibid.
245/Ibid., p. 136.
246/ Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism, pp.8-10.
247/ See Fitzpatrick, The Russian Revolution, pp. 111-119 and Everyday Stalinism, pp. 14-15. 
248/ Fitzpatrick, The Russian revolution, p. 111.
249/ Here Fitzpatrick alludes, I would argue, to the Industrial Revolution in England in 
particular.
250/ Filtzer, The Mobilization of Labor, p. 101. For the effect of the modernisation of 
industry on the structure of society, see the work of the economic historian Robert Allen: 
Standards of Living in the Soviet Union, The Journal o f Economic History, Vol. 58. No. 4. 
(Dec., 1998), pp. 1063-1089. Allen contends that between 1928 and 1940 industrialization, 
while was revolutionary in allowing more labour opportunities, caused a remarkable fall o f6 7 
per cent of real wages per worker. Such a fall however did not reflect the rise of non- 
agricultural wage payments which increased by 50.1 billion rubles as the corresponding 
labor force rose from 13.77 million to 26.53 million workers. (p. 1079) In Allens view, 
although the rise of consumption cannot be denied, standards of living of the non-agricultural 
population were only relatively improved: improvement covered only an aristocracy of skilled 
labourers and the party and administrative elite while the rest of society suffered a 
substantial drop in living standards. Farmers, on the other hand, were almost totally deprived 
of any rise in the level of consumption, (p. 1084); in 1954 Kent Geiger and Alex Inkeles 
wrote that industrialization of the Soviet Union resulted in a great disappointment of the 
Soviet people who live[d] in conditions of material deprivation, both in relation to the 
standards prevailing in Western Europe and relative to their own expectations. Kent Geiger 
and Alex Inkeles, The Family in the USSR, p. 398; for a similar argument, see Harvey 
Wheeler, Problems of Stalinism, The Western Political Quarterly, Vol. 10, No. 3. (Sep., 
1957) Wheeler argues that the myth of high standards of living in the Soviet Union were 
merely a political propaganda the aim of which was to trade a false consciousness based 
mainly on the necessity of peoples sacrifice:
For what is involved is the politics of squeezing people by increasing their productivity while their 
expectations for change are held at zero. In Stalinist theory political power is used to increase 
productivity and also to keep people from expecting to increase their levels of consumption as they are
forced to increase their levels of production, (pp.638-639)
251/Ibid.
252/ Ibid., p. 103.
253/ Hough, The Soviet Concept of the Relationship between the Lower Party Organs and 
the State Administration, Slavic Review, Vol.24. No.2. (Jun., 1965), pp.215-220; see also 
Filtzer, The Mobilization of Labor, pp. 104-105; actually the concept of one-man 
management was not totally new in Bolshevik thinking. E. H. Carr reminds us that importance 
of this concept had been raised since the time of the Civil War when centralized control, 
direction and planning necessitated the recruitment of technical specialists and the adoption 
of one-man responsibility in management: E. H. Carr (1963) The Bolshevik Revolution 
1917-1923 (Vol.2), London, Macmillan, p. 173.
254/ Hough, The Soviet Concept of the Relationship.. p. 215.
255/ Filtzer, The Mobilization of Labor, p. 105.
256/ For a discussion of how privileged groups in the Soviet Union emerged first with 
Lenin, see Mervyn Matthews, The New Inequality in Robert V. Daniels (ed.), The Stalin 
Revolution, pp. 145-6.
257/Ibid., p. 148.
258/ Geiger and Inkeles, The Family in the U.S.S.R, p.399.
259/ Matthews, The New Inequality p. 144.
260/Ibid., pp. 145-6.
261/Ibid., p. 146.
262/ Joseph Stalin, The Socialist Drive in Robert V. Daniels (ed.), The Stalin Revolution, p. 
263/ Inkeles, Social Stratification and mobility in the Soviet Union, p. 465.
264/ Cited in Ibid.,
265/ Ibid., pp. 465-6.
266/ Ibid., p. 466: Inkeles classifies the groups in question as follows: the ruling elite, the 
superior intelligentsia, the general intelligentsia, the white collar group...the working class 
aristocracy, the rank and file workers, the disadvantaged workers, the well-to-do peasants, the 
average peasant, the forced-labor-camps group
267/Ibid., p. 468.
268/Ibid., p. 467.
269/ Ibid., p. 470.
270/ Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism, P.96.
271/ Inkeles, Social Stratification and mobility..., p. 470.
272/ Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism, pp. 95-6.
273/Ibid., p. 97.
274/Ibid.
275/Ibid., pp. 98-9.
276/ Ibid., pp. 103-4.
277/Ibid., p. 104.
278/Ibid.
Notes to Part 4
1/ See the present work, pp. 142-143; 155-156.
2/ See the present work, pp. 108-109.
3/ See the present work, p. 154-155.
4/ John Hoffman, Has Marxism a Future?, Leicester University Discussion Papers in 
Politics, No. P91/1 (Sep., 1991), p. 2.
5/ Ibid., pp. 2-3.
6/ Ibid., p. 4.
7/ Alex Callinicos (1991) The Revenge o f History, The Pennsylvania State University Press, 
p. 17.
8/ Hoffman (2007) A Glossary o f Political Theory, Edinburgh University Press, p. 184.
9 /Ibid., p .ll.
10/Ibid.
11/Ibid.
12/ Charles D. Farris, Authoritarianism as a Political Behavior Variable, The Journal o f 
Politics, Vol. 18, No. 1. (Feb., 1956), p. 62; for a critique of the psychological approach to 
authoritarianism, see Don Stewart and Thomas Hoult, A Social-Psychological Theory of the 
Authoritarian Personality, The American Journal o f Sociology, Vol. 65, No. 3. (Nov., 1959), 
pp. 274-279; for more general reviews of the Berkley Group, see Alfred de Grazias review of
The Authoritarian Personality (T. W. Adorno et al) in The American Political Science 
Review, Vol. 44, No. 4. (Dec., 1950), pp. 1005-6. See also Tamotsi Shibutanis review in The 
American Journal o f Sociology, Vol. 57, No. 5, The Sociological Study of Work. (Mar., 
1952), pp. 527-9.
13/ For a discussion of this point, see Don Stewart and Thomas Hoult, A Social- 
Psychological Theoiy of the Authoritarian Personality, p. 275.
14/ Daniel Levy, Comparing Authoritarian Regimes in Latin America: Insights from Higher 
Education Policy, Comparative Politics, Vol. 14, No. 1. (Oct., 1981), pp.33-41.
15/Ibid., p. 39.
16/ Arendt, Totalitarianism in Power in The Origins o f Totalitarianism, p. 323.
17/Ibid., p. 311.
18/Ibid., p. 319.
19/ Ibid., p. 320.
20/Ibid., p. 321.
21/ Carl J. Friedrich and Zbigniew Brzezinski (1961) Totalitarian Dictatorship and 
Autocracy, Frederick A. Praeger.
22/ Cited in Tucker, The Question of Totalitarianism, p. 377.
23/Ibid., pp. 378-9.
24/ Karl Marx (2002) The Communist Manifesto, London, Penguin Books, p. 243.
25/ Ronald J. Hill et al (1992) Beyond Stalinism: Communist Political Evolution, London, 
Frank Cass, p. 8.
26/ For a discussion of the Stalin 'cultural revolution,' see present work, pp.
27/ J. Vialatoux (1952) La Cite de Hobbes, Lyon, IMP. M. Audin, p. VII.
28/ Ibid., p.VI. I have translated all Vialatoux's quotations here from French.
29/ Ibid, pp. X-XI.
30 /1 am entirely conscious that my thesis might read as a projection of ideas, that is, as a 
forced argument which reads Hobbess Leviathan through the prisms of the Lenin and Stalin 
revolutions and not vice versa
31/ Joseph Vialatoux, La Cite de Hobbes, p. VI.
32/ Ibid., p.VH.
33/ Ibid. Here the concrete form of the Soviet state is perceived as the result of the interaction 
between the productive forces and the new man to whom it gave birth.
34/ Ibid., p. XI.
35/ Ibid.
36/ Ibid., p. 156.
37/ Ibid., p. 157.
38/ Ibid. p. 159.
39/ Ibid.
40/ Ibid., p. 157.
41/ Ibid.
42/ Carl Schmitt (1996) The Leviathan in the State Theory o f Hobbes, Westport, Greenwood 
Press, p.92.
43/ Ibid., p.95.
44/ Ibid., p.96.
45/ George Schwabs Introduction to The Leviathan in the State Theory o f Hobbes, p. XII.
46/ Ibid.
47/ Cited in Ibid., p.XXI.
48/ Cited in Ibid.,
49/ George Schwab's Introduction to The Leviathan in the State Theory o f Hobbes, p.XXII. 
50/ Hannah Arendt (1976) The Political Emancipation of the Bourgeoisie  in The Origins 
o f Totalitarianism, New York, Harcourt Brace & Company, p. 142.
51/ Ibid., pp. 141-2.
52/ Ibid., p. 142.
53/ Hobbes (1968) Leviathan, London, Penguin Books, p. 88.
54/ Ibid., p.89.
55/ Ibid., p. 100.
56/ Ibid., p. 110.
57/ Ibid., p. 118.
58/ Ibid., p. 150.
59/ Ibid., p. 183.
60/ Ibid.
61/ Ibid.
62/ Ibid., p. 184.
63/ Ibid., p. 189.
64/ Ibid., p. 184.
65/ Ibid., p. 185.
66/ Ibid., p. 190.
67/ Ibid., p.223.
68/ Johann P. Sommerville (1992) Thomas Hobbes : Political Ideas in Historical Context, 
London, Macmillan, p.76.
69/ Hobbes, Leviathan, p.223.
70/ Cited in Sommerville, Thomas Hobbes..., p. 78.
71/ David Gauthier (1969) The Logic o f Leviathan, Oxford University Press, p.67.
72/ M. M. Goldsmith (1966) Hobbess Science o f Politics, Columbia University Press, p. 136. 
73/ Hobbes, Leviathan, p.227.
74/ Ibid., p.223.
75/ Goldsmith, Hobbess Science o f Politics, p. 138.
76/ Hobbes, Leviathan, p.227.
111 Ibid.,
78/ Ibid., p.223.
79/ Goldsmith, Hobbess Science o f Politics, pp. 140-41.
80/ Hobbes, Leviathan, p.227.
81/ Cited in J. Vialatoux, La CzYc de Hobbes, p. 156.
82/ Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan, p. 229.
83/ Ibid., p.228.
84/ Ibid.
85/ Gauthier, The Logic o f Leviathan, p. 146.
86/ Ibid., p. 147.
87/ Ibid., p. 151.
88/ Ibid., p. 164.
89/ John Locke (1976) Second Treatise o f Government, Oxford, Basil Blackwell, p.XV.
90/ Ibid., p. 100.
91/ Hobbes, Leviathan, pp.225-6.
92/ Ibid., p.227.
93/ Ibid., p. 184.
94/ Ibid., p.223.
95/ Ibid., pp. 183-8.
96/ It is my position that both Lenin and Stalin simply erroneously believed that they kept to 
the letter of the Marxian text. Veiy few practices revealed that Lenin, for instance, did have 
some intention to construct the socialist state as was theorised by Marx and Engels. Stalin, as 
was proved through his own actions, only spoke in the name of Marxism-Leninism while 
most action from the First Five-Year Plan up to the late 1940s shows his complete departure 
from Marxisms emancipatory thinking
97/ K. Marx (2000) Selected Writings, Oxford University Press, p.608.
98/ Nicolai Bukharin and Preobrazhensky. (1969) The ABC o f Communism, London, Penguin 
Books, p.216.
99/ The Petrograd Soviet was named after the 1905 Petersburg Soviet. For this point, see S. 
Fitzpatrick (1994) The Russian Revolution, Oxford University Press, p. 46.
100/ See the present work, p. 264n7.
101/ Rosa Luxemburg (1961) The Russian Revolution and Leninism or Marxism, The 
University of Michigan Press, p.81.
102/ K. Marx (2000) Selected Writings, p. 189.
103/ Nicolai Bukharin and Preobrazhensky (1969) The ABC o f Communism,
London, Penguin Books, pp.393-95.
104/ Ibid.
105/Ibid., p.393.
106/Ibid., p.218.
107/Ibid., p.217.
108/ K. Marx (2000) Selected Writings, p.261.
109/Ibid.
110/ Here Marx means that the proletarian statefar from represented by a party as a single 
monolithis itself the only guarantee for the disappearance of the class struggle. Marx 
enumerates the conditions of success for the dictatorship of the proletariat. Such conditions 
include, among other requirements, the abolition of property in land...abolition of all rights 
of inheritance... centralization of all credit in the hands of the [proletarian] state, by means of 
a national bank with State capital and exclusive monopoly...equal liability of all 
labour...gradual distinction between town and country... (K.Marx and F. Engels (2002) The 
Communist Manifesto, pp. 243-4.)
111/1 discuss this point in Part I, section I "The Necessity of Social Democracy," pp. 23-32.
112/ K. Marx (2000) Selected Writings, p. 148.
113/Ibid., p. 194.
114/Ibid., p. 60.1
115/ R. Luxemburg (1961) The Russian Revolution... p.33.
116/ Tom Freeman, "Was Lenin a Marxist in What is to Be Done? ?" Studies in Marxism, No. 
10,(2004), p. 14.
117/ V. I. Lenin, What is to be Done?, pp.31-5.
118/ K. Marx (1974) The First International and After, London, Penguin Books, p. 92.
119/ For a definition of the "Totalitarian model," see the present work, pp. 15-16; 141-144. 
120/ Lih, "How a Founding Document was F o u n d . p .  8.
121/ See Gareth Stedman Jones's notes to The Communist Manifesto (2002), pp.260-261 
122/ For Plekhanovs influence on Lenin, see L. Kolakowski (1978) Main Currents o f 
Marxism: Its Rise, Growth, and Dissolution (Vol. 2), Oxford, Clarendon Press, pp. 385-511.
123/ V. I. Lenin (1992) The State and Revolution London, Penguin Books, p.51.
124/ John Hoffman (1992) The State: Has the Withering Away Thesis..., p.92.
125/ Robert C. Tucker (1991) What Time is it in Russias Histoiy in C. Merridale (ed.), 
Perestroika: The Historical Perspective, London, Edward Arnold, p.36.
126/ Cited in Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution..., pp.89-90.
127/ N. Bukharin, T he ABC o f Communism, pp.l 1-12.
128/ In the 1930s Bukharin and other Soviet state theoretician were themselves victims of the 
same trend of thought they theorised and followed. Stalins Great Purges in the 1930s were 
a confirmation rather than refutation of the wrong reach of the state-centrism advanced by the 
Bolsheviks.
129/ See Richard J. Medalie, "The Communist Theory of the State," American Slavic and 
East European Review, Vol. 18, No. 4 (Dec., 1959), p.518.
130/ Cited in Ibid.
131/ K. Marx (2002) Selected Writings, p.608.
132/ R. C. Tucker (1971) The Soviet Political Mind, New York, Norton & Co 1971, p.8.
133/ J. Hoffman, Beyond The State, p. 137.
134/ Trotsky (1904) Our Political Tasks, London, New Park, p.56 
135/Ibid., p.77.
136/ R. Luxemburg, The Russian Revolution..., p.38.
137/ Ibid., p.69. It might well be true that Luxemburgs criticism of the statist character of the 
Bolshevik party was based on an objective consideration of the anti-freedom formula Lenin 
himself opted for. Yet, one might also argue against the pro-liberal stance which Luxemburg 
was obliged to adopt. Her insistence on freedom and democracy was very much influenced by 
the anti-authoritarian kernel of her arguments, which led her to disown the very theoretical 
basis of the Bolshevik party, the theoretical basis that she elsewhere sanctioned as the only 
politico-historical necessity to realize an intact socialist policy. {The Russian Revolution..., 
p.35.) Although Luxemburgs criticism of the single and monolithic rule of the Bolshevik 
party can be accurate, the logic of her criticism against Lenin on this occasion was far from 
Marxian.
138/ Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind, p.58
139/ L. Trotsky, "What is Proletarian Culture and is it Possible?" Philosophy/ History Internet 
Archive (Feb., 2001), p. 4.
140/ Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind, p. 10.
141/ For this point, see Hoffinan, Has Marxism a Future?, p. 8.
142/ Ibid.
143/ Dictatorship here, as Hoffinan argues, was primarily caused by the authoritarian trap of 
1917 (Hoffinan, Has Marxism a Future?, p. 7.)
144/ V. I. Lenin, The State and Revolution, p. 33.
145/ Marxs revision of The Communist Manifesto was based on the following statement in 
the "Preface to the German Edition of 1872": In view of the gigantic strides of Modem 
Industry in the last twenty-five years, and of the accompanying improved and extended party 
organization of the working class, in view of the practical experience gained, first in the 
February Revolution, and then, still more, in the Paris Commune, where the proletariat for the 
first time held political power for two whole months, this programme [of The Communist 
Manifesto] has in some details become antiquated. One thing especially was proved by the 
Commune, viz., that the working class cannot simply lay hold of the ready-made State 
machinery, and wield it for its own purposes. {The Communist Manifesto, .p. 194.)
146/ V. I. Lenin, The State and Revolution, p.34. Ludwig Kugelmann (1830-1902) was a 
German physician, communist, and active member of the First International. He was a good 
friend of Marx and often corresponded with him.
147/ Ibid., p.37.
148/ Ibid.
149/ Ibid.
150/ In this respect, Lenin's argument reduces the importance of Marx's theory that a working 
class revolution must be a timely revolution. Marx's praise of the Paris Commune does not 
override his fundamental theory that a proletarian revolution can only succeed when the 
capitalist mode of production is fully developed. One might well argue here that by believing 
so, Lenin was but divorcing Marxian theory from any possible faithful practice.
151/ Lenins implications found expression later in the work of Stalin who believed Marxism 
could only be validated by Leninist thinking For this point, see my discussion of Stalins 
position in the present work, pp. 109-115.
152/ The leviathan element in Lenin had also to do with his late rise as a god-father of the 
Soviet people. Nina Tumarkin points to the Lenin cult as emerging from such slogans as 
Lenin lived. / Lenin lives. / Lenin will live. (Cited in Nina Tumarkin, "Religion, 
Bolshevism, and the Origins of the Lenin Cult" Russian Review, Vol.40, No.l (Jan., 1981), 
p.38) This expression was articulated in most of the works of literature produced after 
January 1924. The myth of an immortal Lenin haunted peasant life and was incessantly 
confirmed even in the aftermath of his death, (p.37 )
153/ Hobbes, Leviathan, p.227.
154/ Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind, p. 132.
155/ Ibid.
156/ Cited in A. Callinicos, The Revenge o f History, p. 117.
157/ D. M Kotz and Fred Weir (1997) The Demise o f the Soviet System, London, Routledge,
p. 18.
158/ A. Callinicos, The Revenge o f History, p. 27.
159/ Cited in Hoffinan, Has Marxism a Future?, p. 6.
160/ Cited in Hoffinan, Beyond the State, p. 140.
161/ Richard Daniels (1991) Trotsky, Stalin, and Socialism, Oxford, Westview Press, p.124. 
162/ Cited in Stephen F. Cohen (1977) "Bolshevism and Stalinism" in R. Tucker (ed.), 
Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation, New York, Norton & Co., p.22.
163/ Roy Medvedev (1972) Let History Judge, London, Macmillan, p.43. Zinoviev and 
Kamanev belonged to the Old Bolsheviks. They opposed the original plans for the October 
Revolution, but failed to convince the majority of Bolshevik Party members on voting against 
the plans. Initially, they sided with the Mensheviks, and published their plight in the 
Menshevik newspaper, Novaya Zhizn. While in 1923 they sided with Stalin against Trotsky 
(and sought to attack and reduce Trotskyism), between 1926 and 1927, together with Trotsky,
they turned against Stalin. They were both executed by Stalin in what came to be known as 
the Great Purges of the 1930s.
164/ R. Medvedev, Let History Judge, p.27.
165/ Cited in Ibid., p.51.
166/ Kotz and Weir, The Demise o f the Soviet System, p.21.
167/ A. Callinicos, The Revenge o f History, p.28.
168/ Cited in Cohen "Bolshevism and Stalinism" in R. Tucker (ed.), Stalinism..., p. 19.
169/ R. C. Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind, p. 179.
170/ Ibid., p.55. For Stalins conception of the Soviet State (consolidation of the state to fend 
off internal and external attack, etc.), see L. G. Churchward, Contemporary Soviet Theory of 
the State, Soviet Studies, Vol. 12, No. 4 (Apr., 1961), 404-419.
171/ Medvedev, Let History Judge, p.28.
172/ R. V. Daniels, Trotsky, Stalin, and Socialism, p. 124.
173/ See note 31.
174/ Hobbes, Leviathan, p.227.
175/ Joseph Stalin (1937) Mastering Bolshevism, New York, Workers Library Publishers, 
p.5. Actually Lenin himself used a similar logic. The enemies for Lenin were the forces of 
'reaction' and 'capitalist encirclement.'
176/ Ibid., p.8.
177/ Dimitri Volkogonov (1991) Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy, London, Weidenfeld and 
Nicolson, pp.280-1.
178/ Ibid, p.280.
179/ See Ibid., p. 276.
180/ Ibid., pp.276-7.
181/ Ibid., p.276.
182/ See Ibid., p.277.
183/ Cited in Ibid.
184/ Cited in N. Bukharin How it All Began (1998) New York, Columbia University Press, p. 
185/ C. Merridale, "Perestroika and Political Pluralism: Past and Prospects" in C. Merridale 
(ed.), Perestroika..., p. 17.
186/ Cited in Medvedev, Let History Judge, p.24. For Lenin's criticism of Stalin, see Robert 
H McNeal, "Lenin's Attack on Stalin: Review and Reappraisal," American Slavic and East 
European Review, Vol. 18, No.3 (Oct., 1959), pp. 295-314
187/ R. Medvedev, Let History Judge, p.25. See also R. C. Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind, 
p. 51.Actually Lenins disagreements with Stalin date back to the period of the 1917 
Revolution.. By 1918, Stalin adopted a theory of revolution based on the suggestion that 
revolution and socialism could firstly only happen at the national level; such a theory was in 
sharp conflict with Lenin's theory. Shortly after Stalin's pronouncement of his theory, he, 
under Lenin's influence, departed from it. For this point see, Robert H McNeal, "Lenin's 
Attack on Stalin: Review and Reappraisal," pp.296-298 
188/ R. C. Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind, p.51.
189/ Cited in R. V. Daniels, Trotsky, Stalin, and Socialism, p. 129.
190/ R. C. Tucker, The Soviet Political Mind, p.87.
191/ Nina Tumarkin, "Religion, Bolshevism, and the Origins of the Lenin Cult," p. 38.
192/ Cited in Robert C. Tucker, The Rise of Stalins Personality Cult, The American 
Historical Review, Vol. 84, No. 2 (Apr., 1979), p. 348.
193/ Tucker, The Rise of Stalins Personality Cult, p. 349.
194. H. Arendt, The Origins o f Totalitarianism, pp.320-1.
195/ R. V. Daniels, Trotsky, Stalin, and Socialism, p. 124.
Bibliography
Alexandrova, Vera. The Soviet Family, Russian Review, Vol. 5. No. 2. (Spring, 1946), pp. 
74-82.
Allen, Robert. Standards of Living in the Soviet Union, The Journal o f Economic History, 
Vol. 58. No. 4. (Dec., 1998), pp.1063-1089.
Allison, J. Herbert. The Decision to Collectivize Agriculture, American Slavic and East 
European Review, Vol. 20, No. 2 (Apr., 1961), pp. 189-202.
Arendt, Hanah. (1976) The Origins o f Totalitarianism, London, Harcourt Brace & Company.
Avineri, Shlomo. How to Save Marx from the Alchemists of Revolution, Political Theory, 
Vol.4,No.l (Feb., 1976), pp. 35-44.
Bandera, V. N. The New Economic Policy as an Economic System, The Journal o f 
Political Economy, Vol. 71, No. 3 (Jim., 1963), pp. 265-279.
Becker, F. Bennett. Lenins Application of Marxs Theory of Revolutionary Tactics 
American Sociological Review, Vol. 2, No.3 (June., 1937), pp. 353-364.
Brown, Archie. (2004) The Demise o f Marxism-Leninism in Russia, Palgrave Macmillan.
Brzezinski, Zbigniew. The Nature of the Soviet System, Slavic Review, Vol. 20, No. 3. 
(Oct., 1961), pp. 351-368.
Bukharin, N. I. and Preobrazhensky. (1969) The ABC o f Communism, London, Penguin 
Books.
Bukharin, N. I. (1982) Selected Writings on the State and the Transition to Socialism, 
Armonk, M. E. Sharpe
__________ . How it All Began (1998) New York, Columbia University Press
Callinicos, Alex. (1991) The Revenge o f History, The Pennsylvania State University Press.
__________ . (1995) The Revolutionary Ideas o f Karl Marx, London, Bookmarks.
Carr, E. H. (1963) The Bolshevik Revolution 1917-1923, London, Macmillan.
Churchward, L. G. Contemporary Soviet Theory of the State, Soviet Studies, Vol. 12, No. 4 
(Apr., 1961), pp. 404-419.
Cohen, Steven. Stalins Terror as Social History Russian Review, Vol. 45, No. 4 (Oct., 
1986), pp. 375-384.
Dallin, Alexander (1995) (ed.), The Soviet System: From Crisis to Collapse, Colorado, 
Westview Press
Daniels, Robert V. (1997) (ed.) The Stalin Revolution: Foundations o f the Totalitarian Era, 
New York, Houghton Mifflin Company.
____________ . (1991) Trotsky, Stalin, and Socialism, Boulder, Westview Press, Inc.,
____________ . (1968) Red October, London, Seeker and Warburg.
 . The Bolshevik Gamble, Russian Review, Vol. 26, No. 4 (Oct., 1967), pp.
331-340.
____________ . Thought and Action under Soviet Totalitarianism: A Reply to George
Enteen and Lewis Siegelbaum, Russian Review, Vol. 54, No. 3. (Jul., 1995), pp. 341-350.
De Grazia, Alfred. Untitled Review, The American Political Science Review, Vol. 44, No. 
4. (Dec., 1950), pp. 1005-1006.
Deutscher, Isaac. (1957) Russia in Transition and Other Essays, New York, Coward- 
McCann.
Eaton, Henry. Marx and the Russians Journal o f the History o f Ideas, Vol. 41, No.l (Jan.- 
March 1980), pp. 89-112.
Elliot, Charles. Lenin, Rosa Luxemburg and the Dilemma of the non-Revolutionary 
Proletariat Midwest Journal o f Political Science, Vol.9, No.4 (Nov.,1965), pp. 327-338.
Enteen, George. Robert V. Danielss Interpretation of Soviet History, Russian Review, Vol. 
54, No. 3 (Jul., 1995), pp. 315-329.
Farris, Charles. Authoritarianism as a Political Behavior Variable, The Journal o f Politics, 
Vol. 18, No. 1. (Feb., 1956), pp. 61-82.
Fischer, Ruth. Background of the New Economic Policy, Russian Review, Vol. 7, No. 2 
(Spring., 1948), pp. 29-33.
Fitzpatrick, Sheila. (1994) The Russian Revolution, Oxford University Press.
_____________ . (1999) Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life in Extraordinary Times: Soviet
Russia in the 1930s, Oxford University Press.
_____________ . New Perspectives on Stalinism, Russian Review, Vol. 45, No. 4. (Oct.,
1986), pp. 357-373.
_____________ . Politics as Practice: Thoughts on a New Soviet Political History, Kritika:
Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History, Vol. 5, No. 1 (2004), pp. 27-54.
_____________ . Culture and Politics Under Stalin: A Reappraisal, Slavic Review, No. 35,
No.2 (Jun., 1976) pp. 211-231.
 . The Cultural Revolution in Russia: 1928-1932, Journal o f Contemporary
History, Vol. 9, No. 1. (Jan., 1974), pp. 33-52
_____________ . Cultural Revolution Revisited, Russian Review, Vol. 52, No. 2. (Apr.,
1999), pp.202-209.
Frankel, Jonathan. Lenins Doctrinal Revolution of April 1917, Journal o f Contemporary 
History, Vol. 4, No. 2 (Apr., 1969), pp. 117-142.
Freeman, Tom. Was Lenin a Marxist in What is to be Done? ?, Studies in Marxism, No. 10 
(2004), pp. 1-24.
Gauthier, David. (1969) The Logic o f Leviathan, Oxford University Press.
Geiger, Kent and Alex Inkeles The Family in the U.S.S.R, Marriage and Family Living, 
Vol. 16. No. 4. International Issue on the Family (Nov., 1954), pp. 397-404.
Getty, J. Arch. (1985) Origins o f the Great Purges: The Soviet Communist Party 
Reconsidered, 1933-1938, Cambridge.
___________ . State, Society, and Superstition, Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, (Oct.,
1987), pp. 391-396.
Goldman, Marshall. (1992) What Went Wrong with Perestroika, New York, W. W. Norton 
and Company.
Goldsmith, M. M. (1966) Hobbess Science o f Politics, Columbia University Press.
Gorbachev, Michael. (1990) A Road to the Future, Santa Fe, New Mexico, Ocean Tree 
Books.
Haimson, Leopold. Lenins Revolutionary Career Revisited Kritika: Explorations in 
Russian and Eurasian History Vol.5, No.l (2004), pp. 55-80.
Halfin, Igal. The Rape of the Intelligentsia: A Proletarian Foundational Myth Russian 
Review, Vol.56, No.l (Jan., 1997), pp. 90-109
Hedin, Astrid. Stalinism as Civilization: New Perspectives on Communist Regimes, 
Political Studies Review, Vol. 2, No. 2 (Apr., 2004), pp. 166-184.
Hill, R. J. (1992) (ed.,) Beyond Stalinism: Communist Political Evolution Frank Cass.
Himmer, Robert. The Transition from War Communism to the New Economic Policy: An 
Analysis of Stalins Views, Russian Review, Vol. 53, No. 4 (Oct., 1994), pp. 515-529.
Hobbes, Thomas. (1968) Leviathan, London, Penguin Books.
Hobsbawmn, Eric. (1997) On History, London, Abacus.
Hoffinan, John. (2007) A Glossary o f Political Theory, Edinburgh University Press. 
___________ . (1995) Beyond the State, Cambridge, Polity Press.
___________ . Has Marxism a Future? Leicester University Discussion Papers in Politics,
No. p91/l (Sep., 1991), pp. 1-20.
Holquist, Peter. Violent Russia, Deadly Marxism? Russia in the Epoch of Violence, 
Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History, Vol. 4, No. 3. (Summer 2003), 
pp.227-252.
Hoover, Calvin. The Fate of the New Economic Policy, The Economic Journal, Vol. 40, 
No. 158 (Jun., 1930), pp. 184-193.
Hough, Jerry F. The Dark Forces, the Totalitarian Model, and Soviet History Russian 
Review, Vol. 46, No. 4. (Oct., 1987), pp. 397-403.
___________ . The Soviet Concept of the Relationship between the Lower Party Organs
and the State Administration, Slavic Review, Vol.24. No.2. (Jun., 1965), pp.215-220
Inkeles, Alex. Social Stratification and Mobility in the Soviet Union: 1940-1950, American 
Sociological Review, Vol. 15, No. 4. (Aug., 1950), pp. 465-479.
Jauvert, Vincent. Les Demiers Secrets de Staline, Le Nouvel Observateur, No. 2177 
(July/August 2006), pp. 6-15.
Johnson, Simon and Peter Temin, the Macroeconomics of NEP, The Economic History 
Review, Vol. 46, No. 4 (Nov., 1993), pp. 750-767.
Kenez, Peter. The Prosecution of Soviet History: A Critique of Richard Pipes The Russian 
RevolutionRussian Review, Vol. 50, No.3 (Jul., 1991), pp.345-351.
___________ . The Prosecution of Soviet History, (Vol. 2), Russian Review, Vol.54, No.2
(Apr., 1995) pp. 265-269.
___________ . Stalinism as Humdrum Politics, Russian Review, Vol. 45, No. 4 (Oct.,
1986), pp. 395-400.
Kolakowski, Leszek (1978) Main Currents o f Marxism: Its Rise, Growth, and Dissolution 
(Vol. 2), Oxford, Clarendon Press.
Korey, William. The Origins and Development of Soviet Anti-Semitism: An Analysis 
Slavic Review, Vol. 31, No. 1. (Mar., 1972), pp. 111-135.
Kotkin, Stephen. (1991) Magnetic Mountain: Stalinism as Civilization, University of 
California Press, Ltd.
___________ . 1991 and the Russian Revolution: Sources, Conceptual Categories,
Analytical Frameworks, The Journal o f Modern History, Vol. 70, No. 2 (Jun., 1998), pp. 
384-425.
Kotz, D. M. and Fred Weir (1997) The Demise o f the Soviet System, London, Routledge.
Lane, David. (1992) Soviet Society under Perestroika, London, Routledge.
Lenin, V. I. and J. Stalin (1946) Marxism and Revisionism, New York, International 
Publishers.
Lenin, V.I. (1969) Selected Works, London, Lawrence and Wishart.
___________ . (1943) What is to be Done?, New York, International Publishers,
___________ . (1992 ) The State and Revolution, London, Penguin Books
___________ .(1921) Left Wing Communism: An Infantile Disorder, Detroit, Michigan,
The Marxian Educational Society.
___________ . (1937) The Letters o f Lenin (ed.), New York, Harcourt Brace and Company.
___________ . (1978) One Step Forward, Two Steps Back, Moscow, Progress Publishers.
___________ . (1982) Imperialism the Highest Stage o f Capitalism, Moscow, Progress
Publishers.
___________ . (1964) Collected Works, vol. 4, Moscow, Progress Publishers
___________ . (1964) Collected Works, Vol. 6, Moscow, Progress Publishers
___________ . (1964) Collected Works, Vol. 24, Moscow, Progress Publishers
___________ . (1977) Collected Works, Vol. 25, Moscow, Progress Publishers
 . (1974) Collected Works, Vol. 28, Moscow, Progress Publishers
___________ . (1964) Collected Works, Vol. 29, 4th English Edition, Moscow, Progress
Publishers.
 . (1965) Collected Works, Vol. 31, 4th English Edition, Moscow, Progress
Publishers
 . (1964) Collected Works, Vol. 33, Moscow, Progress Publishers
___________ . (1971) Collected Works, Vol. 42, Second English Edition, Moscow, Progress
Publishers.
Levy, Daniel. Comparing Authoritarian Regimes in Latin America: Insights from Higher 
Education Policy, Comparative Politics, Vol. 14, No. 1. (Oct., 1981), pp. 31-52.
Lewin, Moshe. (1988) The Gorbachev Phenomenon: A Historical Interpretation, London, 
Hutchinson Radius.
___________ . (1985) The Making o f the Soviet System London, Metheun & Co. Ltd.
___________ . The Immediate Background of Soviet Collectivization, Soviet Studies, Vol.
17, No. 2 (Oct., 1965), pp. 162-197.
Lih, Lars T. "How a Founding Document was Found or One Hundred Years of Lenin's What 
is to be Done?" Kritika: Explorations in Russian and Eurasian History, Vol.4, No. 1 (Winter, 
2003), pp. 5-49.
__________ . Political Testament of Lenin and Bukharin and the Meaning of Nep, Slavic
Review, Vol. 50, No. 2 (Summer., 1991), pp. 241-252.
__________ . Bolshevik Razverstka and War Communism, Slavic Review, Vol. 45, No. 4
(Winter., 1986).
Locke, John. (1976) Second Treatise o f Government, Oxford, Basil Blackwell.
Luxemburg, Rosa. (1961) The Russian Revolution and Leninism or Marxism The University 
of Michigan Press.
Malia, Martin. (1994) The Soviet Tragedy: A History o f Socialism in Russia, 1917-1991, New 
York, The Free Press.
McNeal, Robert H. "Lenin's Attack on Stalin: Review and Reappraisal," American Slavic and 
East European Review, Vol. 18, No.3 (Oct., 1959), pp. 295-314
Mann, E. Kingston. Lenin and the Challenge of Peasant Militance: From Bloody Sunday 
1905 to the Dissolution of the First Duma, Russian Review, Vol. 38, No. 4 (Oct., 1979), pp. 
434-455.
Manning, Roberta T. State and Society in Stalinist Russia, Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4. 
(Oct., 1987).
Marx, K. and F. Engels (2002) The Communist Manifesto, London, Penguin Books.
__________________. (1976) Collected Works Vol. 5, London, Lawrence and Wishart.
__________________. (1971) On Britain, Lawrence & Wishart.
Marx, K. (1970) The Civil War in France, Peking, Foreign Language Press 
 . (2000) Selected Writings, Oxford University Press
 . (1976) Critique o f the Gotha Programme, Peking, Foreign Languages Press,
 . (1964) The Class Struggles in France, New York, International Publishers.
 . (1974) The First International and After, London, Penguin Books.
Medalie, Richard J. "The Communist Theory of the State," American Slavic and East 
European Review, Vol. 18, No. 4 (Dec.,1959).
Medvedev, Roy. (1972) Let History Judge, London, Macmillan.
Merridale, Catherine. (1991) (ed.), Perestroika: The Historical Perspective, London, Edward 
Arnold.
Meyer, Alfred G. Coming to Terms with the Past...and with Ones Older Colleagues, 
Russian Review, Vol. 45, No. 4 (Oct., 1986), pp. 401-408.
Narklewicz, O. A. Stalin War Communism, and Collectivization, Soviet Studies, Vol. 18, 
No. 1 (July., 1966), pp. 20-37.
Naylor, Taylor. (1988) The Gorbachev Strategy, Lexington, Lexington Books.
Nicolaevsky, Boris I. The New Soviet Campaign Against the Peasants, Russian Review, 
Vol. 10, No. 2. (Apr., 1951), pp. 81-98.
Nove, Alec. Stalinism: Revisionism Reconsidered, Russian Review, Vol. 46, No. 4, (Oct.,
1987), pp. 412-417.
Page, Stanley. The Role of the Proletariat in March 1917: Contradictions within the official 
Bolshevik Version, Russian Review, Vol. 9, No. 2. (Apr., 1950), pp. 146-149.
Patenaude, Bertrand M. Peasants into Russians: the Utopian Essence of War Communism, 
Russian Review, Vol. 54, No. 4 (Oct., 1995), pp. 552-570.
Paz, Knei. (1978) The Social and Political Thought o f Leon Trotsky, Oxford, Clarendon Press.
Pipes, Richard. (1994) Russia Under the Bolshevik Regime 1919 1924, London, Fontana 
Press.
 . (1995) Three Whys of the Russian Revolution, London, Pimlico
___________ . (1992) The Russian Revolution 1899-1919, London, the Fontana Press.
___________ . (1996) The Unknown Lenin: From the Secret Archives. Annals of
Communism. New Haven: Yale University Press
Rabinowitch, Alexander. Richard Pipess Lenin, Russian Review, Vol. 57, No.l (Jan., 
1998), pp. 110-113.
Reichman, Henry. Reconsidering Stalinism, Theory and Society, Vol. 17, No. 1. (Jan.,
1988), pp. 67-70.
Reid, Susan E. All Stalins Women: Gender and Power in Soviet Art of the 1930s, Slavic 
Review, Vol. 57, No. 1 (Spring., 1998), pp. 133-173.
Ritterspom, Gabor T. The State Against Itself: Socialist Tensions and Political Conflict in 
the USSR 1936-1938, Telos, No. 44, (Fall., 1979), pp.87-104.
Roberts, Paul Craig. War Communism a Re-Examination, Slavic Review, Vol. 29, No. 2 
(Jun., 1970), pp. 238-261.
Sakwa, Richard. (1998) Soviet Politics in Perspective, London, Routledge.
___________ . (1990) Gorbachev and his Reforms: 1985-1990, New York, Phillip Allan.
Sandomirsky, Vera. Sex in the Soviet Union, Russian Review, Vol. 10, No. 3. (July., 1951), 
pp. 199-209.
Schapiro, Leonard. (1985) 1917: Russian Revolutions and the Origins o f Present-day 
Communism, London, Penguin Books.
Schmitt, Carl. (1996) The Leviathan in the State Theory o f Hobbes, Westport, Greenwood 
Press.
Schweizer, Peter. (1994) Victory: The Reagan Administrations Secret Strategy that Hastened 
the Collapse o f the Soviet Union, New York, The Atlantic Monthly Press.
Serge, Victor. (1972) Year One o f the Russian Revolution, London, The Penguin Press.
Shanin, T. Late Marx and the Russian Road: Marx and the Peripheries o f Capitalism, New 
York, Monthly Review Press.
Shibutani, Tamotsi, Untitled Review, The American Journal o f Sociology, Vol. 57, No. 5, 
The Sociological Study of Work. (Mar., 1952), pp. 527-529.
Shukman, Harold (2003) Redefining Stalinism (ed.,) London, Frank Cass.
Siegelbaum, Lewis. Robert V. Daniels and the Longue Duree of Soviet History, Russian 
Review, Vol. 54, No. 3 (Jul., 1995), pp. 330-340.
Skilling, Gordon. Interest Groups and Communist Politics, World Politics, Vol. 18, No. 3 
(Apr., 1966), pp. 435-451.
Sommerville, Johann P. (1992) Thomas Hobbes: Political Ideas in Historical Context, 
London, Macmillan.
Stalin, Joseph. (1937) Mastering Bolshevism, New York, Workers Library Publishers.
___________ . (1976) Problems o f Leninism, Peking, Foreign Languages Press.
Stein, Jay W. The Soviet Intelligentsia, Russian Review, Vol. 10, No. 4. (Oct., 1951).
Stewart, Don and Thomas Hoult, A Social-Psychological Theory of the Authoritarian 
Personality, The American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 65, No. 3. (Nov., 1959), pp. 274-279.
Suny, R. Grigor. Revision and Retreat in the Historiography of 1917: Social History and its 
Critics, Russian Review, Vol.53, No.2 (Apr., 1994), pp. 165-182.
____________ . Toward a Social History of the October Revolution, The American
Historical Review, Vol.88, No 1 (Feb., 1983), pp. 31-52.
Trotsky, Leon. (1904) Our Political Tasks, London, New park
___________ . (1968) Stalin: An Appraisal o f the Man and his Influence, London,
MacGibbon and Key.
___________ . (1962) Permanent Revolution and Results and Prospects, London, New Park
___________ . "What is Proletarian Culture and is it Possible?" Philosophy/ History Internet
Archive (Feb., 2001).
Tucker, Robert C. (1971) The Soviet Political Mind, New York, Norton & Co
____________ . (1977) (ed.) Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation, New York.
____________ . The Rise of Stalins Personality Cult, The American Historical Review,
Vol. 84, No. 2 (Apr., 1979), pp. 347-366.
____________ . The Question of Totalitarianism, Slavic Review, Vol. 20, No. 3, (Oct.,
1961), pp. 377-382.
Tumarkin, Nina. Religion, Bolshevism, and the Origins of the Lenin Cult, Russian Review, 
Vol. 40, No. 1 (Jan., 1981), pp. 35-46.
Ulam, Adam B. (1960) The Unfinished Revolution: An Essay on the Sources o f Influence o f 
Marxism and Communism. New York, Random House.
Vialatoux, Joseph. (1952) La Cite de Hobbes, Lyon, IMP. M. Audin.
Viola, Lynne. (1987) The Best Sons o f the Fatherland: Workers in the Vanguard o f Soviet 
Collectivization, Oxford University Press.
Volkogonov, Dimitri. (1991) Stalin: Triumph and Tragedy, London, Weidenfeld and 
Nicolson.
Walicki, Andrzej. Alexander Bogdanov and the Problem of the Socialist Intelligentsia 
Russian Review, Vol. 49, No. 3 (July., 1990), pp. 293-304.
Ward, Chris. (1999) Stalins Russia Arnold Publishers.
Warth, Robert D. On the Historiography of the Russian Revolution, Slavic Review, Vol. 26, 
No. 2. (Jun., 1967), pp. 247-264.
Wesson, Robert G. The USSR: Oligarchy or Dictatorship? Slavic Review, Vol. 31, No. 2. 
(Jun., 1972), pp. 314-322.
Wheeler, Harvey. Problems of Stalinism, The Western Political Quarterly, Vol. 10, No. 3. 
(Sep., 1957).
White, Stephen. (1993) After Gorbachev, Cambridge University Press.
