00001t.tif
Integrated Scale Down Of The Primary 
Downstream Purification Process And 
Assessment Of Alternative Process 
Options For The Production Of An Ovine 
Polyclonal Antibody Based Anti-Venom
A thesis submitted to the University of London 
for the degree of Doctor of Engineering
Gregory Edward Neal
DEPARTMENT OF BIOCHEMICAL ENGINEERING
UNIVERSITY COLLEGE LONDON
TORRINGTON PLACE
LONDON
W C1E7JE
UMI Number: U592174
All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS 
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript 
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.
Dissertation Publishing
UMI U592174
Published by ProQuest LLC 2013. Copyright in the Dissertation held by the Author.
Microform Edition  ProQuest LLC.
All rights reserved. This work is protected against 
unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
ProQuest LLC 
789 East Eisenhower Parkway 
P.O. Box 1346 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346
Abstract
This thesis describes the development o f a linked 1000th scale mimic o f four 
distinct unit operations, including precipitation and centrifugation. These 
operations are utilised during the production o f an anti-snake venom Fab 
fragment. A new approach has been used to define the important engineering 
parameters that impacted on the recovery process; the effect of these was verified 
by experimental work. The mimic requires only millilitre quantities o f material to 
predict changes in the physical and biological properties o f key components, such 
as particle size and antibody activity. The potential impact o f several process 
changes on the characteristics o f the feed stream and on purification steps further 
downstream has been assessed, which is not possible without a linked system.
Microfiltration has been examined as a possible alternative to the current 
centrifugal method o f recovering the antibody particles. A small-scale stirred cell 
device was used to carry out a number o f operations in a single piece of 
equipment; these included separation, concentration and buffer exchange. An 
overall increase in the yield o f 10% was observed. This was attributed to the 
ability o f microfiltration to reduce material losses by integrating a number o f 
operations.
A preliminary investigation has been conducted into the possibility o f utilising 
Protein G affinity chromatography in place o f the current four-step precipitation 
and centrifugation recovery operation. A mathematical model capable o f 
predicting the size and shape o f the breakthrough curves has been developed; the 
predicted curves were tested by comparison with breakthrough curves produced 
under different experimental conditions. The initial results demonstrated the 
feasibility of utilising affinity chromatography as a one step recovery process. 
However the predicted breakthrough curves varied from the experimental curves 
suggesting that the mathematical model requires refinement.
Acknowledgements
Over the past four years numerous people have contributed both emotionally and 
intellectually to the development o f this thesis. I would especially like to thank 
the following people. In no particular order: Protherics PLC for making this 
project possible especially; Keiran O Donovan, Tony Newcombe, Aline Denton, 
Garnet Lewis and Richard Francis for always answering my questions, supplying 
me with material and making me feel welcome when I visited.
I would also like to thank Eli Keshavarz-Moore and Parviz Shamlou for their 
guidance, help and unswerving belief in my capabilities when my own belief 
failed.
Finally but by no means last special thanks go to Victoria Smalley for always 
supporting me and putting up with my despondent phases when I thought I would 
never finish and my Mum and Dad who provided a haven down in Somerset for 
when the big smoke got too much.
As an adolescent I aspired to lasting fame, I craved factual certainty, and I 
thirsted for a meaningful vision o f human life - so I became a scientist. This is 
like becoming an archbishop so you can meet girls.
M. Cartmill
Contents
2.2.1.1 Industrial scale vessel parameters and operating conditions
3 An Ultra Scale Down Approach For The Predication O f Full Scale 
Recovery O f Ovine Polyclonal Immunoglobulins Used In The Manufacture 
4 The Use O f Ultra Scale Down Mimics To Predict The Effect O f Changes 
To The Operating Conditions On The Characteristics O f The Antibody Floes
5 Separation O f IgG Precipitate  From  C ontam inating Proteins Using 
5.3.3 Batch and continuous separation o f precipitated IgG by
6 Purification O f Ovine Polyclonal Antibodies By Protein G Affinity
9 The Impact O f Ultra Scale Down Mimics On The Management O f 
Purification Process Development And The Regulatory Issues Arising From 
9.2 Ultra Scale Sown As The Theoretical Solution To The Process
9.4 Regulatory Issues Arising From The Use O f Ultra Scale Down Mimics
List of Figures
Figure 1.1 Process flow sheet for the purification of polyclonal Fab fragments
Figure 1.3 Stylised representation o f the sub-unit structure o f an IgG antibody..29 
Figure 1.4 Schematic representation o f Ion Exchange chromatography (adapted
Figure 1.6 Effect o f aging on the strength o f particles (Bell and Dunnill 1982) .39
Figure 1.11 Guide to suitable centrifuge design with respect to feed solids
Figure 1.12 Diagrammatic representation o f Dead end filtration (A) and
Figure 1.13 Diagrammatic representation o f the stirred cell filtration device 53
Figure 1.18 Diagrammatic representation o f a disc stack centrifuge showing 
different regions blanked out. a) Top position b) Bottom position c) On top
Figure 3.1a & b Process flow sheet detailing the initial stages of the process scale 
purification process, the ultra scale down mimic o f the process and the
Figure 3.2 Comparison o f the particle size distribution produced during the
precipitation o f antibodies with sodium sulphate on an industrial scale,   and
by a 1000 fold scale down model, A with the same time integrated shear
Figure 3.2 Comparison o f the precipitated antibodies particle size distribution 
before, A after,   1st industrial scale disc stack centrifugation and after 2nd 
industrial scale disc stack centrifugation   (+/-5% at d0.9)(sample points 2,4
Figure 3.3 Comparison o f the precipitated antibodies particle size distribution 
before, A after,   1st industrial scale disc stack centrifugation and after 2nd
industrial scale disc stack centrifugation   (sample points 2,4 & 6 fig 3.1a)
Figure3.4a SDS-page reducing gel showing the contaminants o f each feed stream
at the industrial scale, lane one contains Serum, three contains 1st 
supernatant, four contains 1st solid, five contains 2nd supernatant and six
Figure 3.4b SDS-page reducing gel showing the contaminants o f each feed 
stream at the laboratory scale, lane one contains Serum, three contains 1st 
supernatant, four contains 1st solid, five contains 2nd supernatant and six
Figure 3.5 CFD simulations o f flow and associated hydrodynamic parameters in 
Figure 3.6 Comparison o f the precipitated antibodies particle size distribution 
before,   and after,   (sample points 2 & 6 fig 3.1b) centrifugation in a 
swing out bucket centrifuge at the same flow rate/sigma as the industrial disc 
stack centrifuge (no shear). After shearing with an air liquid interface 
followed by centrifugation in a swing out bucket centrifuge, X (sample point 
4 fig 3.1b). After shearing twice with an air liquid interface followed by 
centrifugation twice in a swing out bucket centrifuge, A (sample point 6 fig 
3.1b) and after industrial disc stack centrifugation,   (sample point 6 fig
Figure 3.7a Mass balance for industrial scale purification process showing the 
levels o f total protein, the main contaminant and the product (sample 
Figure 3.7b Mass balance for the ultra scale down purification process showing 
the levels o f total protein, the main contaminant and the product (sample
Figure 3.8a Mass balance showing a the quantities o f total protein (%), albumin
Figure 3.8b Mass balance showing the quantities o f total protein (%), albumin
Figure 4.1 Comparison o f the particle size distribution o f the antibody particles 
produced with liquid sodium sulphate   and with solid sodium sulphate 
Figure 4.2 Particle size (d0.9) o f the antibody particles produced during
precipitation with solid sodium sulphate after being subjected to differing 
maximum energy dissipations in the rotating disc device for one minute... 131 
Figure 4.3 Comparison o f the particle size distribution o f the antibody particles 
produced using liquid sodium sulphate () and solid sodium sulphate with an
Figure 4.4 Particle size (d0.9) o f the antibody particles produced during
precipitation with solid sodium sulphate with altered mixing conditions after
Figure 4.5 Comparison o f the particle size distribution o f the precipitated
Figure 4.6 Comparison o f the particle size distribution o f the increased
temperature antibody particles before,   and after,  shearing with an air 
liquid interface followed by centrifugation in a swing out bucket centrifuge at
Figure 4.7 Percentage o f active antibody present in the solid () and liquid ()
Figure 4.8 Concentration o f albumin found in the solid () and liquid ( A)  phases
Figure 4.9 Total protein concentration in the solid () and liquid () phases at 
Figure 5.1 Process flow sheet detailing the initial serum purification at an
industrial scale (A) and the proposed purification scheme utilising filtration
Figure 5.2 Total protein, albumin and antibody levels in each fraction produced 
during the batch filtration o f 100ml o f precipitated antibody washed by the
Figure 5.3 Total protein, Albumin and antibody levels in each fraction produced 
during the batch filtration o f 100ml o f precipitated antibody washed by the
Figure 5.4 Total protein, Albumin and antibody levels in each fraction produced 
during the batch filtration o f 75ml o f precipitated antibody washed by the
Figure 5.5 Total protein, Albumin and antibody levels in each fraction produced 
during the batch filtration o f 75ml o f precipitated antibody washed by the
Figure 5.6 Overall antibody and percentage albumin remaining in the final
Figure 5.7 Particle size distribution produced during the precipitation o f 
antibodies with sodium sulphate by a 1000 fold scale-down mimic 
equipment, operating at equal same time-integrated shear stress as the 
industrial scale (standard deviation +/-3pm at d0.9 n=5)(sample point 2,
Figure 5.8A Comparison o f flux rates measured at 0.5bar and different shear.. 167
Figure 5.8B Comparison o f flux rates measured at 1 .Obar and different shear rates
Figure 5.8C Comparison o f flux rates measured at 1.5bar and different shear rates
Figure 5.9A Experimental flux data plotted in terms o f fouling model equations
(5.1) and (5.2). Data refer to experiments carried out under constant volume 
Figure 5.9B Experimental flux data plotted in terms o f fouling model equations
(5.1) and (5.2). Data refer to experiments carried out under constant volume 
Figure 5.9C Experimental flux data plotted in terms of fouling model equations
(5.1) and (5.2). Data refer to experiments carried out under constant volume 
Figure 5.10 Sensitivity analysis o f the area o f membrane required to process
Figure 5.11A SDS denaturing page gels showing a comparison o f the protein 
content o f each intermediate purification stage during the diafiltration
Figure 5.11B SDS denaturing page gels showing a comparison o f the protein 
content o f each intermediate purification stage during the dead end filtration
Figure 5.11C SDS denaturing page gels showing a comparison o f the protein 
content o f each intermediate purification stage during the industrial
Figure 5.12A Mass balance for the diafiltration process, showing the levels o f 
total protein (%), the main contaminant albumin (%) and the product
Figure 5.12B Mass balance for the batch filtration process, showing the levels o f 
total protein (%), the main contaminant albumin (%) and the product
Figure 5.12C Mass balance for industrial centrifugation process, showing the 
levels o f total protein (%), the main contaminant albumin (%) and the
Figure 6.1 Process flow sheet for the purification o f polyclonal Fab fragments
Figure 6.2 Process flow sheet for modified chromatographic separation process
Figure 6.3 Purification o f ovine polyclonal antibodies from serum (run number 1) 
Figure 6.4 Purification o f ovine polyclonal antibodies from serum (run number
Figure 6.5 SDS page non reducing gel showing the protein content o f the various 
fractions produced during the chromatographic separation of antibodies from
Figure 6.6 Langmuir isotherms showing predicted IgG concentrations (solid line) 
the predicted Albumin concentrations (dashed line) the measured 
concentrations o f IgG( A ) and the measured albumin concentrations () 
present in the solute fraction and bound to the matrix at different initial
Figure 6.7 Scatchard plot o f IgG adsorption data, the solid line is the fitted curve 
using the Langmuir equation the () represent the IgG experimental da ta . 198 
Figure 6.8 Scatchard plot o f albumin adsorption data, the solid line is the fitted 
curve using the Langmuir equation the () represent the albumin
Figure 6.9 Concentration o f Albumin () and IgG (A)  remaining in the mobile 
phase at different times after the addition o f the protein solution to the
Figure 6.10 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (2.5cm high column, 0.7cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration,
Figure 6.11 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (2.5cm high column, 0.7cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration,
Figure 6.12 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (2.5cm high column, 0.7cm diameter, 15mg/ml feed concentration,
Figure 6.13 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (2.5cm high column, 0.7cm diameter, 15mg/ml feed concentration,
Figure 6.14 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (5cm high column, 1cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration, 
Figure 6.15 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (5cm high column, 1cm diameter, 15mg/ml feed concentration,
Figure 6.16 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (10cm high column, 1cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration,
Figure 6.17 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (10cm high column, 1cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration,
Figure 6.18 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (15cm high column, 0.8cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration,
Figure 6.19 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (15cm high column, 0.8cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration,
Figure 8.1 Customer Benefits and USD Revenue Model for an average drug223 
Figure 8.2 Customer Benefits and USD Revenue Model for a Blockbuster drug
Figure 9.4 Proposed drug development cycle using ultra scale down technology
Figure 9.5 Process development scheme utilising ultra scale down technology 232
List o f Tables
Table 1.2 Summary o f different antibody subtype binding patterns to protein G
Table 2.2 Operating parameters for the industrial scale precipitation reaction ...82
Table 2.3 Dimensions of the 1000 fold scaled down precipitation vessel 83
Table 2.4 Operating parameters o f the scaled down precipitation reaction 85
Table 2.5 Dimensions and operating conditions o f the industrial scale disc stack
Table 2.6 Dimensions and operating parameters o f the in-house shear device and
Table 2.7 Chromatography bed dimensions for breakthrough curve experiments
Table 2.8 Feed concentrations and flow rates used during the breakthrough curve
Table 3.1 Comparison o f the precipitated antibodies (sample number two in 
figure 3.1a & b) physical properties produced on an industrial scale and by
Table 4.1 Rotational speed and associated maximum energy dissipation o f the
Table 4.2 Physical properties o f the antibody particles produced with liquid
sodium sulphate and solid sodium sulphate under the same mixing conditions
Table 4.3 Physical characteristics o f the precipitated antibody particles produced 
with liquid sodium sulphate and with solid sodium sulphate at an increased
Table 4.4 Comparison of the antibody particles characteristics and sedimentation
Table 6.1 Mass balance for protein G affinity chromatography runs 1,5, 10, 15, 
Table 6.2 Antibody yields for protein G affinity chromatography runs 1,5, 10,
Table 6 3  Experimentally determined values o f Kd, Ki and qm for the interaction
Table 6.4 Summary o f the different conditions utilised during the breakthrough
Table 9.1 Comparison o f initial and commercial production processes (Pisano, 
Nomenclature
co = angular velocity = 27m (rps)
0 = half disc angle (rad)
Z = Sigma (m2)
|i = viscosity (mPa.s)
0  = volume o f matrix (cm3)
$ = Power input per unit volume o f suspension (WKg"1)
AP = pressure (bar)
APtm or TMP = transmembrane pressure (bar)
<|>v =  volume fraction o f particles =  n d No / 6 (-)
Ap  = density difference between the particle and the suspending fluid (gem'3)
A = filter area (m ) 
b = channel height (m)
B = Solubility constant (-)
C = particle concentration (Kg.m'3)
Co = initial protein concentration (mg/ml)
Ca = Camp number (-)
Cb = bulk concentration o f cells in the feed stream (Kg.m' )
Cm = concentration o f solute in the mobile phase (mg/ml)
Cs = concentration o f adsorbed solute at equilibrium (mg/ml)
Cw = wall concentration o f cells (Kg.m*3)
y  i
D = diffusion coefficient (cm s ' )
D = impeller diameter (m) 
d = particle diameter (m) 
ds = particle diameter (m)
Ef = evt = time integrated shear stress (Nm' )
Fo = initial flux (L.m ^.hr'1)
F i = correction factor applied to account for the presence o f the spacer chalks (-)
g = gravitational acceleration (m .s ')
G = mean velocity gradient (-)
1 = ionic strength o f solution (mols)
J = flux (L.m"2.hr"1)
K = mass transfer coefficient (Kg.m^.s*1)
K| = forward rate constant (m3/Kg/hr)
K.| = reverse reaction rate constant (m3/Kg/hr)
K2 = backward rate constant (m3/K g/h r')
Ka = association constant (Kg/m3)
Kb = Boltzman constant (J .K 1)
Kp = disassociation constant (Kg/m3) 
kp = proportionality constant (-)
L = channel length (m) 
n = impeller speed (rps)
No = particle number concentration (-)
Ncrit= rotational speed (rps)
Nr(j = rotational speed o f laboratory rotating disc device (rps) 
p  = density o f the bulk suspension (Kgm*3)
P = power input (W)
Po = power number (-)
Pi = feed inlet pressure (bar)
P2 = retentate outlet pressure (bar)
P3 = permeate outlet pressure (bar)
P/ = liquid density (g e m ')
Pp = particle density (gem'3)
Q = volumetric flowrate (m s ' )
qm = maximum monolayer capacity o f the matrix (mg/ml) 
r = distance from the axis o f rotation (m)
Ro = outer disc radius (m)
Ri = inner disc radius (m)
Rc = cake resistance (m.Kg*1)
rcrit = critical radius o f the structure (m)
re = equivalent min and max radius (m)
Rmax ^maximum radius (m)
R mjn = minimum radius (m)
rp = radius o f the diffusing particle (m)
Rt = sum of the membrane resistance (m .Kg'1)
Rt = total hydrodynamic resistance defined for a given membrane and a pure 
solvent (water) (m .K g1)
5  = solubility (-)
Se = equivalent settling distance (m)
T = absolute temperature (K) 
t = time (s)
T = torque (Nm)
V = volume (m3)
Vcrit = tip-velocity (m .s'1)
Vf = volume o f filtrate required to double the resistance to flow compared to the 
filter alone (L)
Vg = Stokes settling velocity (m .s1)
Vmax = maximum volume filtered (L/m )
Vt = volume filtered (L)
w = channel width (m)
z = number o f discs in the stack (-)
a  = effectiveness factor o f collisions in forming aggregates (-)
Abbreviations
dio / dO.l = particle size o f 10% and less o f the total volume o f particles 
dso / d0.5 = particle size o f 50% and less o f the total volume o f particles 
d% / d0.9 = particle size o f 90% and less o f the total volume o f particles
1 Introduction
1.1 Background O f Protherics
The estimated annual number o f world-wide deaths from snakebites are around 
100,000 (Smith, 2001). In the USA alone roughly 8000 people are bitten each 
year. The incidence o f snakebites is rising as more and more people come into 
contact with snakes, hence there is an increasing need for an effective anti-venom 
(Chippaux, 1998).
Snake venom is composed o f a complex mixture o f proteins; these are injected 
into a victim when bitten. The venoms poisonous action depends on its exact 
composition:
  Some destroy red blood cells and prevent clotting
  Some effect the nervous system and interfere with movement
  Others are destructive to the tissue around the bite
DNA immunisation targeting specific venom toxin molecules has the potential to 
treat large groups o f the population in the affected areas of the world. However, 
the technique is in its infancy (Harrison, 2000) and it will be many years before a 
product becomes available on the market. As such, a snakebite victim is currently 
treated through the use o f antibodies developed against the venom, extracted from 
animal serum and purified for human use. Traditionally anti-venom has been 
produced by immunising animals, such as horses with a cocktail o f venoms from 
across the board. Serum would be harvested from the animal and injected into the 
patient. Due to the foreign nature o f the anti-venom antibodies produced in this 
fashion allergic reactions by the patients are commonplace and could be fatal.
Protherics PLC (Wales, UK) has developed a new rattlesnake venom specific Fab 
fragment that is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. It is expected
to open up a market worth an estimated $35 million a year. Since the action o f the 
anti-venom is determined entirely by the Fab region, the Fc region of the antibody 
is removed during the purification process. This results in a significant reduction 
in allergic responses due to the Fc fragment being highly glycoslylated. Without 
the Fc region the patients immune system cannot readily identify the Fab 
fragment as being foreign in nature. Further reductions in the allergic reaction 
are due to the highly purified nature o f the anti-venom. In addition a Fab 
fragment, when compared to a whole antibody, can more quickly leave the blood 
stream; has faster diffusion rates into the affected tissues and the small Fab-venom 
complex can be more rapidly cleared from the body. This results in an anti
venom, that is more effective.
There are thirty-two species o f rattlesnake and sixty five to seventy subspecies. In 
order for the anti-venom to be effective one single treatment for all types o f 
rattlesnake is required. Investigation into the different rattlesnake venoms 
identified similarities in their composition. Four species o f snake were identified 
the venom from which when used to develop antibodies that are blended together, 
would give protection against all species. These were:
  Agkistrodon piscvorous (Western cottonmouth)
  Crotalus atrox (Western diamondback)
  Crotalus adamanteus (Eastern diamondback)
  Crotalus scutulatus (Mojave rattlesnake)
The antibody fragments, administered via intravenous injection, work by binding 
to and thereby neutralising the venom toxins; facilitating their redistribution away 
from the target tissues and their elimination from the body.
The very first stage in the production o f the anti-venom requires separate groups 
o f sheep to be immunised with each different type o f venom. The polyclonal 
antibody Fab fragments against each type o f venom are then isolated from the 
serum. The four products are then blended in equal quantities to produce one anti
venom effective against all North American rattlesnake venoms.
The sheep (kept in Australia) are immunised on a monthly schedule using venom 
collected in Arizona USA, which has been processed into sheep dose vials then 
freeze-dried in Wales, UK. The venom is mixed with Freunds adjuvant (a 
solution of oils which increases the immune response) and injected into the sheep. 
Each sheep is bled once a month with each bleed producing 750-800mls o f blood. 
The blood is clotted and centrifuged which leaves roughly 400mls o f serum. This 
process takes twenty minutes after which the serum is pooled, dead end filtered, 
frozen and sent to Wales (UK) for purification.
1.2 Industrial Scale Purification O f Fab Fragments From Ovine
Serum
The entire industrial scale downstream purification process is shown in figure 1.1.
Equal volume 
18% (W/V) 
sodium sulphate100L 36% (W/V) sodium 
sulphate Albumin to waste Papain & EDTA
Waste
Serum
D epth Fitter
Precipitation Vessel Disk-S tack  Centrifuge Re-suspension Vessel Disk-S tack  Centrifuge Digestion vessel
10mM Glycine- 
HCL pH 2.5
Low salt phosphate 
buffer
High salt phosphate 
buffer
lOOmM phosphate 
buffer pH 7.5
Filling and 
formulation
D epth Filter
Ion Exchange Affinity Chromatography
Fc fragments 
(waste)
Waste Waste
Figure 1.1 Process flow sheet for the purification of polyclonal Fab fragments 
from ovine serum
The following section describes the purpose of the purification steps; the initial 
step, which is not described in detail, is the 0.2pm depth filtration of the thawed 
serum which removes cyro-precipitates.
1.2.1 Precipitation
Precipitation is a fast way o f concentrating proteins from solution. Under normal 
conditions proteins are associated with various levels o f bound water. These form 
a hydration shell around the molecule. The addition o f highly charged ions (e.g. 
sulphate) to a protein solution has several effects:
1. At low concentrations the solubility o f the protein usually increases slightly. 
This effect is called salting in and is explained by the Debye-Huckel theory. 
This states that at low concentrations the protein becomes surrounded by the 
salt counter ions. This screening results in a decrease in the electrostatic free 
energy o f the protein and an increase in the activity o f the solvent, which in 
turn leads to an increase in solubility (Debye and Huckel, 1923).
2. At high concentrations the attractive forces between hydrophobic areas 
increase due to greater induced dipoles. Also, the salt ions disrupt the 
hydrogen bonds between the protein and water, these effects result in the 
precipitation o f proteins from the solution. The particulars o f precipitate 
formation and growth kinetics are detailed in section 1.3.1.
Protherics PLC use precipitation to salt out the immunoglobulins from the serum. 
Precipitation is a good first step choice because it reduces the volume o f feed 
material and provides an acceptable level o f initial purification. An equal volume 
o f 36%(w/v) liquid sodium sulphate solution is added to the serum, resulting in a 
final concentration o f 18%(w/v) sodium sulphate. This solution is left stirring 
overnight. Sodium sulphate is used in preference o f ammonium sulphate because 
ammonium sulphate is corrosive and toxic. The immunoglobulins are precipitated 
out as a white paste whilst the majority o f the albumin, the main contaminant at 
this stage, remains in solution.
Post precipitation disc stack centrifugation is used to separate the two phases. The 
serum/sodium sulphate solution is pumped into the centrifuge which is spinning at 
7500rpm at a flow rate o f 120 to 130L/hr. The supernatant flows out via the waste 
pipe (albumin fraction). The precipitate is desludged at regular intervals along 
with a hood flush o f 18% (w/v) sodium sulphate. Following the completion o f the
batch, the precipitated IgG is resuspended in 18% (w/v) sodium sulphate and 
centrifuged again in order to further reduce the levels of albumin contamination.
1.2.2 Centrifugation
Centrifugal separation is a sedimentation operation accelerated by centrifugal 
force. As such, a prerequisite for separation is a density difference between 
phases. This technique can be used to separate two liquid phases or a solid/liquid 
mixture. Protherics PLC utilise a continuous flow disc stack centrifuge (Westfalia 
separator serial number SAM R3036, type SAM, bowl volume 6.9L with a max 
speed of 7500rpm, 6288g) to separate the precipitated antibodies from the proteins 
remaining in solution.
Precipitate s o lu tio n :::
C entripetal Pump
C entripetal Pump 
/  Chamber
Flow through  
Disc Stack
Sliding Piston
D ischarge to collection  
vessel Solids 
collection  areaT
D is cs
Figure 1.2 A disc stack centrifuge
The precipitate solution is pumped into the centrifuge (feed flow rate is between 
120-130L/hour) where it collects in the feed chamber at the bottom of the stack. 
During normal operation the stack is spinning at 7500rpm this causes the solid 
precipitate to be thrown outwards and collect on the underside of the discs. It then 
slides down into the collection chamber, which is located by the discharge ports. 
The liquid part containing the unwanted proteins flows out the top of the machine 
to waste. At a time interval, set by the percentage solids content of the feed 
stream, pressurised water is used to open the sliding bowl resulting in the 
collected solid being ejected into a clean vessel. If the interval is too long a 
situation called breakthrough arises whereby the solid collection area becomes full 
and the solids begin to go out via waste.
1.2.3 Digestion
Following centrifugation the partially purified antibodies, consisting mainly of the 
IgG sub type, are digested by the addition of papain. Antibodies are Y shaped 
proteins composed of two heavy chains and two light chains joined by disulphide 
linkages. Digestion with papain cleaves the antibody into two regions: the Fc 
region and the Fab region. The Fc region is so called because it is readily 
crystallisable. The Fab region is so called because it contains the antibody 
binding site.
Figure 1.3 Stylised representation of the sub-unit structure of an IgG antibody
Light chain
Effector
domains Heavy chain
Antigen binding 
domains
r  Fab region
V Fc region
The Fc region mediates some aspects o f the immune response, but differences in 
the glycosylation pattern between species mean that foreign antibodies are easily 
recognised by a patients immune system as being foreign in origin. For this 
reason when antibodies from one species are injected into another an allergic 
reaction is often observed. This is caused by the patients immune system 
attacking the antibodies. The functions o f the Fc region are not, however, 
required by the anti venom. The binding o f the Fab fragment to the venom is 
enough to neutralise it.
Protherics PLC utilise the unique action o f the enzyme papain to cleave the heavy 
chain on the COOH* terminal side o f the disulphide bond that links the heavy and 
light chains. This results in the formation o f two Fab fragments and one Fc 
fragment. The Fc fragment can then be purified out further downstream resulting 
in a product which has been modified sufficiently to reduce recognition by the 
patients immune system. This dramatically reduces the risk o f harmful side 
effects.
A solution o f papain, cysteine and EDTA is added to the product o f the 
centrifugation stage. This solution is then left in a stirring vessel overnight at 
37C. The following morning a sample is taken to the quality control laboratories 
where Fast Protein Liquid Chromatography (FPLC) is used to determine if  the 
digestion is complete. FPLC works by measuring the absorbance o f the proteins 
contained in a solution. The proteins are separated according to their molecular 
weight (IgG = 150-180000 kDa, Albumin = 67000 kDa, Fab = 45-50000 kDa). 
Fab and Fc fragments appear as one peak (Fc rides on the shoulder o f the Fab 
peak), whilst IgG forms another peak. The solution has to contain less than 1% 
IgG. If this is the case, the reaction is stopped by the addition of iodoacetamide. 
Iodoacetamide works by binding irreversibly to cysteine and other side chains 
neutralising the papain.
Filtration is used to remove the majority o f the insoluble or crystallised Fc 
fragments. However the product solution now also contains a large concentration 
o f other chemicals such as EDTA and soluble Fc fragments. Ultrafiltration is
used to remove these chemicals, concentrate the product and change the buffer to 
one compatible with the next purification stages. This is achieved by passing the 
solution across a filter with pores that are small enough to block the passage of 
Fab fragments but large enough to allow other contaminants to pass to waste. At 
this stage the product is known as total Fab and is eighty percent pure. It can be 
stored for up to eight weeks before final processing.
1.2.4 Ion Exchange
Ion exchange chromatography is used to separate the Fc fragments and other 
blood proteins from the Fab fragments. Separation on an ion exchange column 
depends upon the reversible binding o f charged molecules to immobilised ion 
exchange groups o f an opposite charge. There are two types o f ion exchange 
column: cationic exchangers and anionic exchangers. Cationic exchangers bind 
molecules with a net positive charge, whilst anionic exchangers bind molecules 
with a net negative charge.
The pH/ionic strength o f the solution a protein is dissolved in effects its binding 
affinity. By altering the pH or ionic strength o f the solution, proteins can be given 
either a net positive or a net negative charge. Different proteins have different 
charges at different pH/ionic strength. This phenomenon can be used to separate 
one protein from a solution containing many.
Positively charged 
protein binds to the 
negatively charged 
Negatively 
charged protein 
flows through
Cellulose
Agarose
CH, CH,
Diethylaminoethyt (DEAE)group (protonated form) 
OCellulose
Agarose
Caiboxymethyl (CM) group (Ionised form)
Figure 1.4 Schematic representation of Ion Exchange chromatography (adapted 
from the Ion Exchange chromatography handbook, Pharmacia)
As the column has a finite capacity (column dimension 30cm diameter, 19-20cm 
bed height), the total Fab produced to date must be divided up and loaded batch 
wise. As the solution is passed over the matrix the unwanted proteins, such as the 
Fc fragments and albumin, bind reversibly whilst the Fab fragments go straight 
through and are collected. The portion which remains bound to the column is then 
removed by washing with lOmM phosphate, 1M NaCl. The column is then 
cleaned and sanitised by application of 1M sodium hydroxide. Before the next 
batch can be processed the column must be re-equilibrated by the addition of 
lOmM phosphate buffer. This ensures that the matrix and the solution the Fab is 
contained in are compatible.
1.2.5 Affinity Chrom atography
The final purification step is the separation of the component specific antibodies 
from the other unspecific antibodies. Protherics PLC utilise affinity 
chromatography to achieve this.
This technique allows the purification of almost any bio-molecule on the basis of 
its biological function or individual chemical structure. It is a type of adsorption 
chromatography in which the molecule of interest is specifically and reversibly 
adsorbed by a complementary binding substance (ligand) immobilised on an 
insoluble support (matrix).
Proteins 
recognising the 
affinity ligand 
Proteins 
which do not 
recognise the 
ligand pass 
through
Bead with affinity ligand bound 
iiTeversibly to surface
Figure 1.5 Schematic representation o f affinity chromatography
Successful separation requires a bio-specific ligand that can be covalently 
attached to a chromatographic bed material, the matrix.
Protherics PLC utilise the snake venom specific for the anti-venom as the ligand. 
This is bound irreversibly to the matrix (Controlled pore glass, Millipore, Watford 
UK). Thus, as each component recognises a different type of venom, each 
component of the anti-venom requires its own column (Column dimensions 30cm 
diameter, 28.5 to 32cm bed height). This means that there are four columns in 
total. Once again the column has a finite capacity so the product is split into equal
volumes and each is loaded separately batch wise. Separation proceeds as 
follows:
  The column is equilibrated with lOOmM Phosphate buffer pH 7.5 at a flow 
rate o f 141 cm/hr.
  The ion exchange purified Fab is added at a flow rate o f 30cm/hr. Antibodies 
specific for the particular snake venom bind whilst everything else passes to 
waste.
  The column is washed with 0.9% (w/v) NaCl at a flow rate o f 141 cm/hr to 
ensure that all the unbound proteins are washed away.
 The specific Fab molecules are eluted from the column by the addition of 
lOOmM glycine-HCl pH 2.5 at a flow rate o f 141 cm/hr. The product is held in 
this solution for a minimum of two hours as this has been shown to inactivate 
certain groups o f viruses (Omar, 1996).
This process is repeated for each batch. When the columns are not in use they are 
stored in a refrigerated area within a bacteriocidal solution. The final stage is the 
blending and formulation o f the final product.
1.2.6 Blending and Formulation
With the downstream processing complete, the final step is the blending and 
formulation o f the individual components into a solution suitable for freeze- 
drying. This solution is then concentrated so that each vial contains a consistent 
potency o f product.
  The four anti-venom components are equally blended together forming a pure 
product, which contains between lg/L to 3g/L.
  Ultrafiltration concentrates the product to 12g/L and exchanges the buffer to 
sodium acetate, which is compatible with the next stage.
 The product is passed through a 15nm viral filter. This has been shown to be 
an effective viral removal step (OGrady, 1996). This gives Protherics PLC 
two validated steps for virus removal.
 Ultrafiltration exchanges the buffer for low salt phosphate, which is suitable 
for freeze-drying. This causes some o f the Fab to precipitate out these are 
removed by depth filtration.
  Final ultrafiltration concentrates the product to 70g/L.
  Contractors are used to freeze dry the product and place it in to vials. One vial
holds a maximum of 14mls. The bulk formulated solution is tested by
external contractor for its potency to neutralise the venoms activity. The vial
fill volume is calculated such that vials from batch to batch always contain 
sufficient neutralising potency to meet the final product specification.
1.2.7 Conclusion
Anti-venom prepared by this method is not cheap; full treatment normally costs 
$10000. From a process engineering perspective, there is now very intense 
pressure on companies to establish techniques that can rapidly assess new process 
options to produce a potential new drug candidate in sufficient quantities for its 
perceived demand. This pressure is compounded further by the fact that such 
process information is needed often early in the life cycle o f the new drug 
candidate. Unfortunately this is when pilot plant trials are either not feasible, 
because the company has no access to suitable facilities, or not practical because 
only very small quantities o f relevant materials are available for tests.
This thesis describes an engineering approach to the development and verification 
o f small scale devices/processes that mimic industrial scale operations. This 
allows key unit operations and options to be investigated early on in the product 
development life cycle, providing the process engineer with invaluable 
information. It also seeks to investigate alternative process options for the 
production o f the anti-venom.
1.3 Background Theory and Practice of Downstream Unit
Operations
This section details the research already conducted on the techniques o f interest 
and the impact on this study. It endeavours to cover the work related to and the 
concepts important to the running and mimicking o f each purification process 
utilised. It also aims to provide an overview o f the methods available for protein 
purification, which are applicable to the purification o f antibodies from ovine 
serum.
1.3.1 Precipitation
Precipitation has been used as a method to separate proteins for 130 years. It is 
well established in the separation o f proteins from blood plasma, microbial 
extracts and plant extracts (Foster, 1994). Precipitation exploits the differences in 
protein solubility in order to achieve separation. The proteins are precipitated as a 
non-crystalline solid.
Precipitation is often used near the start o f a purification process for a variety o f 
reasons. These include:
  Precipitation methods can inexpensively process a large volume o f crude 
material, resulting in a reduction o f the volume o f material. Although the 
purification factors o f 3-10 that are typically achieved are low compared to 
say chromatographic methods (Bell, et al. 1983; Chisti and Moo-young, 
1991). The ability to process large volumes o f crude material mean this 
method is a good first choice purification step.
  The process is easily scale-able allowing processing options to be easily 
studied before the license is agreed.
  Protein precipitates are compact and stable, thereby allowing the purification 
process to be held at an intermediate stage.
 Precipitation places the protein into an environment depleted o f proteolytic 
enzymes and other biologically active substances.
Since part o f this thesis describes the mimicking of the precipitation stage it is 
important to understand the factors controlling the formation and growth of
precipitate particles. Knowledge o f these parameters will allow an accurate 
mimic o f the process to be designed and operated.
Particle formation usually consists o f two phases; an induction phase involving 
the formation o f the nuclei, followed by a growth phase during which other solute 
molecules attach to the nuclei. The precipitate particles continue to grow until 
equilibrium is reached. In order for particle formation to occur the soluble solute 
concentration must be greater than the normal equilibrium value. As nucleation 
and growth are energy consuming processes, there is a need for the solution to 
attain a certain level o f supersaturation. It is the excess solute concentration 
relative to the equilibrium solubility value that contributes the necessary energy.
The formation and growth o f precipitate particles follows a set series o f well 
defined stages.
Stage 1. Addition o f the precipitant, achievement o f supersaturation and 
nuclei formation. Nucleation times can range from a few seconds to several 
minutes depending on the type o f precipitant and the specific protein. Parker and 
Dalgleish (1977) used light scattering and turbidity measurements in order to 
study the kinetics o f this process.
Stage 2. Perikinetic growth o f nuclei to form primary precipitate particles. 
The rate o f growth o f these particles will be determined by the collision 
frequency. Particles up to the size o f 1 pm are not affected by mixing conditions, 
so collisions will be determined by diffusion, this is shown in equation 1.3.
^ 1  = K N  2 
(equation 1 .1 )
Ka = 8  nDd
(equation 1 .2 )
Where No is the particle number concentration, d is the particle diameter and D is 
the diffusion coefficient.
d = k >t
'Snfjd
(equation 1.3)
Where Kb is the Boltzman constant, T is the absolute temperature and p is the 
viscosity o f the solution.
The above equations imply that there will be a greater rate o f collisions and hence 
a greater growth rate at higher temperatures. They also imply a linear rate of 
increase o f particle volume, mass or molecular weight with time.
Stage 3. Orthokinetic growth occurs once the particles have reached a size 
o f 1 pm. Fluid motion then causes the particles to collide and form macroscopic 
precipitate particles.
~ d N  2 2
  =  aGd N n
=  a $ vG N 0
(equation 1.4)
(equation 1.5)
Where <|>v is the volume fraction o f particles which equals n d No / 6 , a  is the 
effectiveness factor o f collisions in forming aggregates and G is the mean velocity 
gradient.
These equations imply that the growth rate o f the particles should increase with a 
larger mean velocity gradient and greater particle concentration. They also imply 
that the size o f particles should increase exponentially with time.
Stage 4. Batch aging and conditioning. Centrifugation is often used in 
order to separate the precipitate particles from solution. For efficient separation 
the best particles are large, dense and strong. Batch aging can produce particles 
with these attributes. This is where the precipitate is stirred in the tank for a given 
period o f time. The average size o f the final precipitate will be a result o f the 
balance between orthokinetic growth and hydrodynamic shear induced break up 
of particles. Increasing the intensity o f mixing will result in smaller particles. 
Larger sized particles will be obtained at lower shear rates, however these 
particles are unlikely to be very strong and so more likely to break up when 
subjected to the high shear field found in equipment such as centrifuges.
Shear conditions within a reactor can be defined by the Camp number Gt, where 
G is the average shear rate, or mean velocity gradient and t is the time o f exposure 
to the shear. Bell and Dunnill (1982a) found that the aggregate strength was 
dependent on the extent and duration o f agitation. They determined an optimum 
value o f the aging parameter Gt o f 105 (see figure 1.6 ).
Relative strength of 
particles
104 105 
Aging parameter Gt
Figure 1.6 Effect o f aging on the strength o f particles (Bell and Dunnill 1982)
Particles produced by this aging parameter were found to be the most resistant to 
shear break-up. This suggested that precipitates produced under low conditions of 
shear should be aged for longer in order to strengthen them. The improved 
strength at Gt values o f 105 were thought to be due to rearrangement and infilling 
with smaller particles giving a closer, denser and more stable particle. Other 
studies by Hoare (1982) and Clarkson, et al. (1996a) confirmed this finding. 
Hoare (1982) examined the batch aging o f ammonium sulphate precipitated casein 
and found that the maximum stable precipitate size was achieved at a Gt value o f 
105. While Clarkson, et al. (1996a) showed that bakers yeast protein precipitated 
with ammonium sulphate had a reduction in fine aggregates o f approximately 
1.5pm and an increase in the proportion o f larger aggregates o f 2 to 4pm at a Gt 
value o f 1 0 5.
There are several methods o f altering protein solubility, bringing about protein 
precipitation:
  Coagulation by heat may be used to precipitate out unwanted heat labile 
proteins from a solution o f more stable ones. When a protein reaches a 
certain critical temperature it denatures allowing hydrophobic residues buried 
within its structure to interact with each other bringing the protein out o f 
solution.
  Isoelectric precipitation may be used to separate pH stable proteins. This 
method is based on the fact that at their isoelectric point proteins have no net 
charge. This results in a reduction in the repulsive forces between protein 
molecules allowing them to contact each other forming an agglomeration.
  Metal ions such as zinc or calcium can be used to precipitate proteins. These 
work by binding to the surface o f the protein molecules again reducing the 
repulsion between the molecules.
  High concentrations o f non-ionic polymers (~20%w/v) such as polyethylene 
glycol tend to induce precipitation by removal o f water from the protein 
environment.
  Ionic polyelectrolytes induce precipitation, probably by a mixture o f methods 
including charge patch neutralization and polymer bridging. Very low 
concentrations are required and the addition of excess quantities leads to re
solubilisation o f the protein. Reagents used include polyethyleneimine, 
although that particular reagent is difficult to remove further downstream.
The most widely used method o f protein precipitation is the addition o f high 
concentrations o f neutral salts. This process is known as salting-out. At low salt 
concentrations proteins are very soluble as a result o f polar interactions with the 
aqueous solvent, ionic interactions with the salt present and to some extent 
repulsive electrostatic forces between like charged molecules or aggregates 
(Scopes, 1988). This effect is often called salting in. At higher salt 
concentrations solubility depends more on the hydrophobicity o f the protein. The 
most hydrophobic and hence the least hydrated protein tend to be the first to come 
out o f solution (Zhang, et al. 1995). Each protein has a distribution o f hydrophilic 
and hydrophobic residues on its surface; these will determine its solubility 
behavior. When hydrophobic residues are forced into contact with an aqueous 
environment, water molecules become bound in place around these residues. 
When large amounts o f salt are added, the salt molecules become solvated and, as 
water molecules become scarce, pull away the bound molecules from the 
hydrophobic residues. The exposed residues can then interact to form a protein 
aggregate. Once these reach a size no longer favorable to the soluble phase, 
precipitation o f the solid phase occurs (Foster, 1994).
Precipitation reactions generally follow the Cohn equation (Chisti and Moo- 
young, 1991).
In S = B - K J
(equation 1 .6 )
Where S is the solubility and I is the ionic strength of solution. The constants K  
and B represent the slope o f the linear portion of the salting-out curve and the y
intercept respectively. B is a function o f both pH and temperature and is at a 
minimum at the proteins iso-electric point. K  is a function o f the type o f salt used 
and the individual protein. The constants B and K  have also been found to vary 
according to the mode and rate o f addition of the precipitant (Foster, et al. 1976). 
This implies that although the precipitate may be in a stable form this does not 
represent a true equilibrium state.
The differing reagents discussed above have different precipitation kinetics. These 
are discussed in a paper by Chan, et al. (1986).
The relative effectiveness o f neutral salts in salting out, in particular the anions, is 
given by the lyotrophic or Hofmeister series (Hofmeister, 1888; Cacace, et al. 
1997):
Citrate > phosphate > sulphate > acetate ~ chloride > nitrate > thiocynate
The series is in order o f decreasing effectiveness o f anion to cause salting out and 
increasing likelihood o f destabilising the protein.
One o f the most commonly utilised salts is ammonium sulphate due to its high 
solubility, cheapness and stabilising effect on some enzymes. However 
ammonium sulphate is corrosive and evolves ammonia at high pH. This makes it 
difficult to process at a large scale (Richardson, 1987).
The main factors, which determine protein solubility and therefore the extent o f 
precipitation are listed in table 1.1. The effects on the resulting particles o f 
altering some o f them are discussed afterwards.
Protein C haracteristics Solution properties
Size of molecule Solvent availability e.g. Water
Amino acid composition pH
Amino acid sequence Ionic strength
Number of ionisable residues Dielectric constant
Ratio o f polar/non-polar residues Temperature
Distribution o f polar/non-polar residues Specific ion effects
Dissociation constants
Protein conformation
Protein charge
Ion binding properties
Chemical nature o f amino acids
Table 1.1 Factors determining the solubility o f proteins from Foster (1994)
The effects o f altering the pH on the solubility o f the protein and the resulting 
particle size o f the precipitate are shown below.
82 4 60
Figure 1.7 The effect of pH on soya protein solubility (Virkar, et al. 1982)
Figure 1.8 Effect o f pH on precipitate particle size (Chan, et al. 1986)
As can be seen the least solubility and highest particle size occur at roughly the 
same point.
The effect o f ionic strength on protein solubility:
Solubility of|3-
lactoglobulin
(mol/L)
4.8 5.0 5.2 5.65.4
A 0.001M NaCl 
B 0.005M NaCl 
C 0.01M NaCl 
D 0.02M NaCl
Figure 1.9 The effect of ionic strength on protein solubility (Gronwall 1942) 
As can be seen there is a salting in effect at lower concentrations.
It can be concluded from previous research that the pH, temperature, ionic 
strength, the rate and mode o f addition o f the precipitant, the type o f salt and the 
mixing conditions will all need to be kept similar between the scales o f operation 
in order to achieve an accurate mimic.
1.3.2 Centrifugation
Centrifugal separation is a mechanical method o f separating the components o f a 
mixture o f liquids or o f liquid and solid particles. Centrifugation takes advantage 
o f the density differences between the liquid phases or solid and liquid phases. 
The material is accelerated in a centrifugal field, which acts in the same manner as
a gravitational field. The centrifugal field can however be varied by adjusting the
rotational speed and equipment dimensions. Commercial centrifugal equipment 
can reach an acceleration o f 2 0 0 0 0  times gravity ( 2 0 0 0 0  g), where as laboratory 
equipment can reach up to 360000 g.
13.2.1 Types of centrifuge
The application and design o f centrifugal separators has been reviewed by 
Axelsson (1985) and Brunner, et al. (1988). There are five main types o f 
centrifuge, which are required in order to deal with the variety o f process 
materials produced. The choice o f separator depends on the characteristics o f the 
process stream, including the particle size, the difference in density between the 
solid and liquid phases, the solids content and the tendency for the process stream 
to form emulsions. Centrifuges are mainly used for cell harvest and washing after 
fermentation and for recovery o f solid particles following extraction, 
crystallisation or precipitation.
Tubular bowl
The simplistic design of the tubular bowl accounts for its ease of operation. Fluid 
enters at the bottom and the solids sediment against the wall as the fluid flows up 
and out via an inner ring dam or centripetal pump. The centrifuge is capable of 
operating at high rotational speeds. This leads to good clarification and good 
dewatering. There is however no automated solids discharge; solids have to be
removed manually at the end o f the run. Therefore, it is best used with process 
streams that have a low solids content and small batch volume.
Decanter/Scroll
This centrifuge design was derived from the tubular bowl. The main difference is 
that solids discharge is achieved via a conveyer screw which rotates at a different 
speed to the bowl. This has the effect o f concentrating solids in streams with high 
solids content. It is best suited to process streams, which contain large dense 
particles due to the low centrifugal forces achievable because o f the imbalance 
inherent to the design. This machine is attractive because it is capable o f handling 
a high solids content and obtaining good dewatering. It is mainly used for sludge 
dewatering in wastewater treatment.
Multichamber bowl
This centrifuge contains up to five concentric chambers. These have the effect o f 
increasing the axial flow path and increasing the area available for sedimentation. 
Large particles sediment out in the inner chamber, whilst smaller particles 
sediment out in the outer chambers where there is a higher centrifugal force. The 
effect o f shear in the feed zone is decreased since it is flooded. Therefore material 
which enters the feed zone is accelerated slowly. This increases the performance 
o f the centrifuge since less fine particles are produced. Discharge o f collected 
solids is manual but the increased size means that it can handle process streams 
with a higher solids content than a tubular bowl.
Carr Powerfuge
The Carr powerfuge is a tubular bowl centrifuge with an automated solids 
discharge mechanism. The bowl is constructed of titanium, which can tolerate 
higher g forces. As a result, the machine can operate at higher rotational speeds. 
Solids discharge is achieved by means o f a scraper that moves into position near 
the bowl wall. Collected material is then removed from the walls and drops into a 
collection vessel whilst the centrifuge is spinning slowly. The powerfuge can be 
both cleaned in place and steamed in place minimising process stream 
contamination.
Disc Stack
The disc stack centrifuge is one o f the most commonly employed machines for the 
separation of biological materials in the biotechnology industry. Applications 
include the separation o f cells from fermentation broth (Higgins, et al. 1978; Datar 
and Rosen, 1987), the removal o f cell debris after cell disruption (Mosqueira, et 
al. 1981; Clarkson, et al. 1993a), the recovery o f inclusion bodies (Jin, et al. 1994) 
and the recovery o f precipitates (Bell, et al. 1983; Clarkson, et al. 1996b).
The disc stack centrifuge consists o f a bowl containing a series o f conical discs 
stacked one on top o f the other. The discs are separated by spacer bars roughly 
1mm in height. During normal operation the process material splits into thin 
layers and flows between the discs. Settling solids are thrown outwards and 
collect on the underside o f the discs and the bowl wall (figure 1 .1 0 ).
Figure 1.10 Disc stack centrifugation
This configuration provides a large settling area and constant flow path, which 
unlike tubular bowl centrifuges, is not reduced by the previously separated solids 
(Atkinson, et al. 1987). The flow between the discs is usually laminar, which 
makes particle settling easier and reduces the settling distance (Axelsson, 1985). 
Solids discharge is achieved using a hydraulic bowl opening mechanism.
CLARIFIED LOW 
DENSITY LIQUID
SEDIMENT
PARTICLI
cantre
r o t a t i o n
Important factors which affect the performance o f the centrifuge are:
  The properties o f the material being separated
 The centrifuge design and operating conditions
1.3.3 Recovery of biological solids
Centrifuges encounter some problems during the recovery of biological solids. 
These are mainly caused by small particle size, a low density difference between 
phases and shear or denaturation at air liquid interfaces.
Separating cells
A low density difference and high viscosity lead to separation difficulties. These 
are amplified by the small size o f some cells. Bacteria range between 1 pm and 
3pm, yeast range between 4pm and 8 pm and fungi are bigger still, although fungi 
are easily sheared and so recovery is not necessarily easier.
Cell debris
Cells are mainly disrupted by either homogenisation or by a bead mill in order to 
release intracellular proteins. Removal o f the debris produced by these operations 
is difficult due to, for example, the presence of DNA or the small size o f the 
debris (Bonneijea, 1988) but it is very important. For example, affinity 
chromatography is a high resolution operation but the column is easily fouled, so 
cell debris is usually removed before this step. Homogenisation o f cells also 
results in debris with a broad size distribution; some particles may be less than
0.2pm. This can cause problems.
Precipitates
As discussed in section 1.3.1 the density and size of precipitate particles depend 
on the protein, the precipitant and the system (Bell and Dunnill, 1982a & b). 
Typically precipitate particles range in size from 5pm to 25 pm, although some 
can be as small as 1pm (Clarkson, et al. 1993a). The density difference between 
phases is usually in the order o f 1 Okgm' 3 to 150kgm'3 therefore a low flow rate 
may be required. This will result in an increase in the temperature o f the feed 
stream unless the centrifuge has bowl cooling. Other problems are due to the
nature o f proteins, which cause foaming and air entrapment. This causes low 
settling velocities and denaturation. High shear stresses in the feed zone also 
cause precipitates to break-up (Boychyn, et al. 2001; Neal, et al. 2003).
Once separated, solid material must be discharged from the bowl. The disc stack, 
scroll and Carr powerfuge are the only models with automated discharge. In the 
other models the collected solids have to be removed manually. Maybury (1999) 
states that feed rates calculated theoretically are higher than in practice, due to 
hindered settling which occurs in process streams with a high percentage o f solids. 
For process streams containing 0-2 percent o f solids (v/v) two thirds the predicted 
flow should be used and for 5 percent solids half the predicted flow rate should be 
used (Clarkson, et al. 1993b). The percentage solids content is very important 
when choosing which centrifuge to utilise, since only certain centrifuges can 
handle certain solids load. Figure 1.11 (Brunner and Hemfort, 1988) illustrates 
which centrifuges can handle what solids concentration.
Separable  solids (vol %)  0 20 40 60 8 0  100
Cham ber bowl centrifuge 1
Solid bowl centrifuge 1
S e l f - c le a n in g  centrifuge
Nozzle centrifuge 
D ecanter centrifuge 
Figure 1.11 Guide to suitable centrifuge design with respect to feed solids 
concentration (Brumner and Hemfort, 1988)
1.3.4 Sigma theory
The  concept is the most commonly used quantity to characterise centrifuges, it 
was presented by Ambler (1952 and 1959). In his derivation he considered 
particles with a critical diameter that were separated to 50 percent. Today 
however the most commonly used definition o f the critical diameter (dc) is a 
particle that is separated to 100 percent. This does not influence the formulas for 
the sigma value but the value for the feed flow rate (Q) will be halved.   is 
defined as:
= r,.Z
Where,Vg is stokes settling velocity 
  has the general expression:
Vco2re
The equation for critical diameter becomes
(equation 1.7)
(equation 1 .8 )
, V / 2
1 %VQlher S,
{ P - P , ) v < o \
r V /2
(equation 1.9)
Where, p is the dynamic viscosity o f fluid, Pp is the particle density, P/ is the 
liquid density, se is the equivalent settling distance, g is gravity V is volume, co is 
angular velocity and re is the equivalent min and max radius.
The derivation in equation 1.9 assumes the following:
 Viscous drag is determining particle movement
 The flow in disc bowls between the discs is laminar and symmetrical
 The liquid rotates at the same speed as the bowl
 There is no hindered settling
 The particle always moves at its final settling velocity
Sigma theory allows a centrifuge to be described in terms of a separation area and 
is independent o f process parameters. The sigma value indicates the required area 
o f a gravity settling tank, with the same clarifying capacity as the centrifuge, 
under the same conditions. Sigma is used as an index to compare the performance 
of a centrifuge during scale up and between centrifuges o f different types. 
Protherics PLC disc stack centrifuge has a sigma value o f 8400m .
The information detailed within this section indicates that in order to mimic a 
centrifuge the settling conditions need to be maintained and the shear conditions 
recreated.
13.5 Filtration
Filtration is a vacuum or pressure driven process that separates the components of 
a feed stream. Separation is based on size differences rather than density 
differences, through the use o f a selectively permeable membrane. This is o f 
particular importance in certain situations where centrifugation is not applicable
i.e. where there is only a small density difference between components. Cheryan, 
et al. (1988) contains an excellent review on the reasons for choosing filtration. 
Over the past two decades there have been significant advances in membrane 
technology, such as increased control o f pore size distribution, driven by the need 
for increasingly pure pharmaceutical products. Separation technology has reached 
the stage now where it is no-longer limited to the separation o f solutes differing in 
size by about ten fold (Van Reis, et al. 1997). As such, filtration is increasingly
becoming an attractive process option for applications which would have 
traditionally utilised centrifugation.
Membrane filtration has several applications within the bioprocess industry. These 
include:
 Cell harvesting/recycling
 Cell removal
 Debris removal
  Product sterilisation
During filtration the feed stream is either pumped perpendicular to the membrane 
or parallel to it. Figure 1.12 depicts the two differing modes o f operation. If the 
feed is pumped perpendicular to the membrane, then the operation is termed 
normal flow filtration (NFF) or dead end filtration. During this type o f operation 
a layer of particles builds up on the surface of the membrane. This is termed the 
cake. This cake blocks the membrane pores and forms a barrier to filtration, in 
effect fouling the membrane. This results in a decrease in the observed flux rate 
through the membrane as the operation progresses. If the flux rate is to be 
maintained, then the pressure will have to be altered to compensate for the fouling 
caused by the cake.
If the feed stream is pumped parallel to the surface of the membrane then the 
operation is termed tangential flow filtration (TFF). TFF utilises high flow rates 
to generate shear forces at the membrane surface. These act to sweep the 
surface o f the membrane clear o f particles, thereby helping to reduce cake 
formation and prolong higher flux rates.
>  = direction of flow
&3sVSi
membrane
     
B U H  i
Figure 1.12 Diagrammatic representation of Dead end filtration (A) and 
Tangential flow filtration (B)
The stirred cell depicted in figure 1.13 is a dead end filtration process that utilises 
a stirrer bar placed close to the surface of the membrane. When spinning, the 
stirrer bar will generate a shear field, without having to utilise a high flow rate. 
These devices have been successfully used to increase the flux rate for a given 
filtration system, but have not found widespread use in industry due to problems 
during scale up. Lee, et al. (1995) utilised a stirred cell for the concentration of 
recombinant yeast cells. The results showed that flux increased with disc rotation 
speed. The author attributed this to the fact that at higher speeds the observed cake 
build up was minimal and hence membrane fouling was reduced. Vogel and 
Kroner (1999) also utilised a stirred cell to develop a novel technique for the 
separation of animal cells.
stirrer bar
^membrane
Figure 1.13 Diagrammatic representation of the stirred cell filtration device
Filtration processes are normally classified according to the dimensions of the 
membrane pores and the size o f the material to be separated.
Microfiltration
Microfiltration (MF) is generally used to recover particles between 0.05 and 10pm
in diameter. It is a low-pressure operation with pressures typically not exceeding
^ 1 |
2bar. The flux rates obtained are typically greater than 50L.m .h* .bar* . 
Examples o f material removed by MF processes include bacteria, moulds and 
yeast (Winston Ho and Sirkar, 1992). Microfiltration operations can be run in 
several ways. Which one is chosen depends upon the nature o f the feed stream. 
They include, batch, fed-batch, feed and bleed, continuous and diafiltration.
Ultrafiltration
Ultrafiltration (UF) relies on the same principles as microfiltration, but is 
generally used during the recovery o f particles and polymeric solutes between 1 0  
and 150kDa. It is high pressure operation and may be run utilising pressures as
high as 5bar. The flux rates obtained are typically between 10 and 50L.m .h* .bar* 
*. One o f the most common uses for UF is during diafiltration, when one buffer 
liquid is replaced by another. The membrane retains the protein o f interest, whilst 
the old buffer flows to waste new buffer is added to system gradually replacing 
the old. UF is also used to concentrate solutions by decreasing the volume o f a 
process solution (Winston Ho and Sirkar, 1992).
1.3.5.1 Factors determining filtration performance
There are several feed related parameters, which affect the performance o f the 
filtration process; the main ones are outlined below.
Buffer composition
The pH and ionic strength o f the buffering solution can greatly influence the 
performance of the filtration process. By altering a proteins surface charge, the 
solubility o f the protein may be affected. At its iso-electric point a protein will 
have no net charge. As a result, the degree o f adsorption o f the protein into the 
surface o f the membrane will be increased (Bowen and Gan, 1991; Hanemaaijer, 
et al. 1989). It has also been observed that a maximum transmission is achieved at 
the proteins iso-electric point, with a second maximum between the protein and 
the membranes iso-electric point (Bums and Zydney, 1999).
Particle properties
The shape and compressibility o f feed stream components will influence the 
filtration. The compressibility o f a particle will affect the nature o f the cake layer 
formed and impact on performance. The shape o f the particle will determine the 
void volume within the bed, which again influences the flux rate. O f particular 
importance is the size difference between solutes; this will determine the degree 
o f separation achievable.
Viscosity
The viscosity o f the feed stream determines its resistance to flow; an increase in 
viscosity results in lower flow rates and higher pressures to obtain an equivalent 
flux rate.
Temperature
The temperature o f the solution can affect the flux in two ways (Kroner, et al. 
1984). Increasing the temperature can lead to protein aggregation and hence an 
increase in fouling with concurrent decrease in flux. Increasing the temperature 
will also decrease the viscosity. This will result in an increase in flux if  all other 
parameters remain unchanged (Kroner, et al. 1984; Lojkine, et al. 1992).
1.3.5.2 System related factors
Operating mode
The actual physical membrane is rarely the true filtering medium. In reality the 
true filtering medium is the initial thin layer o f precipitate that forms on the 
surface o f the membrane at the start o f the operation. A consequence o f this is 
that this initial layer is o f prime importance in ensuring a satisfactory filtration 
operation.
If full pressure is applied at the start o f the process, as is the case with constant 
pressure filtration where the flux is allowed to decline over time, then the first 
layer o f particles will be compacted into a tight mass that largely blocks the pores 
o f the filter. This may result in a low flux rate for the rest o f the filtration. If the 
initial pressure is low, as in constant flux filtration, the initial precipitate layer will 
be open resulting in increased flux rates during the filtration. During constant flux 
filtration, the pressure is gradually increased in order to maintain the flux rate 
throughout the process. A draw back o f this is that the maximum pressure is 
applied only at the end o f the process so the whole cycle is run at less than 
maximum capacity. Studies by Field et al, (1995) and Howell (1995), have 
suggested that operating in constant flux mode will result in higher flux rates and 
hence a better performing separation operation.
The advantages and disadvantages o f the two types o f operation depend to a large 
degree on the nature o f the feed. If the particles are compressible then increasing 
the pressure may not necessarily result in an increase in the flux rate. With a 
compressible cake, as the pressure is increased so the resistance o f the cake 
increases. Eventually the increase in the resistance o f the cake to flow becomes 
more than the increase in the flow rate caused by the increase in pressure. At this 
point further increases in pressure will have no effect and may even result in a 
decrease in flux.
Process configuration
The membrane separation may be run in a number of different modes. The most 
common configurations are diafiltration, batch concentration and feed and bleed 
(Winston Ho and Sirkar, 1992). Each configuration has its own advantages and 
disadvantages. Which one is used depends on the feed stream and process 
requirements.
During diafiltration, buffer is added to the retentate tank as the process continues 
in order to replace any permeate that has been removed. Diafiltration helps to 
overcome the low fluxes associated with high concentrations or to achieve greater 
removal o f permeable species.
Batch concentration requires the minimum membrane area and is the most 
flexible. However, tank volume requirements may be high, the equipment may 
have a large footprint and the residence time can be excessive. As the permeate is 
removed the concentration o f retained species increases. This is particularly useful 
when dealing with large process volumes, as the volume o f feed can be reduced.
During a feed and bleed process the permeate is removed as is a small portion o f 
the retentate. The remaining retentate is passed on to a fresh filter for further 
concentration; this helps to maintain a high crossflow velocity and reduce 
membrane fouling.
1.3.5.3 Transmembrane pressure
Increasing the pressure on the upstream side of the membrane, with reference to 
the downstream side, results in process fluid being forced through the membrane. 
The difference in pressure between the two sides of the membrane is known as 
transmembrane pressure (TMP) and for TFF is defined as:
p  -t-p 
TMP = 1 2 -P ,
(equation 1.10)
Where Pi is the feed inlet pressure, P2 is the retentate outlet pressure and P3 is the 
permeate outlet pressure.
During the filtration process any material retained by the membrane may be 
deposited on the surface. This phenomenon is called concentration polarisation. 
At the same time that material is deposited it is also removed by back transport 
mechanisms (proposed mechanisms include Brownian motion, inertial lift and 
shear enhanced diffusion). As TMP is increased the rate o f solute convection 
towards the membrane will increase. Eventually this rate will exceed the rate o f 
back transport. At this point the flux rate will be unchanged by further increases 
in the TMP; the membrane is said to be concentration polarised. Porter (1972) 
first noticed this phenomenon during UF it has also been observed during MF 
(Brown and Kavanagh, 1987; Shimizu, et al. 1994).
Operating at an initial higher TMP may give a higher initial flux rate but it may 
lead to lower flux and transmission performance as polarisation and other fouling 
effects will be increased (Lee, et al. 1995; Haarstrick, et al. 1991; Field, et al. 
1995). If a lower TMP is used initially it is often possible to operate the process 
for longer periods o f time without a significant decline in the flux rate. The TMP 
can then be gradually increased to maintain the flux as fouling occurs (Maiorella, 
e tal. 1991; Van Reis, e tal. 1991).
1.3.5.4 Crossflow velocity
The pumping o f the feed stream parallel to the surface of the membrane generates 
shear stress that acts to sweep the membrane, minimising the build up of any 
fouling layer. Increasing the crossflow velocity will increase the rate o f back 
transport, increasing the flux rate achievable for a given TMP. This removal o f
the fouling layer by crossflow has been demonstrated by a number of researchers 
(Culkin, 1998; Mikulasek, 1994). Crossflow velocity cannot however be 
increased indefinitely in order to increase the flux rate. For one, the crossflow 
velocity has no impact on the degree o f internal fouling, which occurs within the 
structure of the membrane and determines transmission. Also higher flow 
velocities require bigger pumps and higher energy consumptions, which impacts 
on the economics of the process.
1.3.5.5 Fouling
The term fouling is used to describe any phenomenon that is detrimental to a 
membranes performance. Fouling can take several different forms, the simplest of 
which is pore plugging.
 membrane
Figure 1.14 Representation of pore plugging
This results when a particle is sufficiently small to enter a pore but does not pass 
through it (Hermia, 1982).
Pore narrowing or constriction is caused by the adsorption of proteins to the 
membrane.
      (  
 membrane
Figure 1.15 Representation of pore narrowing or constriction
The pores become smaller and it may result in the smallest pores becoming 
blocked. Each particle that is retained within the pore will reduce the pore volume.
The equation below is used to describe systems where pore plugging is the main 
method of fouling.
(equation 1.11)
Where Fo is the initial flux rate, K2 is an empirical constant obtained from 
experimental data, t is time and V is the volume filtered. If pore plugging is the 
main mode of fouling then a plot of t/V versus t should produce a straight line 
where the gradient is K2 /2  and the intercept is 1/Fo (Jomitz and Metzler, 1988).
Gel or cake layer formation results in a decrease in flux due to irreversible 
accumulation of particles at the membranes surface. The thickness o f the layer 
increases as the volume of filtered fluid increases.
.  .  *      t  
  I          membrane 
Figure 1.16 Representation of gel or cake layer formation
Assuming that the cake is incompressible and that the pressure is constant the 
filtration should follow the equation outlined below (Jomitz and Meltzer, 1988).
(equation 1.12)
Where t is time, V is the volume filtered and Ki is another empirical constant 
obtained from experimental data.
If surface retention is the primary method o f fouling, then a plot o f t/V versus V 
should result in a straight line where the gradient is Kj and the intercept is V. 
This model is not ideal for biological solutions because often the solids are 
compressible.
The hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity o f the particle or membrane are key 
characteristics in determining these interactions. The type o f membrane will also 
affect the type o f fouling. Marshall, et al. (1993) concluded that proteins reduce 
the performance o f UF membranes by surface deposition in the form of a gel layer 
but during MF the main mechanism of fouling was found to be pore plugging. It 
has also been suggested that the mechanism of fouling is influenced by the 
concentration o f the feed stream. Pore plugging is the main factor at dilute 
concentrations but surface deposition dominates at high concentrations.
Manufacturers o f membranes have developed a wide range o f products with 
different properties in order to combat fouling. There are also several commercial 
systems available which use mechanical methods to decrease fouling. JP. 
Postlethwaite (2004) contains a good review o f these systems (Postlewaite, et al. 
2004).
13.5.6 Models of flux prediction
Concentration polarisation model
Porter (1972) proposed that the permeate flux can be predicted from the following 
model.
J  = K In cb J
(equation 1.13)
Where J is the flux, K is the mass transfer coefficient, Cw is the wall concentration 
of protein, Cb is the bulk concentration o f protein in the feed stream.
This model was developed based on the assumption that a boundary layer or gel 
layer o f high concentration solutes builds up on the membrane surface and that 
this layer forms the limiting resistance to flow. From this, it is possible to 
calculate the transport rate o f water through the membrane on the basis of the 
mass transfer o f membrane retained solutes from the surface back into the bulk 
stream. Porter (1972) assumes that the layer has a fixed concentration (Cg) but is 
free to vary in terms of thickness and porosity.
The mass transfer coefficient (K) can be calculated using the heat transfer 
correlation described by Dittus and Boelter (1930).
K = k. Q
\ 05  0.66
bwL -0.17
(equation 1.14)
Where kp is the proportionality constant, Q is the volumetric flowrate, D is the 
diffusion coefficient, b is the channel height, w is the channel width, L is the 
channel length and V is the kinematic viscosity o f the broth.
The diffusion coefficient is described by the Stokes-Einstein relationship for 
diffusity.
(equation 1.15)
Where Kb is the boltzman constant, T is the temperature, p is the viscosity and rp 
is the radius of the diffusing particle.
Assuming that the proteins at the membrane surface resemble a layer o f closely 
packed spheres having 65-75% solids by volume, the experimental values to 
calculate kp can be used to predict the steady state permeate flux.
This theory has been utilised by many researchers (Wakeman and Williams, 2002; 
Mignard and Glass, 2001) whilst attempting to predict membrane flux and 
fouling.
Membrane fouling model
This theory assumes that the molecules from the feed stream plug the membrane 
pores. The resulting hydrodynamic resistance can be used to predict flux based on 
the following equation.
j  _ ^TM
(equation 1.16)
Where Rt is the total hydrodynamic resistance defined for a given membrane and 
a pure solvent (water).
According to Davies, et al. (2000) Rt can be defined as the sum o f the membrane 
resistance (R m ) the cake resistance ( R c )  and the resistance due to pore blockage 
( R b ) .  Davies, et al. (2000) goes on to state that membrane resistance can be 
measured using pure water flux data.
If using pure water as the feed, the flux equation can be rewritten:
(equation 1.17)
The resistance of the membrane can then be calculated from a plot of flux against 
APtm with the gradient equalling 1 /Rmp.
1.3.6 Chromatography
Separation by chromatographic means generally exploits a facet of the protein of 
interests unique physio-chemical properties. These properties include: size (size 
exclusion/gel filtration), charge (ion exchange), hydrophobicity (hydrophobic 
interaction) and bio-specific interactions (affinity). Ion exchange is used in 75% 
of purification processes (Bonneijea, et al. 1986). This wide spread use was 
attributed to the ease of scale up, the wide availability of cost efficient, robust 
matrixes and the acceptance o f the technique by regulatory bodies. Affinity 
chromatography was found to be used in 60% of processes and gel filtration in 
50% of processes. Chromatographic systems can achieve an excellent level of 
purification in a small number o f steps. They are also apt for dealing with large 
volumes of material containing only small concentrations o f the target protein. 
The different types o f ligand are described in the following sections.
1.3.6.1 Ion Exchange Chromatography
Ion exchange chromatography has found wide spread use for the purification o f 
proteins, both in the lab and in the production plant. In 1956 it became the first 
type of interaction to be successfully employed for the separation o f charged 
macromolecules onto oppositely charged moieties (Peterson and Sobers, 1956). 
This technique has also been employed for the purification and separation o f 
proteins, nucleic acids, polypeptides, polynucleotides and other charged molecules 
(Bonneijea, et al. 1986).
Separation during ion exchange chromatography is dependent on the reversible 
binding o f charged solute molecules to an immobilised matrix consisting of 
oppositely charged groups. There are two types of exchanger: anion exchangers 
are positively charged and bind negatively charged molecules and cation 
exchangers that are negatively charged and bind positively charged molecules.
Separation is achieved by giving either the target protein or the main contaminants 
an opposite charge to the matrix. The protein(s) o f interest will then be retained by 
the solid support whilst all other proteins flow out. This selective charge is 
obtained by looking at a proteins iso-electric point. Above its iso-electric point 
the protein will have a net negative charge, below it the protein will have a net 
positive charge. Once the protein o f interest is bound to the matrix unbound 
proteins are washed away by applying the starting buffer. Elution is achieved by 
changing either the pH or the ionic strength. The protein of interest will elute from 
the matrix and can be collected.
There has been extensive research into ion-exchange chromatography including 
the development o f new media, modelling o f column dynamics/retention 
characteristics, process characteristics and process scale up (Lin, et al. 1987; 
Regnier, 1984; Scopes, 1981; Velayudban and Horvath, 1988; Wankat, 1986; 
Yamamoto, et al. 1983). The major disadvantage o f ion-exchange 
chromatography is that it is not as specific as affinity chromatography as more 
than one species o f protein may bind to the matrix at the same time.
1.3.6.2 Affinity Chromatography
Affinity chromatography is considered to be the most specific separation 
technology currently available. It exploits the unique binding characteristics 
inherent to a ligand-biomacromolecule interaction. Since the technology relies on 
biological recognition rather than physio-cheimcal interactions affinity 
chromatography preserves the biological activity o f the target protein.
Affinity chromatography is a type o f adsorption chromatography in which the 
molecule to be purified is specifically and most importantly reversibly adsorbed 
by a complementary binding substance immobilised on an insoluble support, the 
matrix.
The technique was first utilised in 1910 to selectively adsorb Amylase onto 
insoluble starch. However the complex organic chemistry required to produce the 
matrix prevented widespread use o f the technique. In 1967 Axen, Porath and 
Emback (Axon, et al. 1967) reported that molecules containing primary amino 
groups could be coupled to polysaccharide matrices activated by cyanogen 
bromide. This method is still commonly used today to couple ligands to the 
matrix. Its development opened the way for the widespread use o f affinity 
chromatography.
Advances in technology have resulted in the development of new media, with 
increased stability in high or low pH and increased binding capacity which lowers 
the cost. Verdoliva, et al. (2002) reports the development of an all D synthetic 
peptide with higher binding capacities than protein A or G and very high stability 
in terms o f ligand leakage and stability. Gulich, et al. (2002) reports the 
development of a genetically engineered version of protein G which has increased 
alkaline stability. Therefore columns utilising this ligand can be cleaned with 
sodium hydroxide, which standard protein G columns cannot be.
Process scale affinity chromatography
Process scale matrices need to fulfil certain criteria (Cabrera and Wilchek, 1988; 
Janson and Kristiansen, 1990). The perfect resin would be:
Inert, non-biodegradable, chemically and physically resistant, easily derivatized, 
easily packed and macroporous. However by their very nature, most protein 
affinity columns are biodegradable, chemically and physically unstable and 
deform at high flow rates.
The three most important characteristics are high adsorption capacity, high mass 
transfer coefficient and high liquid flow rate through the bed (Katoh, 1987). From 
a commercial point of view cost, reuse or ligand leakage and the purity o f the 
eluted product are also equally important.
The optimisation and scale up o f  chromatographic processes
In order to successfully scale up an affinity chromatographic separation a 
thorough understanding of the fundamental processes involved in the separation 
mechanism are required. Liapis, 1989; Chase, 1988 and McCormick, 1988 contain 
reviews o f scale up methodology. The authors also address the predictions, 
implications and limitations o f the affinity chromatography models.
Column and matrix based parameters to consider are: the length and diameter of 
the column, the particle size and pore size o f the affinity support. Small-scale 
studies should be carried out utilising a matrix that is suitable for large-scale 
separations. Physical properties that should be considered are: the sample 
volume, flow rates, temperature and pH (Liapis, 1989). Since each separation is 
unique each process must be individually optimised. However several groups are 
developing algorithms to predict the optimum flow rates, gradients, buffer 
compositions and temperatures (Janson and Hedman, 1987).
Affinity ligands
Any component that may be coupled to a base matrix can be used as a ligand for 
purifying its respective binding substance i.e.
Enzyme: Substrate 
Antibody: Antigen 
Hormone: Receptor
This list contains only three possible ligands. Narayanan (1994) contains a good 
review o f the available ligands and matrices. Protein G is o f specific interest in 
the context of this thesis (as opposed to protein A) because of its affinity for ovine 
antibodies. It is therefore applicable to the purification of the anti-venom 
antibodies contained with the ovine serum.
Protein G
Protein G (Akerstrom, et al. 1985; Frank, 1997; McCormick, 1988; Akerstrom 
and Bjorck, 1986) is a bacterial surface protein found in group G streptococcal 
strains (Forsgen and Sjoquist, 1966; Reis, et al. 1984). It recognises and binds to 
the Fc part o f a wide variety of IgG antibodies:
IgG type Binding Strength IgG type Binding Strength
Human IgGl ++ Rat IgG2c ++
Human IgG2 ++ Rabbit IgG ++
Human IgG3 ++ Bovine IgGl ++
Human IgG4 ++ Bovine IgG2 ++
Mouse IgGl + Sheep IgGl ++
Mouse IgG2a ++ Sheep IgG2 ++
Mouse IgG2b ++ Goat IgGl ++
Mouse IgG3 ++ Goat IgG2 ++
Rat IgGl + Horse IgG(ab) ++
Rat IgG2a ++ Horse IgG(c) ++
Rat IgG2b + Horse IgG(T) (+)
Table 1.2 Summary of different antibody subtype binding patterns to protein G 
(adapted from Bjorrck and Kronvall, 1984)
Protein G will bind most strongly to the majority o f different immunoglobulin 
types, at or near neutral pH, but readily dissociates from these solutes when placed 
in a buffer with a lower pH. The native protein contains an albumin binding 
region. This is genetically deleted in modem versions o f protein G used for 
binding immunoglobulins in order to minimise non-specific binding.
1.3.6.3 Gel filtration
Gel filtration has occupied a key position in laboratory scale purification for more 
than 30 years (Porath and Flodin, 1959; Janson, 1987). Separation of molecules 
during gel filtration is based on molecular size and shape. The solution containing 
molecules o f differing sizes is fed down a column containing a hydrophilic cross- 
linked gel with pores o f finite size. By varying the degree o f cross-linking within 
the gel, different pore sizes can be produced resulting in media that covers the 
whole range o f molecular sizes.
Molecules which are larger than the pore size o f the gel will be excluded from the 
matrix and are therefore eluted first ffom the column. Smaller molecules will 
enter the pores within the gel to various extents. This retards their progress 
through the column and they will elute according to their molecular size (largest 
first).
Gel filtration is not suitable for recovery of target proteins present in only 
relatively small concentrations since load volumes should not exceed 1 0 % o f the 
column volume. It is also not suitable for large-scale recovery due to the large 
volumes o f gel required for large process volumes. As a result gel filtration is 
often employed towards the end o f a process as a polishing step and within the 
biopharmaceutical industry to remove aggregates.
1.3.6.4 Hydrophobic Interaction Chromatography
The basis of hydrophobic interaction chromatography (HIC) is an entropy driven 
attraction between non-polar groups in an aqueous environment; the specifics are 
summarised in (Eriksson, 1998). It has been described as The unusually strong 
attraction between non-polar molecules and surfaces in water (Israelachvili, 
1985). Chromatographic separation of proteins by HIC were first reported 
separately by two groups in 1972 (Er-El, et al. 1972; Yon, 1972).
The separation is normally run at high salt concentrations. Hydrophobic pockets 
on the surface o f proteins adsorb onto the support. The protein is eluted by 
lowering the salt concentration. Proteins with high surface hydrophobicity will 
elute first (Hammond and Scawen, 1989). Typically HIC is classified as a mild 
separation technique, as proteins can be eluted from the support in their native 
state. However, it has not found wide spread use in industry due to the fact that 
classical commercial hydrophobic adsorbents are inadequate due to their high 
hydrophobicity (Oscarsson et al 1995). As a result proteins readily bind to the 
support but they are difficult to elute in their native state because the binding is 
too strong. However, it has been successfully employed during the purification of 
periplasmic human interferon a2c expressed in E.coli (Voss, et al. 1994) and 
human growth hormone (Wu, et al. 1990; Pavlu & Gellerfors, 1993).
1.3.6.5 Adsorption Models
The simplest model used to describe the adsorption process that occurs during 
chromatography assumes that the solute (S) confined within the aqueous phase 
(aq) is adsorbed by the ligand (L) o f a solid chromatography matrix. The equation 
shown below describes this adsorption process:
S(aq)+L{s)( ** L(s)
(equation 1.18)
The rate at which the solute will be adsorbed by the ligand is governed by an 
association constant KA, (KA = K 1/K2) where Kjis the forward rate constant and 
K2 is the backward rate constant. The disassociation constant Kd= 1/Ka .
Ka can be calculated from the equation detailed below:
q  _  C Mq m _  C Mq mKa  
s ~  C m + K d ~  C u K a +  1
(equation 1.19)
Where Cs is the concentration o f adsorbed solute at equilibrium, Cm is the 
concentration o f solute in the mobile phase and qm is the maximum monolayer 
capacity o f the matrix.
Isotherms
Rearranging equation 1.19 forms equation 1.20 shown below:
_ [ S - L * Q
qk-Q)
(equation 1.20)
It can be concluded from this equation that the concentration of adsorbed solute is 
asymptotically approaching the maximum capacity o f the matrix. This will be 
reached at lower mobile phase concentrations for solutes that have a higher 
association constant. It can therefore be concluded that buffering conditions 
which increase the association constant will lead to more o f the solute that binds 
to the matrix being bound, resulting in a more efficient separation process. The 
graph resulting from a plot o f the concentration of bound solute (Cs) against the 
concentration o f solute in the mobile phase (Cm) is called the adsorption isotherm.
The relationship shown in figure 1.17 is called Langmuir isotherm (Langmuir, 
1918).
g 20o>
r  1 5
o 10 20 30 5040
Cm (mg/ml)
Figure 1.17 Hypothetical Langmuirian adsorption isotherm
The Langmuir model was originally developed to portray the chemisorption on a 
set o f distinct localised adsorption sites. As a result it is only valid for monolayer 
adsorption of a single solute species in a one to one binding relationship, which is 
not affected by the presence o f other solutes. Generally adsorption o f proteins 
onto ion-exchangers or affinity media is o f a form similar to the favourable model 
described by Langmuir (Horstmann and Chase, 1989; Skidmore and Chase, 1988). 
Langmuir isotherms have been successfully employed on several occasions 
(Weaver and Carta, 1996; Chase, 1984; Skidmore, et al. 1990; Yoshida, et al. 
1993; Mao, et al. 1995). Deviations from the model can be explained by 
contaminating proteins competing for binding sites or proteins binding to the 
matrix by other means. These deviations are discussed by (Gill, et al. 1994).
A multi-component mixture may be described by the multi-component Langmuir 
isotherm.
Several other isotherms have been developed to account for different conditions. 
For instance, the Freundlich isotherm (Freundlich, 1907) describes adsorption to a 
heterogeneous surface. The flow rate through a column and its impact on 
residence time will also affect the isotherm. A good review discussing the various 
merits of the different isotherms can be found in Bellot and Condoret (1993).
1.4 Scale Down O f Industrial Bio-Separation Techniques
Early bioprocess development is often hampered by the availability of material for 
experiments investigating different downstream processing options. The 
production o f laboratory scale devices that accurately mimic industrial scale 
purification processes allows options to be considered with out the use o f large 
amounts o f valuable material. It also provides a powerful tool for minimising 
bioprocess development times.
Successful scale down requires a detailed understanding o f the mechanisms 
involved in order to identify the key parameters influencing a system. Once 
identified, these parameters can be mimicked on a small scale thereby ensuring an 
accurate model.
1.4.1 Current approach to the scale down of precipitation
As described in section 1.3.1 the physical properties of a protein precipitate are 
affected by several factors. Each o f these have to be maintained or taken into 
account in order to obtain a final product with similar characteristics to that 
produced on an industrial scale.
(equation 1.21)
Mechanical parameters, which have to be kept constant between the scale down 
mimic and the industrial scale operation, include:
 Tank geometry (the height to diameter ratio)
  Impeller type
  Diameter o f the impeller relative to that o f the tank
 Placement o f the impeller
 Baffle geometry (if any)
However, even if  all o f the above factors are kept constant fluid flow patterns will 
still alter between the small and industrial scale devices, which could result in 
differences between the final material.
Process parameters that need to be maintained include:
 Temperature of operation
 Ionic strength
 Type o f salt
 Mean velocity gradient, aging parameter (Camp number) and residence time
The mean velocity gradient is a measurement o f the power dissipated (P) per unit 
volume (Smoluchowski, 1917).
 (  P  ^\2
G = 
(equation 1.22)
Where p equals dynamic viscosity, V is the volume and P is the power input.
The power input, P, is calculated by:
P = PvpN'D5
(equation 1.23)
Where Po is the power number, p  is the density of the bulk suspension, N the 
impeller speed and D is the impeller diameter (Rushton, et al. 1950).
The controlling parameter of a precipitation operation is the Camp number; this is 
a measurement o f the amount o f energy inputted into a system over time and is 
defined by the equation below.
Ca = Gt
(equation 1.24)
Where G is the mean velocity gradient and t is time.
By maintaining the Camp number between scales o f operation it is possible to 
mimic a precipitation operation. This has been successfully achieved for protein 
precipitant formation (Boychyn, et al. 2000; Maybury, 1999; Neal, et al. 2003).
1.4.2 Scale down of centrifugation
The scale down o f centrifugation has been achieved through two different 
methods (Mannweiler and Hoare, 1992; Boychyn, et al. 2000). The first involves 
the insertion of blank discs into a disc stack centrifuge in order to reduce the feed 
flow requirement. The second involves the utilisation of an in house shearing 
device. Each method will be discussed separately.
1.4.2.1 Scaling down by reducing the number of active discs
The smallest disc stack centrifuge is a pilot scale model that operates with a bowl 
capacity of 0.69 litres. This means that in order to run the centrifuge more than 10 
litres of feed material are required. During the early stages o f process 
development the amount o f material available for study is small. By scaling down
the amounts required for centrifugation studies the purification process can be 
more extensively studied and alterations made without the need for large amounts 
o f valuable material.
Work by Mannweiler and Hoare (1992), Rumpus (1997) and Maybury (1999) 
concentrated on scaling down a disc stack centrifuge by reducing the number of 
active discs. Maybury, et al. (1998) achieved a 76% scale down o f the settling 
area in conjunction with a 70% reduction in bowl volume whilst still maintaining 
a separation performance that matched that of the full-scale machine. The 
reduction in feed requirements was achieved by blanking off the stack; this was 
done by utilising stainless steel inserts specially made by Westfalia separators. 
These inserts reduced the number o f active discs, therefore reducing the 
separation area, bowl volume and solids holding capacity. There are two different 
types o f insert. The top inserts reduce the bowl volume and solids holding space, 
whilst a bottom insert reduces the bowl volume and lifts the stack off the bottom 
of the centrifuge.
a b c
Active discs
Figure 1.18 Diagrammatic representation o f a disc stack centrifuge showing 
different regions blanked out. a) Top position b) Bottom position c) On top o f 
insert equivalent to 7 discs (Maybury, et al. 1998)
Work by Maybury, et al. (1998) highlighted the importance o f the positioning of 
the active discs within the stack. If the active discs are positioned at the bottom, 
the recovery performance was found to be inferior to the full-scale machine. This 
was attributed to turbulence associated with the region o f the centrifuge where the 
feed stream enters the settling region resulting in re-entrapment o f sedimented 
solids. Positioning o f the active discs at the top o f the stack was found to give a 
superior performance; this was attributed to solid particles settling out as the feed 
stream passed through the solids holding space before reaching the active discs. 
When the discs were positioned a small distance from the bottom above the 
turbulent region, the recovery performance was found to be similar to the full- 
scale machine.
Scaling down by this method changes the bowl geometry, since the bowl height is 
reduced whilst the diameter remains the same. Although this change may be 
expected to alter the recovery performance, Maybury, et al. (1998) concluded that 
it does not. This method has advantages in the fact that the bowl speed and 
diameter remain unchanged and hence dewatering o f collected solid should 
remain the same. However this method still requires several litres o f material. A 
more useful mimic would require only millilitres o f material per run.
1.4.2.2 Scaling down using the shearing device
There are several methods for comparing the performance o f centrifuges. One 
popular method is the Sigma or settling area based on Stokes law which describes 
the sedimentation o f a particle in a centrifugal field (Ambler 1959). In theory, by 
maintaining the same flow rate (Q) to settling area () the end product should 
have the same clarification for all centrifuges. However correction factors must 
be introduced to account for non-ideal flow conditions.
Mannweiler, et al. (1989) demonstrated that the entrance zone of a centrifuge is 
the area where the highest flow stresses prevail. Therefore when a shear sensitive 
material enters the feed zone o f a centrifuge, breakage o f the particles occurs. 
This increases the proportion o f fines resulting in a reduction in the clarification o f 
the material. Within a laboratory scale batch centrifuge, this break up of process
material does not occur since the process material is still relative to the wall o f the 
tube. This means that the laboratory centrifuge will achieve a higher degree of 
clarification than an industrial device, even if the flow rate to settling area is 
maintained between different centrifuges.
The rotating disc device works on the principle that by mimicking the feed zone 
of an industrial centrifuge, the sample can be sheared thus producing the same 
fine particles and decrease in particle size distribution as found at an industrial 
scale. Once sheared samples are centrifuged whilst maintaining the same relative 
settling area between industrial and laboratory scale centrifuge, as a result the 
same degree o f clarification should then be observed.
The rotating disc device consists o f a Perspex chamber o f diameter 40mm. The 
rotating elements are fabricated from smooth aluminium alloy coated with a thin 
layer o f PTFE mounted on a stainless steal shaft. The Perspex chamber is 
constructed o f four interchangeable sections that can be arranged to give different 
heights from 10mm to 40mm. The shaft o f the rotating elements is extended 
through a top cover via a relatively airtight PTFE bearing and connected to a high 
speed DC motor. The motor is powered by a set o f trickle batteries which via a 
transformer, are capable o f delivering a series o f fixed voltages between 2 and 12 
volts, thus providing six fixed speeds o f rotation. The whole assembly is mounted 
on a heavy metal base to stop vibration whilst it is being operated. A full 
description can be found elsewhere (Levy, et al. 1998).
The first step in designing a device that could mimic the shear fields within the 
feed zone o f an industrial scale centrifuge was to accurately map the complex 
flow fields found within an industrial scale centrifuge. Boychyn, et al. (2001) 
used computational fluid dynamics (CFD) coupled with a modem computer to 
solve the necessary equations. Therefore they provided a method where-by the 
complex flow field in an industrial centrifuge could be quantified. Once 
quantified the CFD analysis can be used to predict the speed of disc rotation that 
would be required to mimic the feed zone. When used in combination with a 
laboratory scale centrifuge, accurate predictions of the behaviour o f an industrial
device can be made. This method has been validated by correlation to boundary 
layer theory (Schlichting, 1979, Boychyn, et al. 2001). It is however laborious and 
time consuming.
A less laborious method is based on maintaining a constant tip velocity between 
the rotating disc device and the critical structure in the feed zone of the centrifuge. 
The critical structure is identified as the area where initial contact and acceleration 
o f the process stream occurs. In a disc stack machine the lock nut represents the 
initial point o f contact for the feed suspension. Once the structure has been 
identified the critical radius must be selected. For the lock nut this is the radius at 
its top. The tip velocity can be converted into a maximum power dissipation as 
discussed below and this can be used to predict the performance.
The flow over a disc o f radius R, rotating at an angular velocity co, has been 
theoretically described by Schlichting (1979) and verified by CFD analysis (Levy, 
et al. 1999). The maximum power dissipation is given by:
P cdT 
 ~ p V ~  p V
(equation 1.25)
Where P is the power dissipation, p is the density o f the bulk fluid, V is the 
volume o f the boundary layer, co is the angular velocity and T is the torque.
The magnitude o f forces occurring in the feed zone o f a continuous centrifuge 
may be estimated by determining the tip-velocity (Vcrit) o f the critical structure:
Vcrit  r critCOCrit  27lNcritrcrit
(equation 1.26)
Where rcrit is the critical radius o f the structure and N crit is the rotational speed. 
The critical velocity is then maintained in the laboratory rotating disc device, its 
rotational speed is determined by:
r N\ j  _  crit crit 
iV rd ~
(equation 1.27)
From this an associated maximum energy dissipation rate can be calculated.
Thus the rotating disc device can be used to mimic the feed zone o f an industrial 
centrifuge and a batch laboratory scale centrifuge can be used to mimic the 
settling conditions. This provides an effective method of scaling down 
centrifugation so that process options can be studied using only millilitres o f 
material.
1.5 Aims
Downstream purification process development and optimisation currently requires 
large quantities o f material and time, commodities that are in short supply during 
the initial stages o f drug development. Research into methods o f accurately 
scaling down purification operations has been on going for a number o f years.
The aims o f this project are to develop novel or utilise current scale down 
methodologies in order to mimic the primary industrial scale purification stages 
used during the production o f polyclonal Fab fragments. These mimics are to be 
tested by comparison to the feed stream produced at an industrial scale and used 
to study the effects o f changes to the purification process. Alternative purification 
options for the removal of the precipitated antibodies such as the use of 
microfiltration will be investigated. Chromatographic methods for purification of 
the antibodies directly from the serum, without the need for precipitation or 
centrifugation will also be investigated. These investigations may lead to 
improvements in the yield or in the ease o f operation o f the process.
2 Materials And Methods
2.1 Introduction
Unless otherwise stated all chemicals and materials were obtained from Sigma, 
Poole UK. This chapter details the methods, analytical techniques and 
experiments that were conducted during the preparation of this thesis.
All assay variances quoted within the results sections of this thesis (standard 
deviations and standard errors) were calculated from the actual results.
Section 2.2 describes the design o f the scale down mimics, section 2.3 describes 
the analytical techniques and section 2.4 describes the running o f the scale down 
mimics and other small-scale experiments.
2.2 Application O f Existing Scale Down Theory
2.2.1 Scaled down precipitation
The application o f the theories and experimental conclusions outlined in section
1.4.1 allows a large-scale precipitation reaction to be mimicked and accurately 
reproduced at a laboratory scale.
The first step in any scale down work is to investigate the equipment and the 
process used at the large scale.
2.2.1.1 Industrial scale vessel parameters and operating conditions
Table 2.1 shown below details the dimensions o f the precipitation vessel used 
during the industrial scale precipitation operation.
Vessel height 0.6m
Vessel diameter 0.686m
Volume o f liquid 200L
Construction material Stainless steel
Impeller type 3-bladed marine propeller
Impeller diameter 0.175m
Impeller placement Bottom comer
Height o f impeller 0.20m
Table 2.1 Dimensions o f the industrial scale precipitation vessel
The precipitation reaction is operated under the conditions outlined in table 2.2
Speed o f impeller rotation during addition phase 125rpm
Speed o f impeller rotation during conditioning phase 500rpm
Conditioning time 15 hours
Rate o f addition o f precipitant 4L/minute
Table 2.2 Operating parameters for the industrial scale precipitation reaction 
2.2.1.2 1000 fold scale down mimic
In order to produce an accurate scale down mimic the vessel geometry and power 
input into the precipitation system needs to be maintained between scales.
Scale down o f precipitation vessel
By maintaining vessel geometry between scales a 1000 fold scale down version of 
the industrial scale vessel described in the previous section was produced. It has 
the following dimensions, shown in table 2.3.
Vessel height 0.06m
Vessel diameter 0.0686m
Volume o f liquid 0.2L
Construction material Perspex
Impeller type 3 bladed marine propeller
Impeller diameter 0.02m
Impeller placement Bottom middle
Height o f impeller 0.02m
Table 2.3 Dimensions o f the 1000 fold scaled down precipitation vessel
As can be seen there are some differences between this vessel and the industrial 
one, such as the material o f construction. The industrial scale vessel also has a 
curved bottom where as the scale down vessel has a flat bottom. The main 
difference is in the placement o f the impeller: in the scale down version the 
impeller is in the middle. These differences will affect the flow conditions within 
the reactor. However the controlling factor, which is the power input into the 
system, remains unchanged, which should result in an accurate mimic.
Scale down o f operating conditions
In order to recreate the mixing conditions experienced by the precipitate particles 
during the precipitation process, the total power input into the system needs to be 
calculated. This is expressed as the Camp number. The first step is to calculate 
the power inputted into the industrial scale system. Solving equation 1.23 (shown 
below for reference) using the parameters from tables 2.1, 2.2 and the density 
experiments (described later), allows the power input into the precipitation system 
during the conditioning phase to be calculated.
P = P0p N 3D5
(equation 2.1)
If Po = 0.8 (standard power number for a three bladed marine impeller from 
Rushton, et al. 1950), p  = 130Kgm'3 N = 8.3rps and D = 0.175m the resulting 
power input equals 9.7W.
Using equation 1.22 (shown below for reference), the power input calculated 
above, the volume shown in table 2.1 and the value for the viscosity deduced from 
experiments described later, the mean velocity gradient for the precipitation 
reaction can be calculated.
-  (  p ^
\ V p j
(equation 2.2)
If P = 9.7W, V= 0.2m3 and p = 0.0024Pa.s then the mean velocity gradient is 142. 
From this the Camp number can be calculated where:
Ca = Gt
(equation 2.3)
The conditioning time is 15 hours, therefore the Camp number is 7668000s1.
The mean velocity gradient can be mimicked at the laboratory scale by calculating 
the power input required to achieve the level found at the industrial scale and then 
calculating the impeller speed required to give that power input.
Rearranging equation 2.2 to make the power input the subject gives
P = G2Vp
(equation 2.4)
Solving this equation where G = 142 (calculated above), V = 0.0002m3 (from 
table 2.3) and p = 0.0024Pa.s gives a power input of 0.0097W. The recalculated
power input is then inserted into equation 2.1 which has been rearranged to make 
the impeller speed the subject.
(equation 2.5)
Solving this equation where P = 0.0097W, P0 -  0.8,/?= 130Kgm'3 and dj = 0.02m 
(from table 2.3) yields an impeller speed o f 1840 rpm to be used during the 
conditioning phase. This speed needs to be divided by 3.33 to give the impeller 
speed used during the addition phase o f the precipitation reaction.
Table 2.4 (shown below) summarises the operating conditions of the scaled down 
precipitation reaction that should mimic the industrial scale operation.
Speed o f rotation during addition phase 555rpm
Speed o f rotation during conditioning phase 1840rpm
Conditioning time 15 hours
Rate o f addition o f precipitant 4ml/minute
Table 2.4 Operating parameters o f the scaled down precipitation reaction
2.2.2 Mimicking centrifugation
It was decided to use the method described in section 1.4.2.2 to scale down the 
centrifugation stage; since this offered the possibility o f producing a mimic that 
would require only millilitres o f material. The disc stack centrifuge mimicked has 
the following dimensions and operating conditions:
Number o f discs 95
Outer disc radius 0.1m
Inner disc radius 0.045m
Half disc single 55
Diameter o f lock nut 0.08m
Rotational speed 125rps
Feed flow rate 120L/hr
Sigma Value 8400m2
Correction factor 0.25
Table 2.5 Dimensions and operating conditions o f the industrial scale disc stack 
centrifuge
Calculating the tip velocity o f the critical structure and then mimicking this with 
the in house shear device, mimicked the shear conditions in the centrifuge. 
Equation 1.27 (shown below) was solved in order to determine the speed that the 
in house shear device would be run at, in order to mimic the industrial centrifuge.
r N  .\ t   cnl crit
iV rd ~
(equation 2.6)
Where N crit = 125rps and rcrit = 0.04m and rr<j = 0.015m a rotational speed within 
the shear device o f 20000rpm should recreate the shear conditions found within 
the industrial scale machine.
Once sheared the settling conditions were modelled by maintaining the same Q / Z  
between scales. The sigma value for the industrial disc stack centrifuge can be 
calculated from the equation below (Axelsson, 1985):
Z  =   t t z c o 2q o \ Q ( R q  - R ? ) F X
(equation 2.7)
Where z is the number o f discs in the stack, co = 27m (n is the rotational speed), 0 
is the half disc angle, Ro is the outer disc radius, R\ is the inner disc radius and \ 
is the correction factor applied to account for the presence of the spacer chalks. 
Solving this equation using the parameters in table 1.6 gives a sigma value of 
8400m2.
The sigma value o f the Beckman J2.M1 lab centrifuge fitted with a swing out 
bucket rotor (JA 13.1) with the following dimensions and operated under the 
following conditions can be calculated by utilising equation 2.8.
Maximum radius 0.14m
Minimum radius 0.041m
Volume 3x10 V
Rotational speed 100rps
Sigma 2.76m2
Table 2.6 Dimensions and operating parameters o f the in-house shear device and 
lab centrifuge
g  In
(equation 2.8)
Where R max is the maximum radius, R mi is the minimum radius. Altering the 
volume of material to be separated and the length o f centrifugation can account 
for the difference between the Sigma values. The flow rate to Sigma ratio ( Q / Z )  
can be maintained by utilising the following equation:
Q,ind ^lab
  md ^1 ^ l a b
(equation 2.9)
Rearranging equation 2.9 in order to make time the subject gives the following 
equation:
t = lab
X m F,
\  'E 'm d J
(equation 2.10)
Where Qind is the volumetric flow rate at the industrial scale and Fi is the 
correction factor applied to account for irregularities in the flow. Solving this 
equation shows that the lab scale centrifuge should be run at 6000rpm, with 25ml 
o f sample for 9.6minutes in order to recreate the settling conditions. The 
methodology based on these calculations can be found in section 2.4.2.
2.2.3 Conclusion
This section describes how the operating conditions detailed in section 2.4 were 
determined. Operating the scale down mimics under these conditions should 
accurately mimic the industrial scale operations.
2.3 Analytical Techniques
2.3.1 Biological assays
2.3.1.1 T otal protein
Total protein concentration was determined by the method of coomassie (Pierce, 
Rockford, USA). The method is a modification of the work of Bradford (1976). 
The binding o f protein to the reagent suppresses protonation and results in a 
colour change from brown to blue. Samples to be assayed were diluted to within
the working range o f the reagent (200-1000pg/ml of protein), using phosphate 
buffered saline. This also ensured that the levels of possible interfering buffers, 
such sodium sulphate, were below the level where they could interfere with the 
assay. 50pl of sample were mixed with 950pl of commassie reagent in a cuvette. 
The change in absorbance at 595nm was measured using a spectrophotometer 
(Kontron instruments model 922) after 10 minutes. Comparison o f the reading 
with a standard curve produced, using bovine serum albumin or ovine IgG 
depending on the nature of the sample being tested, enabled the protein 
concentration to be determined. Each sample was measured in triplicate to give a 
mean value.
2.3.1.2 ELISA (Enzyme Linked Immuno Sorbant Assay)
The percentage of active anti-snake venom antibodies was determined using 
enzyme-linked immuno sorbant assay, which allows the identification and 
quantification o f an antigen from within a mixed solution. The assay was carried 
out according to the following protocol. A series o f wells were coated with lOOpl 
each o f snake venom (Protherics, Wales, UK) diluted (1:2000) with PBS pH 7.4 
and incubated for two hours at room temperature. Each well was washed three 
times with a PBS/Tween 20 buffer, pH 7.4 and blocked by the addition of 100pi 
o f 1% skimmed milk diluted in PBS, pH 7.4. After 30 minutes the wells were 
then washed three times with the PBS/Tween 20 buffer. Serial dilutions, using 
PBS, pH 7.4, of each sample were prepared in the range o f 1:2000 to 1:320000 for 
samples where the levels o f antibody present were expected to be low e.g. the 
supernatant and 1:40000 to 1:1280000 for sample where the levels o f antibody 
were expected to be high e.g. ovine serum and precipitated solids. lOOpl o f each 
sample was pipetted in duplicate into the coated wells and incubated at room 
temperature for 2hr. The wells were washed three times with PBS/Tween 20 
buffer, pH 7.4. lOOpl o f anti sheep alkaline phosphatase diluted 1:5000 with 
PBS/Tween 20, pH 7.4 were added to each well. The wells were incubated at 
room temperature for lhr, after which they were washed again with PBS/Tween 
20, pH 7.4. Finally, lOOpl of alkaline phosphate yellow substrate was added to 
each well. When the yellow colour developed, after approximately 30 minutes,
the reaction was stopped by the addition of 25pi of 3M sodium hydroxide. The 
absorbance o f the contents of each well was measured at 405nm by using a plate 
reader (Dynatech MR7000, Guernsey, Channel islands).
The total concentration o f ovine IgG was also measured using an ELISA assay. A 
series of wells were coated with lOOpl o f ovine IgG diluted using PBS, pH 7.4 to 
concentrations between lOOOng/ml and 25ng/ml in order to produce a standard 
curve. Each sample to be assayed was serially diluted using PBS, pH 7.4 to 
within the working range o f the assay and then lOOul were added to each well. 
The plates were incubated for either two hours at room temperature or over night 
at 4C. Each well was washed three times with a PBS/Tween 20 buffer, pH 7.4 
and blocked by the addition o f lOOpl of 1% skimmed milk diluted in PBS, pH 7.4. 
After 30 minutes the wells were then washed three times with the PBS/Tween 20 
buffer. lOOpl o f anti-ovine IgG diluted 1:2000 with PBS/Tween 20, pH 7.4 was 
added to each well and allowed to incubate for lhr. The wells were washed three 
times with PBS/Tween 20 buffer, pH 7.4. lOOpl o f anti sheep alkaline 
phosphatase conjugate diluted 1:5000 with PBS/Tween 20, pH 7.4 were added to 
each well. The wells were incubated at room temperature for lhr, after which 
they were washed again with PBS/Tween 20, pH 7.4. Finally, lOOpl o f alkaline 
phosphate yellow substrate solution was added to each well. When the yellow 
colour developed, after approximately 30 minutes, the reaction was stopped by the 
addition o f 25 pi o f 3M sodium hydroxide. The absorbance o f the contents o f each 
well was measured at 405nm by using a plate reader (Dynatech MR7000, 
Guernsey, Channel islands).
2.3.1.3 Albumin concentration
The concentration o f the contaminating albumin in each sample was determined 
by using albumin reagent, bromocresol green BCG. Albumin binds to BCG to 
produce a blue/green colour with an absorbance maximum at 628nm (Corcoran, 
1977). 50pl o f each sample was mixed with 1ml of BCG in a cuvette. After 5 
minutes the colour change was measured using a spectrophotometer (Kontron
instruments model 922). The concentration of albumin was determined by 
comparing the result with the standard curve produced using bovine serum 
albumin. Each sample was measured in triplicate in order to obtain a mean value.
2.3.2 Physical properties
2.3.2.1 Solid/Aqueous fraction determination
The percentage solid content o f each sample was determined by pipetting 1ml of 
precipitated material into an eppendorf and spinning it at 13000 rpm for 10 
minutes. The volume o f the sample occupied by solid material could then be 
measured by comparison to a graduated eppendorf. The percentage o f solid was 
then calculated by dividing by the total volume. Each sample was analysed in 
triplicate in order to calculate the mean value.
2.3.2.2 Liquid density
The density o f the suspending solution containing the antibodies of interest was 
measured using a specific gravity bottle. 70ml o f sample was spun at 12100g 
using a Beckman J2 M l centrifuge with a JA 20 rotor for 30 minutes in order to 
remove all solid material. 10ml o f the supernatant was decanted into a specific 
gravity bottle and weighed. This was repeated three times in order to obtain an 
average reading.
2.3.23 Precipitate density
The density of the antibody solid fraction was determined by measuring the 
gravity settling velocity i.e. the time taken for the precipitate particles to settle out. 
Then using Stokes law o f free settling and assuming laminar flow the density o f 
the particles could be calculated, given that both the viscosity and the density o f 
the liquid through which the particles were settling had been determined. This was 
considered reasonable considering the relatively small size of the particles.
2.3.2.4 Viscosity
Sample viscosity was determined using the Contraves Rheomat 115 rheometer 
(Contraves AG, Zurich, Switzerland). The Rheomat 115 is a rotational
viscometer; its coaxial measuring systems operate according to the Searle 
principle. A coaxial cylinder arrangement, which rotates in the substance to be 
measured was used to measure the viscosity o f the sample at 15 different shear 
rates. The shearing speed prevailing in the sample is a function of the cylinders 
rotational speed and the shear stress is a function o f the braking torque. The 
samples viscosity, or its flow behaviour respectively can be deduced from these 
values.
20ml of sample at a temperature o f 20 to 25C were used for each run and each 
was repeated in triplicate in order to determine a mean value.
2 .33  Gel Electrophoresis
2.3.3.1 Reducing SDS-Page gel electrophoresis
The proteins contained within each sample were separated and visualised
according to size under denaturing conditions by using SDS polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). A 12% resolving, 4% stacking gel was prepared 
using the method o f Laemmli (1970). The separated protein bands were 
visualised by staining with Coomassie brilliant blue R250 protein dye for 30 to 60 
minutes. Once stained, the gels were destained by shaking in 45% (v/v) methanol, 
10% (v/v) acetic acid in deionised water.
Each sample was diluted to 1 mg/ml. They were then diluted 1 in 2 with sample 
buffer containing 10% (v/v) glycerol, 20% (v/v) o f 10% (w/v) SDS, 12.5% (v/v) 
0.5 M Tris-HCl pH 6.8, 5% (v/v) p-mercaptoethanol, 5% (v/v) of 0.5% 
bromophenol blue and 47.5% (v/v) deionised water to give a final concentration 
of 0.5mg/ml. Each sample was boiled for one minute to ensure that the proteins
were fully denatured. 15pl of each sample were loaded into each well. The gel 
was run at 80V for 30 minutes and then at 150V until the tracking dye reached the 
bottom.
2.3.3.2 Non-reducing SDS page gel electrophoresis
The proteins within certain samples were separated under non-denaturing 
condition. Each sample was diluted to 5mg/ml and then diluted 1:8 in native 
sample buffer (Invitrogen Ltd, Paisley, UK) to give a final concentration of 
0.6mg/ml. Each sample was then placed in boiling water for 1 minute. 15ul of 
sample were loaded into a pre-cast 4-20% Tris-Glycine gel (Invitrogen Ltd, 
Paisley, UK). The gels were run at 150 volts for roughly 1.5 hours or until the
tracking dye reached the bottom. The proteins were visualised by staining with 
Coomassie Brilliant blue R250 (Biorad, Hertfordshire, UK) for 30 to 60 minutes. 
Destaining was achieved by shaking in 45% (v/v) methanol, 10% (v/v) acetic acid 
in deionised water.
2.3.4 Particle size analysis
2.3.4.1 Laser particle sizing
Particle size analysis was carried out using the Malvern Mastersizer 2000 laser 
sizer (Malvern, Worcestershire, UK). Laser diffraction, more accurately called 
Forward Light Scattering measures particles in the range of 0.1 to 2000 microns. 
The instrument consists of three major parts; a schematic is shown in figure 2.1.
Recirculating cell
Laser
Detector
Computer
Figure 2.1 Schematic of the Malvern Mastersizer 2000
  The laser, which acts as a source of coherent intense light of a fixed
wavelength. The lower the wavelength of the light the more stable the
system is and the better the signal to noise ratio becomes. The standard 
He-Ne gas lasers operate at a wavelength of 0.633pm. It is expected 
however that the smaller laser diodes, with wavelengths as low as 600nm, 
will begin to replace the bulkier gas lasers once they become more 
reliable.
  A detector: this consists o f a slice of photosensitive silicon with a number 
o f discrete detectors. It has been shown that the optimum number o f 
detectors is between 16 and 32. Increasing the number o f detectors does 
not necessarily result in an increase in the resolution.
  A means o f passing the sample through the laser beam. Aerosols can be
sprayed directly through the beam. Dry powders can be measured by
being blown through the beam and collected by a vacuum cleaner to 
prevent dust being released to the environment. Particles in suspension 
can be measured by recirculating the sample in front of the laser beam.
The Malvern Mastersizer uses the Mie theory to assume the volume o f the 
particle and then convert this into the diameter of an equivalent sphere. This 
theory completely solves the equations for the interaction of light with matter.
In order to measure a sample the refractive indices for the material and media 
need to be known. The refractive index o f the median was estimated from 
literature (Weast 1978) and that o f the particles was assumed to be the roughly the 
same as biological particles (1.33). Once the samples were measured, the fit o f 
the refractive index could be checked by utilising the Malvern software.
4 drops of each sample to be tested were added into the recirculating cell, which 
contained 18% (w/v) sodium sulphate. This was to ensure that the conditions 
within the instrument matched that of the sample. Each sample was analysed 
three times in order to obtain a mean value.
2.4 Ultra Scale Down Techniques
2.4.1 Ultra scale down precipitation
The precipitation reaction is the first stage in Protherics PLC purification process; 
by mimicking this stage it becomes possible to predict the effect changes will 
have on the large-scale operation and also study the existing process. The 
operating parameters and vessel dimensions were determined in section 2.2
100ml o f serum (Protherics, Llandusul, U.K.) were thawed overnight. The serum 
was then filtered through a 0.2pm filter (Millipore, Watford UK) in order to 
remove any cryoprecipitates. The amount o f filtrate was measured and this was 
then poured into the scaled down reaction vessel. The vessel was placed into a 
water bath set to 30C and the serum allowed to equilibrate with the water 
temperature. Once the temperature o f the serum had reached 30C, an equal 
amount o f 36% (w/v) sodium sulphate (Protherics, Llandusul, U.K.) temperature 
30C was added at a rate o f 4ml/minute by using a Watson Marlow pump model 
101U/R (Watson Marlow, Falmouth, U.K.). Whilst adding the precipitate the 
impeller was set to 555rpm (as determined in section 2.2.1.2). The speed was 
controlled by using a variable speed stirrer (Eurostar Digital, IKA, Lobotechnik). 
Once all the sodium sulphate had been added (approximately 30 minutes), the 
impeller was turned up to 1840rpm and the water bath was switched off. After 15 
hours, the final solution was characterised according to the methods detailed in 
section 2.3.
2.4.2 Ultra scale down centrifugation
Following precipitation at an industrial scale the solid fraction is removed by disc 
stack centrifugation. This operation was mimicked through the use o f the in house 
shear device and a standard swing out bucket lab centrifuge. The operating 
conditions were determined in section 2.2.2.
30ml o f the precipitated antibody solution, prepared as per the method detailed in 
section 2.4.1, was sheared in the in-house shear device at 20000rpm for 1 minute.
Once sheared the solid was then spun down in a Beckman JA20 with a swing out 
bucket rotor for 9.6minutes at 6000rpm. The solids fraction was then re
suspended in 18% (w/v) sodium sulphate. Once re-suspended this solution was 
then sheared again at 20000rpm for 1 minute before being spun down under the 
same conditions as before (at this point samples were taken for particle size 
analysis). Finally, the resulting solids fraction was re-suspended in PBS pH 7.4.
2.4.3 Scaled down filtration
Previously, precipitated immunoglobulins were recovered from the liquor 
containing contaminating proteins by disc stack centrifugation. This process is 
time consuming and requires very strict monitoring for validation purposes. A 
small-scale stirred cell filtration device (Millipore, Watford, UK) has been used to 
study the effects o f replacing the centrifuge with a filter. The precipitated antibody 
feed used in these experiments was produced as per the method in section 2.4.1.
2.4.4 Stirred cell methodology
The stirred cell device was operated in two different modes: batch and continuous. 
It has a diameter o f 0.063m with a total volume o f 200ml and was modified for 
use as a small-scale microfiltration device. A 3 pm (pore size) cellulose acetate 
membrane 90mm in diameter (Millipore, Watford, UK) was cut to the correct 
diameter, as 3 pm pore size membranes were not available in the correct diameter. 
These were then placed at the bottom of the cell. The cell was equipped with a 
single paddle impeller (width = 4.3mm, height = 8.4mm, length = 49.6mm) 
positioned centrally in the cell in close proximity to the surface o f the filter 
membrane. The shaft was driven from the top by a variable speed motor having a 
maximum speed of 242rpm. The rotational speed of the shaft was measured using 
a digital tachometer. The cell was hermetically sealed, once the lid was screwed in 
place, and was supplied with an air inlet and pressure control system allowing 
precise setting o f the air pressure above the solution in the cell during operation.
During continuous (diafiltration) operation the working liquid volume in the cell 
was maintained at a constant level by continuously feeding a wash/diafiltrate 
buffer (18% Na2SC>4 w/v) to the vessel at a rate equal to the permeate rate.
2.4.4.1 Batch filtration
Standard batch filtration tests were carried out as follows: 75ml of suspension 
containing the precipitated antibody was placed in the stirred cell. The rotational 
speed of the paddle was set at a pre-determined value and an air pressure applied. 
The permeate was collected (sample 2a, Figure 5.1b) until the permeate flow 
stopped and a filter cake formed on the membrane. In the second part of the test, 
the cake was washed, as described next. The operation was stopped, 150ml of 
18% sodium sulphate (w/v) was added to the vessel and the paddle speed was set 
to the same speed as before. The mixture was stirred for ten minutes to break and 
resuspend the cake o f precipitated antibody. The air pressure was re-applied and 
the filtrate was collected and measured every minute until the permeate flow 
stopped.
2.4.4.2 Continuous filtration
In diafiltration mode, 75ml o f precipitated antibody was placed in the cell. The 
speed of the paddle was set at the pre-determined value and air pressure applied. 
A buffer solution o f 18% sodium sulphate (w/v) was drawn in at the same rate that 
the permeate was collected, thus maintaining a constant level o f liquid in the 
vessel. The flow o f buffer was stopped after 150ml o f buffer solution had been 
added and the operation switched to cake-filtration mode until the permeate flow 
stopped and a filter cake o f the antibody precipitate formed. The 225ml o f 
permeate was collected in three separate 75ml fractions for analysis.
The final step for both modes o f operation consisted o f adding 75ml of warm 
(37C) phosphate buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.4 to the solid cake in the cell. The 
antibody rich filter cake was allowed to dissolve over approximately ten minutes. 
The air pressure was applied as before and the antibody rich permeate collected 
for analysis.
2.4.4.3 Loading and wash volume determination
75ml and 100ml respectively o f precipitated serum were placed into the stirred
cell. The rotational speed was set to 121rpm and an air pressure o f lbar applied. 
The permeate was collected until the permeate flow stopped. The layer of
precipitated antibodies, which had formed on the surface of the membrane, was 
then washed as described below. The operation was stopped and an equal volume 
in the first set of experiments and twice the initial load volume in the second set o f 
experiments of 18% sodium sulphate (w/v) was added to the vessel. The paddle 
speed was set to the same speed as before and the mixture was stirred for ten 
minutes to break and re-suspend the cake of precipitated antibody. The air 
pressure was re-applied and the filtrate was collected.
2.5 Chromatography
Precipitation followed by centrifugation is an unwieldy and time consuming 
method o f achieving the initial separation. Affinity chromatography utilising the 
unique properties of protein G (as detailed in section 1.3.6.2) offers a simple one 
step procedure for isolating and concentrating the ovine immunoglobulins from all 
the other contaminating proteins.
A preliminary investigation into the feasibility of this process option has been 
carried out. Computer modelling has been utilised to predict breakthrough curves 
o f column separations based on equilibrium data obtained at the laboratory scale.
2.5.1 24 hour equilibrium
Equilibrium binding experiments were used to determine experimental values o f 
the amount of IgG bound to the matrix and the amount remaining soluble in 
solutions of different concentrations after 24 hours. This data can then be fitted to 
model isotherm equations such as the Langmuir curve.
lOOpl o f Protein G sepharose 4 fast flow matrix (Amersham Biosciences, 
Buckinghamshire, UK) equilibrated in 0.2M sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.4 
(binding buffer) was pipetted into a series of eppendorfs. Samples o f purified 
ovine IgG (prepared according to section 2.5.3) and Albumin were prepared at 
concentrations of 40, 35, 30, 25, 20, 15, 10, 8, 6, 4, 2, 1, and 0.5mg/ml by dilution 
with binding buffer. The protein solutions remained clear and there was no visible 
precipitation.
lOOpl o f each sample was pippeted into a separate eppendorf. The tubes were 
closed and placed on an end over end stirrer. After 24 hours, the eppendorfs were 
spun in a microfuge (Biofuge 13, Heraeus sepatech, Germany) at 13000rpm for 
two minutes in order to pack the matrix to the bottom of the tube. (Measuring the 
concentration o f a control sample that had been left at room temperature for 24 
hours checked the stability o f the protein. This showed that no degradation o f the 
protein was occurring). 80pl o f the mobile phase was then removed and analysed 
by Bradford assay for total protein content and ELISA for total IgG content as per 
sections 2.3.1.1 and 2.3.1.2. Each run was repeated three times in order to 
determine a mean value.
2.5.2 Dynamic equilibrium determination
2ml of protein G sepharose 4 fast flow matrix (Amersham Biosciences, 
Buckinghamshire, UK), equilibrated by washing in 10ml of 0.2M sodium 
phosphate buffer pH 7.4, was pippetted into a stirred cell (Millipore, Watford UK) 
(model 8010). The mixer was turned on at a slow speed in order to ensure good 
mixing. 2ml o f each sample (IgG 30mg/ml and Albumin 30mg/ml) was then 
added to the stirred cell. 30ul samples were removed at 15, 30, 45, 60, 90, 120, 
300, 600, 900, 1200, 1500 and 1800 seconds. Any matrix contained with the 
sample was immediately removed by centrifugation through a centrifugal filter 
fitted with a 1 pm pore diameter filter (Millipore, Watford UK). This ensured that 
no further adsorption o f protein to the matrix would occur. The collected samples 
were assayed for total protein content and total IgG content as per sections 2.3.1.1 
and 2.3.1.2.
2.5.3 Purification of ovine IgG by adsorption to Protein G
A 2.5cm high by 0.7cm diameter protein G column (Amersham Biosciences, 
Buckinghamshire, UK) was used to purify the ovine IgG from the serum, forming 
a source of pure IgG for further experiments. 1ml of 0.2pm depth filtered serum 
was mixed with 1ml of binding buffer, in order to ensure buffering conditions 
suitable for the binding o f IgG to protein G. This was loaded onto the column at a
flow rate of 157cm/hr. Any unbound proteins were then washed away by the 
addition o f 6 column volumes (CVs) of binding buffer. The bound IgG was then 
eluted by the addition o f 8 CVs of 0.1M glycine-HCl buffer pH 2.7. Samples 
were collected in one millilitre fractions and the elutant samples were immediately 
quenched to pH 7.0 by the addition of 46pl of 1.0M Tris-HCL pH 9.0 buffer. 
This ensured that the acid labile immunoglobulins were not denatured by the 
harsh elution conditions. Following elution, the column was immediately re
equilibrated with 8 CVs o f binding buffer. After every five runs, the column was 
cleaned by running a solution o f 0.1% Triton 100 detergent through the column 
for one minute (as recommended by the manufacturer). This should remove any 
proteins or lipids that remained bound to the column.
The eluted fractions were pooled, concentrated and a buffer exchange affected. 
This was achieved by centrifugal filtration through a lOOKDa membrane 
(Millipore, Watford, UK) until a final concentration o f IgG in excess o f 40mg/ml 
(determined by measurement o f the absorbance at 280nm) was reached. This 
product could then be diluted as necessary (6 runs were generally required to 
produce 3ml o f final product). The flow through, wash and elution fractions were 
assayed for total protein content and the proteins contained in the samples were 
visualised by non denaturing SDS page as per section 2.3.1.1 and 2.3.3.2.
2.5.4 Breakthrough curves
Purified and concentrated IgG was produced as per the method in section 2.5.3. 
This was diluted with binding buffer to 30mg/ml and 15mg/ml as determined by 
absorbance at 280nm. Columns with the dimensions and bed heights shown 
below in table 2.7 were poured:
Bed Height Bed Diameter Column Volume 
(cm) (cm) (ml)
2.5 0.7 0.96
5 1 3.95
10 1 7.9
15 0.8 7.5
Table 2.7 Chromatography bed dimensions for breakthrough curve experiments
The purified IgG was then pumped onto the column at the flow rates and 
concentrations shown below in table 2.8. A range of flow rates, feed 
concentrations and bed heights were chosen in order to generate differing 
breakthrough curves and test the ability o f the mathematical model to accurately 
predict the shape of the breakthrough curves.
Bed Height (cm) Feed Concentration (mg/ml) Flow rate (cm/h)
2.5 30 157
2.5 30 316
2.5 15 157
2.5 15 316
5 30 76
5 15 76
10 30 76
10 30 38
15 30 120
15 30 60
Table 2.8 Feed concentrations and flow rates used during the breakthrough curve 
experiments
Each column was run until the absorbance reading o f the effluent levelled out and 
was within 0.1 AU of the feedstock.
3 An Ultra Scale Down Approach For The Predication
Of Full Scale Recovery Of Ovine Polyclonal 
Immunoglobulins Used In The Manufacture Of Snake 
Venom Specific Fab Fragment
3.1 Introduction
The results presented in this chapter have been published (Neal, et al. 2003). This 
chapter describes a new approach that allows the prediction of the performance of 
a large-scale integrated process for the primary recovery of a therapeutic antibody 
from an analysis o f the individual unit operations and their interactions in an ultra 
scale-down mimic o f the process. The recovery process consisted of four distinct 
unit operations (figure 3.1a). Using the new approach the important engineering 
parameters in each operation that impacted the overall recovery process were 
defined and in each case its effect was verified by a combination of modelling and 
experimentation.
Immunoglobulins were precipitated from large volumes of dilute blood plasma 
and the precipitate particles were recovered by centrifugal separation from the 
liquor containing contaminating proteins including albumin. The fluid 
mechanical forces acting on the particles and the time of exposure to these forces 
were used to define a time-integrated fluid stress. This was used as a scaling factor 
to predict the properties o f the precipitate particles at large scale. In the case o f 
centrifugation, the performance o f a full-scale disc stack centrifuge was predicted. 
This was achieved from a CFD analysis of the flow field in the centrifuge coupled 
with experimental data obtained from the precipitated immunoglobulin particles 
using the scale down precipitation tank, a rotating shear device, and a standard 
swing-out rotor centrifuge operating under defined conditions. In this way, the 
performance of the individual unit operations, and their linkage, was successfully 
analysed from a combination of modelling and experiments. These experiments 
required only millilitre quantities of the process material. The overall performance 
of the large-scale process was predicted by tracking the changes in physical and
biological properties o f the key components in the system including the size 
distribution of the antibody particles and antibody activity through the individual 
unit operations in the ultra scale-down process flowsheet.
This chapter is concerned with the initial downstream recovery of ovine
polyclonal immunoglobulins as part of a process for the preparation o f
monovalent Fab fragments developed as an antidote to rattlesnake bites. The 
preparation of the anti-venom is detailed in chapter 1.
From a process engineering perspective, there is now very intense pressure on 
companies to establish techniques that can rapidly assess new process options to 
produce a potential new drug candidate in sufficient quantities for its perceived 
demand. This pressure is compounded further by the fact that such process 
information is needed often early in the life cycle of the new drug candidate when 
pilot plant trials are either not feasible, because the company has no access to 
suitable facilities, or not practical because only very small quantities o f relevant 
materials are available for tests. Recently an engineering approach that allowed 
key process information to be generated from small mimics of large industrial unit 
operations was developed. This provided experimental evidence that 
demonstrated the applicability o f the technique in two separate operations, one 
involving the recovery o f a protein precipitate using a multichamber centrifuge 
(Boychyn, et al. 2001) and the other the recovery o f a monoclonal antibody
fragment in solution from fermentation broth using a filtering centrifuge
(Boulding, et al. 2002). This chapter provides experimental evidence to 
demonstrate the capacity o f the approach to link two neighbouring operations of 
precipitation and centrifugation used in sequence in the primary recovery o f the 
immunoglobulins.
3.2 Methodology
All experiments were carried out with the same stock of anti-venom serum 
supplied by, Protherics PLC (Llandusul, Wales, UK).
Figure 3.1a shows the sequence o f operations in the large-scale process flowsheet 
for the primary recovery of the immunoglobulins. The process starts with a 
precipitation step during which the immunoglobulins, primarily IgG, are 
precipitated from the serum solution by the addition of an equal volume o f 36% 
(w/v) solution of sodium sulphate (final concentration 18% w/v). This is followed 
by a solid-liquid separation step in a disc stack centrifuge to remove the 
precipitated antibodies from the liquor containing the contaminating proteins 
including albumin. The solid fraction containing the immunoglobulins are then 
resuspended in a fresh solution o f 18% (w/v) sodium sulphate and centrifuged 
again to remove the residual contaminating proteins.
In the large-scale process, the precipitation step was carried out in a 0.68m 
diameter cylindrical stainless steel, dished-bottom tank having a height of 0.6m. 
The liquid height in the vessel was maintained at 0.5m giving a working volume 
o f 200L. The vessel was equipped with a 3-bladed stainless steel marine propeller, 
positioned off-centre in the tank. The impeller shaft entered the vessel through 
the side-bottom of the tank, 1/5 of the liquid height from the base of the vessel, at 
an angle o f approximately 45. The impeller was driven by an electric motor with 
the speed o f agitation set at 150rpm. Agitation was maintained at this speed for 30 
min to complete the precipitation process, following which the impeller speed was 
increased to 500rpm and maintained at this speed for 15hr to condition (age) the 
precipitate. The whole operation (precipitation and aging) was carried out at 
30C. The precipitated antibody was separated from the liquor containing the 
other biomolecules by using a continuous flow disc stack centrifuge (Model 
SAMR 3036, Westfalia, UK) with a bowl volume of 6.9L operating at a speed of 
7500rpm and a flow rate o f 120Lhr"'. The solids were collected intermittently, 
pooled and resuspended in an equal volume of 18% (w/v) sodium sulphate in a 
tank with identical configuration to the precipitating vessel and operating under 
the same speed. The resuspended antibody particle was then centrifuged under 
operating conditions similar to those used in the first centrifuge. The solids from 
the second centrifuge were pooled and resuspended in phosphate buffered saline 
(PBS) solution before being transferred to the fractionation vessel for treatment 
with papain.
Figure 3.1b shows the ultra scale-down flowsheet used to mimic the operations in 
the full-scale process (Figure 3.1a). The precipitation tank was scaled-down by 
factor of 1000, based on the working volume of the liquid. The main dimensions 
o f the scale-down precipitation vessel were as follows: tank diameter = 0.068m; 
tank height = 0.06m; liquid height = 0.05m; and impeller diameter = 0.02m. There 
were major geometrical differences between the full-scale precipitation tank and 
its mimic. For example, in the scale-down configuration, both the vessel and the 
three bladed marine propeller were constructed from plastic, the vessel had a flat 
bottom and the impeller was positioned in the centre o f the tank and driven via a 
shaft from the top o f the vessel by a small electric motor with a variable speed 
control. The impeller was placed approximately 1/3 of the vessel diameter from 
the base of the vessel and the ratio o f impeller to tank diameter was different to 
that used in the full-scale unit.
3.2.1 Computational Fluid Dynamics simulation
The velocity profile and the associated local energy dissipation rates in the 
entrance region of the disc stack centrifuge were simulated using a commercially 
available package (CFX 4.1, AEA Technology, Oxfordshire, UK). A finite 
volume code was used to solve the integrated form of the governing flow equation 
(Versteeg and Malalasekera, 1955). The flow of the fluid in the entrance is highly 
turbulent, and the high Reynolds number form of the k-e turbulence model (RNG 
k-s turbulence model) was built into the CFX-4.1 code and used for calculation 
purposes. Previously described experimental results validate simulations made by 
CFX (Soon et al, 2001). This package is now used routinely to assess the flow in 
complex process geometry (Boychyn, et al. 2001; Boulding, et al. 2002).
For the purpose o f flow analysis, the two-liquid phase mixture was treated as a 
continuum having the physical properties o f the continuous aqueous phase. This is 
a reasonable assumption given the relatively low solid concentration in the feed 
(12% v/v). The antibody suspension flows into the empty space of the entrance 
chamber, and in its normal mode o f operation the flow is considered as a two- 
phase, gas-liquid system with the liquid expanding through the air space o f the
chamber. The homogeneous two-phase flow model was used to describe the gas- 
liquid interaction. It was assumed that the solution fields for each phase were 
identical except for the volume fractions, which were found by solving separate 
continuity equations for each phase. This approximation was considered to be 
reasonable because the majority o f the volume fractions are close to zero or unity, 
with the exception o f those at the interface. The two-phase fluid flow was 
assumed to be transient, weakly compressible for the gas phase and Newtonian, 
non-isothermal and homogeneous with constant density and viscosity 
(incompressible) for the liquid phase. Gravity effects were assumed to be 
negligible and were not included in the calculations.
Because of the symmetry o f flow the simulations were carried out only for a 
quarter o f the centrifuge volume. In terms of CFD analysis o f flow in the 
centrifuge, an important consideration is the treatment o f boundary conditions at 
moving surfaces. The simulation programme used in the present study is a cell 
centred code in which the variables are calculated and stored at a node in the 
centre of the cell. Therefore, unlike other codes that have active vertices on the 
wall, for example a finite element code, CFX4 does not require the specification 
o f turbulence values on the wall.
The entrance region o f the centrifuge forming the computational domain was 
body fitted for grid generation and the governing equation solved using a 
personal computer (Hewlett Packard, Vectra, Pentium II 400 MHz). Grid 
independent solutions were obtained by using a mesh design consisting o f 90,000 
grids. The grids were refined to allow the details of flow to be examined in 
regions where rapid changes in flow occurred.
3.2.2 Analytical techniques
Biological assays
The activity of antibodies, the total protein concentration and the concentration o f 
albumin within the samples were determined as per the methods in section 2.2.1.
The proteins contained within each sample were separated according to size under 
denaturing conditions by sodium dodecyl sulphate polyacrylamide gel 
electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE). The methodology is described in section 2.2.3
Physical properties
To assess the physical state of the precipitated antibody particles, particle size 
measurements were performed on samples removed from the full-scale process as 
well as the scale-down mimic. The sampling locations are shown in Figures 3.1a 
and 3.1b. Particle size measurements were obtained as per section 2.2.4.
Density measurement o f the liquid and solid fractions, viscosity measurements 
and percent solids content were determined as per the methods in section 2.2.2.
3.3 Results
Figures 3.1a and 3.1b are process flow sheets detailing the initial purification 
steps used during the production o f rattlesnake anti-venom. Figure 3.1a shows the 
industrial scale process which consists o f precipitation, centrifugation, re
suspension and a second centrifugation step. Figure 3.1b shows the scaled down 
mimic process which consists o f precipitation, shearing, centrifugation, re
suspension, a second shearing step and a second centrifugation.
100L 36% (w/v) 
sodium sulphate
s100L Serum
Sample No. 1 9 1 1
2  supernatant 
Sample No. 5
1 supernatant 
Sample No. 3
Equal volume 18% 
sodium sulphate
Disc Stack 
centrifuge
Disc Stack 
centrifugePrecipitation 
vessel Resuspension 
vessel
Precipitant 
Sample No 2
Final product 
Sample No 61 solid 
Sample no.4
100ml 36% (w/v) 
sodium sulphate
f f l
Precipitation
vessel
Rotating disc 
device
100ml Serum Precipitant
Sample No. 1 Sample no.2
Equal volume 18% 
sodium sulphate
1 supernatant 
Sample No. 3
2  supernatant 
Sample No. 5
Rotating disc 
Resuspension device
vessel
Centnfuee
Centrifuge
Final Product 
Sample no.6
1 solid 
Sample no.4
Figure 3.1a & b Process flow sheet detailing the initial stages of the process 
scale purification process, the ultra scale down mimic of the process and the 
sampling points
Table 3.1 is a comparison o f the physical properties of the antibody particles 
produced at the industrial scale and by the ultra scale down mimic. The mimic 
produces a feed stream which closely matches the physical properties of the feed 
stream produced at the industrial scale (standard error: Viscosity +/- O.lmPa.s 
(n=5), Solids content +/- 1.3% (n=5), Density solid +/- 0.16g.cm'3 (n=5), Density 
liquid +/- 0.02g.cm*3 (n=5)
Viscosity (mPa.s) Solids content (%) Density solid (g.cm'3) Density liquid (g.cm'3)
Scale down 2.5 12.0 1.3 1.17
Industrial scale 2.4 12.0 1.3 1.17
Table 3.1 Comparison o f the precipitated antibodies (sample number two in 
figure 3.1a & b) physical properties produced on an industrial scale and by the 
scale down mimic
The particle size distribution of the antibody particles produced at the two 
different operating scales should match, if they do it indicates that the mimic is 
effective. Figure 3.2 shows the particle size distribution of the industrial scale 
particles and the ultra scale down particles. The particle size distributions match 
closely between the two scales indicating a good mimic (standard deviation +/- 
3 pm at d0.9, n=5).
Particle Size
^  60 - 
>  40 -
Size (um) 
d(0.S) 
d(0.1) 
Scale down 3.4
Industrial scale 4.5
10 1001
Particle s ize  (pm)
Figure 3.2 Comparison of the particle size distribution produced during the 
precipitation o f antibodies with sodium sulphate on an industrial scale,   and by a 
1000 fold scale down model, A with the same time integrated shear stress value 
(Ef) (sample point 2 fig 3.1a & b)
Disc stack centrifugation is expected to have some degree of impact upon the 
particle size distribution o f the antibody particles. Figure 3.3 depicts the particle 
size distribution o f the particles before and after their passage through the 
centrifuge. Disc stack centrifugation results in a 50% decrease in the particle size, 
it is interesting to note however that no further reduction size occurs during the 
second passage (standard deviation +/- 3pm at d0.9, n=3).
100 1000 3000
80 P a rtic le  S iz e
o 6 0 -  
>  4 0 -
Size (um) 
d(0.5) 
d(0.1)
Pre-centrifugation 4.5
Post-1st centrifugation 2.6
Post-2nd centrifugation 2.5
d(0.9)
10 1001
Particle size (pm)
Figure 3.3 Comparison o f the precipitated antibodies particle size distribution 
before,  after,   1st industrial scale disc stack centrifugation and after 2nd 
industrial scale disc stack centrifugation  (sample points 2,4 & 6 fig 3.1a)
SDS page gel electrophoresis provides a means of visualising the proteins 
contained within a sample. Figure 3.4a is a SDS page reducing gel of the proteins 
contained within the feed and waste streams at various points during the industrial 
scale purification process. It can be seen that the albumin, which forms the main 
contaminant, is removed during purification.
Albumin
Mr Markers
105,400
98,200
52.800
32,900
24.800
Antibody product (heavy chain)
Antibody product (light chain)
Figure3.4a SDS-page reducing gel showing the contaminants of each feed 
stream at the industrial scale, lane one contains Serum, three contains 1st 
supernatant, four contains 1st solid, five contains 2nd supernatant and six contains 
2nd solid. Sample numbers refer to figure 3.1a
Figure 3.4b is a SDS page reducing gel of showing the proteins contained in the 
feed and waste streams of the ultra scale down mimic purification process. The 
gel shows that the same contaminants are present at both scales.
105,400
98,200
52.800
32,900
24.800
Mr markers
A l b u m i n
< & >
Antibody product (heavy chain)
Antibody product (light chain)
Figure 3.4b SDS-page reducing gel showing the contaminants of each feed 
stream at the laboratory scale, lane one contains Serum, three contains 1st 
supernatant, four contains 1st solid, five contains 2nd supernatant and six contains 
2nd solid. Sample numbers refer to figure 3.1b
CFD simulations allow predictions of the magnitude of forces acting within the 
disc stack centrifuge. Figure 3.5 is the CFD simulation of the flow conditions 
within a disc stack centrifuge. The shear rate is highest within the region of the 
lock nut.
time = 1s time = 2s
Volume fraction
Velocity
Shear rate
  0.8 3 - 1.00 m 0 .1 7 - 0.20 
0.67 - 0.83 0 .1 4 - 0.17
  0.50 - 0.67 m 0 .1 0 - 0.14 
1 0.33 - 0.50 [ 0 .0 7 - 0.10
  0.1 7 - 0.33   0 .0 3 - 0.07 1
|  0.0 0 - 0.17 |  0 .0 0 - 0.03 1
8,7 3 0 - 10,000 
6,984 - 8,730 
5,238 - 6,984 
3,492 - 5,238 
1,7 4 6 - 3,492 
0 - 1,746
Figure 3.5 CFD simulations of flow and associated hydrodynamic parameters in 
the entrance region of the disc stack centrifuge
Particle size distribution measurements of the antibody particles at various stages 
during the ultra scale down purification process are shown in figure 3.6. As can 
be seen without shearing little degradation of particle size occurs. However the 
introduction o f shear stress results in degradation o f the particle size distribution 
to a size which closely matches the particle size produced during industrial scale 
centrifugation (standard deviation +/- 3 pm at d0.9, n=5).
0.1 1 10 100 1000 3000
P a rtic le  S iz e
Size (am)
d(0.1) d(0.5) d(0.9)
Scale down precipitant 3.4 15.1 29.7
Post-centrifugation no shear 2.6 10.4 21.8
Post 1 shear & 1 centrifugation 2.8 6.8 15.5
Post 2 shear & 2 centrifugation 2.8 6.8 13.4
Post-industrial centrifugation 2.6 5.3 12.1
Particle size (nm)
Figure 3.6 Comparison o f the precipitated antibodies particle size distribution 
before,  and after,   (sample points 2 & 6 fig 3.1b) centrifugation in a swing 
out bucket centrifuge at the same flow rate/sigma as the industrial disc stack 
centrifuge (no shear). After shearing with an air liquid interface followed by 
centrifugation in a swing out bucket centrifuge, X (sample point 4 fig 3.1b). After 
shearing twice with an air liquid interface followed by centrifugation twice in a 
swing out bucket centrifuge, A (sample point 6 fig 3.1b) and after industrial disc 
stack centrifugation,   (sample point 6 fig 3.1a)
The levels o f total protein, albumin and active antibody were measured in order to 
produce a mass balance. Figure 3.7a is the mass balance for the industrial scale 
operation. The balance correlates with the visual information given by the SDS 
page gels shown in figure 3.5 (standard error: Total protein +/- 3% (n=5), 
Albumin +/- 5% (n=5), Active antibody +/- 8% (n=3)).
B  A verage Total p ro te in  (% )
  A verage A lbum in  (% )
B  A verage A ctive  A ntibody  (% )
Figure 3.7a Mass balance for industrial scale purification process showing the 
levels of total protein, the main contaminant and the product (sample numbers 
correspond to those in fig 3.1a)
A mass balance was also carried out for the ultra scale down purification process. 
Figure 3.7b depicts the levels o f total protein, albumin and active antibodies 
within the various samples. It can be seen that they closely match the levels 
produced at an industrial scale (standard error: Total protein +/- 3% (n=5), 
Albumin +/- 4% (n=5), Active antibody +/- 9% (n=3)).
A verage  T o tal p ro te in  (% )
A verage  A lbum in  (% )
  A verage  A ctive  A n tibody  (% )
I A verage  A ctive  A n tibody  
w ithou t shear (% )
Figure 3.7b Mass balance for the ultra scale down purification process showing 
the levels o f total protein, the main contaminant and the product (sample numbers 
correspond to those in fig 3.1b)
A comparison of the levels of total protein, albumin and active antibodies found 
with the first solid of the industrial scale process and ultra scale down process is 
presented in Figure 3.8a. The levels of protein closely match between the two 
differing scales of operation (standard error Scale down: Total protein +/-3% 
(n=5), Albumin +/- 4% (n=5), Active antibodies = +/- 9% (n=3). Industrial scale: 
Total protein +/-3% (n=5), Albumin +/- 5% (n=5), Active antibodies = +/- 8% 
(n=3)).
100 -  
Figure 3.8a Mass balance showing a the quantities of total protein (%), albumin 
(%) and active antibody (%) present in the 1st solid (sample point 4)
  Total protein
  Albumin
  Active antibody
Scale down Industrial scale
A mass balance of the total protein content, albumin levels and active antibody 
concentration contained in the final product reveals that the levels match closely 
between the two scales of operation and that the amount of albumin present has 
been reduced to almost zero (standard error Scale down: Total protein +/-3% 
(n=5), Albumin +/- 4% (n=5), Active antibodies = +/- 9%  (n=3). Industrial scale: 
Total protein +/-3% (n=5), Albumin +/- 5% (n=5), Active antibodies = +/- 8% 
(n=3)).
60 -j
  Total protein (%)
  Albumin (%)
  Active antibody (%)
Scale down Industrial scale
Figure 3.8b Mass balance showing the quantities of total protein (%), albumin 
(%) and active antibody (%) in the final product (sample point 6)
3.4 Discussion
3.4.1 Precipitation
The recovery o f the immunoglobulin fraction from the serum solution containing 
other biomolecules must ensure conditions, which avoid damage to the protein 
product. Precipitation is an attractive option that is capable of rapidly isolating the 
desired product and bringing about product concentration and fractionation 
simultaneously. The precipitation step also impacts on the efficiency of any 
subsequent recovery and purification stages in the process flow sheet through the 
size and strength o f the protein precipitated particles. In this investigation, we 
defined the process conditions that allowed the properties of the immunoglobulins 
precipitated particles in a large-scale precipitation reactor to be predicted from 
small-scale studies (figures 3.1a and 3.1b). The methodology is not intended to 
greatly change the concepts and theories o f protein precipitation (Przybycien and 
Bailey, 1989) but to lead to more effective means for its control particularly when 
shear sensitive biological products are processed.
Based on previous work on the impact o f turbulence on biomaterials (Yim and 
Ayazi Shamlou, 2000; Henzler, 2000; Kieran, et al. 2000), it was hypothesized 
that the physical properties o f the precipitated particles at the end o f the aging 
process were determined primarily by the total fluid stress, Ef, acting on the 
particles during the conditioning stage. Assuming that fluid stress is equal, or 
directly proportional to the fluid energy dissipated in the liquid by the impeller, 
then Ef was defined as the product o f the power input by the impeller, P, per unit 
volume of suspension, V, and the aging (conditioning) time, t. Thus, Ef = evt = 
[(P/V)t]. The group (svt) with the units o f N m ', may be thought of as a "time- 
integrated fluid stress" acting on the particles in the aging process and gives a 
measure o f the total work done on the particles during this period. Previous work 
in our laboratories (Bell, et al. 1982a and 1982b) and elsewhere have used the 
concept of Camp number, defined as the product of the average shear rate, G, in 
the precipitating vessel and aging time, t, to correlate experimental data. For a 
Newtonian system the dimensionless Gt is related to svt through the kinematic
viscosity. It is proposed that the physical basis of the time-integrated fluid stress, 
(svt), provides a more rational basis for comparing and correlating experimental 
results and here we used this approach to compare data from the two scales of 
precipitation. In both scales the calculation of the operating Reynolds number 
showed that flow was fully turbulent and power input was obtained from a 
standard power-curve for each impeller. Suspension viscosity, density and solids 
contents were measured as described in section 2.2.2 and particles size analysis 
was performed on samples removed from different points in the process (figures 
3.1a and 3.1b). In table 3.1 physical properties are presented for the two scales o f 
precipitation vessel operating at an equal time-integrated shear stress. The data in 
table 3.1 refers to samples taken at the end of the aging period and prior to the 
first step centrifugation (sampling point 2 figures 3.1a and 3.1b). Figure 3.2 shows 
the corresponding size distribution o f the immunoglobulins precipitated particles 
for the two scales. Excellent agreement is observed between the two scales of 
precipitation. These experiments were carried out at a constant time-integrated 
fluid stress of 2.6x1 O ^ m '2, which was calculated based on an aging time o f 15h 
and an operating power input per unit volume o f 48.5Wm' , representing the 
conditions in the large scale precipitation tank. Using the ultra scale-down 
process, we carried out additional experiments in which Ef was maintained 
constant for different combinations o f P/V and aging times, t. Particle size 
distributions thus obtained for constant Ef were comparable demonstrating the 
general applicability o f the concept o f time-integrated shear stress.
3.4.2 Centrifugation
The plots in figure 3.3 represent the size distribution of samples before (sample 
point 2, figure 3.1a) and after (sample points 4 and 6, figure 3.1a) the two 
centrifugation steps. The data refer to samples obtained from the full-scale 
operation and demonstrate a significant shift in the size distribution towards 
smaller sizes occurring as the material passes through the first centrifuge. It is 
notable that the second centrifuge has negligible impact on the size distribution 
confirming that particle size is determined mainly by the aging conditions and the 
first stage centrifuge. The SDS-PAGE gel analysis of samples (figure 3.4) allowed 
the contents of the solids and supernatant streams to be visualised and tracked.
Comparison of samples 1 and 3 shows that a large fraction of the contaminating 
albumin protein is removed from the immunoglobulin product during the 
precipitation and first stage centrifugation and according to samples 3 and 6 
further albumin is removed during the resuspension and second step 
centrifugation steps. The remaining contaminating components seen in sample 6 
are removed by further downstream processing following treatment with papain. 
Additionally, these gels indicate that there is no detectable antibody present in the 
supernatant (Lane 3) o f the first centrifuge and mass balances by ELISA carried 
out on immunoglobulins showed only a small amount of loss of binding (see later 
discussion).
As described below, we used the ultra-scale down process flowsheet (figure 3.1b) 
to mimic the large-scale process. Previous work on protein precipitates 
(Mannweiler and Hoare, 1992) using a disc stack centrifuge concluded that 
breakage of precipitates occurred in the entrance zone o f the centrifuge. This has 
also been confirmed recently for a multichamber-bowl centrifuge (Boychyn, et al. 
2000). The breakage o f the feed material increases the proportion o f fine particles 
causing a reduction in the separation performance o f the centrifuge (Maybury, et 
al. 1998). The difficulty in using a conventional laboratory centrifuge to predict 
the consequences o f such breakage on the performance of an industrial centrifuge 
is that unlike the former, shear damage in the latter is practically negligible since 
the fluid in the laboratory centrifuge is at rest relative to the centrifuge tube. An 
approach, which overcomes this difficulty, has been recently reported (Boychyn, 
et al. 2001; Boulding, et al. 2002). The methodology used to obtain the necessary 
information is briefly as follows. For a given set of operating conditions, the 
velocity field and the associated hydrodynamic parameters such as shear rates, 
energy dissipation rates and shear stresses in the full-scale centrifuge are mapped 
out by using computational fluid dynamics (CFD) analysis of the prevailing flow. 
Using CFD simulations the regions o f highest energy dissipation rates in the 
centrifuge are identified. A small laboratory device consisting of a 30mm rotating 
disc housed in a 40mm diameter, 20mm height, cylindrical chamber described 
previously (Levy, et al. 1999) is used to create flow conditions inside the chamber 
that accurately produce the highest predicted energy dissipation rates in the full- 
scale centrifuge. A small quantity, typically 30ml, of the process material is
subjected to the predetermined flow environment in the chamber of the rotating 
disc device and the resulting suspension is treated in a standard laboratory 
centrifuge. In the present study, we used the above protocol with a standard 
laboratory centrifuge (Beckman J2, UK) equipped with a set of swing out bucket 
rotors (type J13.1). The Beckman centrifuge was operated at a ratio 
(Boychyn, et al. 2001) equal to that used in the full-scale centrifuge. Each run was 
repeated twice and the material pooled and suspended in 18% (w/v) sodium 
sulphate solution for analysis.
CFD simulations o f the entrance region o f the disc stack centrifuge are shown in 
figure 3.5. These simulations indicated that the maximum energy dissipation rate 
in the centrifuge was in the order o f 5xl04 WKg'1. We carried out ultra scale- 
down experiments using the swing out bucket laboratory centrifuge and the 
rotating disc shear device operating under conditions that matched the maximum 
energy dissipation rate in the disc stack centrifuge. The results are shown in 
Figure 3.7 and demonstrate that the laboratory centrifugation on its own fails to 
mimic the performance o f the disc stack centrifuge. However, by shearing the 
sample in the small scale rotating disc device followed by centrifugation in the 
swing out centrifuge operating at an equal ratio to that used in the full scale 
centrifuge it was possible to achieve results that were in excellent agreement with 
the full-scale unit.
Examination of the size distribution plots in figure 3.6 also shows no significant 
differences in the size distribution o f precipitated particles for solid samples taken 
at points 4 and 6 (figure 3.1b). This agrees very well with the results shown in 
figure 3.3 (for samples points 4 and 6, figure 3.1a) and confirms the general 
applicability o f the proposed ultra scale-down approach.
These results are also consistent with previous observations on breakage of 
precipitates and particles in turbulent flow fields, which suggest that, in these 
cases the size o f the particle that survives an imposed turbulent flow environment 
is uniquely determined by the intensity of the prevailing fluid stresses. Significant 
structural changes occurring during the conditioning stage cause the compaction
of the particle and, in the case o f precipitate particles, previous work has shown 
that the degree o f compaction is not uniform within the structure. Most particles 
tend to posses a hard core and a relatively loose structure on the outer region. In a 
high intensity flow environment, such as that o f the centrifuge, the size the 
particle reduces rapidly as the outer loose structure is removed rapidly by the 
prevailing fluid stresses. As the outer mechanically weak layers o f the particles 
are removed a point is reached at which mechanical strength of the surface 
exceeds the magnitude o f the imposed fluid mechanical stress. The result is a 
pseudo-equilibrium size which is determined by the balance o f these two forces. 
Based on the results shown in figures 3.3 and 3.6 it can be concluded that the 
physical properties o f the precipitated antibodies are determined wholly by the 
aging (conditioning) process in the precipitation step and the first step 
centrifugation, the re-suspension and the second centrifuge steps have no 
detrimental impact on the size o f the precipitate. The latter stages however have 
an important role in removing some o f the residual contaminating proteins from 
the precipitate.
Component and total mass balances for the full-scale process flowsheet and its 
scale-down mimic were also carried out. The results are shown in figure 3.7 and 
3.8. The differences observed between the two systems are within the measured 
level o f error o f the biological assays used. Comparing the data for the two 
flowsheets (figures 3.1a and 3.1b) it is notable that shearing of the antibody 
precipitate in suspension in the chamber o f the rotating disc device causes some 
loss of activity. The differences between the two scales however is within the 
margin of error and taken together the results support the applicability of the 
proposed approach to scale-down o f both the precipitation and centrifugation 
stages.
3.5 Conclusion
This chapter describes a new scale-down approach for the primary recovery o f a 
therapeutic protein precipitate based on a full-scale process flowsheet. The 
process consisted o f a sequence o f four unit operations including a precipitation 
followed by a centrifugation, resupension and a final centrifugation step. Using 
millilitre quantities of process material a new approach was used to define the
important physical properties of the precipitate which impacted upon the recovery 
process. The results show that protein precipitate size distribution was critically 
influenced by the precipitation and first stage centrifugation step, the resuspension 
and second stage centrifugation had no effect on the size of the particles but were 
significant in removing more of the residual contaminating proteins.
In the case of (first stage) centrifugation, prediction of the performance o f a disc 
stack centrifuge was achieved from the CFD analysis of flow in the full-scale unit 
combined with shear sensitivity data obtained from a small rotating shear device 
together with clarification data obtained from a standard laboratory centrifuge. 
The large scale precipitation step was successfully mimicked at small scale by 
using the concept o f time-integrated fluid stress which was defined as the product 
of the power input per unit volume of suspension and the precipitation 
conditioning (aging) time in the reactor.
Taken together the results detailed in this chapter provide a basis for predicting 
the overall performance o f a process by linking the sequence o f operations within 
it via ultra scale-down techniques. Such an approach offers considerable 
advantages. For example, using millilitre quantities of process material, a series of 
scale-down tools, such as the rotating shear device, and CFD analysis of flow 
regimes in the full-scale equipment, process engineers will be able to rapidly 
assess potential process options for a range o f drug candidates early in the 
development cycle o f each drug and reduce the need to carry out numerous pilot- 
scale runs.
4 The Use Of Ultra Scale Down Mimics To Predict The 
Effect Of Changes To The Operating Conditions On 
The Characteristics Of Antibody Particles
4.1 Introduction
Once the initial industrial scale downstream purification process has been 
developed, trials are carried out in order to optimise the processing conditions. 
Due however to the constraints discussed in chapter 3 these optimisation trials are 
often short lived or non-existent. The majority o f downstream purification 
processes are adaptations o f old processes that have not been optimised for the 
new drug candidate. The use o f ultra scale down mimics allows a process 
engineer to study process options cheaply and quickly. The results obtained can 
then be utilised when designing scale-up or process optimisation schemes.
This chapter describes the use o f the ultra scale down mimics developed in 
chapter 3 to predict the effect that changes to the operating conditions o f the 
purification stage will have on the process and on the characteristics of the process 
stream. Since the mimic has been verified as being accurate, by comparison with 
results obtained at an industrial scale, changes made to the operating conditions 
can be assumed with a reasonable degree o f certainty to have the same effect on 
an industrial scale as they do when carried out with the ultra scale down mimic.
Four types of changes were made to the operating conditions of the precipitation 
reaction: solid sodium sulphate was used in the place of liquid, the mixing 
conditions were altered, the temperature of the precipitation reaction was 
increased and the effect of altering the percentage sodium sulphate was studied. 
The effects of these changes on the physical properties of the antibody particles 
(viscosity, density and percentage solids content, particle size distribution and 
resistance to shearing) were assessed, along with the effect on protein 
concentration in each phase.
4.2 Using Solid Sodium Sulphate Instead O f Liquid
The use of a solid precipitation agent, as opposed to a liquid one, immediately 
allows the scale o f the operation to be doubled. For example, instead of adding 
100L of 36% (w/v) sodium sulphate to 100L of serum to achieve a final 
concentration o f 18% (w/v), 36Kg of sodium sulphate can be added to 200L of 
serum resulting in the same final concentration. Using a powder as the 
precipitation agent could effect the kinetics o f the precipitation process. Chan, et 
al. (1986) demonstrated the effect that different precipitation agents have on the 
precipitation o f soya protein. They concluded that the type of precipitation agent 
influences the precipitate particle formed. The mode and rate o f addition o f the 
precipitating agent also influence the reaction (Foster, et al. 1976) and different 
reagents have different precipitation kinetics (Chan, et al. 1986). For this reason it 
is necessary to fully investigate the effects o f any change to the precipitating 
agent.
4.2.1 Methodology
200ml of serum were thawed overnight, 0.2pm filtered and placed in the scale 
down reactor. This was placed in a water bath and the serum was allowed to warm 
to 30C. Once the correct temperature had been reached the impeller was set to 
555rpm and 36g o f sodium sulphate was added at a rate o f 1.2g/min, in line with 
the hypothesised industrial procedure. Once all the sodium sulphate had been 
added, the impeller speed was increased to 1840rpm and the particles were 
allowed to condition for 15 hours. At the end of the conditioning period the 
antibody particles were sized according to the protocol outlined in section 2.3.4.1. 
The physical characteristics were also determined using the methods in section 
2.3.1.
Following the particle size measurements, the antibody particles were sheared in 
the rotating disc device. 10ml of precipitated antibody solution were sheared at 
different levels o f energy dissipation (shown in table 4.1) for one minute. The 
sheared material was then particle sized using the standard methodology.
Volts Rotating disc speed (rpm) Max energy dissipation (WKg*1)
0 0 0
6 10250 12000
8 16000 46000
10 18000 66000
12 20900 100000
Table 4.1 Rotational speed and associated maximum energy dissipation of the 
rotating disc device
The purpose o f these experiments was to determine the impact, if  any, o f using 
solid sodium sulphate on the antibody particles characteristics. Additionally, the 
effect of shear stress on the antibody particles was assessed and predictions of the 
knock on effects that any changes would have on further downstream purification 
operations have been made.
4.2.2 Results
The particle size distribution o f the particles produced during precipitation with 
solid sodium sulphate under scaled down conditions was measured and the results 
are shown in figure 4.1. The particle size distribution of the antibody particles 
produced by the standard scaled down liquid based precipitation is also included 
so that a comparison o f the results can be made.
The use of solid rather than liquid sodium sulphate results in an increase in the 
size of the antibody particles from a d0.9 of 29.7pm to a d0.9 o f 38.5pm (standard 
deviation +/-3pm at d0.9 (n=5)).
Size (pm)
d(0.1) d(0.5) d(0.9)
Scaled down liquid 3.4 15.1 29.7
Scaled down solid 2.9 16.2 38.5
10 1001
Particle size (pm)
Figure 4.1 Comparison o f the particle size distribution of the antibody particles 
produced with liquid sodium sulphate  and with solid sodium sulphate  under 
the same mixing conditions
Table 4.2 is a comparison of the physical properties o f the precipitant solution 
produced by the liquid and solid sodium sulphate precipitation systems. The use 
of solid sodium sulphate causes the viscosity of the solution to rise from 2.4mPa.s 
to 4mPa.s. The solids content of the feed stream also increased from 12% (v/v) to 
25% (v/v). The density o f the liquid and solid phases remained unchanged 
(standard error: Viscosity +/- 0.1mPa.s (n=5), Solids content +/- 1.3% (n=5), 
Density solid +/- 0.16g.cm'3 (n=5), Density liquid +/- 0.02g.cm'3 (n=5)).
Viscosity
(mPa.s)
Solids 
Content (%)
Density solid 
(gem'3)
Density liquid 
(gem'3)
Scale Down 2.4 12 1.3 1.17
Scale Down using solid 
precipitant at same Ef
4 25 1.3 1.17
Table 4.2 Physical properties o f the antibody particles produced with liquid 
sodium sulphate and solid sodium sulphate under the same mixing conditions
The precipitate particles were exposed to various levels of shear in order to assess 
the impact. After exposure the particle size distribution was measured. The 
resulting particle size data is displayed in figure 4.2.
As the level o f energy the antibody particles are subjected to increases so the 
particle size distribution decreases. Exposure to the highest shear rate results in a 
decrease in particle size from a d0.9 o f 38.3pm to a d0.9 of 26.5pm (standard 
deviation +/-3pm at d0.9 (n=5)).
Max energy dissipation (W Kg1) d(0.9)pm
3 20
0 38.5
12000 30.1
46000 29.2
66000 26.5
100000 26.5
20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000
Max energy dissipation (W.Kg )
Figure 4.2 Particle size (d0.9) of the antibody particles produced during 
precipitation with solid sodium sulphate after being subjected to differing 
maximum energy dissipations in the rotating disc device for one minute
4.2.3 Discussion
It is known that the current scale of manufacturing will be unable to meet the 
forecasted level o f demand for the anti-venom. Therefore, since the anti-venom 
production process has already been validated, methods of increasing the scale of 
production or the yield that are easy to implement and validate are o f great 
importance. Using solid sodium sulphate offers the opportunity to double the 
production scale without having to purchase new vessels and equipment. Since the 
same basic methodology is utilised to purify the antibodies a bridging study need 
only be carried out to validate the process.
It can be concluded from figure 4.1 that the use of solid sodium sulphate as 
opposed to liquid sodium sulphate as a precipitating agent causes an increase in 
the particle size distribution o f 30%. It is believed that the cause of this increase 
is the fact that the particles have a solid particle in the form of a sodium sulphate 
crystal to form around. The poor mixing conditions also contribute, resulting in 
earlier precipitation. This would make it easier for the particles to form and give 
them longer to grow during the low shear mixing phase resulting in larger 
particles.
During the addition o f the powdered sodium sulphate it was observed that the 
mixing conditions were not turbulent enough to properly mix the two phases. 
Large clumps of un-dissolved sodium sulphate were observed at the bottom of the 
tank. It was also observed that the antibodies began to come out of solution at a 
lower concentration o f precipitant (roughly 10%) than with the liquid version.
Mixing conditions within the precipitation vessel are an important factor; 
determining the physical characteristics o f the particles (Hoare, 1982; Bell and 
Dunnill, 1982a&b).
It is hypothesised that this earlier precipitation is due to the formation of pockets 
of high concentrations o f sodium sulphate within the vessel, caused by the poor 
mixing conditions. These pockets cause the premature precipitation o f the
antibodies. This earlier precipitation could also be the cause of the larger particles 
since they would have longer to grow (Spielman, 1978). The particles would have 
more time to clump together during the addition phase, before the impeller speed 
is increased and the balance of growth verses shear induced particle break up 
changes.
From a process engineers perspective, larger particles are easier to separate by 
centrifugation (Bell and Dunnill, 1982b). This is shown by the following equation. 
The effective force acting on a spherical particle in a centrifugal field is given by:
F' = 7  d? &P)2rO
(equation 4.1)
Where ds = the particle diameter, Ap = the density difference between the particle 
and the suspending fluid, r = the distance from the axis of rotation and co = the 
angular velocity and is given by:
co = 2m
(equation 4.2)
This equation indicates a cube relationship between the force acting on a particle 
and its diameter. Thus, even a small increase in the particle size, results in a large 
increase in the force acting upon it and hence its sedimentation rate.
By solving equation 4.1 the force acting on a particle 29.7pm in size was found to 
be l.lx lO '9Kg.ms"1. Assuming the distance from the axis of rotation is 1 and the 
speed of rotation remains constant at 125rps. When the particle size increases to 
38.5pm, as is the case when solid sodium sulphate is used, the force acting upon 
these particles becomes 2.4x1 O^Kg.ms'1 (the same assumptions as before were 
applied). The force has been more than doubled with only a 30% increase in 
particle size. This increase in the effective settling force acting upon the particle 
could impact the process time required during centrifugation (Leung, 1998). The 
time may decrease since the particles should settle out faster.
Table 4.2 indicates that the viscosity of the precipitant solution has increased from 
2.4mPa.s to 4mPa.s when solid sodium sulphate is used as the precipitating agent. 
This increase in viscosity was most likely caused by the increase in solids content 
also observed. An increase in the viscosity leads to a decrease in the 
sedimentation velocity. This is shown by the equation below; settling velocity 
under gravity is determined by:
Where g is gravity and p is the viscosity.
bpd2g
18/ i
(equation 4.3)
Solving the above equation for the standard liquid precipitation system where Ap
= 130Kgm' d = 29.7x10 m and p = 0.0024Pa.s. gives a sedimentation velocity of 
2.6x10'5m .s '\ Solving this equation for the solid based precipitation system 
where, Ap = 130Kgm* d  = 38.5x10 m and p = 0.004Pa.s. gives a sedimentation 
velocity o f 2.6x1 O^m.s1. Therefore the increase in the force acting on the particle 
caused by the increase in particle size has been countered by the increase in 
viscosity. This results in particles that, although differ in size, should sediment 
out at the same velocity. The increase in viscosity will also result in increased 
pumping costs, another factor to take into account when implementing the process 
change.
Table 4.2 also shows that the solids content has risen to 25% when solid sodium 
sulphate is used. This may be due to the fact that solid material has been added to 
the mixture. As a result, some over precipitation of the albumin may be occurring 
due to the poor mixing conditions. This may cause local areas o f high 
concentration. The industrial scale centrifuge used at Protherics has a solids 
holding capacity of 3L. Therefore when the feed is being pumped in at 120L/hr 
with the liquid precipitation process, the centrifuge needs to be discharged every
12.5 minutes in order to avoid breakthrough. For the solid sodium sulphate 
process, the centrifuge will need to be discharged every 6 minutes. This is a very 
small interval o f time between discharge cycles. Discharging the centrifuge this
often may interfere with the normal operation. Also during the discharge cycle a 
small amount of feed material is lost and the centrifuge slows down slightly. This 
could result in lower yields. If this level of solids were to be processed by 
centrifugation, the feed flow rate would probably have to be slowed down. This 
may have knock on effects for the rest o f the downstream processing operation 
such as increased turnaround time.
4.2.3.1 Impact of shear
When subjected to high levels of shear stress, protein precipitates tend to break up 
(Boychyn, et al. 2001; Neal, et al. 2003). Figure 4.2 reveals that the particle size 
initially decreases rapidly as energy dissipation increases, until at bbOOOWKg"1 the 
smallest particle size is reached. Above this level o f energy dissipation no further 
degradation in particle size occurs. The d0.9 produced when the solid particles 
were exposed to a level o f shear equivalent to that found in an industrial 
centrifuge and spun down at an equivalent Q / Z  as detailed in section 2.1 was 
26.6pm. Compared to 13.4pm produced when the liquid system particles were 
sheared and spun down.
By solving equation 4.3 we can see that this degradation in particle size has 
altered the settling velocities. The solids system particles now settle at a rate of 
l^xlO ^m .s"1 whilst the liquid system particles settling velocity becomes 0.5x10" 
5m.s"1. As a result o f the shear stress encountered during centrifugation, the solid 
system particles now have a settling velocity more than double that o f the liquid 
system particles. This means that in theory, they should be easier to separate. The 
reason that the solid system particles become easier to separate after 
centrifugation, is that they are more resistant to shear than those produced by the 
liquid system. Exposure to shear results in a 30% decrease in size after one 
minute for those particles produced by the solid system. Whereas exposure to 
shear for one minute causes a 55% decrease in size for those particles produced by 
the liquid system.
4.3 Using Solid Sodium Sulphate And Altering The Mixing
Conditions
Observation of the reactor vessel whilst mixing the solid sodium sulphate into the 
serum revealed that the current mixing conditions were not turbulent enough to 
properly mix the solid and liquid phases. The scale down mimic was therefore 
used to assess the impact o f altering the mixing conditions. The new mixing 
conditions are more turbulent, thus as a direct result the time integrated shear level 
was increased.
The aim of these experiments was to assess what impact changing the mixing 
conditions (to ensure good mixing) would have on the physical characteristics of 
the antibody particles and on their resistance to shear damage.
4.3.1 Methodology
200ml of serum were thawed overnight, 0.2pm depth filtered and placed into the 
scale down precipitation vessel. This was placed into a water bath and the serum 
was allowed to warm to 30C. Once the correct temperature had been reached the 
impeller was set to 1840rpm and 36g o f sodium sulphate were added at a rate of 
1.2g/min, in line with the hypothesised industrial procedure. Once all the sodium 
sulphate had been added the solution was allowed to condition for 15 hours. This 
change in the mixing conditions had the effect of increasing time integrated shear 
stress level (Ef) from 2.6x1 O ^ m '2 to 2.7x1 O ^ m '2. At the end o f the conditioning 
period the antibody particles were sized according to the protocol outlined in 
section 2.3.4.1. The physical characteristics were also determined using the 
method in section 2.3.1.
Once sized, 10ml o f the precipitated antibody solution were sheared in the in 
house shear device at various energy levels as shown in table 4.1. The particles 
were subjected to each level o f shear for one minute, after-which they were re
sized to assess the impact o f the shear stress.
4.3.2 Results
By increasing the impeller speed, the balance of orthokinetic growth and shear 
induced break up o f the precipitant particle was altered. Figure 4.3 shows the 
particle size distribution of the antibody particles, produced by the standard 
precipitation method, compared to those produced when using solid sodium 
sulphate and increasing the time integrated shear stress level. The particles 
produced at the increased shear stress level are significantly smaller than those 
produced by the standard method. The increased shear stress level particles have 
a d0.9 o f only 7.45pm as opposed to the usual d0.9 of 29.7pm (standard deviation 
+/-3pm at d0.9 (n=3)).
Size (pm)
d(0.1) d(0.5) d(0.9)
Scaled down (solid) different Ef 2.95 
Scaled down (liquid) same Ef 3.4
20  -
1 0 0
Particle size (jam)
Figure 4.3 Comparison o f the particle size distribution of the antibody particles 
produced using liquid sodium sulphate () and solid sodium sulphate with an 
increased time integrated shear stress level ()
The physical properties o f the antibody particles were measured and the results 
can be seen in table 4.3. For comparative purposes the physical properties of the 
antibody particles produced by the standard liquid system are included. The 
change in the mixing conditions resulted in an increase in the viscosity from 
2.4mPa.s to 3.4mPa.s. The solids content also increased from 12% (v/v) to 18% 
(v/v). The density o f the solid and liquid phases remained unchanged (standard 
error: Viscosity +/- 0.1mPa.s (n=3), Solids content +/- 1.3% (n=3), Density solid 
+/- 0.16g.cm'3 (n=3), Density liquid +/- 0.02g.cm3 (n=3)).
Viscosity
(mPa.s)
Solids 
Content (%)
Density solid 
(gem3)
Density liquid 
(gem3)
Scale Down 2.4 12 1.3 1.17
Scale Down using solid 
precipitant at different Ef
3.4 18 1.3 1.17
Table 4.3 Physical characteristics o f the precipitated antibody particles produced 
with liquid sodium sulphate and with solid sodium sulphate at an increased time 
integrated stress level
The particles were subjected to various levels of shear stress. Afterwards the size 
distribution was measured. The results are shown in figure 4.4. The particle size 
distribution of the antibody particles, after they were subjected to shear stress, 
remained unchanged at (d0.9) of 7.5pm even after being subjected to the highest 
level of shear stress (standard deviation +/-3pm at d0.9 (n=3)).
0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000
Max energy dissipation (W.Kg'1)
Figure 4.4 Particle size (d0.9) o f the antibody particles produced during 
precipitation with solid sodium sulphate with altered mixing conditions after 
being subjected to differing maximum energy dissipation
4.3.3 Discussion
The final size o f a precipitate particle is determined by the mixing conditions 
within the reactor vessel (Bell and Dunnill, 1982a; Hoare, 1982; Rothstein, 1994). 
The mixing conditions influence the balance o f particle growth versus particle 
break up. It can be concluded from figure 4.3 that increasing the stirrer speed 
during the addition phase o f the precipitation reaction results in a decrease in the 
size o f the antibody particles by 75%. It is hypothesised that this decrease is a 
result o f the increased turbulence and levels of shear present during the 
orthokinetic growth phase. This results in shear induced break up of particles 
playing a more influential role in the final particle size, resulting in smaller 
particles. Since the levels o f shear are higher right from the start, the particles do 
not have the chance to form loose particles that are later degraded during the 
conditioning phase. The result is smaller particles. It was however observed that 
the increase in turbulence solved the problem of bad mixing; no clumps of un
dissolved sodium sulphate were observed and precipitation began to occur at 12% 
in line with the liquid precipitation system.
The effective force acting on particles can be calculated by solving equation 4.1. 
This shows that for particles 7.45pm in diameter the effective force is 1.7xl0"n 
Kg.ms compared to 1.1x10' Kg.ms' for the liquid system and 2.4x10' Kg.ms' 
for the solid system with out the altered mixing conditions. Taken at face value 
these figures show that the force acting on the liquid system particles, with the 
increased mixing conditions, is two orders of magnitude smaller than that acting 
on the other particles. This would make them harder to separate and increase the 
processing time. However both the viscosity and shear effects need to be taken 
into consideration.
Table 4.3 indicates that the viscosity of the final solution increased from 2.4mPa.s 
to 3.4mPa.s. The cause o f this increase attributed to the addition of solid sodium 
sulphate. The viscosity is not, however, as high as the solid system with the 
standard mixing conditions. The decrease in particle size and increase in viscosity
results in a decrease in the sedimentation velocity to lxl0"6m.s'1. This is an order 
o f magnitude smaller than the other two precipitation systems.
Table 4.3 also shows that the solids content increased to 18% this decreases the 
discharge time in the industrial disc stack centrifuge from 12.5 minutes to 8 
minutes, this length o f interval between discharges should be long enough not to 
interfere with the normal operation o f the centrifuge.
4.3.3.1 Impact o f shear
Figure 4.4 shows that when the particles were subjected to shear no decrease in 
particle size was observed. This is probably because the conditions already 
experienced by the particles have strengthened them to the point that no further 
degradation occurs. Bell and Dunnil (1982b) concluded that the strongest 
particles result from a Gt o f 105 and above. The Gt for this system is 8xl06. The 
result is that the sedimentation velocity should not be affected when the particles 
are pumped through an industrial scale disc stack centrifuge similar to the one 
mimicked in chapter 3.
4.4 Conclusion
Changing to solid sodium sulphate doubles the volume of serum that can be 
processed per batch without the need to purchase new equipment. Table 4.4 
shown below summarises the particle size, viscosity and resulting sedimentation 
velocities of the three systems after the particles had been sheared.
Precipitation
System
Particle Size 
(pm) (d0.9)
Viscosity
(mPa.s)
% Solids content Sedimentation 
velocity (m .s1)
Liquid
13.4 2.4 12 0.5x1 O5
Solid same 
mixing 26.6 4 25 1.2x1 O5
Solid altered 
mixing 7.45 3.4 18 l .lx l  O'6
Table 4.4 Comparison o f the antibody particles characteristics and sedimentation 
velocity after shearing
This comparison reveals that the particles produced by using solid sodium 
sulphate, without altering the mixing conditions, should be the easiest to separate. 
However, the large solids content may make disc stack centrifugation difficult and 
the poor mixing conditions could result in poor precipitation. The particles 
produced by the liquid system are next, but the volume would only be 100L per 
batch. The hardest particles to separate will be those produced by the solid system 
with the altered mixing conditions. This is the result o f the smaller particle size 
coupled with the increased viscosity. All the factors outlined above plus 
commercial factors like pumping costs and time considerations need to be taken 
into account before any changes are made.
4.5 The Impact O f Increasing The Temperature During
Precipitation
The effect on particle size distribution of raising the temperature o f the 
precipitation reaction from 30C to 40C was studied. All other parameters were 
kept constant in line with the method in section 2.4.1.
According to equation 1.3 (section 1.3.1), at higher temperatures there will be a 
greater rate of collisions between particles during a precipitation reaction and 
hence a higher growth rate. This suggests that by increasing the temperature, the 
precipitation reaction should produce larger particles that will be easier to separate 
by centrifugation. Therefore the aim of the experiment was to determine the
impact of raising the temperature on the particle size distribution and on the 
resistance of the particles to the shear stress encountered during an industrial scale 
centrifugal separation.
4.5.1 Methodology
The precipitation reaction was run as per the method in section 2.4.1 except that 
the temperature was maintained at a constant 40C during the conditioning phase. 
At the end of the conditioning period the particles were sized as per the procedure 
in section 2.3.4.1. After-which they were subjected to shear conditions consistent 
with those found in an industrial scale disc stack centrifuge as per the method in 
section 2.4.2 and re-sized.
4.5.2 Results
At the end of the conditioning phase the particle size distribution was measured. 
Figure 4.5 is a comparison of the particle size distribution of the antibody particles 
produced at 30C and at 40C. As can be seen, increasing the temperature by 
10C causes the size o f the particles to increase from 29.7pm to 46.2pm (standard 
deviation +/-3pm at d0.9 (n=3)).
Size (pm)
d(0.1) d(0.5) d(0.9)
Scaled down (liquid) 40 C
Scaled down (liquid) 30C
101 100
Particle size (^m)
Figure 4.5 Comparison o f the particle size distribution of the precipitated 
antibodies produced at 30C   and at 40C 
The antibody particles were exposed to a level of shear consistent with that found 
in the industrial scale centrifuge mimicked in chapter 3 and re-sized. Figure 4.6 is 
a comparison o f the particle size distribution before and after shearing. After 
subjecting the particles to the same level of shear stress as found in an industrial 
scale centrifuge, the particle size distribution decreased from 46.2pm to 16pm 
(standard deviation +/-3pm at d0.9 (n=3)).
Size (pm)
d(0.1) d(0.5)
Scaled down (liquid) 40C 3.6
Post shear & centrifugation 3.1
10 1001
Particle s ize  (pm)
Figure 4.6 Comparison o f the particle size distribution of the increased 
temperature antibody particles before,  and after, A shearing with an air liquid 
interface followed by centrifugation in a swing out bucket centrifuge at the same 
QfZ as the industrial scale centrifuge
d(0.9)
4.5.3 Discussion
As indicated by equation 1.3, increasing the temperature results in an increase in 
the particle size distribution, as shown in figure 4.5. Increasing the temperature 
by 10C results in a 35% increase in the particle size distribution. The extra 
energy provided by the higher temperature may have increased the number of 
collisions between precipitate particles, resulting in an increase in the growth rate. 
This increase in size has more than doubled the settling velocity from 2.6x10* m.s*
| O 1
to 6.3x10" m.s* . At face value these particles would appear to be easier to 
separate from the mother liquor by centrifugation.
4.5.3.1 Impact of shear
Precipitant particles aged under the same conditions should have the same relative 
strength. Therefore subjecting them to the same level o f shear stress should result 
in a decrease in particle size similar to that observed in chapter 3. Figure 4.6 
indicates that when the particles were sheared at a level equivalent to that found in 
an industrial disc stack centrifuge and spun down at an equivalent Q/Z value 
(section 2.4.2), the particle size distribution decreased by 65%. When the 
particles produced at 30C were exposed to the same conditions, a decrease in 
particle size o f 55% was observed. This would seem to indicate that the particles 
produced at the higher temperature are not as strong as those produced at the 
lower temperature. This could be attributable to the fact that the increase in 
temperature results in larger particles, with particles that are loosely bound to each 
other. The degradation in particle size results in particles that are the roughly 
same size as those produced at 30C after shearing.
4.5.4 Conclusion
Although the increase in temperature increased the size of the particles, it lowered 
their resistance to shear stress; since exposure to shear resulted in a 65% decrease 
in size as opposed to 55%. This decreased resistance may be due to the fact that 
the extra energy present has resulted in the formation of particles that are more 
loosely packed than those formed at 30C. The conclusion to be drawn from these 
experiments is that increasing the temperature would have no impact on the
centrifugal recovery operation; heating the tank an extra 10C would merely 
increase the cost o f the purification process.
4.6 Altering The Percentage Of Sodium Sulphate
The concentration o f sodium sulphate used to precipitate out the antibody product 
is of critical importance to the success or failure of the purification operation. 
According to the Hofmeister series, sulphate is relatively effective at salting the
protein out and should only destabilise the protein at relatively high
concentrations. The experiments in this section examine the effect o f varying the 
concentration of the sodium sulphate on the precipitation reaction and on the 
activity of the antibody o f interest. The purpose o f the experiments was to 
determine the optimum concentration o f sodium sulphate for salting out the 
antibodies with out destabilising them.
4.6.1 Methodology
90ml of serum, thawed overnight and 0.2pm filtered was separated into 10ml 
fractions and placed into 9 separate test tubes. An equal volume of liquid sodium 
sulphate at concentrations o f 16, 20, 24, 28, 32, 36, 40 and 44% (w/v) was added 
slowly to each tube resulting in serum/sodium sulphate mixtures with the 
following concentrations: 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22 and 24% (w/v). Each test 
tube was mixed thoroughly by inversion and left for 30 minutes to allow the 
precipitation to take place. After the time had elapsed, the solid and liquid 
portions were separated by centrifugation in a Beckman J2-M1 centrifuge fitted 
with a swing out bucket rotor (JA 13) for 30 minutes at 13,000rpm. The solid and 
liquid phases o f each concentration were then assayed for active antibodies, 
albumin and total protein content following the method detailed in section 2.3.1.
4.6.2 Results
The amount of antibody that binds anti-venom present in the solid phase was 
measured and the results are depicted in figure 4.7. This shows the concentration 
of active antibody in the solid phase increasing from zero at 8% and 10% to 38% 
at 12%. The concentration then levels out at around 75% until at 20% sodium 
sulphate the level drops to around 63%. The amount of active antibody in the 
supernatant is seen to decrease from 90% at 8% to 85% at 10% sodium sulphate 
then 60% at 12%. At 14% there are only 5% of the active antibody remaining in 
solution. Above this concentration there are no antibodies which bind anti-venom 
left in solution (standard error +/-9% active antibody (n=3)).
100.00 i
90.00 -
80.00 -
70.00 -
60.00 -
50.00 -
  40.00 -
30.00 -
20.00 -
10.00 -
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24 266 8
% sodium sulphate (w/v)
Figure 4.7 Percentage o f active antibody present in the solid () and liquid () 
phases at different concentrations o f sodium sulphate
The amount of albumin present in the solid and liquid phases was measured and 
the results are shown in figure 4.8. The concentration of albumin in the 
supernatant starts at 40mg/ml. Then as the concentration of sodium sulphate 
increases, so the amount o f albumin present decreases until at 24% sodium 
sulphate only 19mg/ml remains in solution. Juxtaposed to this, the concentration 
of albumin rises from Omg/ml to 11 mg/ml present in the solid phase at 24% 
sodium sulphate (standard error +/-0.1 mg/ml (n=3)).
45.00 n
40.00
35.00 -
f  30.00 -
  25.00 -
1  20.00 -
15.00 -
10.00 -
5.00 -
8 13 18 23 28
Sodium sulphate concentration (%w/v)
Figure 4.8 Concentration o f albumin found in the solid () and liquid (A ) phases 
at different concentrations o f sodium sulphate
The total protein content of each phase was measured and is shown in figure 4.9. 
The figure indicates that there is 75mg/ml of protein present at the start. As the 
concentration of sodium sulphate increases so to does the total protein level in the 
solid phase. At 24% sodium sulphate the solid phase contains 38mg/ml and the 
liquid phase contains 32mg/ml (standard error +/-0.3mg/ml (n=3))
 60 -
  50 - 
~ 40 - 
-  30 - 
o  2 0  - 
2416 18 20 22 2610 12 148
Sodium sulphate concentration (w/v)
Figure 4.9 Total protein concentration in the solid () and liquid () phases at 
different concentrations o f sodium sulphate
4.6.3 Discussion
The amount o f sodium sulphate required to precipitate the antibodies out of 
solution, without precipitating out an excess of contaminating proteins and 
without denaturing the antibodies has been investigated. As the first step in the 
purification process it is o f critical importance that the efficiency and yield of the 
separation is as high as possible as well as the reproducibility.
4.6.3.1 Active antibodies
Precipitation reactions provide a quick and simple method of separating the 
product from the main contaminant (Bell, et al. 1983; Hoare, et al. 1983). The 
experiments described in this section looked at the process of the precipitation and 
sought to determine the optimum amount o f salt.
Figure 4.7 shows how the antibodies respond to the addition of sodium sulphate. 
No precipitation occurs between 8 and 10%. However, at 10% saturation the assay 
reveals that 10-15% o f the antibody has been permanently denatured. The 
samples were diluted to ensure that the sodium sulphate is not interfering with the 
assay and they were left for 24 hours to allow the antibody to refold into its 
normal conformation. (A control sample was tested after 24 hours to ensure that 
no loss of binding activity occurs as a result o f the sample being left at room 
temperature). Thus any antibody not permanently denatured will be detected. It 
can be safely concluded then that 10% (w/v) sodium sulphate causes 10-15% of 
the product to be denatured, to the extent that it no longer binds to the snake 
venom and is therefore no longer biologically active.
Precipitation begins to occur at 12% (w/v). This is the point where supersaturation 
is just being reached and the salting in effect becomes one of salting out 
(Rothstein, 1994). At this point 38% of the antibody has precipitated out, 50% 
remains in solution and 10% is denatured. By 14% (w/v) 75% of the antibody is 
in a solid form, 5% remains in solution but 20% has been denatured. At 18% 
sodium sulphate, the concentration used at the industrial scale 76% of the 
antibodies have been precipitated, the other 24% have been denatured. The rise in 
salt o f 4% has denatured the remaining active antibody without causing any
further precipitation. Above 18% the sodium sulphate denatures around 40% of 
the product. The level found in the solid drops to around 65% from 75%. Based 
on these results a concentration o f between 14% and 18% would seem to combine 
the best recovery o f antibody with the least amount o f denaturation.
4.6.3.2 Albumin
The initial concentration o f albumin in the sheep serum used for these 
experiments was found to be between 35mg/ml and 40mg/ml. This amount will 
vary from sample to sample since this is a biological system. In this particular 
instance the initial concentration was 40mg/ml. A process engineer will wish to 
see high concentrations o f albumin in the liquid phase and only minimal amounts 
in the solid phase. This will indicate a good purification factor and is the main 
purpose of the step. Figure 4.8 reveals that up to concentrations of 10% sodium 
sulphate, no precipitation o f albumin occurs. Some denaturation of the protein 
occurs at 10%, roughly 9mg/ml or 25% has been destabilised. This is seen as a 
drop in the level present in the liquid phase without an opposing rise in the level 
present in the solid phase.
Between 12 and 20% the majority (90% of the un-denatured) albumin remains in 
solution but the sodium sulphate causes some over precipitation, around 10% of 
the albumin can be found in the solid phase. Above concentrations o f 20% the 
sodium sulphate starts to cause the albumin to precipitate out as well. A sharp rise 
in the amount present in the solid is seen coupled with a concurrent drop in the 
amount in the liquid phase. Although the albumin is more soluble than the 
antibodies, a large concentration o f salt still causes it to come out of solution. 
Based on this assay, a concentration below 20% would seem to offer the best 
results, since the majority o f the albumin remains in solution.
4.6.3.3 Total protein
The serum supplied by Protherics PLC contains between 65 and 80mg/ml of 
protein. Figure 4.9 which tracks the levels o f total protein in each phase, reveals 
the precipitation process as it occurs. Up to 10% salt no precipitation occurs, at 
12% there is a big drop in the amount remaining soluble. This is the point where
the antibodies begin to come out of solution. At 18% the levels of protein found 
in each phase are roughly equal. This result, coupled with the gels shown in 
chapter 3 demonstrates that other blood proteins are precipitating out. As a basic 
rule, proteins will precipitate out of solution in order of decreasing molecular 
weight (Rothstein, 1994). These proteins will need to be removed by further 
downstream processing. When 24% is reached it can be seen that the solid phase 
now contains more protein than the liquid phase. This agrees with the results from 
the other assays which show antibodies precipitating out and over precipitation of 
the albumin occurring at the higher concentrations.
4.6.4 Conclusion
The ideal precipitation reaction will remove 100% of the antibodies without 
denaturing them and without precipitating out any other proteins. Since this is not 
possible, a balance has to be struck between recovering the antibodies without 
denaturing them and keeping the albumin and other proteins in solution. The 
results presented in this section suggest that the optimum concentration o f sodium 
sulphate would be between 16% and 18%. This combines the highest recovery of 
antibody with the lowest levels o f albumin. The SDS-page gels shown in figures 
3.5a and 3.5b further back up this conclusion, as they show the majority o f 
antibody product in the solid process stream whilst the majority o f the albumin 
remains in the liquid portion, when 18% (w/v) sodium sulphate is used as the 
precipitating agent.
4.7 Overall Conclusions
The results presented in this chapter demonstrate the power of scale down 
experiments to provide valuable process information without the need for large 
quantities of material. This section demonstrates that utilising solid sodium 
sulphate; changing the mixing conditions and increasing the temperature alter the 
kinetics of the precipitation reaction resulting in particles that have different 
characteristics. It was also determined that the optimum concentration of sodium 
sulphate for precipitation o f antibodies from ovine serum is between 16 and 18%.
5 Separation Of IgG Precipitate From Contaminating
Proteins Using Microfiltration
5.1 Introduction
Microfiltration, utilising a dead end filtration technique with a stirrer at the surface 
of the membrane, as a method to recover the antibody precipitate is an attractive 
process option, because potentially the current four-step centrifugal separation 
technique described in chapter three could be integrated into a single unit 
operation. This is desirable in terms of a possible reduction in process cycle time 
and an increase in the yield o f antibody obtained from a reduction in the number 
of items of equipment used in the process. This chapter focuses on the use of 
microfiltration for separating the antibody precipitate.
Membrane separation techniques including microfiltration and ultrafiltration are 
used for the recovery and purification o f many biological materials. Ultrafiltration 
is traditionally used for separation, concentration and buffer exchange operations 
involving macromolecules, typically less than about lOOnm (Ayazi Shamlou, 
2003). These include plasmids, viruses, therapeutic proteins and antibodies. In 
microfiltration, particle size is typically above 1pm, but normally less 10pm. 
These include cells, cell debris, protein precipitates and protein crystals (Davies, 
et al. 2000; Zeman and Zydney, 1996). In this chapter the suitability of 
microfiltration as a means o f recovering, cleaning and concentrating anti-venom 
antibody precipitate from a serum suspension is assessed. The contaminants are 
mostly soluble proteins with albumin as the major component. A 200ml (working 
volume in the range o f 75ml to 200ml) stirred cell device, equipped with a 3pm 
mixed cellulose ester membrane as the filter/sieving medium, was used to separate 
the anti-venom antibody precipitate from the protein contaminants. An advantage 
of the stirred cell device is that it allows adjustment o f both the shear stress at the 
surface o f the membrane and the transmembrane pressure independent o f each 
other. The stirred cell device has been used in the past to mimic the microfiltration 
operation o f biological materials (Hawrylik, et al. 1994; Kroner, et al. 1987;
Kroner and Nissinen, 1988; Langeloh, et al. 1998; Mercille, et al. 1994; Vogel and 
Kroner, 1999).
The performance o f a membrane separation is affected by fouling of the 
membrane. Given the method of filtration (microfiltration) and the solids content 
of the feed stream used in this study, both fouling by adsorption of the 
contaminating proteins in the pores of the membrane and deposition and 
formation o f a layer on the surface o f the membrane are likely to cause clogging 
of the membrane, limiting continuous operation (Baker, et al. 1985; Belfort, et al. 
1994; Chen, et al. 1997; Field, et al. 1995; Howell, 1995; Kelly and Zydney, 
1996; Marshall, et al. 1993). This chapter describes how the stirred cell was used 
to determine the optimum load and wash volume for a batch filtration process and 
to obtain experimental flux data on the antibody precipitate as a function of time. 
The information was used to study the effectiveness of microfiltration as a 
separation technique and the performance of this method of separation was 
compared with that o f centrifugation.
5.2 Methodology
All experiments were carried out with the same stock o f anti-venom serum 
supplied by Protherics (Llandusul, Wales, UK). The stirred cell device described 
in section 2.4.4 was used to conduct load and wash volume determination 
experiments, the experiments were conducted under the operating conditions 
described in section 2.4.4.3. A new 3pm pore size cellulose acetate membrane 
60mm in diameter was used for each experiment. It was first necessary to 
determine the optimum quantities o f precipitated serum to load onto the 
membrane and the optimum volume o f washing buffer to be used. The optimum 
volume is considered the volume which gave the highest antibody yield and best 
albumin removal within the limits o f scale imposed by the stirred cell device.
Figure 5.1(A) shows the sequence of full-scale process operations currently used 
to recover large quantities o f the immunoglobulins as discussed in chapter three. 
Figure 5.1(B) shows the proposed scale-down microfiltration process against 
which the industrial centrifugal process is compared.
100L 36% (w/v) 
sodium sulphate
100L Serum VlSample No.l * l l
Precipitation
vessel
I supernatant 
S a m n l*  N a  3
Disc Stack 
centrifuge
Precipitant 
Sample No 2
Equal volume 18% 
sodium sulphate
Resuspension
vessel
I -  Solid 
Sample No.4
2nd supernatant 
Sample No S
Disc Stack 
centrifuge
Final product 
Sample No 6
(3rd) 150mL 18% (w/v) (4th) 75mL Phosphate
sodium sulphate Buffered Saline
lOOmL Serum 
Sample No. 1
lOOmL 36% (w/v) 
sodium sulphate
(1) 75mL 
precipitated 
antibody solution
Precipitation
vessel
(2nd) Soluble 
proteins e.g. 
Albumin 
Sample No. 2a
3pm filter
(4th) Re-suspended 
antibody rich 
fraction 
Sample No. 4a
(3rd) Wash 
Sample No. 3a
Figure 5.1 Process flow sheet detailing the initial serum purification at an 
industrial scale (A) and the proposed purification scheme utilising filtration (B)
Load and wash volume determination experiments, batch filtration experiments 
and continuous filtration experiments were conducted as per the methods 
described in section 2.4.3. Each sample collected was assayed for active 
antibody, albumin and total protein content. Sodium dodecyl sulphate 
polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS page) was also used to visualise the 
proteins within each sample as per the methods described in section 2.3.1.
5.3 Results
5.3.1 Load and W ashing volume determination
Experiments were conducted with load volumes of 75ml and 100ml respectively 
and with wash volumes o f an equal volume and two times the original load 
volume.
For the first experiment 100ml of precipitated serum was loaded onto the 
membrane and the precipitant cake was washed with 100ml of 18% (w/v) sodium 
sulphate. Samples were assayed for total protein, albumin and active antibodies. 
The mass balance depicted in figure 5.2 is derived from those assays. 85% of the 
antibodies were recovered and 20% of the albumin remains contaminating the 
final product after filtration (standard error: Total protein +/- 3% (n=5), Albumin 
+/- 5% (n=5), Antibody +/- 6% (n=3)).
I  I M k0  -
Serum Permeate 18% wash
Redissolved
Gel layer
  Total protein (%) 100 32 3 37 28
  Albumin content (%) 100 32 4 20 44
  Antibodies (%) 100 0.1 0.9 85 12
Figure 5.2 Total protein, albumin and antibody levels in each fraction produced 
during the batch filtration of 100ml of precipitated antibody washed by the 
addition of 100ml of 18% sodium sulphate
The volume of washing buffer was doubled to 200ml and the batch filtration run 
again. Figure 5.3 shows the mass balance resulting form this experiment. 87% of 
the antibodies were recovered and 12% of the albumin remains in the final 
product (standard error: Total protein +/- 3% (n=5), Albumin +/- 5% (n=5), 
Antibody +/- 6% (n=3)).
Serum Permeate 18% wash
Redissolved
Gel layer
  Total protein (%) 100 32 15 26 18
  Albumin content (%) 100 32 35 12 20
  Antibodies (%) 100 0.04 0.71 87 10
Figure 5.3 Total protein, Albumin and antibody levels in each fraction produced 
during the batch filtration of 100ml of precipitated antibody washed by the 
addition of 200ml of 18% sodium sulphate
Figure 5.4 is the mass balance for the batch filtration of 75ml of precipitated 
serum washed with 75ml of buffer. 94% of the antibodies have been recovered 
and 10% of the albumin is remaining in the final product after filtration (standard 
error: Total protein +/- 3% (n=5), Albumin +/- 5% (n=5), Antibody +/- 6% (n=3)).
1 [ T 1 ,  Iu
Serum Permeate 18% wash Redissolved cake
  Total Protein (%) 100 44 17 42
  Albumin (%) 100 48 40 10
  Antibodies (%) 100 0.08 0.67 94
Figure 5.4 Total protein, Albumin and antibody levels in each fraction produced 
during the batch filtration of 75ml of precipitated antibody washed by the addition 
of 75ml of 18% sodium sulphate
In the final load and wash volume experiment 75ml of precipitated serum was 
loaded and 150ml of buffer was used to wash the precipitate cake in an effort to 
further reduce albumin contamination. Figure 5.5 reveals that the antibody yield 
is 96% and that only 3% of the albumin is left in the final product (standard error: 
Total protein +/- 3% (n=5), Albumin +/- 5% (n=5), Antibody +/- 6% (n=3)).
Serum Permeate 18% Wash Redissolved cake
 Total Protein (%) 100 44 19 43
 Albumin (%) 100 48 48 3
 Antibodies (%) 100 0.06 0.56 96
Figure 5.5 Total protein, Albumin and antibody levels in each fraction produced 
during the batch filtration of 75ml o f precipitated antibody washed by the addition 
of 150ml of 18% sodium sulphate
A direct comparison o f the antibody yields and albumin levels from all the loading 
and washing volume determination experiments is shown in figure 5.6. Loading 
with 75ml and washing with 150ml gives the highest antibody yield and the 
lowest level of albumin contamination (standard error: Albumin +/- 5% (n=5), 
Antibody +/- 6% (n=3)).
100ml/200ni 100ml/100ml 75ml/150nnl 75ml/75ml
 Antibody yield (%) 85 87 96 94
 % Albumin remaining 12 20 3 10
Figure 5.6 Overall antibody and percentage albumin remaining in the final 
product for each o f the batch filtration experiments
5.3.2 Discussion
The amount o f antibody precipitant loaded onto the membrane and the volume of 
buffer used to wash the precipitate particles will determine the yield o f the 
process, in terms o f antibody recovery and the degree of purification in terms of 
the amount o f albumin removed. The load volume will also impact on the flux 
rate across the membrane, which will have a big impact on the process turn 
around time.
At the end o f the filtration, when 100ml of precipitated serum (ratio o f 
precipitated serum to membrane area = 3.5ml/cm ) filtered and washed with 
100ml of 18% (w/v) sodium sulphate, a gelatinous layer of protein was left un
dissolved on the surface o f the membrane. Examination of the gel layer revealed 
it is a layer o f glutinous protein that had formed on the surface of the membrane 
and remained in place after the washing step. The layer contained a large quantity 
(12%) of the original antibody content which is un-recoverable. It also 
permanently fouls the membrane as pure water flux rates after cleaning did not 
return to the pre-operation levels (data not shown). As a direct result o f the 
formation of the gel layer, the final product contained 85% of the anti venom 
antibodies along with 20% of the original albumin content.
It was hypothesised that increasing the volume of washing buffer may help to 
dissolve the gel layer and therefore increase the yield and decrease the amount of 
albumin contaminating the final product. Figure 5.3 shows the mass balance for 
the batch filtration o f 100ml o f precipitated serum washed with 200ml of buffer.
Once again the gel layer forms at the surface of the membrane. It contained 10% 
of the antibody product however the levels o f albumin are much lower. The final 
product also contains a lower level o f albumin (12%). This amount of 
contamination is still higher that the current centrifugal process. So whilst it 
seems increasing the washing buffer volume had some effect, it did not solve the 
problem. As a result it was decided to lower the loading volume to 75ml of 
precipitated serum (ratio o f precipitated serum to membrane area = 2.6ml/cm2).
It can be seen from the mass balance shown in figure 5.4 that the gel layer has 
disappeared. It is suggested that at 100ml loading volume the membrane is 
overloaded and as a result the proteins at the membrane surface become 
compacted together during the course of the filtration. Therefore forming a 
glutinous un-dissolvable layer. At 75ml loading volume this does not occur. This 
may be the result o f the decreased filtration time. Because the gel layer did not 
form, the yield rises to 94% and the albumin contamination falls to 10% in the 
final product. The level o f recovery o f antibodies is now in line with that seen in 
the scale-down centrifugal process. The levels of albumin contamination are still 
high, so again it was decided to increase the quantity of washing buffer.
The amount o f washing buffer was increased to 150ml. (The mass balance is 
shown in figure 5.5). Immediately it is observed that the levels o f albumin have 
dropped to 3% left in the final product.
5.3.2.1 Conclusion
Decreasing the amount loaded from 100ml to 75ml (a decrease in the volume of 
precipitated serum loaded to membrane area ratio o f 3.5ml/cm to 2.6ml/cm ) 
resulted in a 10% increase in antibody yield and a decrease in the albumin 
contamination along with and increase in the flux rate from 99L/m2/hr to 
166L/m /hr. The increase in flux rate would result in faster processing times. 
Washing with double the volume o f 18% sodium sulphate buffer also decreased 
the amount of albumin contaminating the final product. As a result it was decided 
that the optimum conditions for further filtration experiments within the 
limitations of the equipment would be to load 75ml of precipitant and wash the 
cake with 150ml o f washing buffer.
5.3.3 Batch and continuous separation of precipitated IgG by
microfiltration
The results detailed in this section have been published (Neal, et al. 2004). 
Microfiltration is an attractive separation option, particularly for protein 
precipitate in suspension, which may show susceptibility to shear-induced damage 
in centrifuges (Boulding, et al. 2002; Boychyn, et al. 2001). It is noted that shear 
rates at the surface o f the microfiltration membrane can be high. For example, in 
tangential flow membrane separation, high linear fluid velocities and large 
transmembrane pressures are used intentionally to realise wall shear rates, 
typically in the region o f 5x10V 1 to lx l0 V 1 (Wilson, et al. 2003) in order to 
reduce the thickness o f any deposited layer on the membrane surface. These 
values, however, are still typically an order o f magnitude lower than shear rates 
that have been reported in industrial centrifuges (Boychyn, et al. 2001). It was 
hypothesised therefore that the hydrodynamic conditions in microfiltration are 
unlikely to cause damage to the antibody precipitate and no loss of product to the 
filtrate fraction should occur, provided the auxiliary pumps are selected to avoid 
shear damage during pumping o f the suspension. In what follows we provide 
experimental data to test this hypothesis.
The choice o f a 3 pm pore size cellulose/acetate membrane filter medium was 
based on the size distribution o f the antibody (precipitate) particles shown in 
figure 5.7 included below for reference. It is noted that the presence o f the fines in 
the feed material had little impact on the performance of the filter. Measurements 
of the flux using pure water before and after filtration (data not included) 
indicated no evidence o f permanent fouling o f the filter medium.
5.3.4 Methodology
A stirred cell filtration device was operated in two different modes: batch and 
continuous. It has a diameter o f 0.063m with a total volume of 200ml and was 
modified for use as a small-scale microfiltration device. A 3 pm pore size cellulose 
acetate membrane 90mm in diameter (Millipore, Watford, UK) was cut to the 
correct diameter, as 3 pm pore size membranes were not available in the correct
diameter. These were then placed at the bottom of the cell. The cell was equipped 
with a single paddle impeller (width = 4.3mm, height = 8.4mm, length = 49.6mm) 
positioned centrally in the cell in close proximity to the surface of the filter 
membrane. The shaft was driven from the top by a variable speed motor having a 
maximum speed o f 242rpm. The rotational speed of the shaft was measured using 
a digital tachometer. The cell was hermetically sealed, once the lid was screwed in 
place, and was supplied with an air inlet and pressure control system allowing 
precise setting o f the air pressure above the solution in the cell during operation.
Standard batch filtration tests were carried out as follows: 75ml of suspension 
containing the precipitated antibody was placed in the stirred cell. The rotational 
speed o f the paddle was set at a pre-determined value and an air pressure applied. 
The permeate was collected (sample 2a, Figure 5.1b) until the permeate flow 
stopped and a filter cake formed on the membrane. In the second part o f the test, 
the cake was washed, as described next. The operation was stopped, 150ml of 
18% sodium sulphate (w/v) was added to the vessel and the paddle speed was set 
to the same speed as before. The mixture was stirred for ten minutes to break and 
resuspend the cake o f precipitated antibody. The air pressure was re-applied and 
the filtrate was collected and measured every minute until the permeate flow 
stopped.
In diafiltration mode, 75ml o f precipitated antibody was placed in the cell. The 
speed o f the paddle was set at the pre-determined value and air pressure applied. 
A buffer solution o f 18% sodium sulphate (w/v) was drawn in at the same rate that 
the permeate was collected, thus maintaining a constant level o f liquid in the 
vessel. The flow o f buffer was stopped after 150ml o f buffer solution had been 
added and the operation switched to cake-filtration mode until the permeate flow 
stopped and a filter cake o f the antibody precipitate formed. The 225ml of 
permeate was collected in three separate 75ml fractions for analysis.
The final step for both modes o f operation consisted of adding 75ml of warm 
(37C) phosphate buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.4 to the solid cake in the cell. The 
antibody rich filter cake was allowed to dissolve over approximately ten minutes.
The air pressure was applied as before and the antibody rich permeate collected 
for analysis.
5.3.5 Results
Figure 3.2 is reproduced below for ease o f reference. The precipitate was 
produced under exactly the same conditions as described in section 2.4.1.
80 Particle Size (pm)
Size (pm) 
d(0.5) d(0.9)
15.1 29.7
d(0.1)
100101
Particle size (pm)
Figure 5.7 Particle size distribution produced during the precipitation of 
antibodies with sodium sulphate by a 1000 fold scale-down mimic equipment, 
operating at equal same time-integrated shear stress as the industrial scale 
(standard deviation +/-3pm at d0.9 n=5)(sample point 2, Figure 5.1a)
The permeate flux rate across the membrane was measured at intervals o f one 
minute for three different pressures and three different stirrer speeds. Figure 5.8A 
is the flux profile at 0.5bar. It can be seen that the flux rate decreases rapidly and 
then levels out at roughly 40L/m2/hr. The data also suggests that altering the 
stirrer speed did not affect the flux rate.
Orpm  121rpm  242rpm
1.61 1.2 1.40.6 0.80.40.20
Time (h)
Figure 5.8A Comparison o f flux rates measured at 0.5bar and different shear
2rates during diafiltration (standard deviation +/-5L.m .hr, n=3)
The applied pressure was increased to 1 .Obar and the flux rate was again measured 
at one minute intervals. The results are shown in figure 5.8B, again the initial flux 
rate falls off rapidly and levels out at roughly 60L/m /hr.
Orpm  121rpm  242rpm
10.80.60.40.20
Time (h)
Figure 5.8B Comparison o f flux rates measured at 1 .Obar and different shear rates 
during diafiltration (standard deviation +/-5L.m .hr, n=3)
The pressure was finally increased to 1.5bar at the flux rate was again measured at 
one minute intervals. As shown in figure 5.8C the flux rate again decreases 
rapidly and levels out at around 40L/m2/hr.
200 -I
180 -
160 -
 140 -
E 120 -
n 100 -
X 80 -
Li. 60 -
 Orpm  121rpm  242rpm
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
Time (h)
1.2 1.4 1.6
Figure 5.8C Comparison o f flux rates measured at 1.5bar and different shear rates 
during diafiltration (standard deviation +/-5L.m .hr, n=3)
The experimental flux data was plotted in terms of the model equations 5.1 and
5.2 described in section 1.3.5.5 in order to determine the method of fouling. These 
plots are shown in figures 5.9A-C.
R2 = 0.9976
1 0.60.4 0.8
Time (h)
0 0.2 10.4 0.6 0.8 1.2 1.4 1.6
Time (h)
R2 = 0.9968
0  -j------------------------- 1--------------------------1------------------------- 1-------------------------1-------------------------1
0 0 .05  0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25
Volume (L)
Figure 5.9A Experimental flux data plotted in terms of fouling model equations
(5.1) and (5.2). Data refer to experiments carried out under constant volume 
(continuous/ diafiltration) mode at 242rpm and 0.5bar
Figure 5.9B shows the experimental flux data at 242rpm and l.Obar plotted in
terms of the model equations 5.1 and 5.2.
^  2.5
R2 = 0.9887
0.5 0.9
0.5 Tim* (h)
0 0.4 10.2 0.6 0.8
Time (h)
Volume (L)
0.05 0.1 0.15
Volum e (L)
0.2 0.25
Figure 5.9B Experimental flux data plotted in terms of fouling model equations
(5.1) and (5.2). Data refer to experiments carried out under constant volume 
(continuous/ diafiltration) mode at 242rpm and l.Obar
Figure 5.9C shows the experimental flux data at 242rpm and 1.5bar plotted in
terms of the model equations 5.1 and 5.2.
R2 = 0.9738
0.20 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.2 1.4 1.61
Time (h)
R2 = 0.97382
1 0.139
Volum* (L)
0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.250
Volume (L)
Figure 5.9C Experimental flux data plotted in terms of fouling model equations 
(5.1) and (5.2). Data refer to experiments carried out under constant volume 
(continuous/ diafiltration) mode at 242rpm and 1.5bar
Figure 5.10 is a sensitivity analysis of filtration area versus processing time, 
determined using the values of Vmax and Fo obtained from experimental data. This 
was performed on the experimental flux data in order to determine the membrane 
area required to process a 250L of precipitated antibody serum at 0.5bar, l.Obar 
and 1.5bar.
150 -o- , 
55 <3
0.6 0.8 10 0.2 0.4
1.5bar
l.Obar
0.5bar
Time (h)
Pressure
(bar)
Normalised Vmax 
(L/m2)
Initial Flux
(L/m2/h)
Time required to Process 250L 
with 2.5m2 of membrane
0.5 148 107 155 minutes
1.0 147 175 107 minutes
1.5 186 86 126 minutes
Figure 5.10 Sensitivity analysis of the area of membrane required to process 
250L of precipitated serum versus time
Reducing SDS page gel electrophoresis was used to visualise the proteins 
contained in various samples. Figure 5.11a is a photograph of the gel produced 
during the diafiltration process. The albumin is gradually washed away leaving a 
purified antibody product.
200kDa 
116kDa 
97.4kDa 
66.3 kDa 
55.4kDa
36.5kDa 
31 kDa
21.5kDa
14.4kDa
Lane No. Contents
1 Mr Markers
2 Serum
3 1s* 75mL wash
4 2nd 75mL wash
5 3rd 75mL wash
6 Final product
Figure 5.11 A SDS denaturing page gels showing a comparison of the protein 
content of each intermediate purification stage during the diafiltration process
Antibody Product 
Heavv Chain
Antibody Product 
Light chain
A l b u m i n
The proteins contained in each sample of the dead end filtration process were also 
visualised by reducing SDS page. Figure 5.1 IB is a photograph of the gel 
showing the different proteins. The photo shows the albumin gradually being 
removed with some remaining in the final product.
1 2 3 4 5
200k Da 
116kDa 
97.4kDa 
66.3kDa 
55.4kDa
36.5kDa
31kDa
21.5kDa
14.4kDa
Lane No. Contents
1 Mr Markers
2 Serum
3 la Permeate
4 150mL wash
5 Final product
Figure 5.1 IB SDS denaturing page gels showing a comparison of the protein 
content of each intermediate purification stage during the dead end filtration 
process
Antibody Product 
Heavy chain
Antibody Product 
Light chain
Albumin
The reducing SDS-page gel showing the proteins present during the industrial 
precipitation/centrifugation purification process has been included in figure 
5.11C, shown below for reference.
100 4k Da 
982kDa
52.8kDa
32.9kDa
24.8kDa
Antibody Product 
Heavy chain
Antibody Product 
Lieht chain
A lbum in
Lane No. Contents
1 Mr Markers
2 Serum
3 Is* Supernatant
4 la Solid
5 2nd Supernatant
6 2nd Solid
Figure 5.11C SDS denaturing page gels showing a comparison of the protein 
content o f each intermediate purification stage during the industrial centrifugation 
process
During the diafiltration separation process samples were taken and assayed for 
total protein, albumin and active antibodies. The results were used to produce the 
mass balance shown in figure 5.12A. The albumin is removed during the washing 
phase, whilst the majority o f the antibodies are recovered scale (standard error: 
Total protein +/- 4% (n=5), Albumin +/- 5% (n=5), Active antibody +/- 8% 
(n=3)).
1 1st 75ml 2nd 75ml 3rd 75ml 4
  Average Total Protein (%) 100 40 14 10 38
  Average Albumin (%) 100 38 33 28 1.5
  Average Active Antibodies 100 0.5 0.5 0.4 95
Figure 5.12A Mass balance for the diafiltration process, showing the levels of 
total protein (%), the main contaminant albumin (%) and the product (%)(sample 
numbers correspond to those in figure 5.1)
Samples were also assayed for total protein, albumin and active antibodies during 
the dead end filtration process. Figure 5.12B shows the mass balance produced as 
a result o f these assays. The albumin is removed during the washing phase 
leaving a small amount present in the final product and the majority of the 
antibody is recovered (standard error: Total protein +/- 4% (n=5), Albumin +/- 5% 
(n=5), Active antibody +/- 8% (n=3)).
M Average Total Protein (%)
  Average Albumin (%)
  Average Active Antibodies (%)
Figure 5.12B Mass balance for the batch filtration process, showing the levels of 
total protein (%), the main contaminant albumin (%) and the product (%)(sample 
numbers correspond to those in figure 5.1)
The mass balance for the industrial scale centrifugal process is reproduced below 
in figure 5.12C for reference (standard deviation: Total protein +/- 3% (n=5), 
Albumin +/- 5% (n=5), Active antibody +/- 8% (n=3)).
M Average Total protein (%)
  Average Albumin (%)
SB Average Active Antibody (%)
Figure 5.12C Mass balance for industrial centrifugation process, showing the 
levels of total protein (%), the main contaminant albumin (%) and the product 
(%)(sample numbers correspond to those in figure 5.1)
5.3.6 Discussion
The initial permeate fluxes (F0) were 107L.m2.hr, 175L.m2hr and 86L.m2.hr at 
0.5bar l.Obar and 1.5bar respectively; the reduction in flux rate at 1.5bar is 
attributed to compaction o f the filter cake caused by the higher pressure. In each 
case the flux declines rapidly indicating the deposition of a layer of particles on 
the surface o f the filter membrane. To a first approximation flux profiles depicted 
in figures 5.8A-C are unaffected by stirrer speed (shear rate at the membrane 
surface) and the applied pressure. Different models of filtration are available that 
account for the effect o f suspension properties (pH, ionic strength), filtration 
operation (flow rate, pressure) and filter media (structure, charge). For depth 
filtration, all these properties are critically important.
Permeate flux is expected to increase with an increase in shear rate, the extent of 
the dependency is determined by assumptions made with respect to particle 
diffusion coefficient. For example, the hydrodynamic shear induced diffusion 
model o f Zydney and Colton (1986) predicts that permeate flux is directly 
proportional to the applied shear rate, while the inertial lift model o f Belfort 
(1994) predicts an even stronger dependency with permeate flux increasing with 
the square o f the shear rate. These models are essentially extensions o f the basic 
Brownian diffusion theory based on the effect o f concentration polarization (the 
stagnant film) model proposed by Blatt, et al. (1970). In the case o f surface (cake) 
membrane filtration, flux is largely unaffected by operational parameters and the 
physico-chemical properties o f the buffer/suspension. The data shown in figures 
5.8A-C and 5.9A-C appear to support the hypothesis that the separation o f the 
antibody precipitate is determined by both surface (cake) membrane filtration and 
gradual pore blocking filtration mechanisms. Marshall, et al. (1993) concluded 
that during microfiltration the main mechanism of fouling is pore plugging and 
that in systems where the concentration o f solids within the feed stream is high 
fouling by surface deposition dominates. In this system microfiltration is the 
filtration method and the solids content o f the feed stream is high, resulting in 
both methods o f fouling occurring. This is supported by further analysis o f data 
discussed below.
The data in figures 5.8A-C show that despite the high permeate flux the rate of 
filtration decreases continuously and rapidly during the filtration operation. 
Fouling o f the filtration medium is normally presented in terms of two basic 
models:
(a) Fouling by the deposition o f material that forms a layer on the surface of the 
membrane has been analysed by using Darcys equation of flow through a porous 
medium (Jomitz and Meltzer, 1988) which leads to the following cake deposition 
model (CDM) equation (Jomitz and Meltzer, 1988):
t f V 1
 = K . +
V 1, 2 ,
equation 5.1
where V is total volume o f permeate collected during the time, t. F0 is the initial 
flux rate and Ki is an empirical constant obtained from experimental data.
(b) Adsorption o f macromolecules, such as proteins, in the pores o f the filter 
media may also cause a reduction in permeate flux, which may be described by 
the following expression according to the gradual pore blocking model (PBM) 
(Jomitz and Meltzer, 1988):
r o f  M +
2 , < ^ 0  j
equation 5.2
where K2 is another constant obtained from experimental data.
According to the gradual pore blocking model a linear plot is expected when t/V 
is plotted against t, while if  cake deposition model controls fouling a linear plot is 
obtained when t/V is plotted against V. Figures 5.9A-C shows the filtration data
(of figures 5.8A-C) plotted in terms of both model equations (5.1) and (5.2). The 
plots indicate that for all transmembrane pressures tested, both the cake deposition 
model and gradual pore blocking model give linear plots. Indicating that both 
methods o f fouling are occurring and contribute to the observed flux.
With gradual pore blocking the flow rate of fluid through the filter follows 
equation 5.3 shown below:
F = Fn
equation 5.3
When the flow rate drops to zero (F=0) the maximum volume of precipitated 
antibody serum that could be processed (Vmax) can be determined.
V =max
equation 5.4
Substituting for V max into equation 5.2 gives the V max equation:
V V FY max r 0
Therefore using the experimental data obtained from the stirred cell device and 
assuming that the same filter media and feed composition are employed, it is 
possible to calculate the operating and process parameters for a large-scale 
dynamic microfiltration unit based on the scale-up criterion of Vmax and the initial 
flux rate ( F o )  . The area o f membrane needed to process a given volume of 
precipitated serum can be deduced from equation 5.5, shown below.
Area =
V\  max J
F\ r o y
equation 5.5
Where V b  is the batch volume (L), V t is the filtration time, V max is the normalised 
Vmax (L/m2) and Fo is the initial flux (L/m2/h).
The maximum volume ( V max)  capable of being filter by lm 2 of membrane has 
been calculated for each o f the three pressures used and can be seen in figure 5.10. 
lm  of membrane could process 148L, 147L and 186L of precipitated antibody 
serum at 0.5bar, l.Obar and 1.5bar respectively. At 1.5bar it is possible to process 
a larger volume o f precipitated serum however, the initial flux at 1.5bar was 
86L.m'2.h_1 compared to lOTL.m^.h'1 at 0.5bar and 175L.m"2.h_1 at l.Obar. The 
flux at 1.5bar has decreased substantially, it is hypothesised that this is due to 
infilling and compaction o f the filter cake leading to increased resistance to flow. 
This has the impact o f increasing the processing time which may effect the 
process economics. Based on the sensitivity analysis conducted for figure 5.10 an 
operational pressure o f 1 .Obar would give the most efficient process, in terms of 
the time taken to process 250L o f precipitated serum.
The stirred cell had a 0.063m diameter disc with an effective filtration area of 
0.0028m . Using this information and the V max method for scale-up a sensitivity 
analysis o f filtration area versus processing was carried out. Figure 5.10 is the 
result o f the sensitivity analysis, it can be seen that a stirred filtration machine 
with an effective filtration area o f 2.5m would be sufficient to process a batch of 
250L of antibody suspension in ~2hours. It is noted that agitation did not 
influence the filtration operation. However its inclusion in a full-scale operation is 
recommended to provide a means for re-suspending and dissolving the antibody 
layer in the final stage o f the process. The specification of minimum agitation 
speed of impellers for particle suspension has been studied previously (Ayazi- 
Shamlou, P. et al. 1994; Ayazi-Shamlou, P. 1993) and is thought to be well within 
the ability of commercially available stirred microfiltration equipment (Langeloh, 
et al. 1998).
Figure 5.11 A shows the SDS-page gels for samples removed periodically during 
the continuous (diafiltration) operation o f the unit. For comparison, data are also 
shown for the same starting precipitate in suspension separated by running the
stirred cell in a standard batch (cake filtration) mode of operation, figure 5.1 IB, 
and by centrifugation as detailed in chapter three, figure 5.11C.
Lanes 3,4 and 5 in figure 5.11A track the main protein (albumin) contaminant in 
the permeate fraction. The contaminating albumin is substantially removed from 
the retentate as the buffer is added to the suspension in the stirred cell during 
continuous operation. No antibody was detected in the permeate fractions during 
washing stage as indicated by the gel electrophoresis. At the end of the washing 
period, the operation was switched to the batch (cake) filtration mode to remove 
the sodium sulphate buffer used to wash the precipitate. The layer o f antibody 
precipitate formed on the membrane filter was dissolved in a solution of PBS at 
37C by using the stirrer to re-suspend and dissolve the antibody layer in the 
buffer. Once the dissolution operation was complete, a pressure of l.Obar ( lx l0 5 
N/m ) was applied and the permeate containing the dissolved antibody fraction 
collected. It may be seen from lane 6 (figure 5.11 A) that the product stream 
contains only a negligible quantity o f the contaminating albumin. In the batch 
operation the total volume o f buffer used to wash the cake was the same as that 
used during the constant volume operation. The gels in figure 5.1 IB show that the 
albumin is removed during both the cake filtration and washing stages (lanes 3 & 
4). Again, no antibody was detected in any o f the permeate fractions. The gels in 
figure 5.11C were obtained by separating the antibody precipitate using an 
industrial centrifuge, details o f which are given in chapter three. Comparing the 
results with the microfiltration operation indicate that the microfiltration scheme 
provides comparable outcomes in terms o f purity o f the antibody precipitate.
Figure 5.12A-C provides the results o f a mass balance carried out on the key 
components during the microfiltration o f the antibody precipitate. Data are shown 
for the stirred cell device operating in continuous mode and comparative data are 
given for batch mode as well as for the industrial disc stack centrifuge (Neal, et al. 
2003). The final product for all three systems contains similar percentage of 
albumin (5%). However, if  we define the relative potency of the final product as 
the percentage antibody content divided by the percentage total protein content, 
then it can be seen that the continuous filtration operation has the best relative
potency (2.5) this is followed closely by the dead end filtration (2.2) with the 
centrifugation process giving the lowest value (1.2).
There are two possible reasons for this. The first is the potential shear associated 
damage to the product antibody in the high shear zones in an industrial centrifuge 
(Boychyn, et al. 2001; Boulding, et al. 2002; Neal, et al. 2003). The second is the 
capacity o f the continuous microfiltration to increase the overall process yield by 
integrating several operations (concentration, diafiltration, washing and buffer 
exchange) in a single piece o f equipment. The improvement in yield may be 
considered significant given the high cost o f the antibody product (Neal, et al. 
2003).
5.4 Conclusions
It is known that current manufacturing capacity for rattlesnake venom-specific 
Fab antibody is unable to keep up with the growth in demand. In this chapter a 
modified stirred cell device was used to mimic the operation of dynamic 
microfiltration to separate an intermediate antibody precipitate from a suspension 
containing contaminating soluble proteins. Constant volume flux data were 
obtained as a function o f shear rate at the surface o f the membrane and 
transmembrane pressure and analysed to establish the limits of the filtration 
operation. The results were compared with an existing centrifugation process. The 
analysis indicated that dynamic microfiltration may be used as a single step for 
separation; purification and concentration o f antibody precipitate and offers an 
attractive process option to centrifugation.
6 Purification Of Ovine Polyclonal Antibodies By
Protein G Affinity Chromatography And The
Prediction Of Breakthrough Curves
6.1 Introduction
Affinity chromatography is a powerful tool for the isolation and purification of 
intact proteins. Advances in matrix and ligand technology mean that affinity 
chromatography has now found widespread use and is a well recognised technique 
within the biopharmaceutical industry (Subramanian, 1995). This technology has 
been used for the purification o f many different types o f product ranging from 
antibodies (Huse, et al. 2002; Lowe, et al. 2001), to plant proteins (Weselake and 
Jain, 1992), to proteases (Ibrahim-Granet and Bertrand, 1996).
It is also a potentially attractive process option as a method to purify polyclonal 
immunoglobulins because in principle the current four-step 
precipitation/centrifugal recovery technique described in chapter three could be 
carried out in one step. Protein A affinity chromatography is regularly used for the 
initial purification o f monoclonal antibodies from clarified cell culture fluid 
(Birch, et al. 1995; Blank, et al. 2001; Fahmer, et al. 1999a; Fahmer, et al. 1999b; 
Fahmer, et al. 1999c; Grant, et al. 1999; Schwarz, 2000; Walter, 2000) and the 
same principles could be applied for this purification.
In this instance however, protein G was chosen instead of protein A as it exhibits 
a higher affinity for ovine IgG antibodies (Bjorrck and Kronvall, 1984). It has 
been reported that conventional separation techniques, like precipitation, are being 
replaced by affinity separations (Bonneijea, et al. 1986). Figure 6.2 details the 
proposed process flow sheet for the purification process, with the Protein G 
separation replacing the precipitation and centrifugation steps.
A one step primary separation is extremely desirable because of the potential 
decrease in process time and potential increase in yield obtained from a decrease
in the number of separation steps used to achieve the purification. The flow sheet 
detailed in figure 6.1 has eight discrete stages where as the process sheet in figure
6.2 has five. The degree o f purification obtained from a protein G (affinity) 
purification step may also be greater than the current precipitation/centrifugation 
step, due to the specific nature o f the protein G immunoglobulin interaction. 
There is also general agreement within the biopharmaceutical industry that 
decreasing the number o f steps in a process and increasing the yield will generate 
higher returns (Lowe, et al. 2001).
100L 36% (W/V)sodium 
sulphate Albumin to waste
Equal volume 
18% (W/V) 
sodium sulphate
100L k
Serum
Papain & EDTA
Waste
Depth F ie r
Precipitation V essel Disk-S ta c k  Centrifuge R e-suspension V essel D isk-Stack Centrifuge Digestion vessel
High salt phosphate 
buffer
Low salt phosphate 
buffer
lOmM Glycine- 
HCL pH 2.5 lOOmM phosphate 
buffer pH 7.5
D epth  Filter --------
Ultrafilter
Ion E xchange
Waste
Filling and 
formulation
Affinity Chromatography
Fc fragments 
(waste)
Waste
Figure 6.1 Process flow sheet for the purification of polyclonal Fab fragments 
from ovine serum
0.02M Sodium 
Phosphate pH 7.0
Ultrafilter
Affinity Chromatography
Ion E xchange Affinity Chromatography
Waste Waste
Waste
Serum
Papain & EDTA
Filling and 
Formulation
0 .1M glycine- 
HCL pH 2.7
Flow through to 
waste
lOOmM glycine- 
HCLpH 25
High salt phosphate 
buffer
1 OOmM phosphate 
buffer pH 7.5
Low salt phosphate 
buffer
Figure 6.2 Process flow sheet for modified chromatographic separation process
The steps following the protein G affinity purification are required to remove the 
contaminating Fc fragments produced during the digestion step. Changes to them 
will not be considered here.
This chapter focuses on the use o f protein G for separating polyclonal IgGs from 
ovine serum and assesses the suitability o f affinity chromatography for the initial 
purification step. This method o f separation was also compared to the centrifugal 
method described in chapter 3 and the filtration separation method described in 
chapter 5.
Values for the maximum monolayer capacity ( q m) ,  the dissociation constant ( K d ) ,  
and the apparent adsorption constant (Kj) were determined from batch and rate 
adsorption data. The results were then used in the kinetic rate constant model 
developed by Chase (1984) to build a mathematical model capable o f predicting 
the breakthrough curves o f IgG separations. Predictions were made for various 
bed heights/diameters, antibody feed concentrations and feed flow rates. These 
predictions were tested by comparison to experimentally produced breakthrough 
curves.
6.1.1 Theory
Adsorption isotherms and modelling
Batch adsorption experiments were conducted to generate information about the 
binding characteristics o f the matrix. The results from the batch adsorption 
experiments, for both IgG and albumin, were analysed using the Langmuir 
isotherm (equation 1.19, detailed in section 1.3.6.5 is shown below for reference). 
It has been used extensively in the past to analyse binding characteristics (Bellot 
and Condoret, 1993; Chase, 1984; Jacobson, et al. 1984; Mao, et al. 1995; Weaver 
and Carta, 1996).
q  _  CMqm _  CMqmK A 
s Cu + K d CuK a +1
(equation 6.1)
Where Cs is the concentration o f absorbed solute at equilibrium, Cm is the 
concentration o f solute in the mobile phase at equilibrium, qm is the maximum 
monolayer capacity o f the matrix, Kd is the disassociation constant and Ka is the 
association constant.
The applicability o f this model to describe the batch adsorption experimental data 
was assessed using the Scatchard plotting technique (Andrade, 1985; Blanco, et 
al. 1989; Scatchard, 1949). A linear Scatchard plot indicates the applicability o f 
the Langmuir model, where as a non-linear plot suggests a violation of the basic 
assumptions inherent to the model. Rearranging equation 6.1 yields:
^  = qmKA- K ACs
(equation 6.2)
This equation implies that a plot of Cs/Cm versus Cs should yield a straight line of 
slope - K a  and intercept qmKA if the basic assumptions o f the Langmuir model are 
adhered to. Experimental work (Anspach, et al. 1990; Blanco, et al. 1989; Boyer
et al. 1989) has however demonstrated that many cases of protein adsorption show 
deviations from linearity. If the Scatchard plot results in a concave-up curvature, 
this suggests either negative co-operativity i.e. two different species o f protein are 
competing for the same binding site, or the presence o f two or more 
heterogeneous binding sites. A concave-down curvature indicates positive co- 
operativity, i.e. one binding site binds more than one protein at a time.
Simulations of the breakthrough process can be conducted by determining the rate 
constant (Kj) and using the kinetic rate constant model developed by Chase 
(1984) to describe the adsorption and desorption process. This model assumes 
that the surface reaction rate is slow compared to the mass transfer rate. This 
assumption means that the rate at which the antibodies bind to the protein G is 
slow compared to the rate at which they move from the solution they are 
contained within to within the matrix. This implies that the protein concentration 
inside the adsorbant particle is the same as outside. The rate function accounts for 
the reversible nature o f the solute-adsorbent interaction:
and Hsu, 1990; Huang, et al. 1990; Ruaan, et al. 1988; Sada, et al. 1986; Whitley,
-   = K,Cu (qm- C s) - K _ lCs 
(equation 6.3)
(bta)( 1 -  exp{- 2(av / V)Kxt})
\ b - a )
 -e x p { -2 (a v /F ) ,/}
(equation 6.4)
Where
rcv\
(equation 6.5)
6 = 1
C0V k dv
 + 9, + - e-
(equation 6.6)
Where K_i is the reverse reaction rate constant, Co is the initial protein 
concentration, u is the volume of matrix and V is the volume of solution (Chase, 
1984).
This model was originally developed to describe ion-exchange processes. It lumps 
all the mass transfer resistances into one interaction rate constant. The model also 
assumes that one protein molecule adsorbs to one functional group.
6.2 Methodology
A 0.7cm diameter, 2.5cm high column with a capacity o f 0.96ml, packed with 
protein G sepharose 4 fast flow (Amersham Biosciences, Buckinghamshire, U.K.) 
was used to separate polyclonal IgGs from ovine serum. The main contaminants 
within the serum are albumin and other blood proteins. The column was run 
according to the method detailed in section 2.5.3. The chromatograms of the first 
and twentieth purification run on the 0.96ml capacity column are included in the 
results section in order to show that the column has not significantly deteriorated 
with repeated use. A mass balance has been produced in order to determine the 
levels of recovery and the amount of IgG bound to the column. A non reducing 
SDS-PAGE gel, produced as per the method detailed in section 2.3.3.2, was used 
to visualise the proteins contained in the un-purified serum, the flowthrough/wash 
fractions and the elutant fractions. These fractions were produced during the 
protein G purification.
Column experiments also provided purified IgG for use during the batch and 
breakthrough curve experiments.
Isotherm measurements
Isotherm measurements were conducted using a batch method. Section 2.5.1 
details the method used for the twenty-four hour equilibrium experiments. 
Solutions of IgG and albumin at various starting concentrations were placed into 
eppendorfs containing an equal volume of matrix. They were left for twenty-four 
hours in order to allow the protein concentrations to come to equilibrium. These 
experiments allow the maximum capacity (qn) o f the matrix to be determined 
along with the dissociation constant (K 0.
Dynamic equilibrium experiments were used to determine the apparent adsorption 
constant (Kl). This constant describes the rate o f adsorption of the solute to the 
support; in this case the antibodies to protein G. Section 2.5.2 describes the 
method utilised to determine the dynamic equilibrium. Known concentrations of 
IgG and Albumin were placed in a stirred vessel containing an equal volume of 
protein G matrix. Samples o f the mobile phase were then removed at different 
times. The concentrations o f protein were determined by Bradford assay using the 
methodology detailed in section 2.3.1.1. It was assumed that adsorption and 
desorption take place simultaneously at the surface of the matrix.
Equation 6.4 was solved using Matlab and the experimentally determined 
adsorption values. The predicted breakthrough curves were drawn from the results 
(Dr Hu Zhang, private communication).
The breakthrough curve predictions were tested by comparison with breakthrough 
curves produced using varying bed heights, different flow rates and different 
starting concentrations o f IgG. The method is described in section 2.5.4.
6.3 Results
The chromatogram for the 0.96ml volume column purification of IgG from ovine 
serum after the first run are shown in figure 6.3.
~  2500 
  1500
< 1000
0 10 15
Tim e (m ins)
20 255
Purification o f ovine polyclonal antibodies from serum (run number 
1) 2ml of 32.5mg/ml (total protein) 15mg/ml (IgG) at 157.89cm/hr
The chromatogram for the 0.96ml volume column purification of IgG from ovine 
serum after the twentieth run is shown in figure 6.4.
Time (mins)
Figure 6.4 Purification of ovine polyclonal antibodies from serum (run number 
20) 2ml of 32.5mg/ml (total protein) 15mg/ml (IgG) at 157.89cm/hr
The concentration o f proteins in the flowthrough/wash and in the elution portion 
of the chromatographic run were measured and used to produce the mass balances 
shown below in tables 6.1 and 6.2. 1ml of protein G matrix binds around 19mg of 
ovine IgG from within the mixed protein starting serum solution when the flow 
rate is 157.89cm/hr and the concentration of antibodies in the feed is 15mg/ml.
Run No. Total protein 
Loaded (mg)
Total IgG 
Loaded (mg)
Total protein in 
Wash/Flowthrough (mg)
Product(eluant)
1 65 30 46.1 18.9
5 65 30 46.1 18.9
10 65 30 46.4 18.6
15 65 30 46.4 18.6
20 65 30 45.7 19.3
Table 6.1 Mass balance for protein G affinity chromatography runs 1 ,5 , 10, 15, 
and 20
IgG recovered 
IgG in 
flowthrough (mg)
% IgG recovered 
from column
% IgG 
yield
1 18.9 10 96 63
5 18.9 9.8 96 63
10 18.6 10.2 96 62
15 18.6 9.9 95 62
20 19.3 10 97 64
Table 6.2 Antibody yields for protein G affinity chromatography runs 1, 5, 10, 
15, and 20
A non reducing SDS PAGE gel was used to visualise the proteins contained 
within the various fractions. The antibody is purified out from the other 
contaminating proteins and is found in the elutant fraction.
1 2 3 4 5 6
20OTh
663dTi
55.4h
363Th
2L3h
144dTi
 T T
Antibody
Albumin
Lane No. Contents
1 M  Markers
2 Serum
3 FlovUhrouglVWash
4 HovvthroughAVash
5 Elutant
6 Elutant
Figure 6.5 SDS page non reducing gel showing the protein content of the various 
fractions produced during the chromatographic separation of antibodies from 
ovine serum by protein G affinity chromatography
The total protein concentration at equilibrium in the mobile and solid phase at 
various starting concentrations were determined by batch uptake experiments. 
The results are plotted below in figure 6.6. The Langmuir equation was used to 
produce the predicted isotherm based on the experimentally determined value of 
KAfor IgG antibodies and Albumin.
Qn(rrg'rrl)
Figure 6.6 Langmuir isotherms showing predicted IgG concentrations (solid line) 
the predicted Albumin concentrations (dashed line) the measured concentrations 
o f IgG(A) and the measured albumin concentrations () present in the solute 
fraction and bound to the matrix at different initial starting concentrations after 24 
hours
The method of Scatchard was used to determine the applicability o f the Langmuir 
model for describing the IgG experimental data. The plot shown below in figure 
6.7 is for the batch uptake of IgG onto protein G matrix.
Figure 6.7 Scatchard plot o f IgG adsorption data, the solid line is the fitted curve 
using the Langmuir equation the () represent the IgG experimental data
The method of Scatchard was also used to determine the applicability o f the 
Langmuir model for describing the Albumin experimental data. The plot shown 
below in figure 6.8 is for the batch uptake of Albumin onto protein G matrix.
Figure 6.8 Scatchard plot of albumin adsorption data, the solid line is the fitted 
curve using the Langmuir equation the () represent the albumin experimental 
Dynamic equilibrium experiments were conducted and the concentration o f both 
IgG and Albumin remaining in solution were measured after different time 
intervals. The results are shown below in figure 6.9. The protein G binds IgG in 
large amounts and reaches its maximum capacity after 5 minutes, whilst the 
albumin barely binds to the matrix.
20 25 3015100 5
Time (mins)
Figure 6.9 Concentration o f Albumin () and IgG (A) remaining in the mobile 
phase at different times after the addition of the protein solution to the equilibrated 
protein G matrix
Table 6.3, shown below details the experimentally determined values for Kd  K l 
and qm
Protein
( k jm 3) 3K1 (m /kg/hr)
Max capacity 
(qmkg/m3)
IgG 0.5 12 28.5
Albumin 5 3.6 3
Table 6.3 Experimentally determined values of Kq  K l and qmfor the interaction 
of protein G matrix with IgG and albumin
Predicted and experimental breakthrough curves were determined for a variety of 
different bed heights, flow rates and feed concentrations, in order to test the 
robustness of the mathematical model. Table 6.4, shown below summarises the 
conditions.
Experim ent No. 1 2 3 4 5
Feed concentration 30mg/ml 30mg/ml 15 mg/ml 15mg/ml 30mg/ml
Bed Height 2.5cm 2.5cm 2.5cm 2.5cm 5cm
Flow rate 157cm/hr 316cm/hr 157cm/hr 316cm/hr 76cm/hr
Column diam eter 0.7cm 0.7cm 0.7cm 0.7cm 1cm
Experim ent No. 6 7 8 9 10
Feed concentration 15 mg/ml 30mg/ml 30mg/ml 30mg/ml 30mg/ml
Bed Height 5cm 10cm 10cm 15cm 15cm
Flow rate 76cm/hr 76cm/hr 38cm/hr 120cm/hr 60cm/hr
Column diam eter 1cm 1cm 1cm 0.8cm 0.8cm
Table 6.4 Summary of the different conditions utilised during the breakthrough 
curve experiments
Predicted and experimental breakthrough curves for a bed 2.5cm high, 0.7cm
diameter with a feed concentration of 30mg/ml and a flow rate o f 157cm/hr and
316cm/hr. The predicted curves closely match the experimental curves.
O 0.6
^  0.4
0 5 10
D im ensionless tim e
Figure 6.10 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (2.5cm high column, 0.7cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration, 
157cm/hr flow rate)
O 0.6 
^  0.4
5 100
Dim ensionless time
Figure 6.11 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough
curves (2.5cm high column, 0.7cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration,
316cm/hr flow rate)
Predicted and experimental breakthrough curves for a bed 2.5cm high. 0.7cm
diameter with a feed concentration o f 15mg/ml and a flow rate o f 157cm/hr and
316cm/hr. The predicted curves do not closely match the experimental curves.
0 5 10 15
D im ensionless tim e
Figure 6.12 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (2.5cm high column, 0.7cm diameter, 15mg/ml feed concentration, 
157cm/hr flow rate)
D im ension less tim e
Figure 6.13 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough
curves (2.5cm high column, 0.7cm diameter, 15mg/ml feed concentration,
316cm/hr flow rate)
Predicted and experimental breakthrough curves for a bed 5cm high, 1.0cm
diameter with a feed concentration o f  30mg/ml and 15mg/ml at a flow rate o f
76cm/hr. The predicted curves do not closely match the experimental curves.
0 2 4 6 8 10
D im ension less tim e
Figure 6.14 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (5cm high column, 1cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration, 76cm/hr 
flow rate)
O 0.6
  0.4 
2 4 6 8
D im en sio n less  tim e
Figure 6.15 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough
curves (5cm high column, 1cm diameter, 15mg/ml feed concentration, 76cm/hr
flow rate)
Predicted and experimental breakthrough curves for a bed 10cm high, 1.0cm
diameter with a feed concentration o f 30mg/ml at a flow rate o f 76cm/hr and
38cm/hr. The predicted curves do not closely match the experimental curves.
0 2 4 6 8 10
D im ension less tim e
Figure 6.16 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough 
curves (10cm high column, 1cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration, 76cm/hr 
flow rate)
2 8 100 4 6
D im ensionless tim e
Figure 6.17 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough
curves (10cm high column, 1cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration, 38cm/hr
flow rate)
Predicted and experimental breakthrough curves for a bed 15cm high, 0.8cm
diameter with a feed concentration of 30mg/ml at a flow rate of 120cm/hr and
60cm/hr. The predicted curves do not closely match the experimental curves.
0 2 4 6 8 10
Dim ensionless tim e
Figure 6.18 Sim ulated  (red lin e) and experim ental (b lack lin e) breakthrough  
curves (1 5 cm  high co lu m n , 0 .8 cm  diam eter, 30m g/m l feed  concentration , 
120cm /hr f lo w  rate)
2 100 4 6 8
D im ensionless tim e
Figure 6.19 Simulated (red line) and experimental (black line) breakthrough
curves (15cm high column, 0.8cm diameter, 30mg/ml feed concentration, 60cm/hr
flow rate)
6.4 Discussion
A small-scale protein G column (2.5cm x 0.7cm) has been used to study the 
feasibility o f using affinity chromatography to purify polyclonal immunoglobulins 
from ovine serum in one step (figure 6.2). Thereby replacing the current four-step 
precipitation and centrifugal recovery process shown in figure 3.1a.
Values o f Kd, K i and qm were determined. These values were then input into a 
mathematical model, which was used to predict the shape and position of 
breakthrough curves produced during the binding of ovine polyclonal 
immunoglobulins to protein G. The model was tested by comparing the predicted 
curves against curves produced by frontal analysis experiments. These were 
conducted with columns o f varying lengths/diameters, with varying flow rates and 
varying feed inlet concentrations.
Figures 6.3 and 6.4 show the chromatograms produced during the purification of 
antibodies from ovine serum using the 0.96ml volume protein G column. Figure
6.3 is the chromatogram for the first run and figure 6.4 is the chromatogram
produced during the 20 run. As can be seen, the size and shape o f the elution 
peak remained consistent, indicating that the column is still binding the same 
quantity o f IgG after twenty runs. It is also worth noting that the backpressure 
within the system did not noticeably increase, indicating that the column was not 
clogging (data not shown).
Tables 6.1 and 6.2 are the mass balances for runs one, five, ten, fifteen and 
twenty; the extra runs have been included for comparative purposes. The mass 
balance reveals that when 30mg of IgG is loaded around 19mg binds to the 
column whilst lOmg flows through to waste. These levels remained the same 
from runs one through twenty, again indicating that the column is not degrading. 
It is particularly important from an industrial point of view that the column gives a 
consistent yield, since a purification process needs to be robust in order for it to be 
validatable. A long column life will also improve the economics o f the process. 
The mass balance indicates that the yield is 63% compared to 80% for the
industrial scale precipitation/centrifugal recovery process and 95% for the 
microfiltration process (see figures 3.8b and 5.12a respectively). At first glance 
this yield does not compare favourably with the yields from the other processes. 
However, this is an initial set o f experiments, designed only to test the feasibility 
of using protein G to bind and separate the ovine polyclonal antibodies from the 
rest of the contaminants. Further experimental work would have to be conducted 
in order to determine the most efficient amount of serum to load as well as the 
optimum flow rate and buffering conditions required to gain the highest yield, 
before an accurate comparison could be drawn.
Figure 6.5 is a non-reducing SDS-page gel depicting the proteins contained within 
the process stream at various points during the protein G separation process. Lane 
2 contains the starting serum showing the antibody and the major contaminants. 
Lanes 3 and 4 contain the flowthrough/column wash fraction. As can be seen a 
large quantity o f IgG remains unbound and is lost. Determining the optimum 
loading conditions could reduce this loss. Lanes 5 and 6 contain the elution peak. 
The purity o f the final product is excellent, with only one major band of IgG 
present. This compares very favourably with both the precipitation/centrifugal and 
microfiltration purification processes (figures 3.4a and 5.11a), where 
contaminating proteins are still present.
Isotherms
Batch and dynamic experiments were used to determine experimental values 
which describe the adsorption/desorption process. The Langmuir equation has 
been used extensively in the past to describe interactions between chromatography 
media and various substrates (Gritti and Guiochon, 2003; Hahn, et al. 2003; 
McCue, et al. 2003; Weaver and Carta, 1996). Here it has been used to describe 
the adsorption/desorption process occurring between protein G and ovine 
polyclonal antibodies. The applicability o f this method to describe the 
adsorption/desorption process was assessed through the use o f Scatchard plots 
(Scatchard, 1949). The experimentally determined values were used to build a 
mathematical model capable o f predicting the shape o f breakthrough curves 
produced during the protein G separation process. The mathematical model was
tested by comparing its predictions to actual experimental results. However it 
should be noted that Yang and Tsao (Yang and Tsao, 1982) have highlighted that 
the assumptions o f linear adsorption isotherms or linear adsorption-desorption 
kinetics, which have been used frequently to describe liquid or gas 
chromatography systems (Bellot and Condoret, 1993; Chase, 1984; Jacobson, et 
al. 1984; Mao, et al. 1995; Weaver and Carta, 1996), might not be applicable to 
affinity chromatography. Another assumption of this model is that the binding 
sites on the matrix have affinity for only one type o f adsorbate. However protein 
G recognises and binds to many species o f IgG and the feed material is polyclonal 
in nature. This means that reactions with different rate kinetics may be taking 
place when the matrix and the serum are combined.
Adsorption isotherms were measured for the binding o f polyclonal anti-snake 
venom antibodies and albumin to immobilised protein G. The antibodies/albumin 
were buffered in 0.2M sodium phosphate buffer pH 7.4. Figure 6.6 is a plot o f the 
experimentally determined values for the concentration o f IgG and albumin 
remaining in the mobile phase at different starting concentrations after the system 
had reached equilibrium. The plot shows good agreement between the 
experimental and the Langmuir predicted curves for both the antibodies and the 
albumin. The shape o f the curve shown in figure 6.6 for the antibody-protein G 
interaction is indicative o f a favourable adsorption isotherm (Langmuir, 1918).
The Scatchard plot for the antibody adsorption data is shown in figure 6.7 and the 
albumin adsorption data is shown in figure 6.8. A straight line indicates that the 
Langmuir curve can be used to describe the experimental data. The antibody 
adsorption data, when plotted out, gives a r2 value of 0.88 indicating a reasonable 
correlation. The discrepancies could be attributed to the polyclonal nature of the 
immunoglobulins, which may mean that the different types o f antibody have 
different affinities for the protein G, thus resulting in a mixture of rate constants.
The Scatchard plot for the albumin adsorption data shown in figure 6.8 gives an r 
value o f 0.15, indicating that the Langmuir isotherm does not accurately describe 
the interaction between albumin and the protein G matrix. This is to be expected 
since the protein G molecule has been genetically modified to remove its albumin-
binding site. As such the binding of the albumin is probably be due to unspecific 
interaction with the solid support.
The values for the effective dissociation constant (Kd), forward rate constant (Ki), 
and the maximum capacity (qm) for the binding o f IgG and albumin to protein G 
were determined using equations 6.1 to 6.6 with reference to figures 6.6 and 6.9 
the results are shown in table 6.3.
For the IgG system at equilibrium the dissociation constant ( K d )  equalled
0.5kg/m3, the forward rate constant (Ki) equalled 12m3/kg/hr and the maximum 
binding capacity o f the protein G matrix was 28.5kg/m3 o f gel. These values are 
comparable to those obtained for the interaction between different protein A 
matrices and polyclonal IgG (Hahn, et al. 2003).
For the albumin system at equilibrium the dissociation constant ( K d )  equalled 
5kg/m3, the forward rate constant (Ki) equalled 3.6m3/kg/hr and the maximum 
binding capacity o f the protein G matrix was 3kg/m3 o f gel.
As expected the association constant for IgG was much larger than for albumin as 
was the maximum capacity o f the resin. This maximum capacity would probably 
not be achievable under column separation conditions since this value represents 
the amount bound after 24 hours without any interfering proteins. During column 
separation the residence time will be a matter of minutes not hours and this is one 
of the main factors influencing the amount of IgG bound (McCue, et al. 2003). 
The dynamic equilibrium plot shown in figure 6.9 reveals the rate at which the 
antibodies and the albumin bind to the matrix. After 5 minutes the matrix has 
almost reached its maximum capacity for the antibodies or the albumin. This plot 
was used to calculate the value o f Kj.
Breakthrough curves
Experimental breakthrough curves were determined for packed columns in order 
to study the effect o f changing operating variables such as the flow rate, the 
concentration o f the adsorbate and the size and shape o f the column on the
position and shape o f the curve. These experiments were also conducted to test the 
mathematical models ability to predict the shape and position o f the breakthrough 
curve under different operating conditions. Table 6.4 summarises the conditions 
used during the breakthrough curve experiments and figures 6.10 through 6.19 
show the experimentally produced curve with the predicted curve overlaid.
Figures 6.10 and 6.11 are the experimental and predicted breakthrough curves for 
a 2.5cm long bed, 0.7cm in diameter run at a feed inlet concentration of 30mg/ml 
at a flow rate o f 157cm/hr and 316cm/hr. The predicted and experimental curves 
closely match, indicating a good correlation between the mathematical model and 
the reaction occurring during the experimental run. The column conditions match 
those used during the batch update experiments with regard to the feed inlet 
concentration.
Figures 6.12 through 6.19 are the experimental and predicted breakthrough curves 
for columns run under different operating conditions as detailed in table 6.4. The 
predicted and the experimental curves differ in the predicted time it will take for 
breakthrough to occur; this indicates a possible flaw in the model used to predict 
the breakthrough curves. The possible reasons for these discrepancies will be 
discussed later.
The breakthrough curve model is based on several assumptions as well as relying 
on the accuracy o f the experimentally determined values of Kj and qm to predict 
the shape and position o f the curve. The Langmuir curve and the Scatchard plot 
of the antibody adsorption data indicated that a simple equilibrium relationship 
could be used to describe the system and the interactions occurring during the 
affinity separation (figures 6.6-6.8). However the lack o f agreement between the 
predicted and experimental breakthrough curves suggests that some of the 
assumptions the model is based on do not fully describe what is occurring within 
the system. The model assumes that the adsorbent-adsorbate reaction takes place 
between one molecule and one functional group. However, the antibody solution 
is polyclonal and contains many different types of antibody, which could have 
different binding affinities (Bjorrck and Kronvall, 1984). The model also assumes 
that the protein concentration inside the matrix is the same as outside i.e. the rate
of interaction between adsorbent and adsorbate governs the reaction not the mass 
transfer rate. Both factors could be contributing to the rate of uptake which 
impacts the accuracy o f the model. The experimentally determined values o f Ki 
or qm could be inaccurate, which would introduce discrepancies when the model is 
tested under conditions different from those the values o f qm and Ki were 
determined at. It should also be noted that the values o f the parameters for the 
interaction between adsorbent and adsorbate are only applicable to the conditions 
under which they were measured. Differences in the temperature, pH and ionic 
strength may alter the binding kinetics, resulting in a shift in the position of the 
breakthrough curve.
The shape o f a breakthrough curve can also be used to determine when the most 
efficient adsorption process is achieved. This is obtained when the curve is at its 
sharpest. Chase (1984) determined that the sharpest breakthrough curve is seen 
with the lowest feed flow rate and the highest feed concentration. Within an 
industrial setting these parameters may not be achievable since time constraints 
may restrict the flow rate allowable and the feed inlet concentration is governed 
by the concentration within the ovine serum and the amount o f binding buffer 
added to it.
6.5 Conclusions
This chapter demonstrates the feasibility of using protein G as a replacement for 
the current precipitation/centrifugation purification process. Although the yield of 
63% is less than the current process, optimisation o f the technique may improve 
yields to levels comparable to those of the current purification process. The use of 
protein G affinity chromatography may also present cost saving opportunities in 
terms of the time taken to complete the initial purification step.
The mathematical model devised can predict the shape and position of 
breakthrough curves with some success. Further work is required in order to gain 
a better understanding of the equilibrium reactions that govern the protein G 
polyclonal immunoglobulin interaction. The mathematical model provides a
reasonable prediction o f the shape of the breakthrough curves. Predictions of the 
position were only partially successful, possibly due to either one of the 
assumptions the model is based on is incorrect or the experimentally determined 
values o f Ki or qm are inaccurate. As it stands the model could not be used to 
correctly predict the effect o f altering separation conditions and parameters i.e. 
bed height. However with refinement and further experimental work it should be 
possible to improve the model so that it could be used to predict the impact of 
changes to the operating parameters; such as the flow rate and the feed inlet 
concentration.
7 Future Work
This thesis describes the development o f an integrated ultra scale down mimic and 
its use for studying process changes. Future work in this area could be on the 
optimisation o f the current industrial scale manufacturing process and on the 
production o f a whole bioprocess mimic encompassing the ion exchange and 
affinity chromatography steps. A fully linked bioprocess mimic would afford the 
opportunity to be able to study the knock on effects o f process changes the whole 
way down the process stream.
Chapter five looked at an alternative purification method. A more in depth study 
on microfiltration membrane properties and their effect on the flux rate and 
transmission o f the protein would be beneficial in expanding the understanding of 
filtration.
The ability to purify antibodies from mammalian serum in one step (as 
demonstrated in chapter six) may reduce both processing time and costs; this 
could also be the focus o f future studies. Work needs to be conducted on the 
properties o f the matrix, such as its life span and capacity as well as the durability 
o f the ligand when dealing with feed solutions that contain large quantities of 
contaminating material and are o f high viscosity. New matrices are also 
continually being developed. A study into the new types o f matrices being 
produced, their properties and their applicability to antibody purification would be 
valuable. Work could also be conducted to refine the basic mathematical model 
developed in chapter 6 for predicting breakthrough curves. A study optimising the 
process conditions used during the protein G affinity chromatography separation 
would enable an accurate comparison o f the yields between the different 
separation techniques to be conducted.
The current affinity purification step represents a large proportion of the process 
costs. Experimental work optimising the process would be beneficial. The 
theories developed in chapter six could be applied to the current affinity process in 
order to refine the model and predict beneficial process changes.
8 Ultra Scale Down Solutions
8.1 Introduction
The purpose o f the Engineering Doctorate scheme is to ensure that during the four 
years of the course, candidates receive training in management, validation and 
commercial awareness as well as carrying out novel research.
The work described in the previous chapters details the research conducted during 
the completion o f this thesis on Ultra Scale Down methods for mimicking 
downstream operations and small-scale experiments for determining or predicting 
the behaviour o f the process feed stream at a large scale. The purification 
operations studied include precipitation, centrifugation, filtration and 
chromatography.
The equipment and methodology used to predict and study the downstream 
purification process may have commercial uses. The executive summary detailed 
in this chapter gives a brief overview o f the potential commercialisation o f Ultra 
Scale Down, its benefits and drawbacks, if  it were to be used in an industrial 
setting, along with a brief financial appraisal.
8.2 Executive Summary
8.2.1 USD concept
Ultra Scale Down (USD) solutions will provide services to enhance current 
manufacturing process development activities carried out by the top ten 
pharmaceutical companies, using the unique, patented USD tools and software 
developed by University College London (UCL). USD tools accurately mimic the 
downstream purification process o f a biopharmaceutical drug at a laboratory scale. 
USD is seeking $6 mn in seed funding to finance working capital requirements for 
the first two years, during which time the technology will be upgraded to meet 
current industry standards and the benefits further demonstrated in an industrial 
environment.
The key financial data for the proposed business is shown below:
Year 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Revenues($ 000) 0 0 9,000 9,000 9,000 9,000 34,000 67,000
Operating Profit ($ 000) -3,700 -1,800 6,900 6,900 6,900 6,900 30,200 61,500
Operating Profit as % of 
Revenue
77% 77% 77% 77% 89% 92%
Head Count 15 16 17 17 18 18 18 18
Cumulative Capital 
Required 
($ 000)
4,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000
Table 8.1 Projected Financial Summary
8.2.2 Value proposition
The key benefits o f U SD s service are as follows:
1. Enhanced optimisation o f the manufacturing process. This would result in 
better product yields, thereby reducing the costs o f manufacturing. Initial 
estimates suggest a 10-20% potential reduction in manufacturing costs. 
Furthermore, superior process optimisation may allow better definition of 
equipment requirements, with resultant capital expenditure savings.
2. Optimising process development increases the probability o f being first-to- 
market with a novel drug, through reduced regulatory review times. 
Moreover, due to limited patent lives, speeding up drug launch increases 
the amount o f protected sales.
3. A more robust process reduces risk o f product recall due to manufacturing 
problems.
4. Savings in time and costs associated with the process development 
activities.
8.2.3 The Current Problem
Increasingly, the global biopharmaceutical industry is facing cost and time 
pressures in the drug development process. These result from:
Cost containment drives by drug purchasers (typically national health 
organisations) tend to focus on the most visible area -  drug pricing;
Increasing competitive pressures call for rapid launch o f new drugs. Industry 
experience indicates that the first entrant in a given therapeutic area can capture 
up to 80% market share. Advances in other areas o f product development (e.g. 
bioinformatics) have also shifted the bottleneck to the process development 
activity.
The purification processes for new drugs are becoming increasing complex and 
costly as a result o f increasing complexity o f the drugs themselves;
New drug approval times by regulatory authorities (e.g. FDA) are decreasing and 
these bodies are starting to require that process definition be undertaken earlier in 
the product development cycle.
O f particular importance in defining the manufacturing process for 
biopharmaceuticals are scale-up effects, i.e. taking a laboratory-scale production 
process and defining the appropriate parameters to produce equivalent material at 
bulk scale. Unlike for synthetic chemicals, scale-up effects for 
biopharmaceuticals are difficult to predict (i.e. during fermentation), because there 
is little theory or previous experience in this area. Therefore, pilot scale studies 
are used to generate the requisite empirical data. This procedure is relatively 
costly, time consuming and may not define an optimum process.
8.2.4 Solution
USD tools accurately mimic the downstream purification process o f a 
biopharmaceutical drug at a laboratory scale. The material produced during USD 
studies has been proven to be comparable with the material obtained at bulk scale.
Therefore, process options can be investigated within a laboratory early on in the
drug development cycle and an optimised purification process delivered to the 
pilot plant for verification. USD tools eliminate the need for continual repetition 
o f pilot plant trials, and because the scale is so small the work can be done at a 
fraction of the time and cost compared to the current process. Software has also 
been developed that allows the results from each individual operation to be 
integrated together into a whole process model. USD tools are available for the 
seven main purification methods that are used in manufacturing most marketed 
biopharmaceuticals currently. Further research is being conducted into other key 
operations (e.g. fermentation). It is expected that working models for these 
operations will be developed over the next three years by UCL.
8.3 C ustom ers
The biopharmaceutical industry consists o f four key segments:
Drug Discovery: small companies which focus on the process o f discovering 
novel drugs. After discovery, the drugs are licensed to larger companies for 
clinical trials and marketing;
Specialist Biotech: companies which focus on biopharmaceuticals and are active 
in all areas o f the value chain from drug discovery and development to marketing; 
Big Pharma: traditional large companies which manufacture biopharmaceuticals 
as part o f a portfolio o f both synthetic and bio drugs. The top ten pharma 
companies dominate the global pharmaceuticals market. Typically, these 
companies are active in all areas o f the value chain.
Contract Manufacturing Organisations (CMO): about ten companies in the UK 
manufacture biopharmaceuticals on behalf of big pharma and specialist biotech 
companies. Many o f these CMOs also provide manufacturing process 
development services to their clients.
USD will aim to target Big Pharma companies initially, given that:
This segment stands to gain most directly from the potential benefits of USD, 
particularly given the intensity o f rivalry and the fact that they are active in all 
areas of the value chain, including process development, manufacturing and 
marketing;
They offer the best probability o f demonstrating USD capability on lead 
blockbuster drug candidates, thereby maximizing USDs financial returns and 
market credibility;
The potential for maximizing the financial value of the USD service will be 
highest, given these companies scale of operations and hence financial strength 
and ability to afford the service.
The initial geographic target market will be the UK and US, depending on the 
location o f the development team for the drug candidates to be studied by USD. 
All the Big Pharma companies have a substantial presence in the UK and US. The 
UK also leads Europe in growth in the biopharmaceuticals market.
8.3.1 C om petitors
Two main process simulation software packages are currently used in the 
biopharmaceutical industry, sold by Intelligen and Aspentech. USDs key 
advantages over these are:
The software uses input parameters based on actual empirical data from running 
the USD tools. The resultant process models are superior in validity and 
comprehensiveness to the simulation models based on theoretical algorithms only; 
A more comprehensive offering than Aspentech in terms o f number of 
purification methods simulated (Aspentech focuses largely on a single operation 
-  chromatography).
The USD service will present competition to the CMOs that currently provide 
process development services. However, USDs market entry strategy of 
targeting selected Big Pharma clients, should mitigate some o f the risk o f potential 
competitive responses by the CMOs. Big Pharma companies represent a relatively 
small proportion o f CMO process definition revenue, as they tend to undertake 
most process definition work in-house, before contracting out manufacturing.
8.3.2 Accessing the market and extracting financial value
The first two years will be devoted to developing the hardware and software in 
order to bring it up to current good manufacturing practice standards (cGMP). 
During this time, we will work in parallel with the process development team of a 
Big Pharma company such as Pfizer or Glaxo (which have the largest drug 
development pipelines currently). Work will be undertaken on several different 
projects encompassing the major drug classes in order to demonstrate the 
technology. Direct comparison with the traditional process development scheme 
will enable quantification o f the cost benefits obtained using USD.
The Big Pharma company will be persuaded to allow USD to conduct these 
studies by:
Utilising UCLs contacts and reputation as leverage;
Emphasising that the Big Pharma company has nothing to lose since we will not 
charge a fee initially, on the condition that we can use the trial results to promote 
our product. If, however, the company elects to use USD results for the final 
manufacturing process, a fee will be charged to cover costs.
At the end o f the two year development phase the technology will have been 
proven to be invaluable to any pharmaceutical company that wishes to be 
successful within the current climate of shrinking profit margins and rising 
manufacturing costs. Therefore, once the trial is complete, the founders will tour 
conferences and trade shows marketing USD and demonstrating how effective it 
is by reference to the trial with the Big Pharma company.
Early studies conducted at UCL show that cost savings to the client will be in the 
form of decreased manufacturing costs (10-20% per year) and decreased capital 
costs (~$15mn). A further benefit will derive from the increased chance o f being 
first to market and the associated revenue benefits. Based on these savings, we 
would negotiate a royalties based method o f payment, which is an industry norm. 
We would expect a 0.5-1.5% share o f the future sales revenue for the drug, with 
the exact clauses and percentages being negotiated on an individual project basis.
8.3.3 Management and culture
The founders will form the initial management team, focusing on technical 
aspects and business development. The founding team comprises significant 
experience in the pharmaceutical, biochemical engineering, finance and 
consulting sectors, specifically:
Greg Neal: EngD (Biochem) will assume the role o f Technical Director, with 
responsibility for the overall technical aspects of studies, management of technical 
staff and laboratory facilities, and liaison with UCL on technology strategy and 
development issues. He has significant direct experience with the USD 
technology.
John McNulty: BEng (Chem) MSc (Pharm Eng) will be one of the Business 
Development Directors, with responsibility for marketing USDs services and 
serving as Client Account Manager for selected clients. John is an MBA student at 
London Business School, with a background in various technology transfer,
technical support and project management roles in the bulk pharmaceutical 
manufacturing sector, working with Merck Sharp & Dohme (Irl) Ltd.
Stuti Sahajpal: MEng (Chem) will also undertake the role o f Business 
Development Director. She will also undertake financial and accounting tasks 
initially. Stuti is an MBA student at London Business School. Her previous 
experience includes management consultancy (including business development) at 
Arthur D. Little and equity analysis at Citibank. Most recently, Stuti has worked 
as a planning manager in a small printing firm, giving her exposure to the 
challenges o f managing a small company.
The founding team will manage the process o f shaping USD and securing initial 
funding. Thereafter, USD will seek to recruit, as soon as possible, a Chief 
Executive Officer with relevant industry experience to enhance USDs market 
access, visibility and credibility.
8.3.4 Profit potential and funding requirements
The cost o f manufacturing a biopharmaceutical drug represents 24% of the sales 
revenue. Therefore, for an average drug that has annual sales o f $265mn, the 
manufacturing costs are $63mn. A saving of 10-20% is therefore ~$6-12 mn 
annually. Our fee o f 0.5-1.5% o f sales would cost the customer ~$l-4 mn. For a 
blockbuster drug with annual sales typically o f $2.5 bn, the profit potential is 
significantly larger. The cost o f manufacturing a blockbuster rises to $600 mn, 
and therefore the saving for the client rises to $60-120 mn. The royalty charge on 
sales now represents annual revenues to USD of $13-38 mn.
We estimate that to run a facility with a capacity for six projects per year would 
cost nearly $3 mn/year. Therefore, even without participating in the development 
o f a blockbuster drug, the profit margin is still substantial. In addition, since the 
life cycle o f a drug is between 10 and 15 year, the royalty revenue would be 
ongoing over this time, without incurring further costs directly related to that 
drug.
Given the anticipated growth in drug candidates under development, going from 
45 to 620 (15% of which will be Biopharmaceuticals -  approximately 100 drugs 
per year) by 2005, prospects for scaling operations to conduct studies on more 
than six drugs (i.e. increasing from a 6% market share) per year are promising. 
See Table 8.1 for Financial Summary.
Company 
Savings 
$ 9.3S mn
Revenue
Figure 8.1 Customer Benefits and USD Revenue Model for an average drug
BLOCKBUSTER DRUG  Annual Revenue & 
Costs
Company 
Savings 
$ 90 mn
Revenue
Figure 8.2 Customer Benefits and USD Revenue Model for a Blockbuster drug
9 T h e  Im p a c t  O f  U ltra  S ca le  D ow n M im ics  O n  T h e  
M a n a g e m e n t  O f  P u r if ic a t io n  P ro cess  D ev e lo p m en t 
A n d  T h e  R e g u la to ry  Issu es  A ris in g  F ro m  T h e re  Use
Chapters three and four describe the design and use of ultra scale down mimics of 
precipitation and centrifugation to mimic an industrial scale purification process 
and study the effects o f changes to the purification process. The results presented 
in chapter three show how individual purification operations can be linked 
together and how the laboratory scale results compare to the industrial scale 
process. Chapter four goes on to utilise the mimics to explore the effects of 
process changes.
The ability to produce information at a laboratory scale, that predicts and mimics 
the industrial scale, has interesting implications for the initial downstream process 
design and optimisation and how it is managed.
9.1 The Traditional Biopharmaceutical Drug Development Cycle
The average time to develop and market a new medicine is roughly seven years, 
but varies widely with some drugs only taking four years and others taking as long 
as fifteen. The development cycle varies for each drug but the process follows a 
structure defined by the regulatory environment. The chart below details a typical 
development cycle and the different stages are generic for every process.
Discovery
Pre-clinical
Phase I
Phase II
Phase III
Regulatory approval
Process R&D Pilot development and nianukiciuririL' start-up
0 2 3 4 5 6 7
Figure 9.1 Typical Drug Development Process
Process research and development is on the critical path since the manufacturing 
process needs to be defined before Phase III clinical trails can commence. Any 
changes after the start o f Phase III will result in more consistency and efficacy 
studies. These can result in a delay to Phase III clinical trials and regulatory 
approval.
9.1.1 Downstream process research and development
The goal o f process development is to move from a process that has been 
developed for laboratory developmental work and that is complex, inefficient and 
potentially unsafe to one that is practical, efficient, robust and safe (Pisano, 
1997). The table below highlights the difference between initial discovery and the 
full-scale production process. Process development encompasses all the work 
involved in the transition between these two phases.
Initial Discovery Process Final Commercial Production 
Process
Num ber of 
purification steps
Equipment Testtubes-1 liter flasks 2000-4000 gallon vessels
Batch size (output) ~ 1 gram 100-200 kg
O perators PhD chemists Technicians, semi-skilled plant 
workers
Purity 1 %-10% 99.9%
Cost per kilo ~$20000-$50000/kg ~$3,500/kg
Criteria for process Biological activity of Cost; quality conformance with
design molecule; patent issues regulation; operability
Table 9.1 Comparison of initial and commercial production processes (Pisano, 
1997)
Process R&D can be split into two broad sections upstream, which encompasses 
fermentation design and accounts for roughly 20% of the cost and downstream, 
which is the actual purification process. Process R&D begins with the search for a 
manufacturing process. The manufacturing purification process (downstream 
processing), involves the use o f sequential purification equipment to remove the 
impurities from the feed stream, resulting in a final product that is free from 
contaminants and suitable for administration to humans. The majority of 
biological drugs on the market use the same seven main purification methods in 
variable order to get to a marketable final product. These are: Cell disruption, 
Centrifugation, Filtration/Ultra-filtration, Expanded bed processes, Column 
chromatography and Precipitation (Bonneijea, et al. 1986).
At this point in the cycle, only four pieces o f data are available: 1) The protein 
that needs to be produced; 2) The gene sequence that codes the protein; 3) The 
host cell used to express the protein and 4) The method for isolating/purifying the 
protein within the laboratory. The first step is the design o f assays that accurately 
measure the quantity and purity o f the protein. The next stage is the design of a 
manufacture scale process that is efficient and robust - this stage is called pilot 
development.
9.1.2 Pilot scale developm ent
Traditionally pilot scale studies have been exploratory in nature. This is due to 
the fact that, at this point in time, very little will be known about the purification 
o f the candidate drug. O f particular importance is the scale o f production; this 
influences the performance o f a biotech-process. These scale-up effects are 
difficult to predict because there is little knowledge about what environmental 
variables might affect the process. The emphasis o f process development is to 
get the process parameters defined as quickly as possible.
Sets of pilot experiments are conducted to determine the influence on performance 
of a number o f process parameters. At this stage, problem solving also focuses on 
identifying the critical factors affecting process yields and product quality. 
Getting a process under control requires that a significant amount of data be 
generated over a large number of controlled pilot runs.
Ferm entation design
Laboratory
scalew
purification
process
Preliminary 
process selection
O utpu t from operation
Repeat several times
Pilot Pilot
batches batch
Purification yields 
Process parameters 
Product characteristics 
Econom ics 
A nalytical m ethods
Iden tify  and  re fine  
p ro b lem  steps
Pilot production  trials 
lOOL's m a te ria l 
M onths fo r one batch
Evaluation & 
M odification (1 /10  
final scale)
Facilities & 
Equipment 
design
Evaluate 
at full 
scale
O ptim ise
process
Full scale trials
Figure 9.2 Traditional pilot scale process development scheme
9.1.3 The historical approach to process development
Considering the fact that pilot plant studies are time consuming, expensive and 
require dedicated equipment, the traditional attitude among biopharmaceutical 
companies toward process optimisation has been to delay it until there was a
reasonable certainty that the drug would be approved. In other words, companies 
hoped to avoid spending resources on drugs that would never make it to market. 
In practice, this meant investing heavily in process development/optimisation only 
when drugs got to Phase III clinical trials. Process development was considered a 
success when it did not get in the way of product launch. Creating a process that 
gave the drug a competitive advantage was not a high priority, as this was 
considered a threat to the aim o f keeping process development off the critical 
pathway time wise. In the words o f a traditional manager: If you try to do too 
much process development you will delay the launch.
The challenge was framed in terms o f optimising the initial process developed by 
discovery research scientists, scaling it up and adapting it to the process 
environment. Once the drug reached the market, the focus was on providing 
larger manufacturing facilities, rather than optimising the process in order to 
improve yields. For a biopharmaceutical company, there are three main sources 
of competitive advantage:
1. First to market
2. High quality (in terms o f purity, yield, dependability and flexibility)
3. Low cost
At present each offers advantages that can only be exploited at the expense of one 
o f the others.
1st to market
Optimal
process
Low High quality
Figure 9.3 Benefits o f an optimised manufacturing process
This approach used to make sense when drugs were relatively simple to 
manufacture and process development involved few major challenges. FDA 
regulations also stated that the process did not need to be finalised until later on in 
the development cycle.
However, the industry context is now changing, creating challenges for 
biopharmaceutical companies. The financial and regulatory environment is 
creating downward pressure on revenues (caused by shorter product life cycles, 
pressure by governments to produce cheaper drugs and increased competition) 
and upward pressure on manufacturing costs (caused by the increasing complexity 
o f new drugs and stricter regulatory requirements). As a result leaving process 
development until the last minute will almost certainly lead to unaffordable 
delays.
This changing environment has caused a rethink o f process development 
strategies. It has been proved that thorough investigation o f the manufacturing 
process leads to improved yields, accelerates throughput and reduces 
manufacturing cycle times. These improvements all lead to reduced costs of 
manufacture and potentially provide an advantage in terms o f the potential for 
getting to market first with a new class o f drug.
9.1.4 The current management problem
The time and monetary constraints surrounding pilot plant trials preclude 
biopharmaceutical companies from thoroughly optimising a process. The 
pressure to be first to market and to mitigate the risk o f lost capital investment if a 
drug fails to get to market, out weighs the pressure of having a perfect purification 
process. The result is often an unwieldy, inefficient, and costly 
manufacturing process. If process improvements are carried out after the 
product has been launched, which is very costly and time consuming, then the 
opportunity is missed to reap savings on production costs, since demand normally 
peaks early in product life cycle. Therefore, improvements need to be made early 
on. Also, regulatory constraints mean that any major process changes need to be
validated and approved by the appropriate regulatory authority, a process that is 
by itself time consuming and expensive. However, the high cost and long time 
line o f pilot studies is prohibitive towards carrying out extensive trials and 
providing an optimised process early in the cycle, when the drugs chances of 
reaching the market are less than 20%. The result is that the biopharmaceutical 
companies are now faced with a conundrum; millions cannot be invested early in 
the drug development cycle to develop a manufacturing process, since the chances 
o f it getting to market are so low. Therefore, the biopharmaceutical company 
chooses to burden itself with a generic un-optimised manufacturing process in 
order to reduce time and costs.
9.2 Ultra Scale Sown As The Theoretical Solution To The Process
Development Conundrum
Ultra Scale Down (USD) mimics, such as those described in chapters three and 
four offer process engineers the opportunity to recreate the conditions o f a 
manufacturing scale purification process on a laboratory bench top. At present a 
fermentation design mimic has not been built, although one is in development 
(Lamping, 2003). This means that any purification process that utilises the unit 
operations that USD has the ability to mimic, can be investigated at the start o f the 
development cycle. This is at a fraction o f the cost in terms o f time, material and 
facilities. The results from these scale down investigations ensure that process 
development is kept o ff the critical path and that a robust, effective purification 
process is delivered early on with a minimum number o f pilot scale trials needed 
to verify it. As a result, a biopharmaceutical company can be first to market 
with a low cost and high quality process. The complementary software allows 
results from individual operations to be integrated into one whole purification 
process model. This allows process engineers to make changes to one unit 
operation and then monitor the effect on the whole process in terms o f yield, 
efficiency and cost.
Utilising USD technology has an effect on the drug development cycle, which is 
shown below:
Discovery
Pre-cl inical
Phase I
Phase II
Phase III
Regulatory approval
I S I )  Process R&D. Pilot development and i i i a n u U i c n i r mc  Mart-up
Figure 9.4 Proposed drug development cycle using ultra scale down technology
Process R&D is no longer on the critical path; it takes less time, requires a 
substantially smaller financial investment and delivers a more robust and efficient 
process. This in turn helps to decrease the time to market by reducing the time 
spent at the regulatory approval stage. A robust process that consistently delivers 
a purified product will take less time to gain approval than a process that has not 
been thoroughly investigated and optimised.
Output from operation
Repeat several times
Full scale trials
Pilot batch
Fermentation design
Evaluate 
at full 
scale
Facilities & 
Equipment 
design
Identify and refine 
problem steps
Evaluation/M odifi 
cation (1/10 final 
scale)
laboratory
scale
purification
process
Verify process 
determined by ultra 
scale down hardware
Ultra Scale 
Down process 
development 
hardware & 
Software
Less than IL of material
Pilot production trials 
Days for one batch
Analytical methods
Defined robust 
process
Purification yields
Process parameters
Product characteristics
Economics
Figure 9.5 Process development scheme utilising ultra scale down technology
9.3 Validation Of The Crofab Purification Process
CroFab is the trade name for Protherics anti-rattle snake venom. This section will 
briefly discuss the validation of the purification process described throughout this 
thesis and some of the issues arising from the use of Ultra Scale Down mimics 
during process development.
In order for a company to market a pharmaceutical product within a country, they 
must first obtain approval from the regulatory authorities governing the countries 
they wish to sell to. An example is the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) of 
the United States o f America; they require that the product and process be tested
in order to ensure that it is efficacious, safe for human use and that the 
manufacturing process is robust and reproducible. Validation provides 
documented evidence that when a process is operated under the defined 
conditions, a consistent level o f performance that is acceptable will be obtained.
CroFab process development was undertaken at the former site o f Therapeutic 
Antibodies UK Ltd (Tab UK, London) and transferred to large-scale cGMP 
manufacture at Llandysul, Wales (Protherics UK Ltd).
Six conformance/consistency lots (2 sets o f 3 batches) were produced within the 
cGMP facility at proposed production scale. Details o f the licensed manufacturing 
and process validation may be found within the Chemistry, Manufacturing and 
Controls section o f the original product license application (volume 4 o f 44, 
CroFab original PLA, 24 April 1998). Stability and in process testing was 
undertaken using analytical methods validated according to current ICH 
guidelines. Product stability was assessed on 3 production scale batches. Product 
at various in process holding steps was stored at 2-8C and evaluated by HPLC at 
4 week intervals over a 2 year period. Additional studies were undertaken at 27- 
33C. The product was assessed for appearance, colour, clarity, pH, purity and 
potency. Two prior approval clinical studies were undertaken to assess stability, 
efficacy and dosage o f the final product.
As several volumes o f the original CroFab license application are held within the 
Department o f Regulatory affairs, Protherics Inc USA and due to confidentiality 
restrictions regarding the licensed product, further details of process validation are 
beyond the scope o f this thesis. The CroFab purification process outlined in 
Chapter 1 describes the current, validated method of GMP manufacture.
As a whole process validation involves the characterisation o f each stage o f the 
purification process in order to demonstrate that it is robust, repeatable and 
performs as intended; it should also demonstrate the limits of each step. Cleaning 
validation also falls under this umbrella. The cleaning o f each piece o f equipment 
and the facility needs to be validated to demonstrate removal o f proteins whether
they are from the previous process or the environment. It also needs to 
demonstrate that no trace o f the cleaning chemicals themselves remain.
Equipment validation can be split into two phases. The installation qualification 
provides documented verification that the equipment has been installed inline with 
the manufacturers recommendations and establishes confidence that the 
equipment is capable o f consistently operating within the established limits. The 
operational qualification provides documented evidence that the equipment 
performs as intended over the anticipated operating ranges.
Test methods such as SDS-Page or Gel Permeation Chromatography provide 
evidence of, for example: the purity, identity, concentration or biological activity 
of the protein o f interest. A test method validation study will have to be carried 
out which will demonstrate that the method is capable o f determining the aspect 
being examined, for example the concentration. The study will also have to 
demonstrate that the method is repeatable and accurate. The study involves 
characterising the method including aspects such as its limits o f operation and 
interfering chemicals. Once completed the test method validation will 
demonstrate the applicability, repeatability and acceptability of the test.
The purification o f CroFab involves eight distinct steps the precipitation step has 
been chosen to demonstrate how a process step might be validated. The 
precipitation step is the first major purification step. It is designed to remove the 
majority o f the contaminating albumin and some other contaminating proteins in 
order to produce a feed stream suitable for chromatographic purification 
operations.
In order to validate the purification step a characterisation study was undertaken 
which addressed the parameters influencing the precipitation process. These 
included; the amount o f sodium sulphate used, the rate/mode o f addition o f the 
sodium sulphate, the type of sodium sulphate, the temperature o f operation and 
the mixing conditions/time. Each parameter was studied in order to define a range 
within which the process has to be operated. For example a range of sodium 
sulphate concentrations from ten to twenty percent (w/v) was studied. The study
determined that precipitation occurs from 12% sodium sulphate upwards. A 
working value o f 18% was then chosen so that any small variation that may occur 
during routine manufacture will not impact the output o f the process. Each aspect 
was examined and an operational range set which is within the limits studied. In 
practice the result o f a well thought out and applied characterisation study will be 
a purification step that is robust, repeatable and satisfactory to the governing 
agencies.
9.4 Regulatory Issues Arising From The Use O f Ultra Scale Down
Mimics During Process Development
Ultra Scale Down mimics such as those developed in chapters three and four 
might enable initial process development work to be carried out at a very small 
scale, which requires only very small quantities of material. This would allow a 
company wishing to develop and market a product to conduct more research on 
the purification process should it wish to. This in turn could generate more 
evidence that the manufacturing process is robust and reproducible since a number 
o f experiments could be conducted testing the manufacturing process to the very 
limits o f its design.
If however this information were to be submitted as part o f the validation process 
the Ultra Scale Down mimics would first have to be validated. This would 
involve not only the standard installation, operation and performance 
qualifications required for any piece o f validated equipment but also that the 
results generated by the small scale experiments be validated as being comparable 
to the results generated during a full scale manufacturing run.
In order to do this the manufacturer o f any Ultra Scale Down device would have 
to provide evidence and details o f the working ranges/conditions within which the 
device has been tested to show that when used under the tested operating 
conditions, it will generate results that compare to the full-scale process.
In practice, within the biopharmaceutical industry this may not be possible 
because every process is different, operated under different conditions with a 
different product. Therefore, the ultra scale down mimic would have to be 
validated for each product, process and condition. A restraint which may limit 
their use to that o f a research tool for many years to come.
Ultra scale down mimics have a great potential to provide a wealth o f information 
about a manufacturing process but during the validation o f a process their 
usefulness would be limited by the fact that it would be extremely difficult to 
validate, that the information generated, accurately mimics what occurs at the 
larger scale.
10 References
Akerstrom B, Bjork L. 1986. A physicochemical study o f protein G, a molecule 
with unique immunoglobulin G-binding properties. J Biochem Chem 261 (22): 
10240-10247.
Akerstrom B, Brodin T, Reis K, Bjork L. 1985. Protein G: A powerful tool for 
binding and detection o f monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies. J Immunol 135: 
2589-2592.
Ambler CM. 1952. The evaluation o f centrifuge performance. Chem Eng Prog 48: 
150-159.
Ambler CM. 1959. The theory o f scaling up laboratory data for the sedimentation 
type centrifuge. J Biochem Microbiol Technol Eng 1: 185-205.
Andrade JD. 1985. Principles o f protein adsorption in surface and interfacial 
aspects o f biomedical polymers. Vol 2, Andrade JD. (Ed). Plenum Press, New 
York. pp. 1-80.
Anspach FB, Johnston A, Wirth HJ, Unger KK, Hearn MTW. 1990. High- 
performance liquid chromatography o f amino-acids peptides and proteins, Part 
XCV. J Chromatogr 499: 103-124.
Atkinson T, Scawen MD, Hammond PM. 1987. Large scale industrial techniques 
o f enzyme recovery. Chapter 5 in Biotechnology. Vol 7a Kennedy JF. (Ed) 
VCH Publishers, Weinheim, Germany.
Attia H, Bennasar M, Delafuente BT. 1991. Study o f the fouling o f inorganic 
membranes by acidified milks using scanning electron-microscopy and 
electrophoresis .1. Membrane with pore diameter 0.2-Mu-M. J Dairy Res 58 (1): 
39-50.
Attia H, Bennasar M, Delafuente BT. 1991. Study of the fouling o f inorganic 
membranes by acidified milks using scanning electron-microscopy and 
electrophoresis .2. Membrane with pore diameter 0.8-Mu-M J Dairy Res 58 (1): 
51-65
Axelsson HAC. 1985. Centrifugation. Chapter 21 in Comprehensive 
biotechnology . Vol. 2, Cooney, Humphrey AE. (Eds). Pergamon Press, Oxford, 
Axon R, Porath J, Emback S. 1967. Chemical coupling of peptides and proteins to 
polysaccharides by means o f cyanogen halides. Nature 214: 1302-1304.
Ayazi Shamlou P. (Ed). 1993. In Processing o f Solid-Liquid Suspensions 
Butterworth Heinemann, Oxford, pp. 273-285.
Ayazi Shamlou P. Synowiec P. Zolfagharian A. 1994. Critical suspension 
conditions in stirred crystallizers. Chem Eng J Bioch Eng 55 (1-2): 45-51.
Ayazi Shamlou P. 2003. Scaleable processes for the manufacture of therapeutic 
quantities o f plamsid DNA. Biotechnol Appl Biochem 37 (3): 207-218.
Baker RJ, Fane AJ, Fell CJD, Yoo BH. 1985. Factors affecting flux in crossflow 
filtration. Desalination 53: 81-93.
Belfort G, Davies RH, Zydney AL. 1994. The behaviour o f suspensions and 
macromolecular solutions in crossflow filtration. J Membr Sci 96: 1-58.
Bell DJ, Hoare M, Dunnill P. 1983. The formation o f protein precipitates and their 
centrifugal recovery. Adv Biochem Eng/Biotech 26: 1-72.
Bell DJ, Dunnill P. 1982a. Shear disruption o f soya protein precipitate particles 
and the effect o f ageing in a stirred tank. Biotech Bioeng 24: 1271-1285.
Bell DJ, Dunnill P. 1982b. The influence of precipitation reactor configuration on 
the centrifugal recovery o f isoelectric soya protein precipitate. Biotech Bioeng 24: 
2319-2339.
Bellot JC, Condoret JS. 1993. Modelling of liquid chromatography equilibria. 
Process Biochem 28: 365-376.
Birch JR, Bonnerjea J, Flatman S, Vranch S. 1995. Monoclonal Antibodies: 
Principles and Applications. Birch JR, Lennox ES. (Eds). Wiley-Liss, New York, 
pp. 231.
Bjorck L, Kronvall G. 1984. Purification and some properties o f Streptococcal 
protein G, a novel IgG binding reagent. J Immunol 133 (2): 969-974
Blanco R, Arai A, Grinberh N, Yarmush DM, Karger BL. 1989. Role of 
association on protein adsorption isotherms: p-lactoglobulin A adsorbed on a 
weakly hydrophobic surface. J Chromatogr 482: 1-12.
Blank GS, Zapata G, Fahmer R, Milton M, Yedinak C, Knudsen H, Schmelzer C. 
2001. Expanded bed adsorption in the purification o f monoclonal antibodies: A 
comparison o f process alternatives. Biosep 10: 65-71.
Blatt WF, Dravid A, Michaels AS, Nelsen L. 1970. Solute polarization and cake 
formation in membrane ultrafiltration: Causes, consequences and control 
techniques. Membrane Science and Technolgy. Flinn JE. (Ed). Plenum Press, 
New York, pp 73-98.
Bonnerjea J, Oh S, Hoare M, Dunnill P. 1986. Protein purification: The right step 
at the right time. Bio/Technology 4: 954-958.
Bonnerjea J, Jackson J, Hoare M, Dunnill P. 1988. Affinity flocculation o f yeast 
cell debris by carbohydrate-specific compounds. Enzyme Microb Technol 10: 
357-360.
Boulding N, Keshavarz-Moore E, Ayazi Shamlou P. 2002. Ultrascale down of 
basket centrifuge for the recovery o f secreted antibody fragments from 
Aspergillus awamori. Biotech Bioeng 79 (4): 381-388.
Bowen WR, Gan Q. 1991. Properties of microfiltration membranes: Flux loss 
during constant pressure permeation o f Bovine Serum Albumin. Biotech Bioeng 
38 (7): 688-696.
Boychyn M, Doyle W, Bulmer M, More J, Hoare M. 2000. The laboratory scale 
down o f protein purification processes involving fractional precipitation and 
centrifugal recovery. Biotech Bioeng 69 (1): 1-10.
Boychyn M, Yim SSS, Shamlou PA, Bulmer M, More J, Hoare A. 2001. 
Characterisation o f flow intensity in continuous centrifuges for the development 
o f laboratory mimics. Chem Eng Sci 56 (16): 4759-4770.
Boyer PM, Hsu JT. 1990. Adsorption equilibrium of proteins on a dye-ligand 
adsorbent. Biotech Technol 4: 61-66.
Bradford MM. 1976. A rapid and sensitive method for the quantification of 
microgram quantities o f protein utilising the principle o f protein-dye binding. 
Anal Biochem 72: 248-254.
Brown DE, Kavanagh PR. 1987. Cross-flow separation o f cells. Process Biochem. 
22 (4): 96-101.
Brunner KH, Hemfort H. 1988. Downstream processes: Equipment and 
techniques, Centrifugal separation in biotechnological processes, Advance in 
biotechnological processes. Vol 8, Mizrahi A, Alan R. (Eds). Liss inc, New York, 
pp. 1-50.
Bums D, Zydney AL. 1999. Effect o f solution pH on protein transport through 
ultrafiltration membranes. Biotech Bioeng 64 (1): 27-37.
Cabrera KE, W ilchek M. 1988. Polymeric supports for affinity-chromatography 
and high-performance affinity-chromatography. Makromolekulare chemie- 
macromolecular symposia 19: 145-154.
Cacace MG, Landau EM, Ramsden JJ. 1997. The Hofmeister series: salt and 
solvent effects on interfacial phenomena. Quarterly reviews o f biophysics. 30 (3): 
241-277.
Chan MYY, Hoare M, Dunnill P. 1986. The kinetics of protein precipitation by 
different reagents. Biotech Bioeng 28: 387-393.
Chase HA. 1984. Prediction o f the performance o f preparative affinity 
chromatography. J Chromatogr 297: 179-202.
Chase HA. 1988. Optimisation and scale-up o f affinity-chromatography. 
Makromol Chem-macromol Symp 17: 467-482.
Chen V, Fane AG, Madaeni S, Wenten IG. 1997. Particle deposition during 
membrane filtration o f colloids: transition between concentration polarisation and 
cake formation. J M embr Sci 125(1): 109-122.
Cheryan M. (Ed). 1988. Ultrafiltration handbook. Technomic publishing company 
Chippaux JP. 1998. Snakebites: appraisal of the global situation. Bulletin o f the 
World Health Organisation. 76 (5): 515-524.
Chisti Y, Moo-young M. 1991. Large-scale protein separations - Engineering 
aspects o f  chromatography. Biotechnol adv 8 (4): 699-708.
Clarkson AI, Lefevre P, Titchener-Hooker NJ. 1993a. A study o f the process 
interactions between cell debris clarification stages in the recovery o f yeast 
intracellular products. Biotechnol Prog 9: 464-467.
Clarkson AI, Bulmer M, Siddiqi SF, Titchener-Hooker NJ. 1993b. Pilot scale 
verification o f Bioprocess models. Computers and Chem Eng 18: 561-655.
Clarkson AI, Bulmer M, Titchener-Hooker NJ. 1996a. Pilot scale verification of a 
computer based simulation for fractional protein precipitation. Bioprocess Eng 14: 
69-80.
Clarkson AI, Bulmer M, Titchener-Hooker NJ. 1996b. Pilot scale verification of a 
computer based simulation for the centrifugal recovery o f biological particles. 
Bioprocess Eng 14: 81-89.
Corcoran R, Duran S. 1977. Albumin determination by a modified bromcresol 
green method. Clin Chem 23: 765-766.
Culkin B, Plotkin A, Monroe M. 1998. Solve membrane fouling problems with 
high-shear filtration. Chem Eng Prog 1: 29-33.
Datar R, Rosen CG. 1987. Centrifugal separation in the recovery o f intracellular 
protein from E.coli. Chem Eng J 34: 49-56.
Davies JL, Baganz F, Ison AP, Lye GJ. 2000. Studies on the interaction of 
fermentation and microfiltration operations: Erythromycin recovery from 
Saccharopolyspora erythraea fermentation broths. Biotech Bioeng 69: 429-439.
Debye P, Huckel E. 1923. Zur theorie der elektrolyte II. Das Grenzgesetz fur die 
elektrische leifahigkeit. Phys Z  24: 305-325.
Dittus FW, Boelter LMK. 1930. Heat transfer in automobile radiators o f the 
tubular type. Univ Calif Pub Eng 13: 443.
El Er, Zaidenzaig Z, Shaltiel S. 1972. Use in the purification o f glycongen 
phosphorylase. Biochem Biophys Res Commun 49: 383-390.
Eriksson K. 1998. Protein purification: High resolution methods and applications. 
Second edition. Janson JC, Ryden L. (Ed). Wiley-VCH. Inc. pp. 285.
Fahmer RL, W hitney DH, Vanderlaan M, Blank GS. 1999a. Performance 
comparison o f Protein A affinity-chromatography sorbents for purifying 
recombinant monoclonal antibodies. Appl Biochem 30: 121-128.
Fahmer RL, Iyer HV, Blank GS. 1999b. The optimal flow rate and column length 
for maximum production rate o f protein A affinity chromatography. Bioprocess 
Eng 21: 287-292.
Fahmer RL, Blank GS, Zapata GA. 1999c. Expanded bed protein A affinity 
chromatography o f  a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody: process 
development, operation, and comparison with a packed bed method. J Biotechnol 
75: 273-280.
Field RW, Wu D, Howell JA, Gupta BB, 1995. Critical Flux concept for 
microfiltration fouling. J M embr Sci 100(3): 259-272.
Forsgen A, Sjoquist J. 1966. "Protein A" from S. aureus. I. Pseudo-immune 
reaction with human gamma-globulin. J Immunol 97: 822-827.
Foster PR. 1994. Protein precipitation, Chapter 4 in Engineering processes for 
bioseparations . W eatherley LR. (Ed). Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, U.K.
Foster PR, Dunnill P, Lilly MD. 1976. The kinetics of protein salting out: 
precipitation o f yeast enzymes by ammonium sulphate. Biotech Bioeng 18: 545- 
Frank MB. (Ed). 1997. Antibody binding to protein A and protein G beads. 
Molecular Biology Protocals. (http://omrf.ouhsc.edu/~frank/proteina.html). 
Oklahoma City. Revision date: January 3, 2001.
http://omrf.ouhsc.edu/~frank/proteina.html
Freundlich H. 1907. Ueber die Adsorption in Loesungen. Z physik Chem 57: 385- 
Gill DS, Roush DJ, Willson RC. 1994. Adsorption heterogenecity and 
thermodynamic driving forces in anion exchange equilibria o f cytochrome b5. J 
Colloid Interface Sci 167: 1-7.
Grant K, Turner BG. 1999. Understanding biopharmaceuticals-manufacturing and 
regulatory issues. Grindley JN, Ogden JE. (Eds). Interpharm Press, Denver.
Gritti F, Guiochon G. 2003. Adsorption-desorption isotherm hysteresis of phenol 
on a Cis -bonded surface. J Chromatogr A 1010: 153-176.
Gulich S, Linhult M, Stahl S, Hober S. 2002. Engineering streptococcal protein G 
for increased alkaline stability. Prot Eng 15 (10): 835-842.
Haarstrick A, Rau U, Wagner F. 1991. Cross-flow filtration as a method of 
separating fungal cells and purifying the polysaccharide produced. 
Bioprocess Eng 6 (4): 179-186.
Hahn R, Schlegel R, Jungbauer A. 2003. Comparison o f protein A affinity 
sorbents. J Chromatogr B 790: 35-51.
Hammond PM, Scawen MD. 1989. High resolution fractionation o f proteins in 
downstream processing. J Biotechnol 11: 119-134.
Hanemaaijer JH, Robbertsen T, Vandenboomgaard T, Gunnink JW. 1989. Fouling 
o f ultrafiltration membranes - the role o f protein adsorption and salt precipitation. 
J Membr Sci. 40 (2): 199-217.
Harrison R. 2000. Going ballistic. Wellcome News 24: 24-25.
Hawrylik SJ, Wasilko DJ, Pillar JS, Cheng JB, Lee SE. 1994. Vortex flow 
filtration o f mammalian and insect celles. Cytotechnology 15: 253-258.
Henzler HJ, 2000. Particle stress in bioreactors. Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol 67: 
35-82.
Hermia J. 1982. Constant pressure filtration laws - application to power-law non- 
newtonion fluids. Transactions IChemE 60: 183-187.
Higgins JJ, Lewis DJ, Daly WH, Mosqueira FG, Dunnill P, Lilly MD. 1978. 
Investigation o f the unit operations involved in the continuous flow isolation of P- 
galactosidase. Biotech Bioeng 20: 159-182.
Hoare M. 1982. Protein precipitation and precipitate ageing, Part 1: Salting out 
and ageing o f casein precipitates. Transactions IChemE 60: 79-87.
Hoare M, Bell DJ, Dunnill P. 1983. In Biochemical Engineering III. 
Venkatsubramanian K, Constantinides A, Vieth WR. (Ed). New York. Acad Sci. 
pp 254-269.
Hofmeister F. 1888. Arch Exp Pathol Pharmakol (Leipzig) 24: 247-260.
Horstmann BJ, Chase HA. 1989. Modelling the affinity adsorption of 
immunoglobulin G to protein A immobilised to agarose matrices. Chem Eng Res 
Des 67: 243-254.
Howel JA, 1995. Sub-critical flux operation of microfiltration. J Membr Sci 107 
(1)(2): 165-171.
Huang JX, Schudal J, Guiochon G. 1990. Adsorption behaviour o f albumin and 
conalbumin on TSK-DEAE 5PW anion exchanger. J Chromatogr 504: 335-349.
Huse K, Bohme HJ, Scholz GH. 2002. Purification of antibodies by affinity 
chromatography. J Biochem Biophys Meth 51: 217-231.
IbrahimGranet O, Bertrand O. 1996. Separation o f proteases: Old and new 
approaches. J Chromatogr B-Biomed App 684: 239-263.
Israelachvili JN. 1985. Measurements o f hydration forces between macroscopic 
surfaces. Chem Scripta 25 (1): 7-14.
Jacobson J, Frenze. J, Horvath C. 1984. Measurement o f adsorption isotherms by 
liquid chromatography. J Chromatogr 316: 53-68.
Janson JC. 1987. On the history o f the development o f Sephadex. 
Chromatographia 23: 361-369.
Janson JC, Hedman P. 1987. On the optimization o f process chromatography of 
proteins. Biotechnol Prog 3 (1): 9-13.
Janson JC, Keistiansen T. 1990. Packings and stationary phases in 
chromatographic techniques. Unger KK. (Ed). Marcel Dekker, New York. pp. 
Jin K, Thomas ORT, Dunnill P. 1994. Monitoring recombinant inclusion body 
recovery in an industrial disc stack centrifuge. Biotech Bioeng 44: 455-460.
Jomitz M, M eltzer T. 1988. In filtration in the pharmaceutical industry. Meltzer T. 
and Jomitz M. (Eds). New York: Marcel Dekker Inc.
Katoh S. 1987. Scaling up Affinity Chromatography. Trends Biotechnol 5 (12): 
328-331.
Kelly ST, Zydney AL. 1996. Protein fouling behaviour during microfiltration: 
Comparative behaviour o f different model proteins. Biotech Bioeng 55 (1): 91- 
100 .
Kieran PM, Malone DM, MacLoughlin PF. 2000. Effects o f hydrodynamic and 
interfacial forces on plant cell suspension systems. Adv Biochem Eng Biotechnol 
67: 139-177.
Kroner KH, Schiitte H, Hustedt H, Kula MR. 1984. Crossflow filtration in 
downstream processing o f  enzymes. Process Biochem 19 (2): 67-74.
Kroner KH, Nissinen V. 1988. Dynamic filtration o f microbial suspensions using 
an axially rotating filter. J Membr Sci 36: 85-100.
Kroner KH, Nissinen V, Ziegler H. 1987. Improved dynamic filtration of 
microbial suspensions. Bio/Technology 5: 921-925.
Laemmli UK. 1970. Cleavage o f structural proteins during the assembly of the 
head o f bacteriophage T4. Nature 227: 680-688.
Langeloh T, Bott R, Ehrfeld E. 1998. Continuous sieving with an agitated cross 
flow apparatus. Adv filtration separation technol 12: 442-448.
Langmuir I. 1918. The adsorption o f gases on plane surfaces o f glass, mica and 
platinum. J Am Chem Soc 40: 1361-1403.
Lamping SR, Zhang H, Allen B, Shamlou PA. 2003. Design o f a prototype 
miniature bioreactor for high throughput automated bioprocessing. Chem Eng Sci 
58 (3-6): 747-758.
Lee SS, Burt A, Russotti G, Buckland B. 1995. Microfiltration o f recombinant 
yeast cells using a rotary disk dynamic filtration system. Biotech Bioeng 48: 386- 
Leung WWF. (Ed). 1998. Industrial centrifugation technology. New York. 
McGraw-Hill.
Levy MS, Collins IJ, Yim SS, Weird JM, Keshavarz-Moore E, Titchener-Hooker 
NJ, Ayazi Shamlou P, Dunnill P. 1998. Effect o f shear on plasmid DNA in 
solution. Bioprocess Eng 20: 7-13.
Levy MS, Ciccolini LAS, Yim SS, Tsai JT, Titchener-Hooker NJ. Ayazi Shamlou 
P, Dunnill P. 1999. The effects o f material properties and fluid flow intensity on 
plasmid DNA recovery during cell lysis. Chem Eng Sci 54: 3171-3178.
Liapis AI. 1989. Theoretical aspects o f affinity-chromatography. J Biotechnol 11 
(2-3): 143-160.
Lin JK, Kam  SJ, Ladisch MR. 1987. Cause and correction of base-line 
interruptions observed for small-bore liquid-chromatography columns packed 
with cation-exchange resin in the H+ form. Biotech Bioeng 30 (2): 331-333.
Lojkine MH, Field RW, Howell J. 1992. Crossflow microfiltration of cell 
suspensions: A review o f models with emphasis on particle size effects. Trans 
IChemE 70 (Part C): 149-164.
Lowe CR, Lowe AR, Gupta G. 2001. New developments in affinity 
chromatography with potential application in the production of 
biopharmaceuticals. J Biochem Biophys Methods 49: 561-574.
Maiorella B, Dorin G, Carion A, Harano D. 1991. Crossflow filtration o f animal 
cells. Biotech Bioeng 37: 121-126.
Mannweiler K, Hoare M. 1992. The scale down o f an industrial disc stack 
centrifuge. Bioprocess Eng 8: 18-25.
Mannweiler K, Titchener-Hooker NJ, Hoare M. 1989. Biochemical engineering 
improvements in the centrifugal recovery o f biological particles. IChemE.- 
Symposium on Adv Bioch Eng 105-117.
Mao QM, Prince IG, Hearn MTM. 1995. High-performance liquid 
chromatography o f amino acids, peptides and proteins. CXXXIX Impact of 
operating parameters in large-scale chromatography of proteins. J Chromatogr A 
691:273-283.
Marshall AD, Munro PA, Tragardh G. 1993. The effect o f protein fouling in 
microfiltration and ultrafiltration on permeate flux, protein retention and 
selectivity: A literature review. Desalination 91 (1): 65-108.
Maybury JP. 1999. Scale-down o f a bioprocess sequence for the recovery and 
purification o f an intracellular protein. PhD thesis, University College London, 
Maybury JP, M annweiler K, Titchener-Hooker NJ, Hoare M, Dunnill P. 1998. 
The performance o f a scaled down industrial disc stack centrifuge with a reduced 
feed material requirement. Bioprocess Bioeng 18: 191-199.
McCormick D. 1988. Chromatography and affinity separations - 1988 report. 
Bio/Technology 6 (2): 158.
McCue JT, Kemp G, Low D, Quinones-Garcia I. 2003. Evaluation o f protein-A 
chromatography media. J Chromatogr A 989: 139-153.
Mercille S, Johnson M, Lemieux R, Massie B. 1994. Filtration-based perfusion of 
hybridoma cultures in protein-free medium: Reduction of membrane fouling by 
medium supplementation with Dnase I. Biotech Bioeng 43: 833-846.
Mignard D, Glass DH. 2001: Fouling during the crossflow ultrafiltration of 
proteins: a mass-transfer model. J Membr Sci 186: 133-143.
Mikulasek P. 1994. Methods to reduce concentration polarization and fouling in 
membrane filtration. Collection o f Czech Chemical Communications 59: 737-755.
Mosqueira FG, Higgins JJ, Dunnill P, Lilly MD. 1981. Characteristics of 
mechanically disrupted bakers yeast in relation to its separation in industrial 
centrifuges. Biotech Bioeng 13: 335-343.
Narayanan SR. 1994. Preparative affinity chromatography o f proteins. J 
Chromatogr A 658: 237-258.
Neal G, Christie J, Keshavarz-Moore E, Ayazi Shamlou P. 2003. An ultra scale- 
down approach for the prediction o f full-scale recovery o f ovine polycolonal 
immunoglobulins used in the manufacture o f snake venom-specific fab fragment. 
Biotech Bioeng 81 (2): 149-157.
Neal G, Francis R, Keshavarz-Moore E, Ayazi Shamlou P. 2004. Separation of 
IgG precipitate from contaminating proteins using microfiltration. Biotech Appl 
Biochem 39(2): 241-248.
O Grady J, Losikoff A. 1996. Virus removal studies using nanofiltration 
membranes. Dev Biol Stand 88: 319-326.
Omar A. 1996. Virus inactivation by pepsin treatment at pH 4 o f IgG solutions: 
factors affecting the rate o f virus inactivation. Transfusion 36: 866-872.
Oscarsson S, Angulotatis D, Chaga G, Porath J. 1995. Amphiphilic agarose-based 
adsorbents for chromatography - comparative-study of adsorption capacities and 
desorption efficiencies. J Chromatogr A 689 (1): 3-12.
Parker TG, Dalgleish D. 1977. The use o f light-scattering and turbidity 
measurements to study the kinetics o f extensively aggregating proteins: a s-Caesin. 
Biopolmers 16: 2533-2547.
Pavlu B, Gellerfors P. 1993. Hydrophobic interaction chromatography of 
recombinant human growth hormone. Genotropin Biosep 3: 257-265.
Peterson EA, Herbert A, Sober. 1956. Chromatography o f proteins. I. cellulose 
ion-exchange adsorbents. J Am Chem Soc 78 (4): 751-755.
Pisano GP. (Ed). 1997. The development factory: Unlocking the potential of 
process innovation. Boston: Harvard Business Review Press.
Porath J, Flodin P. 1959. Gel Filtration: A method for desalting and groups 
separation. Nature. 183: 1657-1659.
Porter MC. 1972. Concentration polarization with membrane ultrafiltration. Ind 
Eng Chem Prod Res Develop 11 (3): 234-248.
Postlethwaite J, Lamping SR, Leach GJ, Hurwitz MF, Lye GJ. 2004. Flux and 
transmission characteristics o f a vibrating microfiltration system operated at high 
biomass loading. J Membrane Sci 1: 89-101.
Przybycien TM, Bailey JE. 1989. Aggregation kinetics in salt-induced protein 
precipitation. AIChE J 35: 1779-1790.
Regnier FE. 1984. Methods in Enzymology. Vol 104. Jakoby WB. (Ed). 
Acedemic Press, New York. pp. 170.
Reis KJ, Ayoub EM, Boyle MD. 1984. Streptococcal Fc receptors. I. Isolation and 
partial characterization o f the receptor from a group C streptococcus. J Immunol 
132: 3091-3097.
Richardson P. 1987. A biochemical engineering study o f fractional protein 
precipitation. PhD thesis, University College London, U.K.
Rothstein F. 1994. Protein purification process engineering. Harrison RG. (Ed) 
Marcel Derker Inc. New York.
Ruann RC, Blair JB, Shaeiwitz JA. 1988. Dual-functional affinity protein 
purification. Biotechnol Prog 4: 107-112.
Rumpus J. 1997. Dewatering and scale down of solids recovery in industrial 
centrifuges. PhD Thesis, University College London, U.K.
Rushton JH, Costich EW, Everett HJ. 1950. Power characteristics of mixing 
impellers, part 2. Chem Eng Prog 46 (9): 467-476.
Sada E, Katoh S, Sukai K, Tohma M, Kondo A. 1986. Adsorption equilibrium in 
immuno-affinity chromatography with polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies. 
Biotech Bioeng 28: 1497-1502.
Scatchard G. 1949. The attractions o f proteins for small moelcules and ions. Ann 
New York Acad Sci 51: 658-666.
Schlichting H. (Ed). 1979. Boundary layer theory, 7th Ed. Pergamon Press, 
London.
Schwarz A. 2000. Affinity Chromatography: Methods and Protocols. Bailon P, 
Ehrlich GK, Fung WJ, Berthold W. (Eds). Humana Press, Totowa, NJ.
Scopes RR. 1981. Quantitative studies of ion-exchange and affinity elution 
chromatography o f enzymes. Anal Biochem 114 (1): 8-18.
Scopes RK. (1988), Protein purification: Principles and practice. 2 Edition. 
Springer-Verlag, New york, U.S.A.
Shimizu Y, M atsushita K, Watanabe A. 1994. Influence o f shear breakage of 
microbial cells on cross-flow microfiltration flux. J Ferm Bioeng 78: 170-174.
Skidmore GL, Chase HA. 1988. A study o f ion exchangers for protein 
purification, in Ion exchange for industry Streat M. (Ed). Ellis Horwood Ltd, 
Chichester, pp 520-532.
Skidmore GL, Horstmann BJ, Chase HA. 1990. Modelling single component 
protein adsorption to the cation exchanger S Sepharose FF. J Chromatogr 498: 
113-128
Smith D. 2001. Spitting venom: the search for a cure for a third world killer. The 
Chemical Engineer (TCE) April: 38-39.
Smoluchowski M. 1917. Mathematical theory o f the kinetics of the coagulation of 
colloidal solution. Z Phys Chem 129-168.
Soon SY, Harbridge J, Titchener-Hooker NJ, Ayazi Shamlou P. 2001. Prediction 
o f drop breakage in an ultra high velocity je t homogeniser. Journal of chemical 
engineering Japan 34 (5): 640-646.
Spielman LA. 1978. The scientific basis o f flocculation. Ives KJ. (Ed). Sijthoff 
and Noordhoff. Amsterdam.
Subramanian G, (Ed). 1995. Process Scale Liquid Chromatography, VCH, 
Weinheim.
Van Reis R, Gadam S, Frautschy LN, Orlando S, Goodrich EM, Saskena S, 
Kuriyel R, Simpson CM, Pearl A, and Zydney AL. 1997. High performance 
tangential flow filtration. Biotech Bioeng 56 (1): 71-82.
Van Reis R, Leonard LC, Chang HC, Builder SE. 1991. Industrial scale harvest of 
proteins from mammalian cell culture by tangential flow filtration. Biotech 
Bioeng 38: 413-422.
Velayudhan A, Horvath C. 1988. Preparative chromatography of proteins: 
Analysis o f the multivalent ion-exchange formalism. J Cromatogr 443: 13-29.
Verdoliva A, Pannone F, Rossi M, Catello S, Manfredi V. 2002. Affinity 
purification o f polyclonal antibodies using a new all-D synthetic peptide ligand: 
comparison with protein A and protein G. J Immunol Meth 271 (1-2): 77-88.
Versteeg HK, M alalasekera W. 1955. An introduction to Computational Fluid 
Dynamics. Harlow; Longman Scientific & Technical: New York: Wiley. X. pp: 
Virkar PD, Hoare M, Chan MYY. 1982. Kinetics of acid precipitation o f soya 
protein in a continuous-flow tubular reactor. Biotech Bioeng 24: 871-882.
Vogel JH, Kroner KH. 1999. Controlled shear filtration: A novel technique for 
animal cell separation. Biotech Bioeng 63 (6): 663-674.
Voss T, Falkner E, Ahorn H, Krystek E, Maurer-Fogy I, Bodo G, Hauptmann R. 
1994. Periplasmic expression o f human interferon-a2c in Escherichia coli results 
in a correctly folded molecule. Biochem J 298: 719-725.
Wakeman RJ, Williams CJ. 2002. Additional techniques to improve 
microfiltration. Separation and purification technology 26 (1): 3-18.
Walter J. 2000. Protein Liquid Chromatography (Journal o f Chromatography 
Library Vol. 61): Kastner M. (Ed). Elsevier, Amsterdam.
Wankat PC. (Ed). 1986. Large scale adsorption and chromatography, Vols 1 
and 2. CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL.
Weast RC. (Ed). 1978. CRC handbook of chemistry and physics. CRC Press, 
Florida, U.S.A.
Weaver LE, Carta G. 1996. Protein asorption on cation exchangers: Comparison 
of macroporous and gel-composite media. Biotechnol Prog 12: 342-355.
Weselake RJ, Jain JC. 1992. Strategies in the purification o f plant proteins. 
Physiolologia Plantarum 84 (2): 301-309.
Whitely RD, W achter R, Liu F, Wang NHL. 1989. Ion-Exchange equilibria of 
lysozyme, myoglobin, and bovine serum albumin: effective valence and 
exchanger capacity. J Chromatogr 465: 137-156.
Wilson JA, Postlethwaite J, Pearce JD, Leach G, Lye GJ, Ayazi Shamlou P. 2003. 
Vibrating membrane filtration for the recovery and concentration o f insect killing 
nematodes. Biotech. Bioeng, 83: 236-240.
Winston Ho WS, Sirkar KK. (Eds). 1992. Microfiltration. In: Membrane 
Handbook. Van N ostrand Reinhold. New York, pp: 455-594.
Wu S, Hancock W, Pavlu S, Gellerfors P. 1990. Applications o f high-performance 
hydrophobic-interaction chromatography to the characterisation o f recombinant 
derived human growth hormone. J Chromatogr 500: 596-606.
Yamamoto S, Nakanishi K, Matsuno R, Kamikubo T. 1983. Ion-exchange 
chromatography o f  proteins - prediction o f elution curves and operating- 
conditions .2. Experimental-verification. Biotech Bioeng 25 (5): 1373-1391.
Yang CM, Tsao GT. 1982. Packed bed adsorption theories and their application to 
affinity chromatography. Adv Bioch Eng. 25: 1-18.
Yim SS, Ayazi Shamlou P. 2000. The Engineering effects o f fluid flow on freely 
suspended biological macro-materials and macromolecules. Adv Biochem Eng 
Biotechnol 67: 83-122.
Yon RJ. 1972. Chromatography o f lipophilic proteins on adsorbents containing 
mixed hydrophobic and ionic groups. J Biochem 126: 765-767.
Yoshida H, Nishikara H, Kataoka T. 1993. Adsorption o f BSA on QAE-Dextran: 
Equilibria. Biotech Bioeng 41: 280-286.
Zeman LJ, Zydney AL. (Eds). 1996. Microfiltration and ultrafiltration: Principles 
and applications, Marcel Dekker, Monticello, NY.
Zhang Z, Chisti Y, Moo-Young M. 1995. Isolation of a recombinant intracellular 
p-galactosidase by ammonium sulphate fractionation o f cell homogenates. 
Bioseparations 5: 329-337.
Zydney AL, Colton CK. 1986. A concentration polarization model for the filtrate 
flux in cross-flow micro filtration o f particulate suspensions. Chem Eng Com 47:1- 
2 1 .
11 Appendix
11.1 Proformas
Date: 16/11/1999
Name: Greg Neal Supervisor: Eli Keshavarz-Moore
Registration Date (1999/9/27) Advisor: Mike Hoare
Level: (EngD) (with Protherics)
Project title:
A study o f the biopurification steps in the production o f polyclonal antibody 
fragments for successful operation and scale-up
Significance:
Investigation into the purification steps will lead to a better understanding o f how 
they interact with each other, resulting in a more efficient, less time consuming 
purification process. A greater knowledge o f how the purification steps interact 
will also allow results produced at the laboratory bench scale to be more 
accurately applied to an industrial scale. The scale down is a powerful tool for 
predicting the optimum design and operation o f large scale complex processes. 
It is particularly challenging because o f poor scalability from laboratory to pilot 
plant, and because o f difficulties in the exploration o f process optimisation.
Goals:
To create a scale down mimic o f the pre-purification steps that accurately 
describes the industrial scale process utilised by Protherics, and to study the 
effects o f engineering parameters in the application of process options.
Conceptual Challenges:
The behaviour o f precipitates in the centrifuge has a large impact on the 
clarification and separation characteristics. Precipitates are particularly 
susceptible to shear but the effects are system specific.
Results:
Protherics produce polyclonal antibodies in bulk and final dosage form for 
therapeutic use. The companys products range from antidotes to snake venom to 
antibodies against anti-depressant overdose. They are the worlds biggest 
producer o f anti snake venom. The company distinguishes itself from its 
competitors through the use o f polyclonal rather than monoclonal antibodies.
At present the serum produced by immunised sheep is processed using several 
different techniques ranging from, precipitation and centrifugation to affinity 
chromatography. The company wishes to scale up its production from 100L to 
1000L and is investigating alternative process options.
A two week visit was undertaken in order to gain first hand experience o f the 
production o f the anti snake venom. A report has been produced on this visit 
detailing each step o f the purification process.
Intellectual Property:
Investigation into pre-purification steps is of value as eventually it should allow 
the process to be optimised so that valuable product is not lost during purification 
and it should allow the efficient scale up o f the product.
Publications:
Previous milestones:
Research targets:
6 months:
Understand the purification process used by Protherics with particular emphasis 
on the precipitation and centrifugation steps. Mimic the precipitation step on a 
bench top scale in order to study the qualities of the process stream, and determine 
the characteristics o f the precipitate. The conditions o f the precipitation step such 
as the precipitate used may be altered in order to study it further.
Milestones:
 Calculate the sigma value for both Protherics disc stack centrifuge and the 
bench scale one.
 Mimic the precipitation stage and characterise the process stream, particle 
size, flow characteristics, density, viscosity and the density difference between 
the solution and the precipitate will be determined.
Research targets:
6 months to 1 year:
Understand the behaviour o f the precipitate in the centrifuge and create a scale 
down model that accurately predicts the behaviour o f the industrial scale 
centrifuge. Study the interaction between the precipitation and centrifugation 
steps and how what happens in these steps effects the process further down 
stream.
Milestones:
 Create a model o f the precipitates behaviour in the centrifuge
 Mimic the centrifugation step on a small scale
Training profile
Educational Background: B.Sc (Hons) University of Wales, College o f Cardiff 
Training profile: Lacks engineering background.
Year 1
Core Training:
Course or M anagement activity Dates * Progress & Assessment
Graduate school board skills 
e.g. Personal and Professional 
Management Skills 
PPSRP
Oct 99 to 
June 00
Lectures and workshops 
attended assessment is 
via course work and 
examination
Graduate school technical courses
e.g. Statistics
Statistics
14/01/00
24/03/00
Lectures and workshops 
attended assessment is 
via course work and 
examination
Department training modules 
e.g. Fermentation module 
Downstream Processing
Mar 00 to 
June 00
Downstream processing 
lectures plus course 
work and a final exam
Management activities 
Demonstratorship
Dec 99 to 
Mar 00
Student assessment 
Several training sessions 
attended
Workshops Attended 
e.g. Gene meetings
Shear
Total number o f courses taken
* these may be checked
Date: 14/07/00
Name: Greg Neal Supervisor: Eli Keshavarz-Moore
Registration date (1999/9/27) Advisor: Mike Hoare
Level: (EngD with Protherics)
Project title:
A study o f the biopurification steps in the production of polyclonal antibody 
fragments for successful operation and scale-up.
Significance:
Investigation into the purification steps will lead to a better understanding of how 
they interact with each other, resulting in a more efficient, less time consuming 
purification process. A greater knowledge o f how the purification steps interact 
will also allow results produced at the laboratory bench scale to be more 
accurately applied to an industrial scale. Scale down experiments are powerful 
tools for predicting the optimum design and operation of a large scale complex 
process. It is particularly challenging because o f the poor scalability from 
laboratory to pilot plant and because of difficulties in the exploration o f process 
optimisation.
Goals:
To create a scale down mimic o f the pre-purification steps that accurately 
describes the industrial scale process utilised at Protherics, and to study the effects 
of engineering parameters in the application of process options.
Conceptual Challenges:
The characteristics o f precipitate particles affect their behaviour in the centrifuge 
and have a large impact on the clarification and separation process. Precipitate 
particles are particularly susceptible to shear but the effects are system specific.
Results:
A scale down model o f  the precipitation process has been built which accurately 
mimics the industrial scale operation. The model can be used to predict what 
effects changes in the precipitation operation will have on the precipitate particles 
characteristics. M aterial produced by the model can also be used to further study 
the purification process.
Intellectual Property:
Investigation into pre-purification steps and scale down models is o f value as it 
will allow processing options to be more thoroughly investigated at the early 
stages o f development when only small amount o f material are available. It will 
also reduce the amount o f  time it takes for a product to get to the market.
Publications:
None.
Previous Milestones:
Understood the purification process used by Protherics, particularly the 
precipitation and centrifugation steps. Mimicked the precipitation step on a bench 
top scale and determined the precipitate particles characteristics including, particle 
size, density, viscosity and percentage solids content.
Research targets:
Next 6 months:
Understand he behaviour o f the precipitate in the centrifuge and create a scale 
down model that accurately predicts the behaviour of the industrial scale machine. 
Study the interaction between the precipitation and centrifugation steps and how 
what happens in these steps effects the process further down stream.
Milestones:
 Understand how precipitate particles behave in a centrifuge and how their 
characteristics affect the performance o f the centrifuge.
 Build a scale down model o f the disc stack centrifuge that accurately 
mimics the industrial scale device.
Research Targets:
Next 6 months to 1 year:
Study what effect alterations in the precipitation conditions have on the 
centrifugation step and what knock on effect this has on chromatography stages. 
Study what effect changes in engineering parameters during the centrifugation 
stage have on the performance o f the centrifuge. Produce a scale down model of a 
chromatography column.
Milestones:
 Build a scale down chromatography column
 Understand process interactions
Training Profile
Course or M anagement 
activity
Dates * Progress & Assessment
Graduate school board skills 
e.g. Personal and Professional 
Management Skills 
PPSRP
Oct 99 to 
June 00
Completed awaiting result
Graduate school technical
courses
e.g. Statistics
Statistics
14/01/00
24/03/00
Completed awaiting 
results
Department training modules 
e.g. Fermentation module 
Downstream Processing
Mar 00 
June 00
Completed awaiting 
results
Management activities 
Demonstratorship
Dec 99 to 
Mar 00
Completed
Workshops Attended 
e.g. Gene meetings
Total number of courses taken
Date: 14/11/00
Name: Greg Neal Supervisor: Eli Keshavarz-Moore
Registration date (1999/9/27) Advisor: Mike Hoare
Level: (EngD with Protherics)
Project title:
A study o f the biopurification steps in the production o f polyclonal antibody 
fragments for successful operation and scale-up.
Significance:
Investigation into the purification steps will lead to a better understanding of how 
they interact with each other, resulting in a more efficient, less time consuming 
purification process. A greater knowledge o f how the purification steps interact 
will also allow results produced at the laboratory bench scale to be more 
accurately applied to an industrial scale. Scale down experiments are powerful 
tools for predicting the optimum design and operation o f a large scale complex 
process. It is particularly challenging because o f the poor scalability from 
laboratory to pilot plant and because o f difficulties in the exploration o f process 
optimisation.
Goals:
To create a scale down mimic of the pre-purification steps that accurately 
describes the industrial scale process utilised at Protherics, and to study the effects 
o f engineering parameters in the application o f process options.
Conceptual Challenges:
The characteristics o f precipitate particles affect their behaviour in the centrifuge 
and have a large impact on the clarification and separation process. Precipitate 
particles are particularly susceptible to shear but the effects are system specific.
Results:
Bioprocess design and optimisation customarily involves the use o f pilot plant and 
industrial scale experiments to define the process and study the effect that changes 
to the process have on the level o f contaminants or yield o f product. These 
studies require large amounts o f time, money and material, all o f which are in 
short supply during the initial stages o f process design. The use o f scaled down 
laboratory models that accurately mimic the large scale process allow the process 
to be studied without the need for costly and material expensive pilot plant trials.
A scaled down model o f the precipitation stage has been built which accurately 
mimics the industrial scale operation. This model has been used to characterise 
the process stream, it has also been used to determine the effects, if  any changes to 
the process will have on the precipitate particles and hence on operations further 
downstream.
Protherics wish to change from liquid precipitant to solid in order to scale up 
production. This change to solid sodium sulphate has been studied and its effects 
are detailed below:
 Increase in process stream viscosity
 Increase in the amount o f solid material
 No change in particle size
The model has also been used to study the effects o f higher shear levels during 
primary particle formation. These were determined to be:
 Increased process stream viscosity
 Decreased particle size
 Increased amount o f solid material
Precipitant produced by the mimic has been used in scale down centrifugation 
studies. The in house shear device is being used to mimic a disc stack 
centrifuge and to study the effects o f shear on particle size and biological activity.
Intellectual Property:
Investigation into pre-purification steps and scale down models is o f value as it 
will allow processing options to be more thoroughly investigated at the early 
stages o f development when only small amount of material are available. It will 
also reduce the amount o f time it takes for a product to get to the market.
Publications:
Previous Milestones:
Scale down mimic o f disc stack centrifuge nearly complete, the scale down model 
of the precipitation stage has been used to study what effects changes to the 
process set-up have on the characteristics o f the product, i.e. the effect of 
changing to solid precipitant and changes in mixing conditions.
Research targets:
Next 6 months:
Build a complete picture o f the precipitation and centrifugation stage, including 
mass balances and visual method o f tracking the process. Use this picture to 
optimise the process and study the effects of changes. Produce the first paper on 
the scale down o f precipitation and disc stack centrifugation.
Milestones:
 Use ELISA, SDS-page and total protein assays to create a mass balance 
and track/visualise exactly what is happening during precipitation and 
centrifugation.
 Complete paper on scale down of precipitation and centrifugation.
 Finish study on the effect o f changing to a solid precipitant.
 Finish study on the effects o f shear on particle size and biological activity.
 Determine the Zeta potential of the precipitate particles.
Research Targets 
Next 6 months to 1 year:
Study what effect alterations in the precipitation conditions and centrifugation 
stage have on the chromatography step and how the stages interact. Produce 
second paper on mixing conditions and process interactions. Produce a scale 
down model o f a chromatography column.
Milestones:
 Second paper
 Build a scale down chromatography column
 Understand process interactions
Training Profile
Course or M anagement 
activity
Dates * Progress & Assessment
Graduate school board 
skills
e.g. Personal and 
Professional M anagement 
Skills 
PPSRP
Oct 99 to 
June 00
Completed awarded pass 63%
Graduate school technical
courses
e.g. Statistics
Statistics
14/01/00
24/03/00
Completed awarded pass 63%
Department training 
modules
e.g. Downstream  
Processing
Bioprocess M anagement
Mar 00 to 
June 00
MarOl to 
June 01
Completed awarded pass 
In future
Management activities 
Demonstratorship
Nov 00 to 
Mar 01
One year completed starting 
second year
Workshops Attended 
e.g. Gene meetings
Total number of courses 
taken
Date: 14/06/01
Name: Greg Neal Supervisor: Eli Keshavarz-Moore
Registration date (1999/9/27) Advisor: Parviz Ayazi-Shamlou
Level: (EngD with Protherics)
Project title:
A study o f the biopurification steps in the production of polyclonal antibody 
fragments for successful operation and scale-up.
Significance:
Investigation into the purification steps will lead to a better understanding of how 
they interact with each other, resulting in a more efficient, less time consuming 
purification process. A greater knowledge o f how the purification steps interact 
will also allow results produced at the laboratory bench scale to be more 
accurately applied to an industrial scale. Scale down experiments are powerful 
tools for predicting the optimum design and operation o f a large scale complex 
process. It is particularly challenging because o f the poor scalability from 
laboratory to pilot plant and because o f difficulties in the exploration o f process 
optimisation.
Goals:
To create a scale down mimic o f the pre-purification steps that accurately 
describes the industrial scale process utilised at Protherics, and to study the effects 
o f engineering parameters in the application o f process options.
Conceptual Challenges:
The characteristics o f precipitate particles affect their behaviour in the centrifuge 
and have a large impact on the clarification and separation process. Precipitate 
particles are particularly susceptible to shear but the effects are system specific.
Results:
A scale down model o f the precipitation process has been built which accurately 
mimics the industrial scale operation. The model can be used to predict what 
effects changes in the precipitation operation will have on the precipitate particles 
characteristics. Material produced by the model can also be used to further study 
the purification process.
The mimic has been used to study the effect that a change from liquid precipitant 
to solid has:
 Increase the viscosity
 Increase the percent solids
 No change in particle size
It has also been used to study the effect of higher shear levels during primary 
particle formation:
 Increased viscosity
 Decreased particle size
 Slightly increased percent solids
Precipitant produced by the mimic has been used in scale down centrifugation 
studies. The in house shear device has been used to mimic a disc stack 
centrifuge and to study the effects of shear on particle size distribution and 
biological activity. The results are to be published in the first paper.
Intellectual Property:
Investigation into pre-purification steps and scale down models is of value as it 
will allow processing options to be more thoroughly investigated at the early 
stages o f development when only small amount of material are available. It will 
also reduce the amount o f time it takes for a product to get to the market.
Publications:
Scale down o f precipitation and centrifugation. In preparation.
Previous Milestones:
Scale down mimic o f  disc stack centrifuge complete, the scale down model of the 
precipitation stage has been used to study what effects changes to the process set
up have on the characteristics o f the product, i.e. the effect of changing to solid 
precipitant and changes in mixing conditions, temperature etc.
ELISA, SDS-page and total protein assays have been used to create a mass 
balance and track/visualise exactly what is happening during precipitation and 
centrifugation..
The study on the effect o f changing to a solid precipitant has been finished 
Finished study on the effects o f shear on particle size and biological activity
Research targets:
Next 6 months:
Finish first paper on scale down o f precipitation and disc stack centrifugation. 
Complete three-month new venture development course at the London school of 
business. Carry out study to determine solubility profile o f antibodies in ovine 
serum. Investigate the effect o f temperature on particle size and recoverability.
Milestones:
 Paper finished
 Course completed
 Solubility profile determined
 Effect o f temperature determined
Research Targets 
Next 6 months to 1 year:
Investigate the next stage in the purification process papain digestion and 
chromatography for a product in phase two clinical trials, find a way of removing 
the precipitation and centrifugation stage.
Milestones:
 Complete model o f papain digestion
 Complete study into removing the precipitation and centrifugation stage
Training Profile
Course or Management 
activity
Dates * Progress & Assessment
Graduate school board skills 
e.g. Personal and 
Professional Management 
Skills 
PPSRP
Oct 99 to 
June 00
Completed awarded pass 63%
Graduate school technical
courses
e.g. Statistics
Statistics
14/01/00
24/03/00
Completed awarded pass 63%
Department training 
modules
e.g. Downstream Processing 
Bioprocess validation 
Bioprocess management
Mar 00 to 
June 01 Completed awarded pass 68%
Completed
Completed
Management activities 
Demonstratorship
Nov 00 to 
Mar 01
Two years completed
New venture development at 
July 01- 
Sept 01
Biobusiness plan 
competition
Sept 01- 
OctOl
Workshops Attended
e.g. Gene meetings
Total number of courses 
taken
Date: 02/10/01
Name: Greg Neal Supervisor: Eli Keshavarz-Moore
Registration date (1999/9/27) Advisor: Parviz Ayazi-Shamlou
Level: (EngD with Protherics)
Project title:
A study o f the biopurification steps in the production o f polyclonal antibody 
fragments for successful operation and scale-up.
Significance:
Investigation into the purification steps will lead to a better understanding of how 
they interact with each other, resulting in a more efficient, less time consuming 
purification process. A knowledge o f how the purification steps interact will also 
allow results produced at the laboratory bench scale to be more accurately applied 
to an industrial scale. Scale down experiments are powerful tools for predicting 
the optimum design and operation of a large scale complex process. It is 
particularly challenging because o f the poor scalability from laboratory to pilot 
plant and because o f difficulties in the exploration o f process optimisation.
Goals:
To create a scale down mimic o f the downstream processing steps that accurately 
describes the industrial scale process utilised at Protherics, and to study the effects 
o f engineering parameters in the application of process options.
Conceptual Challenges:
The characteristics o f precipitate particles affect their behaviour in the centrifuge 
and have a large impact on the clarification and separation process. Precipitate 
particles are particularly susceptible to shear but the effects are system specific.
Results:
A scale down model o f the precipitation and centrifugation stages has been built. 
This model has been validated against material provided by Protherics in order to 
prove the accuracy and validity o f results. The model can be used to predict what 
effects changes in the precipitation operation will have on the precipitate particles 
characteristics, also the impact o f the centrifugation operation can be assessed 
along with the effects o f changes in the operating parameters o f this stage. The 
material produced by the model is representative o f the feed stream produced at an 
industrial scale so all results can be applied to this scale, furthermore the material 
can also be used to study alternative purification options.
The mimic has been used to study the effect that a change from liquid precipitant 
to solid has:
 Increase the viscosity
 Increase the percent solids
 No change in particle size
It has also been used to study the effect o f higher shear levels during primary 
particle formation:
 Increased viscosity
 Decreased particle size
 Slightly increased percent solids
London Business School
A three-month course entitled new venture development was undertaken. During 
the time spent at London Business School my teammates and myself developed a 
business plan for the commercialisation of Ultra Scale Down technology.
Intellectual Property
Investigation into pre-purification steps and scale down models is o f value as it 
will allow processing options to be more thoroughly investigated at the early
stages o f development when only small amount of material are available. It will 
also reduce the amount o f  time it takes for a product to get to the market.
Publications:
An Ultra Scale Down Approach For the Prediction of Full Scale Recovery of 
ovine Polyclonal Immunoglobulins Used in The Manufacture of Snake Venom 
specific Fab Fragments (Final Draft)
Previous Milestones:
Scale down mimic o f disc stack centrifuge complete, the scale down model of the 
precipitation stage has been used to study what effects changes to the process set
up have on the characteristics o f the product, i.e. the effect o f changing to solid 
precipitant and changes in mixing conditions, temperature etc.
ELISA, SDS-page and total protein assays have been used to create a mass 
balance and track/visualise exactly what is happening during precipitation and 
centrifugation..
The study on the effect o f changing to a solid precipitant has been finished 
Finished study on the effects o f shear on particle size and biological activity 
Solubility study on the Fab fragments has been undertaken and finished. 
Three-month course at London Business School finished.
First paper has been completed.
Research targets:
Next 6 months:
Start work to scale down filtration and study this purification process as an 
alternative to centrifugation.
Milestones:
 Complete scale down model
 Study effect o f feed stream (precipitant solution) on filtration
Research Targets 
Next 6 months to 1 year:
Investigate alternatives to the existing purification process:
1. Ultra scale down model o f membrane filtration
2. Ultra scale down model o f chromatographic and papain digestion stages 
Milestones:
 Complete model o f membrane filtration
 Complete model o f chromatographic and papain digestion stages
Training Profile
Course or Management 
activity
Dates * Progress & Assessment
Graduate school board 
skills
e.g. Personal and 
Professional Management 
Skills 
PPSRP
Oct 99 to 
June 00
Completed awarded pass 63%
Graduate school technical
courses
e.g. Statistics
Statistics
14/01/00
24/03/00
Completed awarded pass 63%
Department training 
modules
e.g. Downstream  
Processing
Bioprocess validation 
Bioprocess 
management
Mar 00 
June 01
Completed awarded pass 68%
Completed
Completed
Management activities 
Demonstratorship
Nov 00 
Mar 01
Two years completed
New venture development 
at LBS
July 01- 
Sept 01
Completed
Biobusiness plan 
competition
Sept 01- 
OctOl
Final stage qualifiers
W orkshops Attended 
e.g. Gene meetings
Total number o f courses 
taken
Date: 14/08/02
Name: Greg Neal Supervisor: Eli Keshavarz-Moore
Registration date (1999/9/27) Advisor: Parviz Ayazi-Shamlou
Level: (EngD with Protherics)
Project title:
A study o f the biopurification steps in the production o f polyclonal antibody 
fragments for successful operation and scale-up.
Significance:
Investigation into the purification steps will lead to a better understanding of how 
they interact with each other, resulting in a more efficient, less time consuming 
purification process. A knowledge o f how the purification steps interact will also 
allow results produced at the laboratory bench scale to be more accurately applied 
to an industrial scale. Scale down experiments are powerful tools for predicting 
the optimum design and operation o f a large scale complex process. It is 
particularly challenging because o f the poor scalability from laboratory to pilot 
plant and because o f difficulties in the exploration of process optimisation.
Goals:
To create a scale down mimic o f the downstream processing steps that accurately 
describes the industrial scale process utilised at Protherics, and to study the effects 
o f engineering parameters in the application of process options.
Conceptual Challenges:
The characteristics o f precipitate particles affect their behaviour in the centrifuge 
and have a large impact on the clarification and separation process. Precipitate 
particles are particularly susceptible to shear but the effects are system specific.
Results:
A scale down model o f the precipitation and centrifugation stages has been built. 
This model has been validated against material provided by Protherics in order to 
prove the accuracy and validity o f results. The model can be used to predict what 
effects changes in the precipitation operation will have on the precipitate particles 
characteristics, also the impact o f the centrifugation operation can be assessed 
along with the effects o f changes in the operating parameters of this stage. The 
material produced by the model is representative o f the feed stream produced at an 
industrial scale so all results can be applied to this scale, furthermore the material 
can also be used to study alternative purification options.
The mimic has been used to study the effect that a change from liquid precipitant 
to solid has:
 Increase the viscosity
 Increase the percent solids
 No change in particle size
It has also been used to study the effect of higher shear levels during primary 
particle formation:
 Increased viscosity
 Decreased particle size
 Slightly increased percent solids
Ultra Scale Down Filtration
A ultra scale down stirred cell filtration system has been used to study the effect 
of using filtration to remove the precipitated antibodies instead of centrifugation. 
Factorial design was used to design a series o f experiment studying the effect of 
pressure and shear rate on permeate flux rate. The yield o f antibodies and the 
purification profile has also been determined and compared to the centrifugation 
route. This work will form the basis of a second paper
London Business School
A three-month course entitled new venture development was undertaken. During 
the time spent at London Business School myself and my team mates developed a 
business plan for the commercialisation of Ultra Scale Down technology.
Intellectual Property
Investigation into pre-purification steps and scale down models is o f value as it 
will allow processing options to be more thoroughly investigated at the early 
stages o f development when only small amount of material are available. It will 
also reduce the amount o f time it takes for a product to get to the market.
Publications:
Neal G, Christies J, Keshavarz-Moore E, Ayazi Shamlou P. 2003. An ultra scale- 
down approach for the prediction of full-scale recovery o f ovine polycolonal 
immunoglobulins used in the manufacture o f snake venom-specific fab fragment. 
Biotech Bioeng 81 (2): 149-157.
Previous Milestones:
Scale down mimic o f disc stack centrifuge complete, the scale down model of the 
precipitation stage has been used to study what effects changes to the process set
up have on the characteristics o f the product, i.e. the effect o f changing to solid 
precipitant and changes in mixing conditions, temperature etc.
ELISA, SDS-page and total protein assays have been used to create a mass 
balance and track/visualise exactly what is happening during precipitation and 
centrifugation..
The study on the effect o f changing to a solid precipitant has been finished 
Finished study on the effects o f shear on particle size and biological activity 
Solubility study on the Fab fragments has been undertaken and finished. 
Three-month course at London Business School finished.
First paper has been completed and accepted for publication by Biotechnology 
and Bioengineering
Ultra scale down o f filtration process has been undertaken and finished
Research targets:
Next 6 months:
Finish second paper on the effect o f swapping from centrifugation to filtration on 
the downstream processing
Milestones:
 Complete second paper
 Produce an Ultra scale down model of chromatographic and papain digestion 
stages
Research Targets 
Next 6 months to 1 year:
 Link all the ultra scale down mimics together to form a whole bioprocess 
model
 Complete an economic evaluation o f the present process compared to the 
alternatives studied
 Complete third paper on economics of process change
Milestones:
 Production o f whole bioprocess model
 Completion o f third paper
Training Profile
Course or Management 
activity
Dates * Progress & Assessment
Graduate school board skills 
e.g. Personal and 
Professional M anagement 
Skills 
PPSRP
Oct 99 to 
June 00
Completed awarded pass 63%
Graduate school technical
courses
e.g. Statistics
Statistics
14/01/00
24/03/00
Completed awarded pass 63%
Department training modules 
e.g. Downstream Processing 
Bioprocess validation 
Bioprocess management
Mar 00 
June 01
Completed awarded pass 68%
Completed
Completed
Management activities 
Demonstratorship
Nov 00 
Mar 01
Two years completed
New venture development at 
July 01- 
Sept 01
Completed
Biobusiness plan competition Sept 01- 
OctOl
Final stage qualifiers
Date: 01/06/03
Name: Greg Neal Supervisor: Eli Keshavarz-Moore
Registration date (1999/9/27) Advisor: Parviz Ayazi-Shamlou
Level: (EngD with Protherics)
Project title:
A study o f the biopurification steps in the production o f polyclonal antibody 
fragments for successful operation and scale-up.
Significance:
Investigation into the purification steps will lead to a better understanding of how 
they interact with each other, resulting in a more efficient, less time consuming 
purification process. A knowledge o f how the purification steps interact will also 
allow results produced at the laboratory bench scale to be more accurately applied 
to an industrial scale. Scale down experiments are powerful tools for predicting 
the optimum design and operation o f a large scale complex process. It is 
particularly challenging because o f the poor scalability from laboratory to pilot 
plant and because o f difficulties in the exploration o f process optimisation.
Goals:
To create a scale down mimic o f the downstream processing steps that accurately 
describes the industrial scale process utilised at Protherics, and to study the effects 
of engineering parameters in the application of process options.
Conceptual Challenges:
The characteristics o f precipitate particles affect their behaviour in the centrifuge 
and have a large impact on the clarification and separation process. Precipitate 
particles are particularly susceptible to shear but the effects are system specific.
Results:
A scale down model o f the precipitation and centrifugation stages has been built. 
This model has been validated against material provided by Protherics in order to 
prove the accuracy and validity of results. The model can be used to predict what 
effects changes in the precipitation operation will have on the precipitate particles 
characteristics, also the impact o f the centrifugation operation can be assessed 
along with the effects o f changes in the operating parameters of this stage. The 
material produced by the model is representative o f the feed stream produced at an 
industrial scale so all results can be applied to this scale, furthermore the material 
can also be used to study alternative purification options.
The mimic has been used to study the effect that a change from liquid precipitant 
to solid has:
 Increase the viscosity
 Increase the percent solids
 No change in particle size
It has also been used to study the effect of higher shear levels during primary 
particle formation:
 Increased viscosity
 Decreased particle size
 Slightly increased percent solids
Ultra Scale Down Filtration
A ultra scale down stirred cell filtration system has been used to study the effect 
of using filtration to remove the precipitated antibodies instead of centrifugation. 
Factorial design was used to design a series of experiment studying the effect of 
pressure and shear rate on permeate flux rate. The yield o f antibodies and the 
purification profile has also been determined and compared to the centrifugation 
route. This work will be published in a second paper
Scale Down Chromatography
A small scale study o f  the equilibrium binding kinetics of ovine polyclonal IgG to 
Protein G has been conducted and the results used to build a mathematical model 
capable o f predicting the breakthrough curves. The model has been tested by 
comparison with actual breakthrough curves produced under different conditions.
London Business School
A three-month course entitled new venture development was undertaken. During 
the time spent at London Business School my team-mates and myself developed a 
business plan for the commercialisation o f Ultra Scale Down technology.
Intellectual Property
Investigation into pre-purification steps and scale down models is o f value as it 
will allow processing options to be more thoroughly investigated at the early 
stages o f development when only small amount of material are available. It will 
also reduce the amount o f time it takes for a product to get to the market.
Publications:
Neal G, Christies J, Keshavarz-Moore E, Ayazi Shamlou P. 2003. An ultra scale- 
down approach for the prediction o f full-scale recovery o f ovine polycolonal 
immunoglobulins used in the manufacture of snake venom-specific fab fragment. 
Biotech Bioeng 81 (2): 149-157.
Neal G, Francis R, Keshavarz-Moore E, Ayazi Shamlou P. 2004. Separation of 
IgG precipitate from contaminating proteins using microfiltration. Biotech and 
Applied Biochem 39(2): 241-248.
Previous Milestones:
Scale down mimic o f disc stack centrifuge complete, the scale down model o f the 
precipitation stage has been used to study what effects changes to the process set
up have on the characteristics of the product, i.e. the effect of changing to solid 
precipitant and changes in mixing conditions, temperature etc.
ELISA, SDS-page and total protein assays have been used to create a mass 
balance and track/visualise exactly what is happening during precipitation and 
centrifugation..
The study on the effect o f changing to a solid precipitant has been finished 
Finished study on the effects o f shear on particle size and biological activity 
Solubility study on the Fab fragments has been undertaken and finished. 
Three-month course at London Business School finished.
First paper has been completed and accepted for publication by Biotechnology 
and Bioengineering
Ultra scale down o f filtration process has been undertaken and finished.
Second paper ahs been completed and submitted.
Research targets:
Next 6 months:
Write up thesis
Milestones:
 Complete Thesis
Training Profile
Course or Management 
activity
Dates * Progress & Assessment
Graduate school board skills 
e.g. Personal and 
Professional Management 
Skills 
PPSRP
Oct 99 to 
June 00
Completed awarded pass 63%
Graduate school technical
courses
e.g. Statistics
Statistics
14/01/00
24/03/00
Completed awarded pass 63%
Department training modules 
e.g. Downstream Processing 
Bioprocess validation 
Bioprocess management
Mar 00 
June 01
Completed awarded pass 68%
Completed
Completed
Management activities 
Demonstratorship
Nov 00 
Mar 01
Two years completed
New venture development at 
July 01- 
Sept 01
Completed
Biobusiness plan competition Sept 01- 
OctOl
Final stage qualifiers
