ProQuest Dissertations
The Best of all Possible Worlds?; 
The Ideology and Practice of British Communism in the Cold War, 
1953-1961
Glyn Powell
University College London 
A thesis submitted in partial fulfilment to the 
Degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
at the University of London
Department of History 
University College London 
March 2001
ProQuest Number: U643364
All rights reserved
INFORMATION TO ALL USERS 
The quality of this reproduction is dependent upon the quality of the copy submitted.
In the unlikely event that the author did not send a complete manuscript 
and there are missing pages, these will be noted. Also, if material had to be removed,
a note will indicate the deletion.
uest.
ProQuest U643364
Published by ProQuest LLC(2016). Copyright of the Dissertation is held by the Author.
All rights reserved.
This work is protected against unauthorized copying under Title 17, United States Code.
Microform Edition  ProQuest LLC.
ProQuest LLC 
789 East Eisenhower Parkway 
P.O. Box 1346 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48106-1346
Acknowledgements
Supervisor at University College London History Department:
Dr E.B. Halpern
Colleagues on the project, Consensus or Coercion?:
The State, the People and Social Cohesion in Post-War Britain:
Zoe Doye, Lawrence Black, Michael Dawswell,
Julia Drake, Andy Homer, John Jenkins
Dedicated to my son, Sam 
13 October 1982 to 2 February 2001
Abstract
This thesis examines the ideology and practice of the Communist Party of 
Great Britain (CPGB) in the 1950s. Ever since its formation, the CPGB had adhered 
to, and modelled itself upon, the Communist Party of the Soviet Union.
The Soviet Party transformed from its revolutionary ideology and practice 
towards representing state dictatorship under Stalin. This transformation from 
Bolshevism to Stalinism had profound implications for the British Party. Following 
Stalins death in 1953, British Communism embarked upon a process of d
stalinisation; a process accelerated by the speech of First Secretary Khruschev to the 
20^ Congress of the Soviet Party in February 1956.
This period coincided with a general decline in British Party membership and 
with an increased emphasis on electoral practice. Two contradictions emerged as the 
CPGB attempted to reconcile the socialist and revolutionary aspirations of its 
membership with the practices of Stalinism and this concentration on elections. These 
socialist aspirations were undermined by Khruschevs revelations about Stalins 
crimes and his own regimes intervention in Flungary at the end of 1956. Members 
response to 1956 threatened to damage the Party beyond repair. A disparate 
opposition emerged in 1956, but never coordinated into a coherent challenge to the 
leadership. The continuing loyalty of the majority of members, combined with an 
increase in industrial, unrest during this period, to reverse the sudden decline in 
membership precipitated by 1956.
In 1957, the Party rescued itself, partly through intervention within the trade 
union rank and file. In parallel with this rank and file level activity, the Party had, since 
its formation, operated a strategy which sought to place members into the leadership 
of the trade unions. The thesis demonstrates the limitations and the damaging 
implications of this leadership strategy as it examines Communist intervention into the 
Electrical Trades Union.
Table of Contents
Introduction Bolshevism, Stalinism 
and British Communism
Structure, agency and problems in 
Communist history 
Leninism and Bolshevism 
From Leninism to Stalinism 
Continuity and Discontinuity
Chapter 1 Communists or Cold Warriors?
Bolshevism, the Comintern and the CPGB
From Class against Class to Popular Front
The CPGB; war and post-war
British theoretical limitations and the effects
of Stalinism
The habits of adhesion 
Three questions about British Communism 
Loyalty, discipline and the recognition of 
political reality
Chapter 2 Bullets in the East, Ballots 
in the West
Stalins death
The response to state terror 
A process of absolution?
The long-term decline of British Communism 
Criteria of Decline
Chapter 3 1956: Revelation, Counter-Revolution
and the Response of British 
Communism
Revelation from above
Confused reactions
The Congress of the CPGB
After the 24  Congress
By hand or by brain - false dichotomy?
Revolution from below
Chapter 4 Managing the Crisis: The leadership and 
its critics, March 1956 to April 1957
The diffuse political focus of the opposition 
The consequences of The Reasoner 
The 25** Special Congress 
A heterogeneous monolith? Democracy 
and the CPGB
Chapter 5 Responding to Criticism 152
A challenge to Stalinism or co-option of dissent? 
Confronting the demon 
Oppositionist attempts at coordination 
An inconvenient history 
New formations
Chapter 6 Trade Unionism and Communist Politics 176
Trade union intervention: Class against Class 
to the post-War period 179
Anti-Communism 186
The politics of productivity 190
I  rade union bureaucrats or tribunes of the people? 194
Unity and the danger of liquidation 199
Rank and filism 200
The targeting of the ETU 202
Chapter 7 Turning off the Power: 
The Debacle in the ETU
Against the odds 
Rank and file rancour or Cold-War campaign? 
How the anti-Communists mobilised 
Power and purpose 
From propaganda to conflict 
A war of words 
Raising the temperature
Chapter 8 Turning off the Power II
Communist trade unionists as bureaucrats 
The consequences of bureaucratic leadership 
The ETU Committee of Inquiry 
Further bureaucratic iniquities 
The reaction
Political leadership and bureaucratic power
Conclusion
Bibliography
List of Tables
Table 1 CPGB membership and electoral performance,
1920-1935 46
Table 2 CPGB membership and electoral performance,
1935-1951 47
Table 3 Membership and Daily Worker Sales, 1950-1956 88
Table 4 Figures for the 1950 General Election 89
Table 5 General Election October, 1951 90
Table 6 Communist Party candidates in three
constituencies in 1945 and 1955 91
Table 7 Composition of the Commission on
Inner Party Democracy 157
Table 8 Occupational Composition of National
Congresses, 1952-1963 172
Table 9 Productivity growth in Britain between
1947 and 1954 192
Introduction 
Bolshevism, Stalinism and British Communism
the consensus posited an uncomplicated conclusion; No meaningful 
differences or discontinuity existed between Bolshevism and Stalinism,
...for twenty years this historical interpretation was axiomatic in almost 
all scholarly works on Soviet history and politics. It prevails even today.^
The Communist Party of Great Britain (CPGB) existed throughout as a 
contradictory political phenomenon. This statement is not the predication of a 
retreat into the sort of historical relativism which refuses to define either what this 
organisation was, or what it was not. It is, rather, the only possible description of a 
party populated with militant socialists, perceived as the repository of the 
revolutionary Marxist tradition but which, throughout most of its existence, adhered 
persistently to one of the worlds most oppressive regimes. This thesis identifies a 
number of contradictions within the ideology and practice of British Communism, 
but it was this particular conflict between socialism and Stalinism that proved both 
the most influential and the most destructive. Adherence to Stalinism was a product 
of the CPGBs particular historical genesis, its leaderships persistent 
misrepresentation about the realities of Soviet life and finally, the need for members 
to sustain their activity through reference to a model of existing socialism.
The fact that members required the sustenance of Moscow was not only the 
product of theoretical shortcomings, it also contributed to them. What Edward 
Thompson described as the Monolith which has droned on in a dogmatic 
monotone both replaced the need for, and inhibited and disfigured, the application 
of Marxs theories to British circumstances, but also precluded meaningful analysis 
of the Soviet Union and its post-revolutionary development.^ The British Party was 
not alone in this. Until 1943, it was part of something akin to a world-wide 
Communist Party, guided and directed by Moscow through the auspices of the Third 
International.^ Following 1943, even the nominal aspirations about world revolution 
implied by the existence of the Comintern, were jettisoned when Stalin sacrificed it 
to diplomatic and military expediency."*
  Stephen F. Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet Experience. Politics and History since 1917 
(Oxford, 1985), 39.
E.P. Thompson, Winter Wheat in Omsk, World News. 3:30 (30 June 1956) 408.
 Constituted Moscow, March 1919.
"* The Third International (Comintern) was replaced by the Communist Information Bureau 
(Cpminform) in September 1947. Zhdanov posited a model of the world divided into two 
camps of Socialism and Capitalism. Cominform included the Eastern European Communist 
Parties and France and Italy. The CPGB was excluded.
Western Communist Parties retained allegiance to Moscow, but the 
combined effects of the Cominterns dissolution and the Cold Wars iron curtain left 
them ideological refugees in a Stalinist diaspora. At Moscow, Yalta and Potsdam, 
as Stalin accepted the diplomatic reality of spheres of influence, even the nominal 
concept of a single world revolutionary party was vetoed. Western parties began a 
process of acculturation to their respective national political environments. Some, 
such as the French and Italian Parties, adapted more successfully than others to 
the post-Comintern world and to their respective domestic politics. This was largely 
due to their significantly higher membership and the fact that their role in anti-Nazi 
resistance gave them considerable credibility within the consciousness of their 
various populations. The CPGB had neither the size nor the credibility either to 
challenge Labour Party hegemony within the British working class or to exert 
influence over world Communism. Throughout the post-war period, however, it 
sought to retain the credibility devolved from its association with the Soviet Union. 
As late as 1956, Harry Pollitt, CPGB General Secretary, still insisted that we are a 
fighting Communist Party, proud to defend the Soviet Union...even if at times we 
have our differences over certain minor aspects of their policies.
As a branch of this world-wide Communist Party, the CPGB had enjoyed an 
inclusive role in an international fraternity of socialists engaged in dialogue about 
how to change the world. Membership gave British Communism a domestic 
credibility which belied its size and institutional significance. Robin Page Arnots 
membership of the Executive Committee of the Communist International (ECCI), 
the frequent visits to Moscow by leading CPGB figures and the direct interaction 
between Pollitt, Rajani Palme Dutt and others with emerging world figures, all 
served to inflate the importance of this small Marxist organisation, most damagingly 
in the eyes of British Communists themselves.
Although the egalitarian features of the Comintern had been eroded by the 
late 1920s, it was still perceived by world Communism as an entity through which to 
achieve socialism. While this perception remained, however, the paradoxical 
acceptance of socialism in one country precipitated a new role for the Comintern 
as an instrument of Soviet foreign policy, often in opposition to revolutionary activity
 I. Deutscher, Stalin (London, 1990) 485-533. Also see David Reynolds T h e  Big Three and 
the Division of Europe, 1945-48: An Overview, Diplomacv and Statecraft 1:2 (July 1990), 
111-136.
 H. Pollitt, Speech to Closed Session of 24*   Congress of the Communist Party of Great 
Britain (1 April 1956). Communist Party Archive, Museum of Labour History, Manchester 
[Henceforward Manchester], CP/Cent/Cong/09/09.
throughout the world/ Comintern membership and continuing association with 
important Communist parties abroad, distorted perspectives about the position of 
Communism in Britain. This was most famously expressed at the St. Paneras North 
by-election in 1948. After Communist John Mahon had received 854 votes, Harry 
Pollitt announced we may not have won St Paneras, but weve got China.
Had the British Party not been part of the Comintern, it would have been 
little more than a Marxist-Leninist sect. Some former members went so far as to 
describe the Party as a despised sect. With the Cominterns changing role and its 
eventual dissolution, a sect was, in reality, what the CPGB had become by the 
1950s. This exposed as fiction, the received wisdom shared by many within the 
Party, about its domestic and international importance. The Party and those closely 
associated with it, however, continued, right up until its dissolution, to insist on the 
reality of this fiction. This had consequences as the Party attempted to intervene in 
and influence working class struggle. As a result of this confused perception of 
itself, the Party faced an ongoing dilemma between sectarianism on the one hand 
and liquidation into institutions which it could never hope to influence politically, on 
the other. It was a dilemma that the Party never resolved.
The Partys sectarianism was fuelled by an arrogance, born largely from its 
membership of the Comintern. It emerged as early as 1929, when Stalins Class 
against Class anti-social democratic policy, inspired an attempt to build red unions 
in opposition to the social fascists of the Trade Union Congress. The political 
arrogance that fuelled sectarianism remained in evidence long after the dissolution 
of the Comintern. Ralph Russell cited an example from the 1960s when he was a 
tutor at the School of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS) in London University. 
Russell said of this period that the attitude of Communists to the students was that 
were the revolutionary vanguard -  if they dont follow us then it's not a 
revolutionary movement.  Presumptions about its left-wing hegemony remained 
discernible throughout the 1980s as the Partys main organ, Marxism Todav.
  The slogan was adopted at the CPSUs 14 *  Congress in April 1925. See Stalin The  
Question of the Victory of Socialism in One Country in The Foundations of Leninism. On the 
Problems of Leninism (Moscow, 1950) 228- 246. Also Deutscher, Stalin. 389.
 Cited in A. Macleod, The Death of Uncle Joe (Suffolk, 1997), 16. Also cited in K. Morgan, 
Harry Pollitt (Manchester. 1993). 161.
 Nottingham Marxist Group, Why W e Left The Communist Party (Nottingham, 71957), 6.
Ralph Russell, interviewed by author 26 May 1998. [Henceforward, interview refers to 
people interviewed by author, unless specified]. Russell joined the CPGB in 1934. He 
chaired the Partys University Joint Staffs Committee. He stayed in the Party until its 
dissolution, joining the Democratic Left.
continued to insist that its own analysis of contemporary capitalism must be the 
starting point for the whole of the British left/^
The Party also retained enough confidence to allow suicidal lengths of rope 
to members able to intervene within the bureaucracies of British trade unions. The 
Party continued to believe that it was theoretically sound enough and politically 
influential enough to avoid these members being subsumed into such 
bureaucracies. Contrary to the popular perception that the unions these people 
administered were controlled' by the CPGB, the effect was, largely, the opposite. 
Rather than exerting meaningful political influence, Communist trade union leaders 
were dominated by the bureaucratic imperatives of office-holding. Not only was 
their political influence limited, but in some cases, the Party machine represented 
an opportunity for personal advancement. As Morris Schaer, a shop steward in the 
Electrical Trades Union said, we began to think from the rank and file point of 
view, more critically about...members who were in leading positions in the unions -  
a bit suspicious about whether they were feathering their own nests. T h e  Party 
continued, throughout its existence, to plough this politically barren furrow and 
viewed trade union office-holding as being synonymous with socialist leadership of 
the working class. It also continued to stand large numbers of candidates for 
Parliament and local government that yielded a similarly meagre return for the 
disproportionate amount of effort invested by members.
The ability to achieve bureaucratic trade union office, however, reflected a 
reality in which rank and file activists led struggles and represented discontent, 
often in a highly effective way. In workplace and local community, it was 
intervention at this rank and file level where potential lay for building a significant 
political opposition within Britain. The thesis argues that the bureaucratic 
sectarianism symptomatic of Stalinism, combined with a despairing liquidation into 
trade union bureaucracy and electoral politics, impeded the possibility of this rank 
and file activity generalising into a coherent opposition to the established political 
culture within Britain. In the 1950s, this was a political culture dominated by a bi
party parliamentary consensus over what Leo Panitch called a contemporary
  Raphael Samuel said of this faction, like their hardline opponents, they cling to the 
antique Communist belief that a correct' analysis faithfully followed, will bring the required 
result. Samuel, Class Politics: The Lost World of British Communism, Part Three, New Left 
Review. 165(1987), 53.
Morris Schaer, interview, 5 April 2000. Schaer was a shop steward in the Electrical 
Trades Union (ETU). Rejoined the CPGB following World W ar II.
expression of corporatism, as well as almost all aspects of British foreign policy, 
particularly with regard to the USSR/^
Structure, agency and problems in Communist history
Much historical writing on British Communism has accepted the idea that 
the CPGB was a significant institutional feature of British society. Histories which 
have not ascribed to this view have derived from a perspective which has been 
antagonistic to Marxism. This body of work has not distinguished between Marxism, 
Bolshevism or Stalinism but has assumed that, if they are not the same, then they 
share a self-evident contiguity which these writers barely question. This work has 
included Henry Fellings The Communist Party; a Historical Profile and, more 
recently, Frances Becketts Enemy Within. I t  has pandered to many stereotypes 
about Communism which, although expressed most aggressively during the Cold 
War, are by no means the preserve of that period. This perspective has approached 
this history armed with a dual agenda, seeing Communism, at the same time, as 
both fallacious and evil. It has sneered at the nave dilettante intellectual and 
misguided young militant on the one hand, while demonising the manipulative 
apparatchik on the other. These writers have also focused upon the Partys 
hierarchical structures as they have presented the organisation, both as a malign 
Bolshevik cancer taking orders from Moscow and, at the same time, a barmy army 
of political inadquates. With their concentration upon scandals relating to Moscow 
gold and Stalinist infiltration, these writers have marginalized, almost to the point of 
negation, the real significance of rank and file communist intervention in 
communities and the trade union movement.
Another significant body of work has been generally sympathetic to 
Communism and has emanated from writers who have either been members or 
have been closely associated with the CPGB. Notwithstanding the Partys own 
historians objective to place this history within the context of the political events of 
the period, generally this work has been self-referential.^^ It has broadly accepted 
the Partys propaganda about its institutional significance within Britain. This has led
L. Panitch, Social Democracy and Industrial Militancy The Labour Party, the Trade Unions 
and Incomes Policy 1945-1974 (Cambridge. 1976), 245.
H. Palling. The Communist Party: a Historical Profile (London. 1975).
F. Beckett, Enemy Within: The Rise and Fall of the British Communist Party (London, 
1995).
N. Branson, The History of the Communist Party of Great Britain [2 yols.] yol.1, 1927- 
1941 (London 1985), yii. Also see J. Klugmann, History of the Communist Party of Great 
Britain [2 vols.] (London, 1968 and 1969).
to distortion. The work has emphasised the institutional features of the Party; its 
hierarchies, structure and leadership as well as its leading personalities, at the 
expense of the more important activity of individuals or small groups of Communists 
in work places and communities.^ Neither of these two tendencies has challenged 
the received wisdom that the Party represented revolutionary Marxism. As Raphael 
Samuel wrote later, the CPGB may never have been in any meaningful sense a 
revolutionary party.
In recent years, a more nuanced approach to this history has emerged. 
Samuels engaging analysis, The Lost World of British Communism, appeared in 
New Left Review between 1985 and 1987.  Nina Fishmans adapted doctoral 
thesis. The British Communist Partv and the Trade Unions: 1933-1945. whilst the 
subject of criticism below in terms of its analysis of British Communism and 
Stalinism, has provided an invaluable shop floor account of Communist trade 
union activity.^ Along with Geoff Andrews and Kevin Morgan, Fishman also co
edited Opening the Books: Essavs on the Social and Cultural Historv of British 
Communism.  Morgan has also made a significant contribution, as both editor and 
author, to this recent trend, which has engaged with the subject from a more 
balanced and less partisan perspective than previously.^^
A question has arisen within this recent historiography about the role and 
motivations of individual Communists. Kevin Morgan identified Trotskyist 
historians, for example, who assumed a rigid dichotomy between individuals as 
objects of historical forces and these same peoples subjective role as CPGB 
members, through which they became potential agents of historical change.The 
assumption of such a dichotomy, suggested Morgan, allowed these historians to 
treat this organisation, constituted as it was by a range of individual experiences, as 
something quite apart from the objective framework of the circumstances in which
For the CPGBs early period, see L.J. MacFariane, The British Communist Partv: Its 
Origin and Development until 1929 (London. 1966).
Samuel, T h e  Lost World of British Communism. Part One., New Left Review. 154 
(Novem ber-Decem ber 1985), 32.
 Samuel, T h e  Lost World of British Communism [three parts]. New Left Review. 154, 156 
and 165 (November-December 1985, March to April 1986, January to February 1987) 3-54, 
63-113 and 51-91.
N. Fishman, The British Communist Partv and the Trade Unions: 1933 - 1945 (Aldershot, 
1995).
G. Andrews, N. Fishman, K. Morgan, eds.. Opening the Books: Essavs on the Social and 
Cultural Historv of British Communism (London, 1995). Also see A. Campbell, N. Fishman, 
J. Fishman, British Trade Unions and Industrial Politics: The Post-War Compromise. 1945- 
64 (Aldershot,-1999).
^M organ , Harry Pollitt.
K. Morgan, Against Fascism and W ar Ruptures and continuities in British Communist 
politics. 1935-41 (Manchester, 1989) 5-7.
such individuals lived their l ives .As  a result, such writers have reduced their view 
of the CPGB to one of an organisation of professional revolutionaries with 
responsibility for providing the correct revolutionary leadership, a task in which, 
because of the Stalinist dominated line, they fa i led.The danger with Morgans 
response to this characterisation is that, in its turn, it reduces the CPGB to a 
collection of well meaning ordinary people with no responsibility at all for the 
practice, either of their national organisation, or of the international tendency with 
which it was associated. Although Morgan is careful to point out that these people, 
whilst ordinary in their experiences of the iniquities of capitalism were nevertheless 
exceptional in their wholehearted refusal to accept their inevitability, there is a 
danger of characterising this membership as almost entirely separated from, and 
therefore innocent of, the formulations and strategies concocted in Moscow and 
King Street. These concoctions did indeed constitute what Alison Macleod and 
other critics have consistently and witheringly referred to as the line.   In asking 
questions about the role of the CPGB, this thesis attempts to analyse the 
relationship between these members, the organisation they made a conscious 
decision to join and its leadership, both in Britain and in Moscow. As the chapters 
concentrating upon oppositional currents within the Party show, even after every 
member had been made painfully aware of the precise nature of the regime their 
organisation had so uncritically supported, only a minority were prepared to 
criticise, either their own leadership or the regime itself.
Ideologically, the British party, in line with the rest of world Communism, 
moved away, during the course of the twentieth century from the fundamental 
Marxist idea that the process of achieving socialism must be conquered by the 
working classes themselves to one in which this process was to be orchestrated 
from above, either by a party bureaucracy or a parliamentary coa l i t ion .As 
discussed below, such a move began as an enforced response to the particular 
circumstances in which the Bolshevik revolution found itself by the early 1920s. 
Characteristic of Stalinism, however, was the transformation of this response into a 
universal guide to action -  an ideological line -  for consumption by world 
Communism.The subordination of the idea of peoples self-emancipation to one 
where socialist change could be administered from above was expressed, for
^^Ibid., 5.
Ibid.
Ibid. 6. Alison Macleod, interviewed, 15 October 1997.
See, for example, K. Marx, General Rules of the International Working M ens Association 
in K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Works [2 vols.], vol. 1 (Moscow, 1958) 386.
The most obvious example of this was the transforming of Socialism in one country" from 
an unfortunate necessity into a central feature of Stalinist ideology.
example, in the acceptance by world Communism of the post-World War II Eastern 
European states as socialist. For the British party, it was expressed within its 
seamless and uncritical move towards a parliamentary programme. The British 
Road to Socialism. ^
Much of the history of the CPGB in the 1950s is contained within literature 
covering its entire history. This includes not only Fellings and Becketts works, 
which, as suggested above, both tended towards the negatively partisan, but also 
Willie Thompsons more objective. The Good Old Cause, whose interpretation of 
the Party in the Cold War is discussed below.  The crisis year of 1956 was covered 
from a biographical perspective by former Daily Worker journalist, Alison Macleod, 
in her book. The Death of Uncle Joe.  Macleods record of the events of 1956 
provoked discussion among Party activists from the period and others, many of 
whom noted a perspective affected by her negative experiences at the time and by 
an increasing antipathy towards Communism since.^   Potential problems of 
memory and the subsequent interpretation of events by individuals, inevitably exist 
within the biographical and oral genre that constitutes much of the historiography of 
this period. This includes Gareth Stedman Jones interview with Eric Hobsbawm in 
1986, John Savilles, Malcolm MacEwens and Margot Heinemanns accounts in 
The Socialist Register 1976. as well as MacEwens biography. The Greening of a 
Red, published in 1991.^   Biographical and oral sources are also vulnerable to 
question in terms of historical perspective. As discussed below, the tendency for 
such interpretations to view 1956, for example, as a political bombshell which, in 
turn, translated into a discontinuity within CPGB history, stems from the fact that 
these people were involved personally and that these events profoundly affected 
their own lives. Whether the impact of 1956 -  as devastating as it was for these 
individuals -  was as important in terms of the CPGBs historical development, is 
something which the thesis examines. The oral history sources utilised below, 
present similar dangers regarding memory. The thesis balances its use of 
biographical and oral sources, however, with large amounts of material drawn from
The British Road to Socialism (London. 1951).
W. Thompson The Good Old Cause (London, 1992). See below. Chapter 2, 84-85.
^  A. Macleod, The Death of Uncle Joe (Woodbridge, 1997). Alison Macleod is also one of 
several oral history interviewees in the following thesis.
See, for example, V.G. Kiernans review in London Review of Books. 20:18 (17 
September 1998), followed by correspondence from H.V.F. Winstone, 20:19 and from 
Macleod herself and Kiernan, 20:21 (29 October 1998).
See G. Stedman Jones, 1956, interview with E. Hobsbawm, Marxism Todav (November 
1986), J. Seville, The XXth Congress and the British Communist Party, M. MacEwen, The 
Day the Party Had to Stop, M. Heinemann, 1956 and the Communist Party all in The 
Socialist Register 1976. J. Seville and R. Milliband, eds. (London, 1976), M. MacEwen, The 
Greening of a Red (London. 1991).
the CPGB archives and from the Party press. The thesis also takes a perspective 
that sees 1956, not just as a visitation by dark Stalinist forces, but also as an 
expression of contradictions within British Communism between its claims to 
represent Marxism, its adherence to the Soviet Union and its reformist practice. The 
major discontinuity in British Communist history might, more usefully, be seen as 
the Second World War, rather than 1956. It was during the war when the Partys 
popular front aspirations and support for the Soviet Union seemed to be more in 
tune with popular British political sentiment than at any time before or after. The 
Partys post-war period can in turn, be seen as an ongoing attempt to recapture this 
position, on the basis of its leadership of an anti-Conservative front, allied with 
support for Soviet declarations about peaceful co-existence and the public 
repudiation of a revolutionary strategy.
Apart from these biographical perspectives, Katherine Hudsons doctoral 
thesis. The Double Blow: 1956 and the Communist Party of Great Britain has 
concentrated specifically upon the year, 1956.^   Hudson drew mainly from the 
Communist Party press and published pamphlets. While this was augmented by 
some 11 oral sources, her lack of access to the CPGB archives has resulted in a 
limited range of material for this subject reflected, in turn, by a narrow bibliography 
contained within just eight pages. '   Although it is the case that much CPGB 
material was unavailable in catalogued form in 1992, Hudson restricted her study to 
just 20 pamphlets and relied for her general history of British Communism on 
Klugmann, Branson and George Matthews 1980 pamphlet. All for the Cause. I t  is 
also the case that, although verbatim Congress Reports for 1956 and 1957 were 
unavailable at the time. Executive Committee Reports to the two congresses were 
available.^ Lack of access to the CPGB archives forced Hudson to rely heavily 
upon the Daily Worker and World News with the result that most membership 
voices remained subject to the considerable editorial sanction or censorship 
employed by these publications at the time. Similarly, the leaderships response to 
the concerns of members was restricted to articles within the Party media, such as 
Harry Pollitts World News articles of April and May 1956 and the Executive
K. Hudson, T h e  Double Blow; 1956 and the Communist Party of Great Britain, PhD. 
Thesis, University of London (1992), 5, Institute of Historical Research.
^  Ibid., Bibliography.
G. Matthews, All for the Cause (London, 1980).
Pamphlets were available, both from the British and Marx Memorial Libraries. Reports 
were available at the British Library.
Committee resolution which appeared in The Marxist Quarterly in July.^^ For her 
record of the Closed Session of the CPGBs 24*  Congress, Hudson was forced to 
rely upon Monty Johnstones Notes from which she cited contributions by Willie 
Gallacher and Maurice Cornforth, for example, but which did not reflect the 
contributions of branch delegates and others.^ On the subject of the publication of 
The Reasoner. Hudson again concentrated upon Party media, relying heavily upon 
two articles in World News by John Seville and Edward Thompson entitled 
Problems of the Communist Party and Winter Wheat in Omsk respectively. The 
Partys response to The Reasoner was limited to the two main Party publications. 
Finally, although Hudson, unusually for CPGB history, has presented a critique of 
Stalinism and Moscows influence over British Communism, this was employed in a 
mono-causal way, largely omitting the British partys internal contradictions. 
Although the events of 1956 and the Partys response to them, constitute just three 
chapters in this thesis, access to the CPGB archives has enabled a far more wide- 
ranging, balanced and profound analysis of the response of leaders and members 
than was possible for Hudson.
More recently, Keith Laybourn and Dylan Murphy have drawn upon the 
CPGB archives for their book. Under the Red Flag, a history from before 1920 until 
the formation of the Democratic Left in 1991."* As with much CPGB history, going 
back to Macfarlane in 1966, these authors have presented the Partys history 
...almost wholly in organisational terms.'*  They have acknowledged only 
intermittently that Communist organisation and activity were related to the 
ideological tradition of Marxism, even if, at times, such a relationship may have 
appeared nominal. Although referring to Stalinism in phrases such as after the 
Second World War the CPGB was still very much under the influence of Stalin, 
Laybourn and Murphy made little attempt to analyse where Stalin, Stalinism and, by 
association, the CPGB, stood in relation to Communisms own claimed ideological 
inheritance.'*^ Concentration upon the Partys activity and organisation marginalizes 
and even negates its role as both a political and a Marxist organisation. As the 
chapters dealing with the CPGB in the trade unions discuss, the most intensive and
H. Pollitt, 'The 20**  Congress of the CPSU and the Role of Stalin, World News 3:16 and 
18 (21 April and 5 May 1956), 246-248 and 278-280. Lessons of the Twentieth Congress of 
the CPSU, Marxist Quarterly. 3:3 (July 1956) 178-183.
 Hudson, 'The Double Blow, 83.
 J. Seville and E.P. Thompson, World News 3:20 (19 May 1956) and 3:26 (30 June 1956).
K. Laybourn and D. Murphy, Under the Red Flag: A Historv of Communism in Britain 
(Trowbridge, 1-999).
M. Woodhouse Marxism and Stalinism in Britain 1920-1926 in B. Pearce and M. 
Woodhouse, A Historv of Communism in Britain (London, 1995) 10.
Laybourn and Murphy, Under the Red Flag. 142.
successful activity within trade unions or local communities remained at the level of 
trade unionism and community service unless members and their party could relate 
such activity to an ideological tradition embodying aspirations for socialist change. 
The following thesis focuses upon this question of the CPGB as a political 
organisation claiming to represent the Marxist tradition. The fact that it was 
generally unsuccessful at this should not be a reason for marginalizing such a 
question in favour of a concentration upon the things which it appeared to do better.
The perilous task of making judgements about the CPGBs practice has 
been tackled by historians in two discernible ways. The first has been to judge the 
Party on the basis of its consistent claims to being both a Marxist and a Leninist 
organisation. The second has judged CPGB practice almost entirely within the often 
limited parameters that the Party leadership of the time deemed expedient, either 
as declared strategy or justified after the event. Thus, in the hands of Nina 
Fishman, a retreat away from the illusory potential of rank and filism, translated 
into something called revolutionary pragmatism on the part of Harry Pollitt and J.R 
Campbell.'^^ Fishman evaluated Pollitts and Campbells actions on the basis of 
criteria determined by the parameters to which they themselves proscribed Party 
activity, with little regard to the question posed, for example, by Kevin Morgan in 
relation to the 1930s, what had this effort and initiative to do with the achievement 
of Communism?'*'* Matthew Worley, in an account of the CPGB during the late 
1920s, appeared to view the Partys actions wholly in terms of a reasonable 
response to British historical conditions; dislocating almost entirely these actions 
from the Class against Class line which was, coincidentally it would seem for 
Worley, being pedalled by the Comintern at the time.'*  The Partys acceptance of a 
dangerously sectarian strategy was less important than its practical response to the 
downturn in industrial struggle following 1926. To subordinate its ideological raison 
d tre, in this way, ultimately invalidates the CPGBs existence as a political 
organisation and the thesis bases much of its critique on the Partys claims to be 
both Marxist and Leninist. Although impossible to quantify, such claims constituted 
at least part of the reason why many joined in the first place.'* Much of the criticism 
levelled at the leadership by members in 1956 related to its abandonment of 
Marxist principles in favour of the very pragmatism that many historians appear to
'* See N. Fishman, No Home but the Trade Union Movement: Communist Activists and 
Reformist Leaders, 1926-56 in Andrews, Fishman, Morgan, eds.. Opening the Books. 
'*'* Morgan, Against Fascism and W ar. 21.
'* M. Worley, Left Turn a reassessment of the Communist Party of Great Britain in the 
third period: 1928-33 in Twentieth Century British Historv. 11:4 (2000).
'* See below, for example. Chapter 1, 35.
commend. This thesis is less concerned with whether or not the Partys practice 
can be justified, however, than with the effect such practice may have had upon the 
development of socialist ideas within Britain.
Reference to the malign influence of Stalinism, whilst repeated as a liturgical 
refrain throughout British Communist history, is rarely subjected to definition or 
explanation. There has been little attempt, either to explain what Stalinism was, or 
to understand its role in the development of the wider British socialist movement, 
not only during the 1950s, but also, throughout the developing political changes 
associated with the 1960s. The following thesis attempts to redress this, firstly by 
offering a definition of Stalinism, then by showing how the British party, and 
particularly its leadership, accepted and promoted it as the only existing alternative 
-  the best of all possible worlds. At other times, when Stalinism was exposed as 
negative, either in the USSR in 1956 or in Britain within the Electrical Trades Union, 
for example, the Party attempted to distance itself from it. It is only by 
understanding Stalinisms influence as an endemic ideological feature of British 
Communism that the CPGBs practice can be properly understood. Stalinism 
produced within British Communism, political features which E.P. Thompson 
characterised as opportunist and lacking in socialist principle.^
The following thesis is not an attempt to present British Communism as a 
sociological study as in, for example, Kenneth Newtons useful 1969 work."* Neither 
is it an attempt to present Communist history as social history in the manner of 
Raphael Samuels The Lost World of British Communism.'  Apart from Samuels 
work, existing published and unpublished biographies have also concentrated upon 
the socio-cultural aspects of Communist Party membership. Among the best known 
are Doris Lessings The Golden Notebook or, more recently, Phil Cohens Children 
of the Revolution. Both have studied the social implications of long-term 
Communist Party membership. This concentration upon the socio-cultural is 
interesting in itself but has come at the expense of political analysis. The 
concentration upon the sincerity of individual socialist commitment and positive 
community contribution has tended to minimise the political impact of British 
Stalinism upon the development of socialism within Britain. The CPGB was not just 
the aggregate of members aspirations and contributions. It was a, finally 
unsustainable, synthesis between this aggregate and Stalinism.
E.P. Thompson to James Klugmann (22 March 1956) Manchester CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
K. Newton, The Sociology of British Communism (London, 1969).
Samuel The Lost World of British Communism.
D. Lessing, The Golden Notebook (London, 1993). P. Cohen Children of the Revolution: 
Communist Childhood in Cold W ar Britain ^London. 1997).
The Party claimed to unite the vanguard of the militant socialist fighters of 
the working class. S u c h  a claim could be substantiated by the fact that the Partys 
membership included some of the most effective fighters within, and on behalf of, 
the British working class. It was not just support for the Soviet Union that made the 
CPGB Stalinist, however. The Party held up Stalinism as the desideratum of British 
socialism; it imported its demonology and, where it could, replicated its bureaucratic 
practices. The Lilliputian scale of Stalinism in Britain often gave it an absurd aspect 
that further undermined the potential of its membership. The more perceptive, who 
were able to see beyond the caricature, however, often did not like what they saw. 
As John Saville said of the lurid picture painted by the Party of the transition to 
socialism, the man in the street is entitled to say Not for me brother.' ^
Leninism and Bolshevism
When I first began work on this book, shortly after Lenins death, 
Marxist-Leninism was just being invented by the rising Stalin...by 
the time the original edition...was published, in the spring of 1948, 
Marxist-Leninism had hardened into a monolithic creed which Stalin 
had authoritatively defined for two decades.^
Any history which aspires towards an analysis of the ideology, strategy and 
practice of the CPGB cannot commence without making an attempt to understand 
the forces that motivated and sustained its leadership and membership from its 
formation in 1920. "* As well as the writings of Marx and inseparable from this body 
of work, the overwhelming influence on the Partys early strategy and theoretical 
direction was the Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU) and its undisputed 
leader, L e n in .A t  least until 1956, as far as the leadership and most CPGB 
members perceived it, this influence had remained essentially the same; described 
with an unbroken line from Marxism, through early Leninism, to revolutionary 
Bolshevism and expressed, finally, within the practice of the Stalin regime.
CPGB, The British Road to Socialism (London, 1951) 22.
J. Saville Problems of the Communist Party, World News. 3:20 (19 May 1956) 314.
David Shub, Lenin: A Bioqraphv (London, 1977), 9.
^  Communist Unity Convention, Official Report (July 31 and August 1 1920). Marx 
Memorial Library [Henceforward MML], London.
The Bolshevik Party (the Bolshevik faction of the Russian Social Democratic Labour 
Party) changed after 1917. Lenin, in The April Theses (Moscow, 1985), demanded Instead 
of Social Democracy, whose official leaders...have betrayed socialism...we must call 
ourselves the Communist Party, 9. Subsequently, the party was known as RCP(B) (Russian 
Communist Party (Bolshevik)) until the USSR constitution of 1923 when it was changed to 
Communist Party of the Soviet Union (CPSU).
The seminal moment for British Communism was Lenins call for the 
formation of a British Party affiliated to the newly formed Third International. There 
had existed a small, but identifiable British Marxist tradition, however.  The CPGB 
owed its existence to the Bolshevik revolution but was also influenced by this 
tradition, however inconsequential it may have appeared at the time and 
subsequently. Edward Thompson and John Saville identified sectarianism and 
dogmatism as they described the slow growth of a native Marxist tradition. The 
small propagandist organisations which had constituted early British Marxism 
reflected the specific circumstances that prevailed within Britain and have persisted 
ever since. Lenin was aware that a revolutionary organisation operating within, and 
in opposition to, the reformist and hegemonic British labour movement, dominated 
by the trade unions and the Labour Party, faced particular problems.
This native Marxist tradition notwithstanding, the most profound influence 
over British Communism was the Bolshevik Party, its leadership, and the 
revolutionary theory and practice with which it had been successful in 1917. Some 
have argued that these Russian conditions were so different from those within 
Britain that they were not only irrelevant, but that attempting to organise on the 
basis of them was pre-destined to failure. This thesis concentrates, through the 
personal testimony of those involved and through the available source material, 
upon how the influences of Bolshevism, Leninism and Stalinism affected British 
Communism and the degree to which these influences can be characterised either 
as enabling and constructive or disabling and destructive. Drawing largely from 
modern Sovietology, this introduction attempts to construct a definition of these 
terms that can be applied with consistency to the rest of the thesis.
The existence of a qualitative difference between revolutionary Bolshevism 
and Stalinism and its implications for world Communism was first identified by 
Trotsky. In 1936, Trotsky wrote of the revolution having ebbed back into its 
channels. This perspective remained, until recently, the polemical territory of
 Lenin, Left Wing Communism An Infantile Disorder (Moscow, 1935), 76-88. In my 
opinion, the British Communists should unite their four...parties into a single Communist 
Party on the basis of the Third International [ibid.84].
  A recent account of these pre-CPGB formations appears in Laybourn and Murphy, Under 
the Red Flag. 1-36.
 J. Saville and E.P. Thompson, Why W e Are Publishing [editorial], The Reasoner A 
Journal of Discussion. 1 (July 1956), 5. British Library [henceforward BL] pp3558 iyd.
See Ken Alexander, Democratic Centralism The Reasoner (July 1956), 6. Also 
Thompson, Winter Wheat in Omsk, 408-9.
 These terms are distinguished more carefully below. Stephen F. Cohen criticised their use 
within the academic world saying, the terms Bolshevik, Leninist, Stalinist were used 
interchangeably, Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet Experience. 39.
 L. Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed (New York, 1972), 2.
Trotskyism, but is fundamental both to coming to a view about Stalinism and to 
understanding how the regime associated with that term had a qualitatively different 
influence upon British Communism compared to Bolshevism.^ If, as this 
introduction asserts, Stalinism was neither Communism, Bolshevism, nor the 
embodiment of a workers state in transition to socialism, then immediately, a 
contradiction emerges between the socialist aspirations of Communists and the 
political reality with which they identified through their party. Such a contradiction 
ran through the heart of British Communism from its acceptance of the Stalinist 
line in 1928, through the criticisms of Stalin by Khruschev in 1956, and beyond. 
Leninism has often been seen as synonymous with Bolshevism. As 
descriptions of a specific kind of theory and practice, the two terms share 
considerable congruity. In this sense, it may be that Leninism is simply another way 
of describing Bolshevism. Care needs to taken here, however. While the two terms 
coincide in the sense that they describe a specific theory and practice, largely 
stemming from the work of Lenin, and usually thought of as beginning in 1902, the 
term Leninism refers to one mans ideas and formulations."* Bolshevism, although 
identical in many ways, nevertheless, refers, at the very least, to a collective 
consensus around such ideas. As historian Moshe Lewin put it, the two notions are 
not identical. "Bolshevism applies to the Party as a whole, which espoused 
Leninism by and large as its ideology of struggle, but bolshevism included factions 
which often proposed divergent interpretations. Stephen F. Cohen has seen the 
equating of the two as a denial that Bolshevism was a more diverse political 
movement...than is usually acknowledged. Cohen described Bolshevism as 
larger and more diverse than Lenin and Leninism. Other Bolsheviks certainly 
challenged and argued over Lenins ideas and much of Lenins theoretical work was 
the result of such dialectical engagement. Subsequent perceptions have, 
nevertheless, equated Bolshevik theory and practice with Leninism. It is, however, 
important when using such terms, to bear in mind the distinctions outlined above.
 See Trotsky The Revolution Betrayed and Stalin (London 1947). Also C.L.R. James, 
World Revolution (New Jersey, 1994), T. Cliff, Russia A Marxist Analysis (London, 1957).
 N. Khruschev, The Crimes of the Stalin Era [Special Report to the 20th Congress of the 
Communist Party of the Soviet Union] Anatole Shub, ed. (New York, 71956).
"* 1902 saw the publication of What is to be Done? (New York, 1992). It formed the basis of 
Bolshevik organisation following the split with the Mensheviks at the RSDLP Conference of 
1903. For world Communism it represented the foundations of Leninism and Bolshevism.
 M. Lewin, The Making of the Soviet System (London, 1985), 191.
 Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet Experience. 49.
 Ibid.
From Leninism to Stalinism
Robert C. Tucker identified Leninism as emerging with his political writings 
around the turn of the century and commented that it was a word he himself never 
used. In opposition to this idea of Leninism as representing a specific body of 
work, however, the idea of Leninism as a cult began to emerge shortly after his 
death. The establishment of the Leninist cult had important implications for Stalins 
rise to power and for the establishment of his own cult. Stalin quickly moved to 
establish himself as the heir of Lenin and Leninism. Five days after Lenins death, 
before the Congress of Soviets, Stalin proclaimed his Oath which adopted the 
semi-religious tone typical of much of the language utilised in the establishment of 
the cult, as he declared, in leaving us. Comrade Lenin ordained us to hold high and 
keep pure the great title of member of the party. We vow to thee. Comrade Lenin, 
that we shall fulfil honourably this thy commandment.
Tucker identified the celebrations around Stalins 50th birthday in 1929 as 
the effective beginning of his personality cult, a phenomenon destined to grow to 
gigantic proportions in the thirties and forties.  Before his death, Lenins elevation 
to such status was so alien to his nature that he refused to attend his own 50th 
birthday celebration in 1920 which had, in any case, been hastily arranged as a 
party affair. Stalins 50th birthday, on the other hand, was organised as a 
bureaucratic extravaganza where his statues and busts of all possible sizes filled 
the squares, the halls of public buildings, and the windows of every shop down to 
the humblest barbers shop. Stalin is the Lenin of today, the propagandists 
shouted themselves hoarse.   What motivated these idealistic, egalitarian and 
socially progressive strands in the Russian intelligentsia and working class to 
continue to capitulate to Stalins cult has been tackled by J. Arch Getty and Oleg V. 
Naumov, who identified the Stalinists as prisoners of the symbolic construction -  
the ideology -  that they created. They were ultimately no more capable of escaping 
it than is the priest of any religion.
Stalinism was a multi-faceted term of which the cult of personality was 
merely one aspect. It was this aspect, however, through which the others were
 R.C. Tucker, Stalin as Revolutionary. 1879-1929 (New York,1973), 21. Recent debate 
has emerged between Simon Clarke Was Lenin a Marxist? The Populist Roots of Marxism- 
Leninism; John Molyneux How Not to Write About Lenin and John Ehrenberg Problems of 
Leninism in Historical Materialism: research in critical Marxist theory. 3 (Winter 1998), 3-27, 
47-63, 65-72 respectively.
 Cited in Deutscher, Stalin. 272-273.
Tucker, Stalin as Revolutionary. 463.
Ibid., 465. Deutscher, Stalin. 318.
J. Arch Getty and O.V. Naumov, The Road to Terror. Stalinism and the Self-Destruction of 
the Bolsheviks. 1 9 3 2 -1 9 3 9  (New Haven, 1999), 8, 22.
established. As Lewin has suggested, not much effort is needed to relate the 
Stalin cult to this broader strategy of sanctifying the state. The Stalin cult 
became the linchpin in this revamped secular orthodoxy. S t a l i n s personality cult 
was crucial to the exercising of state power as it persuaded, coerced and 
intimidated the population in the collectivisation of agriculture, forced 
industrialisation and self-sacrificing patriotism that were characteristic of the Soviet 
Union after 1929.
The sort of adulation to which Tucker and Deutscher referred, was not 
confined to Russia. For western Communists, Stalin came to represent, not just the 
development of the Bolshevik revolution but also the highest potential to which 
revolution, socialism and, therefore mankind, could hope to aspire. Some remained 
ecstatic up until his death. Harry Pollitt, for example, mourned his former mentor, 
describing him as the leader of all progressive mankind, of all who love peace, 
value democracy, treasure their national independence and desire the 
establishment of socialism.Neither was it just Communists who, in Barbara 
Drakes words, fell in love with Soviet Russia. T h a t  indefatigable Fabian couple, 
the Webbs, for example, whom Neal Wood described as essentially Benthamite 
utilitarians...with little sympathy either for the masses or for equalitarianism... 
conceived of Gosplan as the first human agency designed to put into practice the 
great pleasure pain calculus.  Wood also cited John Strachey and Harold J. Laski 
as intellectuals who popularised Stalins government.^^
By 1956, the term Stalinism began to accrue to itself a range of negative 
implications related to the authoritarian aspects of Soviet social and political life, 
mass murder and imprisonment. Roy A. Medvedev, shortly after Khruschev had 
launched his indictment of Stalin in 1956, wrote that the prolonged period of terror 
had a great influence on the ideological life of the Party, on the countrys literature 
and art, on the natural and social sciences, on the psychology and ethics of the 
Soviet people, on the methods of governing the Party and the state...on the way 
that tens of millions think and behave.  Like many writers in Russia and within the 
Communist movement at this time, however, Medvedev felt that, despite its crimes
Lewin, The Making of the Soviet System. 306.
H. Pollitt, W e Honour Him With A Pledge, Daily Worker (6 March 1953).
B. Drake, cited in N. Wood, Communism and British Intellectuals (London, 1959), 45. 
Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed. 2. Wood, Communism and British Intellectuals. 45. 
Gosplan: State General Planning Commission, was instituted to co-ordinate planning 
between the agricultural and industrial sectors of the economy.
Ibid., 43-45.
R.A. Medvedev, Let Historv Judge - The Origins and Consequences of Stalinism. (New  
York, 1971), xviii.
and lawlessness, Stalinism 'was a time of great accomplishments both at home 
and abroad/ Stalins own, much quoted statement in 1931 that we are fifty or a 
hundred years behind the advanced countries. We must make good this distance in 
ten years. Either we do it, or we shall go under, identifies the material basis of 
Stalinism.
For the British Party, the influence of Bolshevism had been dynamic. It had 
taken the CPGB from a disparate collection of propagandist organisations to a 
relatively effective, coherent organisation of working class militants and 
intellectuals. When the CPGB began life in 1920, it was inspired by a party and its 
leadership which, against all the odds and its own predictions, had led the Russian 
working class to power. Post-revolutionary Bolshevism (the RCP (B)) recognised 
that British Communism was operating under a stiflingly bureaucratic tradition of 
trade unionism which, nevertheless, retained the allegiance of British workers. 
Lenin recognised these particular problems when he devoted a chapter to Britain in 
Left Wing Communism. An Infantile Disorder. Trotsky also focused upon the 
political development of England which, he recognised, presents remarkable 
peculiarities...which now lie directly in the way of its future growth'.  Although J R. 
Campbell appealed to the ECCI to recognise these peculiarities in May 1927, Braun 
of the German KPD, nevertheless accused the CPGB and its MP, Saklatvala, of 
Parliamentary cretinism. Lenins and Trotskys understanding of the British 
problem was in contrast to this insistence upon the unconditional acceptance of a 
line that was evident by 1927."
Ibid. xxvi; Also see Khruschev, T h e  Crimes of the Stalin Era, 13-14.
 Stalin, T h e  Tasks of Economic Administrators, Speech to First All-Union Conference of 
Managers of Socialist Industry, February 193T Collected Works [13 vols], vol 13 (Moscow, 
1953), 37.
 Lenin, Left Wing Communism. An Infantile Disorder. 75-88.
 Trotsky, Leon Trotsky on Britain (New York, 1973) 26.
 14*   Plenary Session, ECCI, (26 May 1927), 75, Manchester, DOC K/132.
" Conditions of Admission to the Communist International Report of Proceedings of the 
Second Congress of the Communist International (Moscow 1920), 531-537, MML. Condition 
16: the Communist International and the Executive Committee are naturally bound in every 
form of their activity to consider the variety of conditions under which different parties have 
to work...binding resolutions should be passed only on such questions upon which such 
resolutions are possible, ibid., 535.
Continuity and Discontinuity
Campbell's experience reflected an identifiable change between the post
revolutionary period and the end of the 1920s. The way this affected the CPGB is 
dealt with in the main body of the thesis. It was not just a change of attitude by the 
ECCI but also signalled a decisive discontinuity for Bolshevism. The British Party 
leadership consistently denied that any fundamental change had taken place. For 
Stephen F. Cohen, however, how and why this shift occurred should have become 
the quintessential historical question for debate.   Cohen continued, of all the 
questions raised by the Bolshevik revolution and its outcome, none is larger, more 
complex, or more important than that of the relationship between Bolshevism and 
Stalinism. Both fervent supporters of Soviet Communism as well as its equally 
fervent detractors, however, until recently, stressed the continuities, rather than the 
discontinuities, between Bolshevism and Stalinism.
Cohen dealt specifically with this continuity thesis. Asking why it was that 
the distinction between Bolshevism and Stalinism produced very little dispute in 
academic Soviet studies, he answered, saying that, during the expansion of the 
field between the late 1940s and 1960s, a remarkable consensus of interpretation 
formed on the subject. This implicit consensus relied upon a deterministic view of 
early Bolshevism which detected everywhere, practices and structures leading, 
inevitably, to Stalinism. It also involved the arbitrary application of a teleology in 
which reading history backward, projecting Stalinist outcomes on the Soviet past 
constituted, according to Cohen, a Sovietological version of Whig history. Cohen 
identified a consensus within academic writing of the Cold War school in the USA, 
which located Stalinisms totalitarian aspects within the very nature of Bolshevism 
and the revolution of 1917. Merle Fainsod summed up this position, observing that 
out of the totalitarian embryo would come totalitarianism full blown. FI. Gordon 
Skilling, however, referring to Stalinism in Czechoslovakia, wrote that although 
labelled Bolshevik by Stalin, the characteristics of the remodelled party were 
closer to the practice and doctrine of Stalin in the late twenties than of Lenin and 
the Bolsheviks. The stress on historical continuity between Bolshevism and 
Stalinism has survived the collapse of the Soviet Union. Robert Service, for
 Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet Experience. 38. 
 Ibid.
^lbid., 38-70.
 Ibid., 39.
 Ibid., 20. '
 Fainsod, Flow Russia is Ruled, 59.
 FI G. Skilling, Stalinism and Czechoslovak Political Culture in Stalinism: Essays in 
Flistorical Interpretation R.C. Tucker, ed. (New York, 1977), 261.
example, in 1992, though replacing the epithet, totalitarianism, with authoritarian 
aspects, implying that such authoritarianism was uniquely Bolshevik, identified 
these aspects as embryonic Stalinism, as he wrote that the Bolsheviks...added to 
the dimension of political ruthlessness. Former Soviet historian and Peoples 
Deputy, Yuri Afanasyev, on other hand, was clear that Stalinism was 
counterrevolutionary, saying I do not accept this totalitarian course as inevitable, 
necessary or social ist.Shei la Fitzpatrick has recently identified an evolution 
within Sovietology, from the postwar years where generous US government 
funding, encouraging the project of understanding the enemy was superseded in 
the 1970s, by a new generation consisting mainly of social historians.'  Fitzpatrick 
identified a third phase, focusing on Stalinism as a culture. Since then, following 
perestroika and the collapse of the Soviet Union, accessibility to archives and to 
oral historical subjects has opened up the field considerably. The thesis does not 
ignore these recent developments but is concerned with the first phase of Cold War 
historiography which dominated the 1950s perception of Stalinism.
On the other side of the Cold War divide, those proclaiming the Soviet Union 
as socialist also located Stalinisms antecedence within Bolshevism and Marxist 
ideology. A spectrum existed across which the ideas of this latter group ranged. At 
one end, unrepentant Stalinists took the view that, by eliminating the Kulaks and 
collectivising the peasantry, Stalinism had fundamentally achieved socialism by 
1931. At the other end were those who, while admitting that the USSR was not 
socialist, nevertheless saw Stalins achievements in industrialisation and agriculture 
as pre-conditions towards achieving this goal. Marxists have agreed that socialism 
could not be achieved without the increases in material resources that had been 
brought about by, for example, capitalist industrialisation. Many Communists drew a 
crudely utilitarian conclusion from this, maintaining that, as long as the desired ends 
were achieved, then the means were justifiable or irrelevant. Flarry Pollitt reflected 
this utilitarianism when he wrote, in 1956, we must never forget, that when the 
errors and abuses occurred, they occurred within the framework of a profound 
socialist advance and transformation. In 1956, when British Communism was 
wracked with collective anguish following Khruschevs revelations at the CPSU 20th 
Congress, P.P. Dutt commented, infamously, that there should be spots on any
 R. Service, The Russian Revolution 1900-1927 (London, 1992), 75.
 Y. Afanasyev, interview with S.F Cohen and Katrina Vanden Heuvel in Voices of Glasnost 
^New York, 1989), 102.
 S. Fitzpatrick, Stalinism New Directions (London, 2000), 2-3.
 Ibid., 3.
 H. Pollitt, The 20*   Congress of the CPSU and the Role of Stalin, World News. 3: 16 (21 
April 1956), 279.
sun would only startle an inveterate Mithra-worshipper. If one end of this 
spectrum of ideas viewed the Soviet Union as socialist, the other characterised it as 
a workers state in transition to socialism.
The challenge to the Cold War paradigm of a direct line of continuity 
between Bolshevism and Stalinism began with Trotsky, who saw the rise of Stalin 
as representing a reaction or even a counter-revolution. Trotsky characterised 
Stalin as a secondary figure before the masses and in the events of the revolution, 
but who later revealed himself as the indubitable leader of the Thermidorien 
bureaucracy.According to Cohen, the challenge to the continuity thesis was left 
largely to Trotskyists (and lapsed Trotskyists)...suffered from an excess of idiomatic 
Marxist labeling and has been unduly ignored by scholars.
Several sets of circumstances militated against the revolutionary initiative 
...spirit of self-sacrifice and plebeian pride which Trotsky saw as carrying the 
revolution forward in its early stages. The first was the virtual destruction of the 
working class by revolutionary civil war between 1917 and 1921. This coincided 
with an expansion of the RCP (B) and the gradual substitution of party cadres into 
areas of government that had previously been subject to Soviet Power. This 
process towards Party dictatorship, while not necessarily altering the actual 
personnel, nevertheless represented a widening gap between workers and 
government. A few days after the October revolution, Lenin urged, Comrades, 
Workers Remember you yourselves now administer the state...unite and take all 
the affairs of the state into your own h a n d s . B y  1919, as the destruction of the 
proletariat and its substitution by Party members developed, Lenin was forced to 
defend the process, saying yes, the dictatorship of one party We stand upon it and 
cannot depart from this ground, since this is the party which in the course of
R.P. Dutt, The Great Debate, Labour Monthly. 38: 5 (May 1956).
 In Marxism, Socialism describes a period after the seizure of working class power when 
abolition of private property and redistribution of resources precedes the move to the 
classless society described as Communist; the first phase of communism (usually called 
socialism), Lenin, State and Revolution . (Moscow, 1981), 89.
Marx described the workers state or dictatorship of the proletariat as an instrument of 
class rule. The Civil War in France (Peking, 1977), 236. The history of the Paris Commune 
of 1871 analysed the natures of bourgeois and proletarian states. A workers state would be 
as much an instrument of class rule as the bourgeois state it must smash, though it would 
differ radically in form: the governmental force of repression and authority over society was 
thus to be broken in its merely repressive organs, and where it had legitimate functions to 
fulfil, these functions were not to be exercised by a body superior to the society, but by the 
responsible agents of society itself, ibid., 243.
 Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed, 88-93.
Ibid.
Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet Experience.41.
Trotsky, The Revolution Betrayed. 88.
Lenin, Collected Works. [45 vols.) vol. 22 (Moscow, 1960), 55.
decades has won for itself the position of vanguard of the whole factory and 
industrial proletariat.
A second circumstance came about for essentially practical reasons. 
Trotsky, as Peoples Commissar for War, first put before the Central Executive of 
the Soviets, the idea of recruiting ex-Tsarist officers to build and run the Red 
ArmyT^ Trotsky explained, as industry needs engineers, as farming needs 
qualified agronomists, so military specialists are indispensable to d e fe n c e .T h e  
Red Armys success in the civil war may have encouraged Lenin to demand a 
similar strategy for government administration once peace had been attained. In 
1921, Lenin announced that, for the revolution, while previously, the key feature 
was an orderly retreat...in the present situation the key feature is people , choose 
the proper men and introduce practical control. That is what the people will 
appreciate. A s  the proportion of workers in the Party in 1921 fell to 41 per cent, 
many key administrative posts were taken by ex-Tsarist officials. Even when the 
working class constituted a majority in the Party, its lack of administrative expertise 
gave it less influence over the execution of policy than those experts and 
technocrats who had, initially, been recruited as employees and were later 
rewarded with Party membership.^
A third circumstance distorted the revolutionary trajectory of Bolshevism. 
This was precipitated by a scrutiny of party members in 1921 under the 
supervision of a central verification committee, with the intention of purging non- 
communist elements. This reduced party membership from more than 650,000 
to under 500,000.^^ Combined with the previous post-revolutionary expansion, this 
purge resulted in an overwhelming majority of the party members...composed of 
adherents who had joined during the civil war. Their main if not their only 
experience in party and Soviet politics had therefore been during a period of vicious 
war and of particularly highhanded and coercive m e thods .A f te r  the initiation of
" Ibid., vol.24, 423.
 Trotsky outlined this strategy to the Moscow Soviet on 19 March 1918. He re-stated it on 
21 March and on 28 March 1918. See Deutscher, The Prophet Armed. 405-447.
' Ibid., 408.
 Lenin, Speech to 11th Party Congress RCP (B) 1922, Collected Works, vol.33., 279.
 See Carr, Socialism in One Countrv. 1924-1926. vol. I, 89-136. Quoting Zinoviev, Carr 
wrote that the structure of Soviet society had been further complicated by the emergence of 
another group, sometimes referred to as the commanding staff or officer corps and 
comprising specialists, technicians, administrators and professional men...in the service of 
the Soviet Government...This group was distinguished from the new bourgeoisie" by the 
fact that it...cdntrolled no means of production, ibid., 103. .
1* Ibid., 211-215.
11 Ibid.
I ll  Lewin, The Making of the Soviet Svstem. 23.
the New Economic Policy (NEP), a further recruitment drive brought hundreds of 
thousands of new members into the party...often illiterate workers. ^ A t  the same 
time, the bureaucratic machinery of the Party was expanding under the auspices of 
Stalins secretariat. Members within this machinery were not expected to act as 
political or ideological leaders, but served as loyal functionaries to the secretariat. 
Many of those recruited during this phase constituted the Stalin faction in the 
Politburo and on the Central Committee throughout the 1920s.
Most importantly, the momentum was arrested following the failure of 
revolutionary activity in the rest of Europe. Whatever differences -  real or 
concocted -  may have existed between Trotskys ideas on permanent revolution 
and Lenins thoughts about the possibilities for successful revolution in Russia, both 
agreed that the Russian revolution, as Carr emphasised, was to be merely the 
forerunner of the much more important German, European and eventually world
wide proletarian revolution, and was indeed dependent on such a revolution for its 
own su rv iva l .C a r r  continued, if the temporary headquarters of the proletarian 
world revolution had been set up in Russia, this was no more than an unexpected 
and rather disconcerting a c c id e n t . T h e  failure of European revolution to 
materialise following 1918 remains the single most important factor in the 
subsequent failure of the Russian revolution to survive, either as a workers state or 
into socialism.
Examples from the economic and social areas of Soviet life, before and after 
Stalins victory, clarify the discontinuities between Bolshevism and Stalinism. It has 
been estimated that by 1928, there were 30,000 people in internment camps in the 
USSR.  By 1931, after three years of the first five year plan, there were two 
million, and by 1933-5, this had increased to five million.   Wages and salaries 
were another area where developments in the Soviet Union under Stalin ran 
counter to the aspirations of 1917. Lenin wrote of the initial stage of revolution, that 
as equality is achieved for all members of society in relation to ownership of the 
means of production, that is, equality of labour and wages, humanity will inevitably
Ibid., 24.
Carr, Socialism in One Countrv. vol.1, 25. Lenin, The April Theses. 42-55.
Carr, Socialism in One Countrv. 25.
'Socialism in One Country was first mooted by Bukharin, adopted by Stalin in May 1924. 
See Stalin, The Foundations of Leninism The Problems of Leninism. 228.
Cliff, Russia. A Marxist analysis. 30.
D.J. Dallin and B.l. Nicolaevsky, Forced Labour in Soviet Russia (London, 1948), 54-62.
be confronted with the question of advancing further.^ L e n i n  saw wage 
equalisation as a pre-condition for socialist advance and talked about the need to 
organise the whole economy...so that the technicians, foremen and accountants, as 
well as all officials, shall receive salaries no higher than a workmans wage.^ 
Following the seizure of power, the Bolsheviks consciously sought such objectives 
and by 1921, equalisation of wages was in progress to such an extent that the 
difference between formerly highly and low-paid workers was virtually zero.^^
Following implementation of the NEP in 1921, such equality, while subject to 
legislation, was already being eroded. By March 1926, the average industrial wage 
was 58.64 rubles, whilst factory managers' salaries were 187.90 rubles for Party 
members and 309.50 rubles for others.Although this represented a reversal 
under what Lenin described as the state capitalism" of the NEP period, wage 
differentials continued to be subject to law until 1929.^^   In this year, following the 
inauguration of the first five year plan in 1928, the law limiting the income of Party 
members was first modified, then jettisoned altogether and the general law of 
wages of 1920 was scrapped, leaving the country with virtually no wage legislation. 
By 1937, Victor Serge noted that the extreme inequality of wages bewilders the 
observer and makes possible various statistical camouflages, the least of which 
consists in recording an average wage that is really a good deal higher than the 
wage of the great majority.^ ^
Following its victory, the Stalin faction reversed much of the revolutions 
social legislation. For example, unless justified under strict medical conditions, one 
of the revolutions most progressive achievements, the right to free abortion, was 
finally outlawed in 1935. Homosexuality was re-criminalised, attracting a penalty of 
three years in prison. Capital punishment was restored for theft and, in April 1935,
Lenin, State and Revolution. 94.
Ibid. 50. Published quotation marks.
Figures quoted in Cliff, Russia. A Marxist Analysis. 54.
Ibid., 55.
State capitalism is capitalism that we must confine within certain bounds; but we have 
not yet learned to confine it, Lenin, Speech to 11th Congress, RCP (B) Collected Works. 
vol.33, 279. As the NEP developed, the States role diminished in favour of Kulaks and 
independent traders called NEPmen. De-Kulakization at the end of the 1920s coincided with 
an increase in the role of the State in an economy where exploitation of labour, 
expropriation of surplus value and accumulation, for Marx, essential characteristics of 
capitalism, were intensified.
V. Serge, Russia Twentv Years After (New York, 1937), 3. Serge lived in the Soviet 
Union between 1919 and 1936. He was a member of the ECCI before his expulsion from 
the Soviet Union in 1936.
was applied to children as young as 12. Divorce, from being a matter of mutual 
desire for separation under the Bolsheviks, became proscribed with a range of 
fiscal and legal obstacles in order to strengthen the family.
The Bolsheviks had wrestled with a contradiction between revolutionary 
political aspirations and economic backwardness.^^ If Stalinism can be defined as 
a single phenomenon, it was the abandonment of these revolutionary aspirations in 
favour of an unrestrained drive towards industrialisation at any cost. The imperative 
to justify the cost, paid by the victims of famine, torture and execution, can serve as 
one criterion by which it is possible to describe any one person or group as 
Stalinist. The primitive accumulation of capital through exploitation of both wage 
and slave labour and totalitarian forms of political and legal repression, represented 
a defeat for the revolution rather than a development of it.
Within modern Sovietology it is possible to identify three constituents that, 
together, combine to define the phenomenon of Stalinism. The first and most 
obvious is the cult of personality which successfully propagandised a particular kind 
of state power both in the USSR and abroad. Secondly, there is the series of 
sometimes adroit, often fortuitous and reactive, manoeuvres by which such power 
passed into the hands of one particular faction. This took place within a political 
structure where the internal rules which dictated behaviour and placed limits on the 
extent to which conflicts could be pursued, were fluid and subject to constant re- 
invention. Within this structure, there was no constitutional brake on the ruthless 
prosecution of the ambitions of the strongest and least principled faction. Men such 
as Zinoviev, Kamenev and Bukharin remained, up until their respective falls, in a 
state of unbelief at the lengths to which their comrade was prepared to go to 
achieve ascendancy. Bukharin, following Stalins defeat of the United Opposition of 
Zinoviev, Kamenev and Trotsky, attempted a rapprochement with Kamenev in the 
hope of surviving as the Right opposition within the Politburo. His words to 
Kamenev imply a great deal more than a man fighting merely for political survival; 
he will strangle us. He is an unprincipled intriguer who subordinates everything to 
his appetite for power. At any given moment he will change his theories in order to 
get rid of someone.
Ibid., 24-25 and 186-190.
Economic backwardness was not uniform. Trotsky, in History of the Russian Revolution 
(London, 1934), noted combined and uneven development in all but the most backward 
areas of the economy. Economist, Preobrazhensky, shared these ideas and, in 1924, wrote 
a report entitled 'The Fundamental Law of Socialist Accumulation stressing the 
expropriation of the surplus product of the country for the broadening of socialist production, 
cited in Carr, Socialism in One Countrv. 219.
Cited in Deutscher, Stalin. 315.
This Inability to come to terms with the implications of Stalins ambition was 
not political naivete, but was endemic within Bolshevism itself. The party under 
Lenin had never shirked from acrimonious verbal debate while members continued 
in fundamental comradeship, never expecting to be purged, exiled or assassinated 
as a result of such disagreements. This, as Cohen pointed out, was one of the 
qualitative differences between Leninist Bolshevism and the systematic crushing of 
all opposition that typified the regime under Stalin.
Most importantly, Stalinism was a socio-economic phenomenon that utilised 
state power mercilessly in the pursuit of rapid industrialisation. The millions who 
died, suffered within slave camps or whose labour power was exploited to an 
almost unprecedented degree, were forgotten by Khruschev in his 1956 
condemnation of Stalin. This omission, not only shifted the focus away from the true 
nature of the Stalinist system, but allowed elements of it to continue or to be 
reintroduced. Whilst these three aspects of Stalinism can be viewed discretely, they 
were, nevertheless, dependent upon each other as factors in the survival and 
promulgation of the Soviet social and economic system and, as such, form 
constituent parts of a whole definition. Whilst such a definition may be incomplete, 
it, nevertheless, forms a reference point for a term which has often been applied as 
if it required no definition whatsoever.
Even after western Communist Parties had formally repudiated Stalinism 
(or at least the most unpalatable bits of it), after 1956, very few accepted the logic 
that such a system could not be called socialist and both the misnomers of 
socialism and Communism continued to be applied to the Soviet Union. This has 
created problems of definition when attempting to analyse an organisation whose 
members were socialists but believed in the verisimilitude between the Soviet Union 
and their own principles. This thesis focuses upon these contradictory aspects 
within British Communism that existed, not only between the USSR and Britain but, 
crucially, within the minds of individual Communists.
It is impossible to produce a calculus to quantify the net effect of Stalinism 
on the ability of millions of people worldwide to radically alter the terms and 
conditions under which they lived. Examples of Stalinisms regressive effects have 
been well documented: China, in April 1926 when thousands of Communists were 
murdered by the Stalin backed Kuomintang, Germany where Communists (KPD) 
were forbidden to work alongside the Social Fascist SPD against the rise of 
Nazism, and Barcelona where Trotsky-fascist members of the POUM and CNT
127 Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet Experience. 48-9.
were rounded up, tortured and killed in their hundreds by Spanish Communist Party 
troops. These incidents militate against the idea that the regime in Moscow and the 
world movement that supported it were, on balance, a positive force for socialist 
change throughout the twentieth century. As Roy Medvedev put it, By his crimes, 
Stalin did not help, he hindered, he did not accelerate, he slowed the peoples 
movement to socialism and communism in the Soviet Union and the whole world. In 
some respects Stalin even turned this movement backw ard .The  insistence that 
Stalinism, in spite of its crimes and mistakes was nevertheless, in Voltaires 
phrase, the best of all possible worlds remained the received wisdom of most 
Communists.
Although impossible to quantify, the thesis attempts to understand to what 
extent Stalinism in Britain turned the movement backward and to what extent the 
progressive elements within it can be seen as having been positive. The thesis 
analyses this question from the CPGBs position within the political superstructure. 
The chapters on the Partys industrial intervention are seen from this political 
perspective, rather than from the point of view of labour history. There is no doubt 
that Communist industrial intervention can be seen as a positive contribution in the 
fight for better wages and conditions. As these chapters demonstrate, however, the 
Partys confusion between trade unionism and socialist politics meant that it saw 
the winning of wage demands or the election of Communist trade union leaders as 
necessarily equating to an advance for socialism.
The Party never had a mass political base, either for the representation it 
enjoyed within the bureaucracy of trade unions or to justify a parliamentary strategy. 
The questions the thesis asks are firstly, was the adoption of these strategies a 
realistic attempt to build such a political base for British Communism? Or were they 
a response to the lack of such a mass base; a despairing attempt by the Party to 
live up to its inflated claims about its institutional significance and its hegemonic 
position on the left of British politics? Any study of Communism during this period 
cannot avoid the impact of the events of 1956. Khruschevs secret speech in 
February and his suppression of the Hungarian uprising in November had a 
profound effect upon the Party and precipitated the departure of over 7,000 
members. The thesis, however, does not characterise these events as the cause of 
any subsequent decline, but sees them as a symptom, both of the longer term 
decline of British Communism and of the destructive nature of Stalinism. 1956 
demonstrated to many that, what had been characterised as a synthesis between
Medvedev, Let History Judge, xxxi.
revolutionary Bolshevism and British revolutionary aspirations was, in fact, a 
contradiction between something else called Stalinism and left-wing social 
democracy.
Chapter 1 
Communists or Cold Warriors?
United Communist Party of Great Britain constituted today on following
bases:- Adoption of Soviet system for achieving power by the workers.
Proletarian Dictatorship as means of combating counter-revolution.
Adherence to Third International.
Parliamentary action as means of revolutionary propaganda and agitation.
Affiliation to Labour Party as a revolutionary tactic.
Party expresses joy at being able to march hand in hand with great
Russian and other Communist Parties of the world.
Long live the Russian Soviet Republic
Long live the Third International
Long live Communism^
During the 1950s, the Party's membership and its periphery were forced to 
focus upon and question, the relationship between British Communism and the 
Soviet Union. Although 1956 was the year characterised as one of revelations, of 
engendering shock and turmoil and precipitated an exodus of over 7,000 
members, doubts about Stalinism had existed before this time.^ Max Morris, for 
example, remembered that in 1953, he had complained...in the CP Executive... 
over reports of Soviet anti-Semitism.   In contrast to the prevailing attitude within 
the wider population during World War II when, as Morris Schaer recalled, they 
used to say Joe Stalin for King, by the 1950s, following the formation of Bevin s 
Communist Information Department, this situation had altered significantly."* Not 
only had Attlees government reoriented British sympathies against the Soviet 
Union, but there was also an increase in propaganda and activity against 
Communism domestically. According to Peter Wright, in 1955, MI5 initiated 
Operation Party Piece, when agents invaded the Mayfair flat of a wealthy Party 
member and recorded 55,000 files over the course of a weekend.^ This typically 
absurd operation to obtain already available information nevertheless reflected 
contemporary attitudes towards the CPGB and its relationship with the Soviet 
Union. Wright even claimed it as the final proof of MI5s post-war mastery over its 
rivals on the other side of the iron curtain.
  'Telegram to ECCI of the Third International, Communist Unity Convention Official Report.
(July 31 and Aug 1 1920), 59., MML 
Taking Stock, The Reasoner. 1 (JTaking Stock, The Reasoner. 1 (July 1956), 4.
 Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998. Morris was on the Executive Committee of the 
CPGB during.the period covered by the thesis.
Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997.
 P. Wright with Paul Greengrass, Sovcatcher (Richmond, Victoria, 1987), 54-56.
 Ibid., 56.
Both the Cold War and the stifling bi-Party consensus which, according to 
Leo Panitch, developed in terms of a common response to the difficulties which 
beset British capitalism, affected the direction of the CPGB/ In the 1950s, the 
Cold War and quasi-corporatism constituted the context within which British 
Communism operated. The Party synthesised its support for the Soviet Union as 
the antithesis of Western capitalism with aspirations to leading a popular front 
within Britain, in opposition to the prevailing corporatism of the period. The Partys 
adoption of The British Road to Socialism in 1951 and the particular circumstances 
of the Cold War, both gave the popular front strategy of the 1950s a somewhat 
different coloration to that of the 1930s which is described briefly below. The most 
obvious expression of this was in 1950, when the Party stood 100 candidates in 
opposition to Labour reformism and Labour imperialism. In the 1930s, the 
struggle was against Fascism and the National Government, whereas in the 
1950s, it was pitched against the USA, as the main representative of Western 
imperialism and a British government in pawn to the United States.
John Callaghan called The British Road to Socialism an abrupt 
conversion to Parliamentary reformism.  The programme, according to Moreen 
Branson, was first mooted in the summer of 1950 following a visit by Harry Pollitt 
to the Soviet Union, during which he had a discussion about the British political 
situation with Stalin who had suggested that the British Party needed a long-term 
programme.Callaghan saw the CPGB as being hustled into a programme of 
parliamentary reformism.M i l o v a n  Djilas reinforced this perspective, as he 
recalled Stalin declaring that today socialism is possible even under the English 
monarchy. Revolution is no longer necessary.  Despite its claim to be carrying 
forward the traditions and socialist aims of the British working class, the new 
programme was explicitly Stalinist as it referred to the establishment of Socialism 
...through Peoples Democracy...as in the Peoples Democracies of Eastern 
E u r o p e . I n  1920, the Party had called for adoption of Soviet system for
  L. Panitch, Social Democracy and Industrial Militancv: The Labour Partv, the Trade Unions 
and Incomes Policy 1945-1974 (Cambridge, 1976), 2.
" British Road to Socialism (London. 1951) 6.
 D. Kartun, America Go Home (London, 1951) 14.
J. Callaghan, Raiani Palme Dutt: A Study in British Stalinism (London, 1993), 239. The 
programme emerged, to a large extent, from Pollitts book, Looking Ahead, published in 
1947 (London, 1947).
N. Branson, History of the Communist Partv of Great Britain [2 vols] vol.2, 1941-1951 
(London, 1997.), 232.
Callaghan, Raiani Palme Dutt. 239.
Stalin cited in M. Djilas, Conversations with Stalin (London, 1962), 104.
The British Road to Socialism. (London, 1951), 14.
achieving power by the workers and for Proletarian Dictatorship.   The British 
Road to Socialism rejected this, defending a hitherto unexpressed position as it 
declared, the enemies of Communism accuse the Communist Party of aiming to 
introduce Soviet Power in Britain and abolish Parliament. This is a slanderous 
misrepresentation of our policy. 
To what extent the analysis emerged from Pollitts discussions with Stalin 
and how much it was a British perspective, is unclear. It was, however, an analysis 
which took little account of the Labour Partys record in office. The analysis was 
influenced by Labours huge majority at the 1945 general election as well as the 
CPGBs own modest achievement with the election of Phil Piratin and Willie 
Gallacher. The programme which emerged, saw the 1945 election as proof that 
the people of Britain were determined that there should be a change. B y  1951, 
however, such optimism receded in the face of British political realities with the 
programme identifying the right-wing leadership as supporting the privileges and 
profits of the capitalists.  The Labour leadership, the programme claimed, was 
disrupting and demoralising the Labour movement...preventing the building up 
of...an alliance between militant trade unionists, co-operatives, and...sections of 
the Labour Party, along with the Communist Party which, together, would form the 
basis of a Peoples Government.  By 1951, the CPGB had lost its MPs and was 
losing ground in local elections.^ In addition, the Party was increasingly under 
attack from anti-Communist and anti-Soviet propaganda.
The CPGB responded to the quasi-corporatism dominating British politics 
and industrial relations during the 1950s by attempting to build a new popular front 
in opposition to the barely distinguishable policies of the two established parties.
It had become an oppositionist, rather than a revolutionary party. It attempted to 
maintain this oppositionist position with a Marxist-Leninist ideology, structure and 
language, whilst at the same time, adopting the practice of radical parliamentary 
reformism. Along with the incompatibility between its Stalinist association and the 
socialist aspirations of its members, this represented another contradiction within
Communist Unity Convention Official Report. 59. MML, London.
The British Road to Socialism. 14.
Ibid.. 4.
Ibid., 15.
^lbid., 15 and 14.
See below Chapter 3.
Pan itch. Social Democracy and Industrial Militancv. 4, 226 and 234. Also see S. Beer, 
T h e  Comparative Method and The Study of British Politics, Comparative Politics. 1:1 
(1968) who talked of the new group politics...the system of quasi-corporatism bringing 
government and producers groups into intimate and continuous relationship.
British Communism. The Partys industrial intervention reflected this contradiction 
in a characteristic dualism between rank and file militancy on the one hand and 
bureaucratic electoralism on the other. The existence of this duality and its 
potential for conflict within the corporate climate of 1950s Britain was rarely 
articulated. Rank and file intervention, in the fortuitous upsurge of industrial 
militancy in 1957, proved a significant factor in rescuing the Party from the crisis of 
1956. Its penetration into the upper echelons of British trade unionism, however, 
damaged the Partys credibility when the Communist leadership of the Electricians 
Unions were found guilty of conspiracy in 1961.^^
Stalinism was a crucial factor in the Partys inability and unwillingness to 
position itself as a revolutionary Marxist alternative to the Labour Party. The CPGB 
not only refused to recognise the negative practices of the Soviet regime, but also 
failed to understand the ideologically destructive nature of Stalinism. Members 
criticised their leaders for ignoring the show trials, post-war anti-Semitism and 
other expressions of state terror. Although 1956 raised these issues amongst 
members, however, only a minority saw them as irreconcilable with socialism. 
Even fewer asked how and why their Party had been transformed from a socialist 
organisation to a Soviet propaganda machine on the one hand and a radical 
reformist party on the other.
The following chapter studies the effects of Moscows influence upon the 
British Party from 1920 onwards. The CPGB remained convinced that adhesion to 
Moscow, combined with a blindly optimistic electoral strategy would eventually 
produce results. Association with the powerful Soviet state contributed to political 
arrogance; the smug and supremely self-righteous belief that it was acting in the 
interests of the working class.   This, along with a persistent sectarianism, 
particularly toward those identifying themselves as socialist, continued throughout 
the Partys history.
The small size of the British Party meant that Moscows influence was less 
subject to critical assessment from a wider and more variegated membership. The 
CPGB had a limited theoretical tradition. There was no one of the credibility of 
Gramsci or even Louis Althusser and, since its inauguration, the British Party had 
relied, firstly upon theoretical heavyweights like Lenin and Trotsky and later, on the 
dubious talents of Stalin. Beginning with the Russian Revolution, through anti- 
Fascism and finally during World War II, the CPGB had accumulated prestige
See below, chapters 6-8.
E.P. Thompson to Bert Ramelson, 28 May 1956, Manchester, CP/CentOrg/18/04.
through its association with the Soviet Union. By the time of the Cold War, the 
effects of this association had become more negative. The Party, however, stuck 
to its Gold War guns, persisting with propaganda about the superiority of the 
Soviet system over Western capitalism.
Whether, had the CPGB broken with Moscow, it could have reconstructed 
itself as a Marxist alternative to the ideologically integrative Labour Party, is 
unanswerable.^'* Later configurations, such as the Euro-Communist trend that 
coalesced around the journal, Marxism Todav. would suggest not, however. Like 
their Stalinist predecessors, these people remained sectarian towards those to 
their left and retained an intellectually elitist attitude to the labour movement. 
Although sporting a new Gramscian label, this coalition of repentant Althusserians, 
disenchanted loyalists and born again social-democrats continued to manifest an 
abhorrence towards ideas about revolution.^^ Instead, they persisted along the 
same idealistic trajectory that, like the CPGB in the 1950s, sought to build a 
popular front, often with people with no interest in socialism or even the radical 
reform of capitalism. Although they discarded the explicit Stalinism of their 
predecessors, the contradiction between claims to Marxist ideology and reformist 
practice became more pronounced. As Raphael Samuel said of the Marxism 
Today faction, they continued to cleave...to traditional Party verities and like 
Communists of old their self-image is first and foremost as strategists, 
masterminding realignment on the left.  Although this formations industrial 
intervention went largely unnoticed, Samuel observed that they saw themselves as 
architects, in the trade union movement, of a new realism, hegemonic in their 
vision where the Labour Party is merely corporatist, pacemakers and pathfinders 
for the British Left.^
Bolshevism, the Comintern and the CPGB
On 31 July and 1 August 1920, in London, at the Cannon Street Hotel and 
at the International Socialist Club respectively. The Communist Unity Convention 
declared the formation of the Communist Party of Great Britain. The Joint 
Provisional Committee of Communist Unity summoned 152 delegates. Formed 
after protracted negotiations, the Committee represented the British Socialist Party
Panitch, Social Democracy and Industrial Militancv. 2.
R. Samuel,' Class Politics: The Lost World of British Communism, Part Three New Left 
Review. 165 (January to February1987), 53.
^^Tbid~
Ibid.
(BSP), a descendent of H.M. Hyndmans Social-Democratic Federation (SDF), the 
Communist Unity Group and the South Wales Communist Council. Delegates 
came from a variety of organisations including the Socialist Labour Party (SLP), 
shop-stewards movements of Clydeside and South Wales and revolutionary 
elements of G.D.H. Cole's Guild Socialists.^
This convention coincided with the Second World Congress of the Third 
International at which Zinoviev, the first President of its Executive Committee, 
outlined twenty one conditions to which affiliated Communist Parties around the 
world should adhere.^ Conditions 15 and 16 demanded programmes based upon 
the Third Internationals programme and the formation of national parties bound 
both by Comintern Congress and ECCI decisions. This was a tactic to force 
centrist organisations such as the USPD (Unabhangige Social Demokratische 
Partei Deutschlands), effectively the left wing of the SPD, to break with reformist 
politics and embrace revolutionary methods. Given the subsequent history of world 
Communism, this could be seen as an attempt at Soviet domination of the 
Comintern, later manipulated so decisively by Stalin. This, however, takes 
insufficient account of the preoccupation of leading Russian Communists at this 
fragile stage of the revolution; the necessity of a German revolution.
The London Convention made three crucial decisions. The first was an 
immediate and unanimous decision to affiliate to the Third International under 
Zinovievs conditions. Secondly, the convention voted in favour of parliamentary 
activity and thirdly, by a majority of 100 to 85 it agreed to apply for affiliation to the 
Labour Party.  Lenin outlined the tactic of affiliation in Left Wing Communism an 
Infantile Disorder. In his fraternal message to the Unity Convention, he reiterated 
that he was personally...in favour of participation in Parliament and of adhesion to 
the Labour Party on condition of free and independent Communist activity. This 
was not a proposal for entryism but a medium term strategy to orient on what was
The Independent Labour Party (ILP) was involved later. Dutt had been part of a Marxist 
group within this organisation and in 1921, he, Emile Burns, E.H. Brown, S. Saklatvala, 
Helen Crawford and J. Walton Newbold joined the CPGB. Sylvia Pankhursts Workers 
Socialist Federation (WSF) refused to collaborate on the basis of parliamentary activity and 
affiliation to the Labour Party. Minute details of this inauguration process appeared in 
Klugmann, History of the Communist Partv of Great Britain [2 Vols.], vol.1. Formation and 
Early Years (London. 1968) 13-74.
The Second Congress began in Petrograd on 19 July and continued in Moscow from 23 
July to 7 August 1920.
Report of Proceedings of The Second Congress of the Communist International 
(Moscow, 1920), 531-537. MML., London.
Communist Unitv Convention Official Report. 9 and 57.
Lenin, Left-Wing Communism an Infantile Disorder. 76-88.
Communist Unity Convention Official Report. 65.
still a fledgling institution with mass working class support. The political experience 
of the masses of a Labour government, wrote Lenin, would make them 
disappointed in their leaders and...begin to support communism.'^ Typically, 
however, he admitted, I cannot deal here with...the question of affiliation... have 
too little material at my disposal...in view of the peculiar character of the Labour 
Party .Despi te  subsequent, repeated rejections of its applications, the CPGB 
continued agitating around the question of Soviets versus the parliamentary 
democracy, utilising the tactic of the united front. T h i s  represented a decisive 
break with propagandist activity which had previously characterised British 
Marxism, to the sort of tactical flexibility that had provided the Bolsheviks with 
success.Lenins suggestion that Communists should stand for Parliament did not 
equate to a parliamentary road to socialism but was distinctively revolutionary. 
Lenin wrote that our soviet politicians task should be disrupting parliament from 
w / f / 7 / n . . .preparing the ground within parliament for the success of the soviets 
forthcoming task of dispersing parliament. 
The decision to adhere to the Comintern ensured British Communisms 
continuing fealty to the CPSU, regardless of that partys deteriorating Marxist 
authenticity and even despite the Cominterns dissolution. It is not clear whether 
members saw adherence to Moscow in devotional terms or whether they viewed it 
as a practical strategy through which the Party received the benefits of 
revolutionary experience and theoretical expertise in exchange for support for the 
fledgling revolution. It was a relationship that stimulated a momentum within British 
Marxism which, despite the setbacks of the 1920s as revolutionary possibilities 
receded, nevertheless sustained the Party until 1927.
The initial effects of adherence to Moscow contrast with the effects after 
1927. An example from this period demonstrates how, as circumstances and 
personnel changed in Moscow, British Communisms continuing loyalty had
^  Lenin, Left-Wing Communism an Infantile Disorder. 82.
 Ibid., 87.
 T. Bell, The British Communist Partv; A Short History (London, 1937), 67-68.
Trotsky defined the united front as our readiness, within certain limits and on specific 
issues, to correlate in practice our actions with those of reformist organisations. The First 
Five Years of the Communist International. [2 vols.] vol. 2 (New York, 1945), 91-95.
See Bell. Pioneering Days (London 1941) and Bell, The British Communist Partv. Bell had 
been a member of the Socialist Labour Party, a syndicalist organisation affiliated to the 
IW W  (Industrial Workers of the World).
Lenin, Left-Wing Communism an Infantile Disorder. 79.
different consequences.^ At its Ninth Congress in October 1927, the CPGB was 
still under the leadership of Albert Inkpin. Despite an accelerated drive, following 
the General Strike, to expel Communists from trade unions, the Party continued its 
efforts to establish its right to affiliation to the National Labour Party'."  The CPGB 
remained optimistic that the Labour Partys reactionary...and bureaucratic leaders 
could be replaced by militant working class fighters.'*  Two months later on 15 
December, however, Inkpin and Willie Gallacher attended a meeting of the ECCI 
where they were instructed to recognise that the slogan of a LP Govt under the 
control of the LP EC is wrong...that the main slogan should be the slogan of a 
revolutionary Labour Govt and that as a RULE no votes should be given for LP 
candidates.
This coincided with Stalins announcement at the 15   Congress of the 
CPSU, that the stabilization of capitalism had come to an end, that a series of 
revolutionary upsurges was imminent and that Communist Parties should begin a 
final offensive against capitalism. Stalin proclaimed co-operation with social 
democracy to be impossible and, henceforth, it was to be seen as the enemy of 
Communism and characterised as Social-Fascist. * This so-called left turn' by 
Stalin, also sloganised as Class against Class, announced traumatic changes 
within the Soviet Union with the implementation of the first five year plan. This 
demanded, among other things, the collectivisation of 20 per cent of all farms by 
1933.'*'* It also followed Trotskys expulsion from the Politburo in October 1926 and
A. Sobolev, ed., Outline History of the Communist International (Moscow, 1971). 
Contributors included Walter Ulbricht (SED), R.P. Dutt and A. Rothstein (CPGB). The 
contributors wrote, the sectarianism displayed during the class versus class tactic led, not 
to united action between Communists and socialists...It made it difficult for Communists to 
work among the masses for a united front...and made it easier for the reformist leaders to 
manoeuvre in their efforts to isolate the communist parties from the masses., 270. Also see 
James, World Revolution 1917-1936. 268-372. Also see D. Hallas The Comintern. (London,
1985), 123-138.
CPGB Ninth Annual Congress Report (London, 1927), 16, Manchester
CP/Cent/Cong/02/01.
'** Ibid
'*  Resolution of Small Commission of Presidium. ECCI (15 December 1927), Manchester, 
CP/IND/DUTT/14/4.
'* Stalins line on social democracy was not a development of the Bolshevik position. Lenin 
wrote, the majority of the workers in England still follow the lead of the English Kerenskys 
...it is true that the Hendersons, the Clynes, the MacDonalds and Snowdens are hopelessly 
reactionary, but Communists should support the Labour Party in the same way as a rope 
supports the hanged Left Wing Communism an Infantile Disorder. 78-86.
*'* Robert Conquest estimated 14.5 million deaths from famine and dekulakisation. 
Conquest, Harvest of Sorrow: Soviet Collectivisation and the Terror Famine (London. 1986), 
394. Whilst Conquests counterfactual calculation should be treated with caution, most 
commentators have calculated the figures in millions.
Zinovievs ejection from the presidency of the Comintern. Trotskys deportation to 
Alma Ata completed Stalins defeat of the United Opposition.
The first directive about the new turn came from Bukharin, who said that 
while Lenin spoke of the necessity of helping the Labour Party to power the 
situation was now quite different."*  It was time to confront the candidates of the 
Labour Party with candidates of our own." Despite these demands, a three day 
meeting of the CPGB Central Committee in January 1928 decided to continue with 
the policy of a united front with the British Labour Party and trade unions. The 
decision was carried by seventeen votes to six, with Harry Pollitt, Shapurji 
Saklavata and J.T. Murphy among the dissenters.'*^
Following this meeting, R.P. Dutt, at the time in Brussels and in close 
political contact with the ECCI, persuaded Pollitt to join him in composing a 
statement which was published in The Communist.'*  The statement admitted that 
since the beginning of 1927, the Communist Party has declined very seriously in 
membership.'* A year after the defeat of the General and miners strikes, the pair 
nevertheless identified a leftward advance in the working class.A l though  the 
epithet left-turn has been appended to the strategy which developed, the 
statement itself was concerned with the election of candidates to Parliament, 
whether Communist, Labour or those  "good workers...prepared to fight on our 
united front programme.*
Pollitt and Dutt insisted that the downturn in industrial struggle after 1926 
was an indication that the working class had turned to political solutions. The 
reason why the leftward advance of the working class had not been able to be so 
visible in 1927 was because interest has turned increasingly to the political field 
and the question of the Labour P a r t y . A s  the figures below demonstrate, the 
CPGB, in 1929 and 1931 fielded, respectively, 25 and 26 candidates, the highest 
number apart from 1950, until 1964. Parliamentary activity suddenly appeared at
'* N. Bukharin at 15*  Congress CPSU [Imprecorr vol.7. no.73], (29 December 1927), 
Manchester CP/Ind/Dutt/15/1.
'* Ibid.
R.P. Dutts papers, Manchester CP/IND/DUTT/28/08. Saklatvala was elected Labour MP 
for North Battersea at the 1922 General Election.
'* R. P. Dutt and H. Pollitt Ourselves and the Labour Party: Alternative Proposals to the 
Thesis of the Central Committee, The Communist (1928), 142-153, Manchester, 
CP/I nd/Dutt/15/1.
Ibid., 150. .
50 Ibid.
* Ibid., 151. 
Ibid., 150.
the core of Pollitt and Dutts proposals.They further proposed that where a 
Labour candidate refuses to accept our united front demands, we should call on 
the workers to give him no support, and to refuse to vote.  In February 1928, the 
CPGB leadership censured Dutt for an article in Labour Monthly that represented 
a thinly disguised attack on the Party Policy with regard to the Labour Party.
At the Ninth Plenum of the Comintern in the same month, Togliatti and 
Robin Page Amot ordered J R. Campbell and Gallacher to denounce the Labour 
Party as an auxiliary of the bourgeoisie. Following the CPGBs Tenth Congress in 
January 1929, entitled The New Line, the Comintern declared that the British 
leadership had failed to understand and implement the tactic. Shortly afterwards, 
the Presidium of the ECCI despatched a Closed Letter to the British Central 
Committee declaring that the last Congress...disclosed serious deficiencies in the 
leadership, which made a number of mistakes, among them Right mistakes and 
demanded changes in personnel.  Finally, in December 1929, the Political Bureau 
of the CPGB circulated a Statement On Organisational Changes, saying that 
Comrade Horner and Comrade Rothstein have been removed from leading 
positions, and Comrades Inkpin, Cant and Wilson have been removed...from their 
positions as full time functionaries because they were representative of right 
opportunist tendencies. The Party adopted the new line at a special congress in 
Leeds in November 1929 when Pollitt fulfilled a prediction of Dutts and became 
General Secretary. Some of those marshalled against the leadership later 
became prominent Party figures, such as Reg Groves, William Rust and Dave 
Springhall.
The implications for electoralism are dealt with below, chapter 2, 85.
^  Dutt and Pollitt, The Communist (1928), 151.
 Letter to DPCs [District Party Committees] R.P. Dutt and the Labour Monthly ' (22 
February 28), Manchester, CP/IND/DUTT/14/4.
Callaghan, Raiani Palme Dutt. 119.
Closed Letter from Presidium ECCI to CPGB Central Committee (27 February 1929), 
Manchester, DOC K/132/25, 1-7.
Political Bureau CPGB to Branches (28 December 1929), Manchester, 
CP/IND/DUTT/28/08.
R.P. Dutts role in Class against Class is detailed in Callaghan, Raiani Palme Dutt. 11Q- 
140. Also see B. Pearce and M. Woodhouse, A History of Communism in Britain (London, 
1995), 184-210. The Leeds Congress was an emergency congress, 30 November to 3 
December 1929.
From Class against Class to Popular Front
According to Brian Pearce, as a result of this capitulation, the party 
became completely and utterly isolated from the mainstream of the British labour 
movement for several yea rs .The  following table shows membership figures from 
the Partys inauguration until 1935, when Georgi Dimitrovs speech to the Seventh 
Congress of the Comintern called for the formation of popular fronts against 
Fascism. The table also includes the average vote for the CPGB in general 
elections during this period.
Table 1. CPGB membership and electoral performance, 1920-193561
Date Membership Number of 
candidates
Total
Average vote 
per CPGB 
candidate
Average CPGB vote 
in contested 
constituencies
1920 4,000
1921 2,000-2,500
1922 5,116 7 52,819 7,545 23.2%
1923 No figure 9 77,641 8,627 25.3%
1924 3,000-4,000 8 55,296 6,937 19.0%
1925 5,000
1926 6,000-10,000
1927 7,377
1928 5,500
1929 3,500-3,200 25 50,622 2,025 4.3%
1930 2,555
1931 2,724-6,279 26 74,824 2,870 6.5%
1932 9,000-5,600
1934 5,800
1935 7,700 2 27,117 13,558 29.9%
Figures fluctuated significantly throughout this period. Broadly speaking, 
they can be seen to have followed the course of industrial struggle during the 
1920s, reaching a peak in 1926 and declining steadily until 1931. It is worth noting, 
however, that the industrial downturn following 1926 coincided with the CPGBs 
acceptance that the Third Period represented a general crisis of capitalism, 
characterised by sharpening economic battles. T h e  rise in 1931 and 1932 may 
be due to the relative success of the National Unemployed Workers Movement. 
Despite this rise, both Brian Pearce and Moreen Branson shared the view that
Pearce, A History of Communism in Britain. 197.60
Source, Newton, The Sociology of British Communism. 159 and 166.
Resolution of the tenth plenum of the Comintern Executive, July 1929, cited in D. Hallas, 
The Comintern (London, 1985) 126. J. Degras, ed.. The Communist International. 1919- 
1943: Documents [2 vols.], vol.2 (London, 1960) 456.
Morgan. Against Fascism and W ar. 20. Walter Hannington, a founder member of the 
CPGB, was National Organiser for the NUWM.
Class against Class left the Party smaller and more isolated than ever before or 
since'.^ Similarly, John Callaghan noted the self-destructive character of [the 
CPGBs] sectarianism. Membership throughout this period may have been more 
inconsistent than these bare statistics imply. According to Branson, within a few 
weeks of February 1935, 2,000 new members were recruited, mainly through the 
NUWMs activity around unemployment benefit. Many of these new members 
who had joined on impulse...soon drifted away again, so that by July, the figure 
was 7,700/^
The figures for Communist Parliamentary candidates reflect a shift in the 
Partys attitude to the Labour Party. During Class against Class, as discussed 
above, the policy was to stand Communists against Labour candidates. By 1935, 
with the inauguration of the Popular Front, the enemy was no longer Labour, but 
the National Government, and the CPGB urged voting for any candidate opposing 
it. In 1935 only Pollitt in East Rhondda and Willie Gallacher in West Fife stood as 
Communists. The following table shows membership figures from the date of 
Dimitrovs intervention until 1951.
Table 2. CPGB membership and electoral performance, 1935-1951 69
Date Membership Number of 
candidates
Total
Average vote 
per CPGB 
candidate
Average CPGB vote 
in contested 
constituencies
1935 7,700 2 27,117 13,558 29.9%
1936 11,500
1937 12,250
1938 15,570
1939 17,756 .
1941 22,738
1942 56,000
1943 55,138
1945 45,435 21 102,780 4,894 11.0%
1946 42,123
1947 38,579
1948 43,000'"
1950 38,853 100 91,736 917 1.0%
1951 35,124" 10 21,640 2,164 3.8%
N. Branson, History of the CPGB 1927-51 (London, 1985).64
Callaghan, Raiani Palme Dutt. 133.
Branson, History of the CPGB 1927-1951.
  Ibid.
Gallacher was returned as Communist MP. Pollitt had replaced Arthur Horner as the 
candidate and polled 13,665 yotes against Labours 22,088.
Newton, The Sociology of British Communism. 159-160 and 166.
Figure from Daily Worker (1 May 1948).
Figure from Branson, History of the CPGB. 1941-51. 252.
The figures show a rise in membership during the period of the Popular 
Front. British Communism attained its highest membership, however, following the 
launch of Operation Barbarossa in June 1941 and throughout the attacks on both 
Leningrad and Stalingrad. Despite continuing Soviet popularity following Hitlers 
defeat, however, membership began to decline. The significance of the popular 
vote for British Communism is dealt with in the following chapter, but it is worth 
noting here that the respectable performance in 1945 contributed to the shift 
towards an explicitly parliamentary programme, signalled by Pollitts Looking 
Ahead in 1947.^^
Interestingly, at a time when membership was at its nadir in 1930, the Party 
made a decision to launch the Daily Worker. Notwithstanding membership levels, 
the papers launch was a political decision, it arose out of the necessities of the 
situation.   Kevin Morgan saw it as a mistaken attempt to keep pace with the 
"deepening revolutionary crisis, identified within the Class against Class analysis. 
According to William Rust, circulation...during the pre-war years, never rose 
higher than 50,000 a day; this compared to 82,000 in November 1942, rising to 
106,000 by the end of the war.^  Allen Hutt contrasted the "tremendous efforts and 
sacrifices made towards the papers sale and distribution during the 1930s with 
the early 1950s, when he diagnosed the cause of falling sales figures as lying 
within "the weakness of branch life, adding that local activity was "limited. 
In response to Hitlers accession to power in January 1933, the CPGB, on 
the somewhat tentative and ambiguous orders of the Comintern, initiated 
proposals for "joint action with the Labour Party, the TUC and others.^^ According 
to Branson, the first moves had been made as early as February by the Labour 
and Socialist International (LSI) which included the Independent Labour Party.^ 
One of the first results of this thawing in the sectarian freeze was an anti-Fascist 
demonstration in Hyde Park, organised jointly by the ILP and the CPGB. The 
culmination of this joint work was the formation in July 1934, of the "Co-ordinating 
Committee for Anti-Fascist Activity, with John Strachey as secretary.^ Ironically it
H. Pollitt, Locking Ahead (London, 1947). 1945 saw the re-election of Willie Gallacher in 
West Fife and the election of Phil Piratin in Mile End, Stepney.
W. Rust, The Story of the Daily Worker (London, 1949) 9.
K. Morgan, The Communist Party and the Daily Worker, 1930-56 in, Andrews, Fishman, 
Morgan, eds.. Opening the Books. 143.
Rust, The Story of the Daily Worker. 42. A. Hutt, Review of Daily Worker Circulation (22 
June 1956), Manchester, CP/lnd/misc/Hutt/2/1.
Hutt, Review of Daily Worker Circulation, 6 and 12.
Branson, Historv of the CPGB. 1927-41. 112.
Ibid., 111.
Ibid. 121.
was Trotsky, at the time in exile in Turkey, who pre-dated the call for a 
rintroduction of the United Front tactic against the rise of Fascism, following the 
increase in the Nazi vote from 800,000 to over six million in the German elections 
of 1930. For Stalinism in 1930, while Fascism represented more and more the 
dominant method of bourgeois rule, social democracy remained the most active 
factor and pacemaker in the development of the capitalist state towards fascism. 
By 1933, however, and particularly after the burning of the Reichstag at the end of 
February, the Comintern was forced...to produce its manifesto of 5 March 1933 
outlining the United Front against Fascism.
Dimitrovs declaration of the Popular Front can be seen on one level, as a 
continuation of this 1933 realignment. At another level it was a far more 
fundamental and qualitative shift. Whereas the United Front stressed unity of 
front...within certain limits and on specific issues, the Popular Front involved both 
a new Soviet foreign policy of international alliance-building, along with a radical 
reorientation of national Communist parties towards the so-called masses as they 
are, and not as we should like to have them. While it remains, in retrospect, a 
piece of idealistic and decidedly nonsensical rhetoric, Dimitrovs supplication 
appeared to many at the time to signal a new kind of realism. Much subsequent 
CPGB history has characterised the Popular Front in similar terms. Such a 
characterisation has only been possible, however, by abstracting the policy from its 
international context and viewing it almost entirely in terms of the British Partys 
new hail fellow well met brand of activism. Just as Class against Class was a 
quasi-ideological vehicle for Stalinist consolidation and the launch of a series of 
domestic policy initiatives, the launch of the Popular Front signalled a new turn in 
Soviet foreign policy towards alliance-building, initially with countries opposed to 
Germany, and finally, in 1939, with Germany itself.
The first such alliance, in 1935, was a mutual security pact with France, at 
the time headed by a Conservative government under future Nazi collaborator, 
Pierre Laval." The PCF now advocated a Popular Front alliance to contest the
Trotsky, T he  Turn in the Communist International and 'What Next? in The Struggle 
Against Fascism in Germany (New York. 1971) 57-60, 248.
Degras, The Communist International: Documents, vol.3, 44 and 159.
Laybourn and Murphy, Under the Red Flag. 76.
Trotsky, The First Five Years of the Communist International. 91-95. G. Dimitrov, cited in 
Morgan, Against Fascism and W ar. 33.
See R. O. Paxton, Vichy France: Old Guard and New Order 1940-1944 (New York, 
1972).
election of April and May 1936.  The alliance won, with the PCF, campaigning for 
a free and happy France, achieving 72 deputies. In France, popular frontism 
revealed a somewhat less insouciant character than the mass singing, musical 
turns, theatrical performances and...historical pageants with which it has been 
associated in Britain. In Britain, the CPGB, not only remained too small to feature 
as a major player within political life but, in the absence of a potentially explosive 
political situation, was never in the position of the PCF where its decisions would 
make any fundamental difference.   It is, therefore, instructive to look briefly at the 
Popular Front within the French context, where events exposed it somewhat more 
starkly.
Following the 1936 election, a wave of strikes against wage cuts amid calls 
for nationalisation, was underway by June involving some five million workers. 
More than one and a half million workers occupied scores of factories throughout 
the country. On 6 June, however, the PCF daily, lFlumanit. denounced rank and 
file calls for insurrection as Trotskyism, following an appeal by Prime Minister, 
Leon Blum, to PCF leader, Maurice Thorez. During the course of this activity, 
some eager workers began running the factories themselves. The industrial editor 
of lFlumanit was dismissed from his post merely for reporting this. The paper 
declared it is simply a question of making the bosses give back a little of their 
purchasing power to the men. In the same issue, Thorez declared One must 
know when to end a strike. Following salutations both to the army and to the 
Republican Senate on 15 July, lHumanit appeared to propose a united front with 
Fascism, as it offered to shake hands with the sincere Croix-de-Feu and with the 
sincere National Volunteers. Despite a rightward drift within the Popular Front 
government during the following two years, the PCF continued in its support until 
1938, when the Anglo-German agreement at Munich looked in danger of isolating 
the Soviet Union. The same Chamber of Deputies which French Communism had
The alliance was with the Socialists (SFIO), who achieved 182 Deputies and The 
Radicals, who achieved 116.
 Morgan, Against Fascism and W ar. 44.
According to C.L.R. James, World Revolution. 389, the PCF numbered 150,000 
members in 1936.
James, World Revolution. 396.
Hallas, The Comintern. 146. Pivert, the leader of the SFIO was one of those calling for 
insurrection, declaring Everything is possible, ibid.
James, World Revolution. 396.
Ibid.
Ibid. 397-8.
supported since 1936, agreed, in 1939, to outlaw the PCF and, finally, in 1940, 
voted to install the Retain regime.^
According to Laybourn and Murphy, the way the Popular Front was 
expressed throughout world Communism illustrated that, in 1935, the Comintern 
abandoned all the revolutionary tenets of Marxism-Leninism...and effectively 
accepted the process of Stalinization begun in the late 1920s. Such a view 
contrasted with Morgans view of the British Party, identifying a confused picture, 
a revolutionary party acclimatising itself to a situation offering few opportunities for 
revolutionary activity without abandoning its fundamental conceptions and 
expectations. The experience in France suggests that almost all conceptions 
about workers self-activity and expectations about its revolutionary potential were 
abandoned as the PCF sought unity with anyone willing to accommodate it.
Although the policy was on a smaller scale and within a very different 
context in Britain, Laybourn and Murphy noted a discernible gap between the 
actions of the executive and local members regarding fascism at the beginning of 
June 1936. The British Partys analysis of Fascism led it to direct its opposition 
towards the National Government rather than towards Mosley and his British Union 
of Fascists.   R.P. Dutt, for example, saw the formation of the National 
Government in Britain as part of the same trend of social, economic and political 
bankruptcy of the existing capitalist regime that had led to Nazism in Germany. It 
was Bourgeois Democracy, in the form of the National Government which, like 
Trotskys Aesopian cattle dealer, who drove his bulls to the slaughter, became the 
target for attack, rather than the Fascist butcher...with his sharp knife who 
awaited them. At the suggestion they should attack the butcher before he 
massacred them, the bulls, who had received their education in Manuilskys 
institute, asked in what way is the butcher any worse than the dealer?. Although 
in practice, the CPGB pursued a dual policy, according to Laybourn and Murphy, it
See Paxton, Vichy France. Also see, J. Monnet, Memoirs (London, 1978)17-35, 137-149. 
Also W .S. Churchill, Their Finest Hour [vol.2, The Second World W arl (London, 1956) 172- 
^  Laybourn and Murphy, Under the Red Flag. 112.
Morgan, Against Fascism and W ar. 15.
 Laybourn and Murphy, Under the Red Flag. 91.
 See Morgan, Against Fascism and W ar. 19-30. For a recent account of anti-Fascist 
activity in this.period, see D. Renton, This Rough Game: Fascism and Anti Fascism (Stroud, 
2001).
 R.P. Dutt, World Politics. 1918-1936 (London, 1936) 72.
 Trotsky, What Next in The Struggle Against Fascism in Germany. 248.
was frequently only membership pressure and even threat of rebellion, which 
drove its opposition to the BUF.^
Apart from the political and populist aspects of the Popular Front in Britain 
which can be seen to have influenced the Partys post-war strategy, for reasons 
both associated with the new turn and imposed by non-conducive circumstances, 
the Partys industrial strategy began, in this period, to take on a shape that would 
remain recognisable by the 1950s. This was the period of, what Nina Fishman has 
described as revolutionary pragmatism, and also of a conscious acceleration in 
what is described below as the CPGBs leadership strategy. A s  Fishman wrote, 
by 1945 Pollitt and Campbell had achieved their ambition...to make the 
Communist Party an important force inside the official trade union movement.
The CPGB; war and post-war
One of the main planks of the CPGBs policy during the period prior to the 
Second World War had been the demand for the signing of an Anglo-Soviet Pact 
against Germany. In August 1939, however, Stalin signed a pact, not with 
Chamberlain, but with Hitler. The Party continued to call for an Anglo-Soviet 
agreement, characterising the Molotov and Ribbentrop concordat in terms of a 
Soviet tactic to ensure peace. When war was declared on 3 September, the Party 
was calling for a war against the rise of Fascism, fought, not by the appeasers of 
Chamberlains Government, but prosecuted under the direction of a Peoples 
Government.Fol lowing the receipt of a telegram from Moscow on 14 
September, however, the Party executed an abrupt turn in which it was to be 
recognised without reserve that this is an imperialist war. " At the Central 
Committee meeting of 2 October, the new line was presented in the form of a 
Political Report by Dutt.  This was subsequently released To All Party 
Organisations in the form of a Political Letter on 12 October 1939.  Pollitt and 
Campbell, as the two dissenters at the 2 October meeting, were removed from
Laybourn and Murphy, Under the Red Flag. 91-92.
See Fishman, No Home but the Trade Union Movement, Andrews, Fishman, Morgan, 
eds., Opening the Books. 106. Also see Fishman, The British Communist Party and the 
Trade Unions: 1933 - 1945 (Aldershot, 1995). See below chapters 6-8. Also see Morgan, 
Against Fascism and W ar, where he cited the Partys 14 * Congress in 1937, out of 501 
delegates, more than two hundred held official union positions, 37.
Fishman, The British Communist Partv and the Trade Unions. 154.
This line was presented in a Manifesto from the Central Committee, released on 2 
September 1939.
Secretariat, CPGB, Political Letter (12 October 1939), 2. Manchester CP/lnd/Dutt/31/7
Details of this meeting are in F. King and G. Matthews, eds.. About Turn (London, 1990).
Secretariat, CPGB, Political Letter.
their positions on the Central Committee, and leadership passed to a three-man 
secretariat headed by Dutt. The letter blamed the Polish government for its 
invasion by Germany, highlighted The Imperialist Character of the War and 
worried about the danger of a new Versailles peace bringing about 'the 
dismemberment of Germany, and the establishment of a subservient reactionary 
government in Germany in order to strangle any popular revolution. T h e  Party 
now called for immediate peace negotiations, emphasising that the question of 
peace terms is not the issue. I t  called for members to fight for increases in 
wages to offset war price-rises, a campaign against ARP and other services and 
for a campaign to reduce re n ts .T h e  letter retained the rhetoric of united front 
within the trade unions, whilst calling for an end to the collaboration of the labour 
movement with the Chamberlain government.^ The Party accepted the new line 
at a series of district meetings. Pollitt and Campbell returned to their positions 
following Declarations on 12 and 13 November in which Pollitt admitted the 
entirely incorrect estimation of the 2 September manifesto.*'^  Campbell confessed 
that he had been wrong to concentrate on German Fascism as the main enemy of 
the British working class. P o l l i t t  may have had 1939 in his mind when in Moscow 
in 1956, he confided poignantly to Dennis Ogden, that all our problems always 
came from here.^ ^
In terms of membership figures, the Partys position during this period is 
difficult to quan t i f y . I t  may be that the ambiguity in the CPGB line which softened 
significantly following the German invasion of France in 1940, rescued it from 
collapse. Ralph Russell remembered that, during this period at Cambridge 
University, a number of questions were raised to which he did not have an 
answer.^^ According to Morgan, however, 1939 appears not to have had the same 
impact upon the Party or its public standing as, for example, the Soviet invasion of 
Hungary in 1956. ^ This may further suggest that in an otherwise unquantifiable
Ibid., 2-3.
lbid.5.
Ibid. 6.
^^lbid.
H. Pollitt to Central Committee, CPGB (12 November 1939), Manchester 
CP/lnd/Dutt/31/7.
J R. Campbell to CC, CPGB (13 November 1939), Manchester CP/lnd/Dutt/31/7.
Dennis Ogden, interview, 3 November 1997.
See above. Tab le  2 , where figures between 1939 and 1941 do not appear. Morgan, 
however, has,suggested that the figure may have remained above 20,000, Against Fascism 
and W ar. 311.
Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
Morgan, Against Fascism and W ar. 315.
way, the Party was generally more popular after the period of the Popular Front, 
than it was in the middle of the Cold War.
Between the launch of Operation Barbarossa until 1944, the main thrust of 
Communist Party policy towards the war, was to call for the opening of a second 
front to Germanys west. The major concern of its industrial policy was to ensure 
minimum disruption. As detailed below, it was during this period of high popularity 
for British Communism, that many Communist trade unionists achieved the official 
positions to which they sought to cling during the 1950s.^^   By 1945, the Party 
retained over 40,000 members but, as the following chapter discusses, this figure 
went into a steady decline up to and including 1956. Several factors added up to a 
new set of circumstances for British Communism following the Second World War. 
The first of these was the emergence of the Soviet Union as a major world power. 
Association with the Soviet Union during the war devolved enormous benefit upon 
the CPGB, and its promotion to world-power status might be thought to have 
elevated the British Party in a proportional way. In fact, the opposite happened. 
The dissolution of the Comintern in 1943, the USSRs increasing drift away from 
even the rhetoric of world revolution and the onset of the Cold War, all combined 
to diminish, rather than enhance, any status that the CPGB may have accrued 
from its previous Soviet association. The programme which developed during this 
period has, routinely been characterised by historians, as reformist and, although 
perhaps suggested by Stalin, has been accepted as an essentially British idea 
tailored for domestic condi t ions.What is omitted from this characterisation, 
however, is the emergence during this period, of the Eastern European Peoples 
Democracies, firstly, from 1945, as National Front coalitions, but after 1947, as 
Stalinist dominated one-party s ta t e s .A s  discussed throughout the thesis. The 
British Road to Socialism was explicit about these erroneously named Peoples 
Democracies as models. The CPGB remained a Stalinist party.
See below chapters 6-8.
See, for example, Laybourne and Murphy, Under the Red Flag. 135-138. Also see 
Branson, History of the CPGB. 1941-1951. 232-239.
See, for example, Ben Fowkes, The Rise and Fall of Communism in Eastern Europe 
(Basingstoke, 1995).
British theoretical limitations and the effects of Stalinism
Persistent adherence to the demands from Moscow inhibited, not only the 
British Partys practice by repeatedly lurching it in directions that alienated it from 
its own membership and the rest of the working class, but also undermined its 
ability to articulate a coherent British theoretical tradition. The development of such 
a tradition might have equipped the Party both to operate independently of 
Moscows vacillations and to remain a consistent force on the British left in contrast 
to the electorally capricious Labour Party.
The development of a British theoretical tradition was repeatedly 
undermined as the Party sought to justify Stalins fluctuating domestic and foreign 
policies. In pursuit of this, Party intellectuals became adept at utilising Marxist 
sounding phraseology. James Klugmann revealed this tendency in his book From 
Trotsky to Tito, an attempt to justify Yugoslavias exclusion from Cominform and 
that organisations subsequent demonising of Tito.^^ Malcolm MacEwen wrote of 
Klugmann, that while he stood both for all that was best in the Party - 
unselfishness, disregard for making money, lack of personal ambition, devotion to 
the cause and a keen intelligence, he also represented its most fatal defects: 
carrying loyalty to the point where it silenced his conscience and blunted his good 
sense.K lugmann employed Marxist phraseology in order to prove to his and his 
leaderships satisfaction, that Tito was an agent of imperialism and reaction. 
Yugoslavia, he claimed, was putting fonA/ard a theory of a smooth and peaceful 
transition to socialism, in the style of the Mensheviks and of Ramsey Macdonald 
...they were rejecting...what had been taught by Marx, Engels, Lenin and Stalin. 
Few appeared to notice the coincidence with the publication of The British Road to 
Socialism, which appeared to advocate precisely the same th ing .T i to ,  Klugmann 
added bewilderingly, had installed a Turkish regime which 'had...led straight to 
the camp of reaction.
Moscows vacillations also created tensions within the day to day activity of 
the Party. Dennis Ogden recalled his experience as a student in Manchester 
following the split between Yugoslavia and Cominform. Ogden said that the 
relationships between...the student Communist Party branch and the Labour Party
J. Klugmann, From Trotsky to Tito. (London, 1951).
M. MacEwen, The Greening of a Red (London, 1991), 196.
Klugmann, From Trotsky to Tito. 9.
See Pollitt, Looking Ahead, in a number of countries where popular democracies have 
been established...it is possible to see how the people will move towards Socialism without 
further revolution...a new British Road to Socialism in which British democratic institutions 
will be preserved., 90 and 92.
Klugmann, From Trotskv to Tito. 10-11.
student branch were strained. H e  was part of an affiliation called the Student 
Labour Federation, consisting of Communist, Labour and non-aligned socialists. It 
was, said Ogden, a reasonably successful example of a broad left wing front...but 
it was subjected to considerable strains. O n e  such strain emerged over 
Yugoslavia; was it a socialist state or was it a semi-fascist state?. T h e  debate 
between the Communist students and others focused upon whether the Yugoslav 
student movement should be allowed membership of the International Union of 
Students and, if they were, should the British National Union of Students be in the 
International Union of Students...there was a terrific struggle to keep NUS in lUS 
and to keep Yugoslav students out of lUS.
The Habits of Adhesion
Khruschevs secret speech in 1956, combined with the Soviet invasion of 
Hungary to provoke an exodus of over 7,000 members. This represented a point in 
British Communist history when socialist aspirations and support for the Soviet 
Union were revealed as two sides of an irreconcilable contradiction. Many in the 
Party began to perceive contradictions where, previously, they had assumed 
harmonious unity. It would be wrong, however, to conclude that Khruschevs 
revelations and the invasion of Hungary disturbed all members equally. Many 
remained in the Party, intending to reform it from within. As John Hostettler said, 
Td been in the Party so long, it had been my life.^
Members judged that the Cold War had been provoked by the West in 
general and the USA in particular, for domestic and foreign policy reasons. Under 
such conditions, it became difficult to disentangle opposition to capitalism from 
support for what appeared to be capitalisms antithesis - the USSR. Under such 
conditions, in the absence of a coherent analysis of the Soviet Union, it was 
difficult not to take sides. Opposition to capitalism in the form of the USA and 
Western Europe seemed naturally, to lead to support for the USSR. For most 
British Communists, the Soviet Union as a nation state was synonymous with 
Marxism, a conviction reinforced by both Soviet and western propaganda. Such 
propaganda escalated the illusion of ideological antagonisms to biblical 
proportions. Whilst both sides sported their respective ideological colours
125 Dennis Ogden, interview, 3 December 1997.
Ibid.
Ibid.
John Hostettler, interview, 25 June 1997.
throughout, however, in reality, the Cold War was a squabble between the worlds 
two strongest nations over the disposal other peoples territory and resources. 
The Cold War was a post-war scramble for military hegemony and economic 
influence as the confusion, duplicity and misunderstandings of Moscow, Yalta and 
Potsdam were resolved by a combination of threats, outright bribes and diplomatic 
thuggery.^^ Isaac Deutscher saw Stalins attitude to Germany as a conflict 
between his nationalism and his revolutionism in which the anti-revolutionary 
element predominated.
John Seville and Edward Thompson said in 1956, that the shocked reaction 
to Khruschevs speech was the result of our general failure to apply a Marxist 
analysis to Socialist countries and to the Soviet Union in particular. The absence of 
such an analysis...bred Utopianism and encouraged attitudes of religious faith 
amongst us.^   This went along with what Malcolm MacEwen called uncritical 
adulation of the USSR. ^  As theory suffered as a result of the Partys adhesion to 
Stalinism, so the absence of a coherent Marxist critique strengthened this 
adhesion. The habit of adhesion survived the factional splits that plagued the Party 
during the 1960s and 1970s. Almost without exception, the configurations that 
emerged from splits within British Communism constructed themselves upon the 
idea that somewhere there existed an example of authentic Communism. For 
some, this meant reinforcing traditional ties with the Soviet Union. For others it 
involved abandoning the USSR and identifying with the Peoples Republic of 
China. In other cases, states such as Albania were co-opted as concrete examples 
of existing socialism. These groups attempted to compensate for their small size 
and incomplete analysis of developed capitalism by redefining nationalist 
movements in the developing world as incongruous templates for socialism under
See George F. Kennan T h e  Long Telegram [Moscow, 22 February 1946] in 
Containment: Documents on American Policy and Strategy 1945-1950. T.H. Etzold and J.L. 
Gaddis, eds. (New York, 1978) 50-63 and A. Zhdanov, Report on the International Situation 
to the Cominform [22 September 1947] in The International Situation and Soviet Foreign 
Policy: Key reports by Soviet Leaders from the Revolution to the Present M. Rush, ed. 
(Columbus Ohio, 1970), 124-139.
See P. Ginsborg, A History of Contemporary Italy (Harmondsworth, 1990) Ginsborg cited 
US intervention in the 1948 elections, where $176m of interim aid was promised. Marshall 
declared that aid would cease in the event of a Communist victory. Also see V. Zamagni, 
"American Influence on the Italian Economy (1948-58) in Italy in the Cold War: Politics. 
Culture and Society 1948-58. C. Duggan and C. Wagstaff, eds., (Oxford, 1995), 77-87. 
Zamagni referred to the extent to which the American presence in Italy succeeded in 
changing the structure of the Italian economy, 77.
Deutsche^ Stalin. 524.
E.P. Thompson and J. Saville, Taking Stock, The Reasoner.1 (July 1956), 4.
M. MacEwen, The Day the Party had to Stop, The Socialist Register 1976. J. Seville 
and R. Milliband, eds.(London, 1976), 25.
contemporary British conditions. National liberation was often seen as being 
synonymous with socialist revolution as movements of guerrilla armies of 
intelligentsia-led peasants were characterised as leaders of the worldwide 
proletarian movement. This, as Lenin had pointed out, confused the interests of 
the oppressed classes, of working and exploited people with a concept of national 
interests as a whole, which implies the interests of the ruling class.
Pollitt identified the theoretical shortcomings that contributed to this habit of 
adhesion when he wrote in 1956 that we are too prone to concern ourselves with 
immediate problems and insufficiently with questions of principle. L e n i n  had 
made a similar point, stressing that without revolutionary theory there can be no 
revolutionary movement and emphasised the importance of secure theoretical 
analysis as opposed to an infatuation for the narrowest forms of practical 
activity. P o l l i t t  identified a reluctance to consider new ideas which did not seem 
to fit into practical day to day work.^ ^
Three Questions about British Communism
The analysis discussed so far in this thesis, raises three questions about 
British Communism. Firstly, if the Soviet Union was neither Communist, socialist, 
nor a workers state, but was something quite different called Stalinist, and if the 
CPGB, not only supported that state but drew upon it for the fundamental elements 
of its theory and practice - does this mean that the British Party was not Marxist, 
but Stalinist? Or was it a hybrid organisation; Marxist in theory, Bolshevik in 
structure and social democratic in practice, held together by an uncritical 
allegiance to, and unqualified faith in the Soviet Union as a socialist state?
The second question involves an arbitrary distinction. Its application is in 
the interests of clarity rather than to insist that the differences necessarily 
aggregate to more than the commonalities. This distinction is between leadership 
and membership. Unlike in the traditional labour movement, the relationship 
between leaders and members in the CPGB was one of dynamic political 
interaction and easy social intercourse. The British Party did not manifest the sort 
of elitism, either of the established labour organisations or of the larger Italian and
Lenin, Theses on National and Colonial Questions. For the Second Congress of the 
Third International Selected Works [3 vols.] vol.3 (Moscow, 1971), 433.
H. Pollitt, T h e  20th Congress of the CPSU and the Role of Stalin in World News 3:18 (5 
May 1956), 280.
Lenin, What is to be Done? , 25.
Pollitt, The 20th Congress of the CPSU and the Role of Stalin, 260.
French Parties. The highly centralised application of democratic centralism, 
however, nevertheless militated towards exclusion and elitism.
Nominally, the Party was run by a democratically elected Executive 
Committee. It was never clear, however, who or which body was making decisions 
on a day to day basis. Alison MacLeod who worked as a journalist at the Dailv 
Worker in the early 1950s, claimed that the Politburo wasn't the real power. 
Editors of various Party publications also played a crucial role in the leadership. 
Macleod claimed that Dailv Worker editors were always political appointments 
and that they were approved by M o s c o w .T h e  leadership was sensitive to 
accusations of lack of democracy and, in 1956, ordered a re-evaluation of the 
application of democratic centralism by a Commission on Inner Party 
Democracy.The distinction between leadership and membership can be justified 
by the fact that Party leaders frequently took crucial political and strategic 
decisions without reference to members. As in 1939, they often left it until after the 
event to explain such decisions in the Party press.
The second question applies to this leadership. Were the leaders of the 
CPGB partly or fully aware of the system of repression and terror that existed in 
the Soviet Union? If, despite being aware of this situation, they continued to 
support the regime, often justifying or ignoring its most malign aspects, did this 
mean that the British leaders were as corrupt as those in Moscow from whom they 
drew guidance and inspiration? Clearly motivated by sincere socialist principles 
when they joined the Party, all of them continued to defend such principles 
throughout their political lives. This thesis is less concerned with the sincerity of 
such principles than with the effects in terms of historical change, of this 
leaderships activities.
Disciples of Stalinism ranged across a spectrum which, at one end viewed 
it as socialist and, at the other, saw it both as the best of all possible worlds and 
as a necessary process in constructing the material conditions for socialism. In 
1957, following Khruschevs speech and the invasion of Hungary, John Gollan was 
still able to declare that the USSR is not building socialism. It has achieved 
socialism.W h e r e v e r  they stood on this spectrum at any particular time. Party 
leaders nevertheless remained committed to J R. Campbells position that, in the
Ibid. This claim is difficult to verify. See W. Rust The Story of the Dailv W orker (London,
Alison Macleod, interview, 15 October 1997.
1949) which does not support Macleods assertion.
MacEwen, 'The Day the Party had to Stop, 24-41.
J. Gollan, On International Unity and Relations between Communist Parties World 
News Discussion Supplement, 3 (23 March 1957) 7, Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/05.
face of the Trotskyites staking all their hopes on international revolution, the 
Bucharinites [sic.] wanting to advance to socialism at a snails pace...it was the 
leadership of Stalinism that saved us; and in his glorious and successful period 
that pointed the way to soc ia l i sm. In  assessing this leadership, the existence of 
this spectrum must be kept in mind. The possibly unanswerable question is to what 
extent was the British leaderships continuing fealty to Stalinism the result of 
political ignorance or analytical naivete and to what extent were they conscious 
and willing dummies, puppets and apologists for Soviet aggression? "*
Following Khruschevs revelations, Pollitt wrote "whatever the mistakes and 
abuses associated with Stalins personal methods, the great historic achievement 
...is...the superiority of the Socialist system over the capitalist system. 
Domestically, given the size and weakness of the CPGB, its marginal position 
within British politics and its unequal relationship with the Labour Party, did the 
leadership have any choice but to adhere, with such unerring persistence to 
Stalinism? If it had detached itself, would this have improved or retarded the 
prospects for socialism in Britain? Definitive answers to such questions, are 
impossible. The leadership of the CPGB justified Stalinism and its association with 
it, by recourse to the idea that, for all its faults, the regime in Moscow remained a 
force for socialist change. Even after the secret speech, the leadership persisted 
with this argument.
The third question is whether Party members were Stalinist or socialist. If 
the CPGB persisted as a contradiction between socialism and Stalinism, how did 
members attempt to resolve it? Clearly, most members were not in a position to 
know everything about the iniquities taking place in the Soviet Union. How much 
any particular individual knew, how much any individual had time to care under the 
frenetic circumstances of their political lives, are questions which are both 
impossible to quantify.
Commentators have generally acknowledged the CPGBs theoretical 
shortcomings, which went along with its lack of analysis of the Soviet Union. Up 
until 1956, the idea that the Soviet Union was the concrete expression of Marxism 
remained unchallenged by membership and leadership alike. As Morris Schaer put
J.R. Campbell, Speech to Closed Session of 24* Congress CPGB (1 April 1956) 
Manchester CP/Cent/Cong/09/02.
P. Fryer, Hungarian Tragedy. (London, 1997), 146.
H. Pollitt, Speech to Closed Session of 24**  Congress CPGB (1 April 1956), Manchester 
CP/Cent/Cong/09/02.
it, it was a...strong feeling that the Soviet Union was a workers s t a t e . R o g e r  
Simon said, I remember...the Soviet brides... was puzzled about that, but that 
was about the only thing as far as I remember I was critical about...until 1956. '* 
Brian Pearce recalled that we accepted rather easily, the Moscow Trials...the 
business in Spain, about the POUM . and then of course the Soviet German 
Pact. "*  Pearce continued, saying, we were...most of us, a bit superficial 
and...prepared not to pursue a question very deeply, to accept rather easy 
answers to difficult questions. E r i c  Hobsbawm maintained that there was very 
little talk indeed about the Soviet Union, and the people who knew about it kept 
very quiet. "* Education within the Party was limited to a narrow range of Marxs, 
Lenins and Stalins writings or, as Pollitt implied, was directed towards activity 
rather than attempting to synthesise Marxist theory with revolutionary practice. 
Alison MacLeod commented, oh theyd forgotten all about Marx - whos he?. 
Morris Schaer reinforced this, saying I was never strong on theory...these people 
that call themselves Marxists, I cant believe them and continued, Stalin...if you 
read any of his stuff, it made sense.Dur ing  the 1950s, Schaer recalled, one of 
the most important things was...that we held a lot of education around the British 
Road to Socialism.
E.P. Thompson and John Savilles regret at the lack of analysis of the 
Soviet Union reflected a general trend within the CPGB towards parochialism and 
practical day to day problem solving. It would be simplistic to suggest that there 
was an anti-theory, anti-intellectual attitude within British Communism, but there 
was an essentially utilitarian view about theory which drew directly from Stalinism. 
Stalin, in whom Trotsky observed a contemptuous attitude towards ideas, 
described himself and his cohort in the CPSU as we Bolshevik practical workers 
as opposed to those litterateurs who now constituted a dying b reed .Ra lph
Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997.
Roger Simon, interview, 10 December 1997. The Soviet Brides were women who had 
married Englishmen during World W ar II. In 1947, the Soviet authorities refused them 
permission to join their husbands in Britain. On 21 March 1947, the Soviet Union formally 
forbade its citizens to marry foreigners. Fifteen brides' were forced to divorce their 
husbands.
Brian Pearce, interview, 1 February 1999.
Ibid.
E. Hobsbawm, interview with G. Stedman Jones, 1956, Marxism Todav (November
1986), 19.
Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997
Ibid.
Trotsky, Stalin (New York, 1946), 15. Stalin, Authors Preface, Collected Works [13 
vols.] vol. 1 (Moscow, 1946), XIX.
Russell said of Harry Pollitt that he felt for a long time that he was anti-intellectual 
and anti-theory for that matter.'^^^ If L. Marks was correct in talking about the 
undisputed...low level of our theoretical understanding, then Anthony Ryles 
diagnosis that some of our errors in the past can be attributed to our confusing the 
needs of Soviet diplomacy with a Marxist analysis of the situation, indicates a 
connection between the Partys attitude towards theory and members apparent 
obliviousness towards the destructive aspects of Stalinism.
Members received information about the Soviet Union either through the 
pro-western mainstream press or through its antithesis, the Dailv Worker. Under 
Cold War conditions, the paper saw its job as counter-propaganda on behalf of the 
USSR as well as presenting the political line...of the Communist Party.^   The 
leadership at this crucial time, however, suggested making the paper more 
popular, more easily read and whilst retaining a minimum of political news, 
perceived a need to simplify, lighten, humanise and picturise.^ Members related 
to their leadership largely through the Dailv Worker, whose circulation in the mid- 
1950s averaged approximately 68,000 copies per month .A l though more 
analytical publications, such as The Marxist Quarterlv or Dutts Labour Monthlv. 
which claimed a circulation of 13,380 for 1953, were available, day to day analysis 
of world events was subject to such simplification.
While members saw the Soviet Union as the leader of world socialism, it 
was never clear to what extent Moscow remained of symbolic significance or to 
what extent it was seen as a realistic force for political change. Morris Schaer 
referred to an attitude within the Party which expressed generalised cultural 
responses rather than anything specifically political when he said Communists - 
whatever Russia did, they supported them - they wanted them to win the Olympics. 
When the Dynamo [Moscow Dynamo] came over, they wanted them to win the 
football match, because they wanted to show that they were superior because they
E.H. Carr quoted a letter from Stalin to German CP leader Maslow in 1925 in which he 
described litterateurs such as Lunarcharsky and Bogdanov who have passed over to a 
secondary role Socialism in One Country [3 vols ], vol.1 (London, 1970), 199.
Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
L. Marks to World News. 3:23 (9 June 1956), 369.
Anthony Ryle to World News 3:22 (2 June 1956), 346.
A. Hutt [Circulation Manager Dailv Worker The Daily Worker its policy and content". 
(July 1956) 2, Manchester C P/I nd/m isc/Hutt/2/1.
'  ibid., 1.
A. Hutt, ''Review of Daily Worker Circulation' (22 June 1956), 4-5, Manchester 
CP/lnd/misc/Hutt/2/1.
The Marxist Quarterlv was replaced in 1957 by Marxism Todav. The Labour Monthlv 
figure was claimed in The Marxist Quarterlv [back cover], 1 (January 1954).
were socialists.  Max Morris, reporting on a teachers delegation to the Soviet 
Union for World News was enthusiastic about a plentifully stocked bookshop with 
its large queue waiting...to open.  Morris described the socialist realism of 
Soviet art with a craftsmanship and technical skill that it would be hard to beat.  
While western Communists saw this cultural superiority as emanating from the 
Communist system, in the USSR, such perceptions were the result of a conflation 
with less progressive ideas about Great Russian Nationalism.^^
The attitude of members towards the Soviet Union, a combination of 
naivete and Orwellian doublethink, was, outwardly at least, almost totally 
uncritical. This uncritical acceptance of all aspects of the Soviet Union was partly 
a response to relentless criticism within the established m e d i a . F o r  those who 
believed that the Soviet Union and its subject states were Communist, it was easy 
to digest the universal propaganda that the Cold War was primarily ideological. It 
was a belief which put British Communism on the defensive in two ways. 
Ideologically, it had to argue for and defend Communism as a progressive 
alternative to the various ideologies that, together, constituted capitalist 
democracy. Secondly, in a narrower political sense, it was forced to mount a 
defence of the socio-economic achievements of the Soviet state. Although the 
ideological agenda upon which the Cold War was predicated appeared to make 
these two ideas synonymous, members began to discover during the course of the 
1950s that this was not necessarily the case.
It is possible to conclude from this that the membership was, objectively. 
Stalinist in the sense that, however unwittingly, it nevertheless served the interests 
of the Soviet regime. While such a formulation is valid for the leadership, however, 
the contribution made by Communists to the British labour movement in the cause 
of socialism, may well have outweighed the negative political effects of their 
association with Stalinism. Members served their work colleagues and 
communities with a selfless devotion that put enormous strain on themselves and
Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997.
M. Morris, Where Culture Belongs to the People, World News and Views. 32:40 (11 
October 1952), 478.
Ibid.
M. Fainsod, How Russia Is Ruled (Cambridge, Mass.,1970) Soviet patriotism in its 
Stalinist manifestation represented a many sided effort to mobilize support for the regime 
and to combine the specifically Russian nationalism of the W ar period with an ideological 
commitment to Marxism-Leninism...with particular accent on the leading position of the 
Great Russian people in the Soviet family of nations., 115.
Lenin wrote in 1919, Scratch many a Communist...and you will find a great Russian 
chauvinist.. Collected Works [45 vols.] vol. 24 (Moscow ,1960), 155.
Doctor [London SW] to Dailv Worker (12 March 1956), 2.
their families. Under different circumstances, the respect and loyalty they earned 
for such activity might have had the potential to build an effective socialist 
organisation. Jack Beeching identified a tension between Party and individual in a 
letter to World News. Objecting to the banning of The Reasoner. Beeching 
referred to honest Labour men for whom the ban reinforced the feeling that whilst 
they respect individual Communists, they mistrust the CP as an organisation.^^
The activities of members within the centralised structure of the CPGB 
could be destroyed very quickly by the effects of Stalinism. Following the Soviet 
invasion of Hungary, for example. Wolf Wayne remembered speaking outside a 
factory gate in Cricklewood, North London, where the Party had members in 
factory after factory. Wayne recalled that the crowd was enormous and...they 
were firing fire crackers at us...that was a shocking experience...they were all local 
workers from the factories.  Members often transcended these destructive 
effects, and many overcame the tension between individual and Party identified by 
Beeching. Stan Turner referred to this, saying that credibility was gained by our 
actions in support of their well being and therefore, whether they were anti
communist... or not...they certainly didnt reflect it back onto us, they still elected 
us as their leaders, shop stewards and so on despite the fact that we were 
Communists. 
Loyalty, discipline and the recognition of political reality
Party discipline held the organisation together, but democratic centralism 
was also the mechanism through which Stalinism often undermined members 
positive activity. According to one particularly cynical commentator, C.H. Darke, 
this centralized discipline relied upon a leadership culture through which the 
Communist, taught to regard himself as the leader of the working-class, is also 
taught to be an uncritical follower of his own leaders.  Darke continued, 
suggesting that among the ordinary members of the Party there is a fanatical 
worship of leading Communists, British and Russian and that the leading 
Communist is never guilty of a mistake. It was always some other fellow.  In the
J. Beeching, Unity is not a Tactic World News. 3:44 (3 November 1956), 702.
Wolf Wayne, interview, 10 February 1999.
Ibid.
Stan Turner, interview, 9 July 1997
C.H. Dark, The Communist Technique in Britain (London, 1952), 24.
Darke was a Hackney Borough Councillor and CPGB member for eighteen years. He 
resigned from the Party in May 1951, after which he published his book.
Ibid.
absence of a coercive apparatus, Party discipline was essentially self-discipline but 
was, nevertheless, rigorously applied and deemed essential by most comrades. 
Alison Macleod recalled one aspect of Party discipline, saying "branches were not 
allowed to write to each other...the Secretary of a branch was not allowed to write 
to the Secretary of another branch...you see there was the set of rules.^  Lenin 
had dismissed bureaucratic rules, saying they demonstrated no idea whatsoever 
of the real political tasks of Social-Democracy.^  The CPGB, however, rivalled the 
most bureaucratic trade union with its Rules Revision Congress in 1957, which ran 
to over 436 proposed amendments.^^^ Members, however, accepted that discipline 
was necessary. Morris Schaer, for example, felt that "discipline was the main thing 
that made our party different...we were the cadres that would lead, and we could 
only do that by discipline.
John Hostettler, who chaired the Appeals Committee between 1957 and 
the mid-1970s gave some insight into the operation of Party discipline. Following 
the War, the Appeals Committee routinely referred decisions about reinstating 
expelled members to the Executive Committee which, in turn, passed its decisions 
to the Political Committee. The EC decision "was always in my experience against 
the Appeals Committee recommendation...there were more full-timers on the EC 
and...there were members on the EC...who would do whatever the Political 
Committee said...I cant recall that anyone was reinstated, although we 
recommended that.^"* Hostettler recalled members being expelled "for odd 
reasons such as suggesting that a CP member should not stand in an election 
against a Labour candidate, for example. This would nearly always end in 
expulsion.
In 1956, the argument that had begun in February with Khruschevs 
speech, developed into a row over democratic centralism in the Party. Even The 
Reasoner. Thompson and Savilles attempt to "give adequate expression to the 
storm of ideas, became diverted into an argument over the constitutional 
legitimacy of its publication.^^ Most of those who resigned their Party cards during
Alison MacLeod, interview, 15 October 1997
The Aims and Constitution of the Communist Partv of Great Britain (1982 edtn.), 10-11 
confirms MacLeods recollection.
Lenin. What is to be Done?. 115.
Proposed Amendments to Rules [25  Congress CPGB 19-22 April 1957] (London, 
1957).
Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997.
John Hostettler, interview, 25 June 1997.
Ibid.
E.P. Thompson and J. Saville, Why we are Publishing [editorial], The Reasoner. no.1 
(July 1956), 3.
this period do not appear to have done so over discipline, however, but for more 
profound political reasons. The most significant of these was the question raised 
by the events of 1956 about the contradiction between Stalinism and socialism.
Under Khruschev, the CPSU promised to de-Stalinise. The British Party 
also moderated its rhetoric from Pollitts declaration in 1956 that I...believe it is my 
duty to defend the Soviet Union at any p r i c e . I n  1957, new General Secretary, 
John Gollan, was stressing 'the need for frank and comradely criticism between 
Communist Parties.^ The Warsaw Pact invasion of Czechoslovakia in 1968 
raised similar questions to those of 1956, about the nature of the Soviet state. 
Under Brezhnev, the Moscow regime, whilst subject to limited reform under 
Khruschev, re-acquired a Stalinist contempt for democratically expressed political 
aspirations. In Britain, many who had justified staying in the Party after Hungary, 
departed or demanded thoroughgoing change following Czechoslovakia. The 
eventual cleavage in the Party between those whose support for the invasion 
earned them the disparaging epithet 'tankies' and those who were opposed to 
intervention, exposed irreconcilable differences. Whether such differences were as 
ideologically profound as they appeared at the time and has been claimed since, is 
open to question. Those opposed to the invasion, subsequently constituted much 
of the Euro-Communist tendency in Britain. As Raphael Samuel said of this group, 
although the name of Gramsci is invoked to dignify their project ...like their 
hardline opponents, they cling to the...belief that a correct analysis, faithfully 
followed will bring the required results.
The fact that three quarters of the membership remained in the Party 
following 1956 implies that British Communism maintained a powerful political 
appeal.  As discussed below, the large number of resignations represented an 
acceleration in a decline which had begun at the end of the war.   Although, as 
Wolf Wayne suggested, in some trade unions people could not progress within the 
bureaucracy "unless you held a Party card, in general, membership of the CPGB 
was not something embarked upon for career reasons.^   Joining the Communist
H. Pollitt, Speech to Closed Session of 24 Congress, CPGB. (1 April 1956), 1.
J. Gollan, On International Unity and Relations between Communist Parties in World 
News Discussion Supplement no.3 (23 March 1957), 7. Manchester, CP/Cent./Cong/10/05.
Samuel, Class Politics: The Lost World of British Communism, Part Three, 53.
See Newton, The Sociology of British Communism. 160. Newtons figures showed 
membership for 1956 at 33,095; 1957 at 26,742 and 1958 at 24, 670.
Ibid. In 1942, following operation Barbarossa, British membership was 56,000 and, apart 
from 1948, declined steadily until 1956.
Wolf Wayne, interview, 10 February 1999. Wayne was referring to the Amalgamated 
Engineering Union (AEU) in which he was a Branch President.
Party gave expression to aspirations that, otherwise might have remained abstract 
ideals and principles. Members joined the Party for a range of reasons. John 
Hostettler recalled being inspired when taken to Earls Court to witness the return 
of the International Brigade from Spain and remembered Paul Robeson singing. 
Brian Pearce had concluded in the 1930s, that 'what we want is some authority 
that will take all these economic factors by the scruff of the neck and make them 
work properly. I could easily have gone fascist on that basis but as it turned out I 
went Communist. '* Morris Schaer recalled that he joined the Young Communist 
League [YCL] for social life, nothing else. 
The Party provided a practical framework for the principles that had 
motivated people to want to change society. Party propaganda made much of the 
idea that Marxism was scientific, while rarely specifying what this meant. Raphael 
Samuel cited Professor George Thompson, for example, who wrote in the YCL 
paper. Challenge, that Communism was more than an idle dream...it is a scientific 
certainty.  Similarly, George Matthews wrote to arrive at truth, it is necessary 
first to make a scientific examination of phenomena...this is the Marxist approach 
to social and political questions.  Samuel characterised this faith in the 
association of social progress with natural science as constituting a metaphysical 
as well as a political space within which British Communists operated, and dubbed 
it the earthly expression of a hidden God.  E.P. Thompson, replying to 
Matthews, cited the CPGBs response to Yugoslavia, saying in that, as so many 
other cases, far from being scientific, we have been guided by faith -  or wrong 
information. 
Propagandists like Matthews, however, remained unclear what they meant 
by scientific. Like so much within the Stalinist political cannon, scientific and 
scientific socialism were epithets whose persistent repetition negated much of 
their meaning. J.D. Bernal, Professor at Birkbeck College London, a founder of 
molecular biology and pioneer in crystallography and water structure, was no more 
specific than Matthews. During the course of a hagiography following Stalins 
death, Bernal conflated ideas about Marxism as social science with the
John Hostettler, interview, 25 June 1997.
Brian Pearce, interview, 1 February 1999.
Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997.
G. Thompson, cited in R. Samuel, T h e  Waning of Collectivity: The Lost World of British 
Communism, Part One. New Left Review. 154 (1985), 41.
  G. Matthews, A Caricature of Our Party" [Reply to Winter W heat in Omsk], World 
News. 3: 26 (30 June 1956), 409.
Samuel, The Lost World of British Communism, Part One., 42.
 E.P. Thompson, Reply to George Matthews, The Reasoner. 1 (July 1956), 11.
technological feat of turning a backward and half-ruined country into a great and 
prosperous industrial and military p o w e r ' I n  the process of merging these two 
ideas, Bernal described Stalin, not only as the greatest figure of contemporary 
history' but continued with the bewildering claim that he was at the same time a 
great scientist. 
The habit of conflating Soviet technological progress with both social and 
natural science within the phrase, scientific socialism, was common throughout 
the literature of the CPGB. The first conflation ignored similar technological 
advances that had occurred under capitalism and, even more dynamically, under 
Italian Fascism and German Nazism. The second conflation between social and 
natural sciences was more interesting. The implication that human development 
was subject to the same immutable forces which appear to govern the natural 
world, ultimately negated altogether need for human agency, either in the form of a 
revolutionary Party or a workers movement. Bernal quoted Stalin, who declared 
that in life which is born and grows day after day is invincible, its progress cannot 
be checked...the proletariat...in the long run, it must conquer. 
Equating human progress with the immutable laws of natural science 
remained typical of the determinism within Stalinist ideology and was consistent 
with the pre-eminence it gave to structural forces within historical development. 
Marx had said that in the social production of their life, men enter into definite 
relations that are indispensable and independent of their will, relations of 
production which correspond to a definite stage of development of their material 
productive f o r c e s . T h i s  expressed a determinist element within Marxism that 
Stalin's phrase, cited by Bernal, reflected and which, along with an emphasis on 
structural causes, characterised the Stalinist approach towards historical change.
The other element within Marxism that stressed human agency and the 
significance of man as a self-creating being was, in general, ignored. Marx wrote 
that the outstanding achievement of Hegels Phanomenologie...\s thus first that 
Hegel conceives the self-creation of man.^ '  Similarly, in the Grundrisse. Marx 
emphasised, nature constructs no machines, no locomotives...They are products 
of human industry, natural materials transformed into instruments of the human
190 J.D. Bernal, Stalin as Scientist, The Modern Quarterly. 8:3 (Summer 1953), 133.
Ibid.
'"lbid 136 '
Marx, Preface to A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy in Marx and Engels 
Selected Works [2 vols.] vol.1 (Moscow, 1958), 362-363.
Marx. Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 fMoscow. 1977), 140.
domination of l abour 'Enge l s  emphasised the role of human agency in human 
development, saying that labour created man himself Far from relying on the 
...defeat of the decaying forces of society whatever their apparent strength at the 
time, human agency in the form of labour, was the crucial element in propelling 
and understanding human historical development.^   Emphasis upon determinism 
and structures allowed, according to Charles Taylor, a facile view which would 
assimilate Marxist values to the more hideous aspects of Soviet practice.  As
E.H. Carr pointed out, however, Stalins role in history...remains paradoxical and 
in some sense contradictory. Although Stalinist ideology referred frequently to 
iron laws of development, in practice, Stalinism in the USSR was voluntarist and 
concerned almost entirely with strategy and tactics'.  The more hideous aspects 
of Soviet practice were justified as the result of historical development. At the 
same time, the relentless exhortations for increased production embodied, for 
example within Stakhanovism, relied upon extreme appeals to voluntarism.
The frequent reference to Marxism as scientific was also, partly, a 
response to the charge made against socialism, that it was idealistic. Marguerite 
Morgan, for example, remembered Communists being attacked as naive, 
misguided, wishy-washy idealists.  The scientific propaganda, however, 
obscured the principles and moral sense that had inspired many to join the Party 
and seemed, to E.P. Thompson, to have created a situation where correct 
formulations...have replaced right and wrong.  Reference to the Soviet Union as 
existing socialism was also, in part, a response to the accusation of idealism. 
Thompsons frustration with those who were more Stalinist than Stalin and who 
represented a monolith without a moral tongue identified him and his colleagues 
in 1956, as representatives of a trend within the Party which stressed human 
agency within historical development as well as the humanism within Marxism.
The main motivation for remaining within the CPGB was, perhaps, the lack 
of any credible alternative outside the Labour Party. As Max Morris said, the point
Marx, Selected Writings in Sociology and Social Philosophy. T.B. Bottomore and M. 
Rubel, eds. (London, 1956), 91.
Engels, 'The Part Played by Labour in the Transition from Ape to Man, Marx and Engels 
Selected Works, vol.2 (Moscow, 1958), 80.
Bernal, Stalin as Scientist, 136.
C. Taylor, 'Marxism and Humanism, New Reasoner 1:2, (Autumn 1957), 92.
Carr, Socialism in One Country vol. 1, 201.
 Ibid., 197.
M. Morgan, Part of the Main. (London, 1990), 24.
Thompson; 'Winter Wheat in Omsk, 408.
See New Reasoner. sub-titled A Quarterly Journal of Socialist Humanism. Also see E.P. 
Thompson, 'Socialist Humanism: An Epistle to the Philistines, New Reasoner. 1:1 (1957) 
105-143. Thompson, 'Agency and Choice - T ,  New Reasoner. 1:5 (Summer 1958), 89-106.
is you were socialists. You didnt see the Labour Party as being a socialist party 
with any conviction at all.' '* The CPGBs roots within the trade union movement 
were also a factor in why members remained in the Party. Such success, however, 
was built upon what Lenin had called the economic struggle of the workers against 
the employers rather than upon the far more extensive and complex...political 
struggle of Social-Democracy.  As discussed below, although the Partys trade 
union intervention had wide credibility, it did not necessarily translate into political 
success for the Party.
British Communisms relationship to the Soviet Union was a crucial factor in 
its genesis and early development and remained a feature of its theory and 
practice during the Cold War. Even for members who, like Morris Schaer, were all 
so involved in our own struggle that they hardly noticed it, Stalinism remained all- 
pervading. It was an influence to which the following thesis refers frequently. It is 
important to bear in mind, however, the political, social and economic 
circumstances that prevailed within Britain during this period. The Suez crisis, for 
example, was a far more prevalent feature of 1956 for most British people than 
either the secret speech or the Soviet invasion of Hungary. Stuart Hall saw the 
Trafalgar Square Suez demonstration as the first mass political rally of its kind in 
the 1950s and as a key moment in inspiring the creation of at least one half of the 
first New Left, the publication of Universities and Left Review.   Stalinism 
combined with these British circumstances to constitute the conditions under which 
the CPGB faced the problems of operating in opposition to the political consensus 
of the 1950s.
British Communism was not an isolated planet spinning in a universe of its 
own domestic conditions. It was one of a number of such planets of varying sizes 
orbiting within a system whose order was dictated by the Soviet Union. The 
following thesis focuses upon the British Party, however. The next chapter 
discusses how the malign effects of Stalinism were already beginning to weigh 
down upon the Party before the events of 1956 caused it to buckle. These effects 
only became truly significant because of the Partys inability to understand the 
nature of Stalinism. As well as this, the Party became unwilling to present itself as 
the clear representative of revolutionary Marxism within Britain. In its efforts to 
retain the respectability it had gained through anti-Fascist struggle and diligent
Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998.
Lenin, What is to be Done?. 109.
S. Hall, The First" New Left: Life and Times in Out of Apathy Voices of the New Left 
Thirty Years On. Oxford University Socialist Discussion Group, eds.(London, 1989), 18.
trade unionism, it became, as an organisation, more of an apologist for, rather 
than an exponent of, the revolutionary ideas of Marxism. Its move from 
revolutionary to oppositionist party meant that an already undistinguished 
theoretical tradition gave way almost completely to an often uninspiring emphasis 
on practical day to day work.   As Doris Lessing said, the Communist Party is 
largely composed of people who arent really political at all, but who have a 
powerful sense of service.
H. Pollitt, T h e  20 Congress of the CPSU and the Role of Stalin, 280. 
Lessing, The Golden Notebook. 148.
Chapter 2 
Bullets in the East, Ballots in the West
This chapter focuses upon a contradiction. Whilst the British Party justified 
violent aspects of state terror in the Soviet Union, its domestic programme 
increasingly denied the possibility of revolution in favour of elections. In the years 
when the CPGB advocated a far less painful...transition to socialism, it defended, 
just as passionately, the pain inflicted upon Soviet and Hungarian citizens by Stalin 
and Khruschev.^ The chapter analyses factors which contributed to the decline of 
British Communism from the height of its success during World War II. This decline is 
measured in terms of membership, popular vote and sales of the Dailv Worker.
The chapter begins by looking at how the British Party responded to Stalins 
death. It continues with a detailed example of how British Communism previously had 
colluded with Stalinism in sanitising some of its grossest aspects, focusing upon its 
response to reports of Soviet anti-Semitic propaganda and terror that emerged at the 
end of the 1940s. This reveals a characteristic response where outright condemnation 
of such rumours as capitalist propaganda was, after a period of time, superseded by 
declarations of remorse as denial became increasingly untenable.
Significantly, this occurred before 1956 and is, therefore, important in two ways. 
In terms of the Partys decline, it demonstrates that, both when measured by 
quantative criteria and in terms of its long-term historical causes, this decline did not 
begin with the revelatory moment of 1956, but was the ongoing effect of contradictions 
that had existed since the late 1920s. Secondly, it is significant in terms of d
stalinisation. In the Soviet Union during the period following Stalins death, the Moscow 
regime attempted to distance itself from an identification with Stalin, an attempt 
reinforced by the Malenkov Amnesty. In 1956, however, the new regime demonstrated 
that the distance between itself and Stalin was narrower than most observers had 
calculated as it ordered the violent suppression of the Hungarian uprising. The British 
Partys response to this can be compared with its response to Soviet anti-Semitism 
before so-called de-Stalinisation and suggests that the process itself was, at best, a 
superficial exercise in both countries.
Throughout the 1950s, the British leadership continued to see its job as 
maintaining the illusion that the Soviet Union was the concrete expression of Marxism. 
Most within the membership accepted this for most of the time. Even when members
  H Pollitt, Looking Ahead. 92. The British Road to Socialism (London, 1951), 14.
felt disquiet over some of the rumours, their political perspective remained dominated 
by the idea that the USSR and socialism were, broadly, synonymous. As discussed in 
the previous chapter, the ideological hold of Stalinism meant that, however much they 
sought to avoid it, members felt bound to defend the practices of successive Soviet 
regimes. Max Morris articulated the problem, saying imagine having to defend...the 
Russian Brides case... it stuck in ones throat. People like myself just kept quiet.  Morris 
remembered Marjorie Pollitt coming to my branch meeting to give us a defence of... 
banning the marriages...but these were incomprehensible...they still are.^
The description of 1956 as a watershed year; a radical discontinuity in British 
Communist history, is common within Communist historiography.'* Such a view, 
however, has minimised important continuities in the preceding history which, together, 
reveal a longer term process of decline. Whilst many in the Party perceived of 1956 as 
an apocalyptic moment, several discernible pressures, both internal and external, had 
accumulated since 1945 which contributed to this moment. One such pressure was the 
influence of Stalinism but, as discussed previously, there were also significant internal 
factors. The Partys drift away from a revolutionary perspective towards one of radical 
reformist opposition, demonstrated an incongruous optimism with regard to its own 
electoral potential, along with a pessimism with regard to the potential of revolution. 
Building the Party as the vanguard of potential working class power had given it a 
unique role and a specific focus within the politically uninspiring world of the British 
labour movement. Whilst such a position often made the Party appear marginal, it 
nevertheless offered a clear pole of attraction for those disillusioned by the Labour 
Party and their own trade union leaders. The CPGBs abandonment of this role as 
representing what Perry Anderson has called structured socialist ideology within 
Britain, was an attempt to escape from the political margins. The tiny, but sharply 
illuminated, area it had occupied in the half-light of British politics, however, was 
perceptibly dimmed once the revolutionary beam had been turned off.
The Partys programme. The British Road to Socialism, reflected its pessimism 
about revolution along with an unfounded optimism about its own electoral potential. It 
was not a programme which acknowledged the realities of the Partys position within 
1950s Britain. Although, at the programmes inception, the Party retained two MPs, by 
the time of its publication, it had none and the Partys total vote in the General Election 
was less than 100,000. In reality, as Morris Schaer put it, the programme was a get
 Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998. 
  Ibid.
 See G. Matthews, All For the Cause: The Communist Partv 1920-1980. (London, 1980)
 P. Anderson, 'Origins of the Present Crisis, New Left Review 23, (January to February 
1964).
out, an alternative to the more difficult arguments about revolution. This altered the 
nature of Party work, as huge amounts of individual effort were invested in return for 
tiny numbers of votes. In 1950, for example, 38,853 members managed to capture just 
92,000 votes, as the Party stood 100 candidates at the General Election/ The 
perspective was also a shift from the Marxist idea of the self-emancipation of the 
working class, to one where such emancipation was to be carried out by a parliament. 
Parliament, local councils and their respective elections were no longer seen as forums 
for propaganda about socialism and for demonstrating the inadequacy of reformist 
leaders, but became ends in themselves.
It is difficult to be sure whether people voted for Communist candidates because 
they were good, hard-working and conscientious individuals or because voters agreed 
with the overthrow of the capitalist system and its replacement with socialism. The first 
of these was not really a vote for socialism and possibly not even a political act at all, 
but reflected Doris Lessings characterisation of Party members powerful sense of 
service. If people were voting for the overthrow of capitalism, on the other hand, then 
they might, more profitably, have been perceived as potential members.
This may explain why the Communist vote remained persistently low. Rosa 
Luxemburg had said, in the bourgeois society the role of Social Democracy is that of 
opposition party. The CPGB could claim to represent opposition to the political 
consensus and to the quasi-corporatist structure it administered. For the Communist 
Party to win enough votes to make its strategy coherent, either a substantial part of that 
political consensus would need to shift radically to the left or, in order to become part of 
it, the Party would need to jettison ideas about the overthrow of the existing order. In 
the end, neither happened. In what the Party characterised as the most significant 
leftward shift in British politics in 1945, the CPGB still only managed to achieve two 
MPs. This indicates the extent to which the political centre of gravity within Britain 
would have needed to move in order to make the Partys programme viable. In reality, 
such a radical shift could occur only when confidence in the existing political 
establishment of Conservative and Labour administrations was so low that people 
would seriously begin to look elsewhere. A situation, in Jrgen Habermass terms, of a
 Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997.
  CPGB figures in Newton, The Sociology of British Communism. 160. F.W.S. Craig, British 
Parliamentary Election Results 1949-1973 (Chichester, 1983). A. Sked and C. Cook, Post-War 
Britain. A Political History (Harmondsworth, 1990), 85.
 Lessing. The Golden Notebook. 148.
 R. Luxemburg, Selected Speeches and Writings (Berlin, 1955), 64.
crisis of legitimation, in itself, potentially revolutionary/^ The CPGBs only hope of 
achieving a position where it could administer a transition to socialism was in a situation 
where it would have to act as a revolutionary organisation. The existence of The British 
Road to Socialism was, in itself, a denial of such a possibility, whilst at the same time, it 
promoted an unrealistic optimism about the possibilities of electoral success. In both 
ways, it constituted the politics of despair.
Stalins death
The death of Stalin was announced on 6 March 1953. Harry Pollitts eulogy in 
the Dailv Worker. We Honour Him With a Pledge, was an echo of Stalins own Oath to 
Lenin of 1923.^   Pollitt described Stalin as loved as no other man in world history has 
ever been loved by all working people and called him the man of steel and vision, who 
proved by mighty deeds that there are no obstacles which Bolsheviks cannot 
overcome.Four  days after the death, R.P. Dutt, the Partys vice-chair, spoke at 
Shoreditch Town Hall, of the radiance of the immortal creative genius whose lifework 
...has led the way in liberating one-third of humanity...brought socialism from a dream 
to a joyful reality...opening up new vistas of uncharted advance to Communism. 
James Klugmann, in the Jewish Clarion, declared creatively, that side by side with 
Lenin, Stalin built up and strengthened the Communist Party. Together with Lenin he 
was the inspirer and leader of the Great October Revolution.
Whether all members were so affected is not certain. Max Morris recalled being 
at a meeting at the time where most people were shocked. When asked what he felt 
about Stalin, however, Morris replied, mixed feelings, but lets be clear, most members 
of the Communist Party just tolerated it all...some of it you had to take with a large 
pinch of salt.  Morris, however, had himself written of the new life that is being built in 
the Soviet Union, about how culture, in the widest sense of the word, belongs to the 
people and of the fullness and richness of Soviet life.  In the Educational Bulletin 
which Morris edited, G.C.T. Giles echoed the hallelujahs of Dutt and Pollitt. Giles
J. Habermas, Legitimation Crisis. (London, 1976).
D. Held, Introduction to Critical Theory: Horkheimer to Habermas (Cambridge, 1995), 249- 
H. Pollitt, W e Honour Him With a Pledge, Dailv Worker (6 March 1953).
Ibid.
Cited in Callaghan, Raiani Palme Dutt. 265.
J. Klugmann, Stalins Work Lives On For Ever, Jewish Clarion. 73 (April 1953), 1.
Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998. Morris was a leading member of the National Union 
of Teachers. He-was founding editor of the Party teachers journal. Education Bulletin which 
became Education Todav in November/December, 1953.
M. Morris, Where Culture Belongs to the People, World News and Views 32:40 (11 
October 1952), 477-8.
described Stalin as having faith in the common people, mastery of the facts, a 
profound theoretical understanding, simplicity of character and s t y l e . H e  described 
how Stalin understood the material as well as the spiritual basis of popular progress.  
Stalin, Giles suggested, had demonstrated both qualities when he addressed the First 
Conference of Stakhanovites... Life has improved comrades. Life has become more 
joyous. And when life is joyous, work goes well".
Some members shared their leaders' shock and grief. Helen Mason, for 
example, said I can remember when Stalin died, I thought it was awful.  Morris 
Schaer said that many British people still had a lot of respect for Stalin for what he did 
in the War...so he killed a few million Communists -  so what?^  Schaer went on to say 
that many Communists had seen Stalin as one of the real leaders of world socialism, a 
kindly uncle...deep thinker and lover of children and humanity.
The Communist Party was not alone in its panegyrics following Stalins death. 
The Fabian and anti-Communist New Statesman, for example, maintained that Stalins 
achievements are beyond dispute and that many first hand account? confirm the 
popular portrait of an extraordinary human being. A Communist with a sense of 
humour, even if a macabre one, is a rarity.  Even The Times admitted that in Russia 
and the adjacent Communist states Marshall Stalin...occupied a position of personal 
eminence almost without parallel in the history of the w o r l d .T h e  following day, the 
Manchester Guardian noted that, although the British Parliament did not adjourn 
because Stalin was not officially a head of state, in India, flags were flown at half- 
mast.^ The paper commented that Mr Nehrus speech was curiously emotional.  The 
Times noted that the flag of the United Nations flew at half mast and that, before 
resuming its debate on Korea, the Political Committee stood for a moment in silence. 
All this was, of course, routine on such occasions. It is notable, however, that a range 
of publications from the Dailv Worker and World News through to The Times and The 
Listener referred, immediately after his death, to Stalins greatness, his achievement in 
industrialising the Soviet Union and particularly his military acumen during World War
G.C.T. Giles, T he  Humanity of Joseph Stalin, Educational Bulletin. 5:5 (June 1953).
Ibid.
Ibid.
Helen Mason, interview, 9 July, 1997.
Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997.
Ibid.
The World Without Stalin [editorial] New Statesman and Nation [Henceforward, New 
Statesman (7 March 1953), 248.
Marshall Joseph Stalin, The Times (March 6 1953), 7.
Manchester Guardian. (7 March 1953), 5 
Ibid.
'Mr Vyshinsky On Way Home, The Times (7 March 1953), 5.
11.  Elsewhere, such as in West Berlin, the judgement on Stalin was, unsurprisingly, 
less enthusiastic. The Manchester Guardian quoted from Per Abend which asked what 
after all, are Mr Stalins achievements? The answers are - annihilation of the middle- 
class, the organised starving to death of three million Ukrainians, complicity in Hitlers 
war, the massacre of the Poles at Katyn, enslavement of a large part of Europe and the 
menacing of the rest of the world.
The popular perception of Stalin as the main bulwark against Nazism probably 
best explains these positive responses following his death. In addition, by 1953, the 
Cold War had raised circumstances which demanded diplomacy rather than 
antagonism. If praising Stalin was part of the Wests diplomatic agenda, however, it 
must have had little resonance in Moscow where, after a barely decent period of 
mourning, the new regime proceeded to bury him as soon as possible. There was a 
discernible retreat away from identification with Stalin and Stalinism. As The Times 
noted, barely a month after Stalins death, 'the laudatory tributes and the adulation of 
Stalin in the Soviet press and on the radio have suddenly ceased. The article 
continued with the news, however, that in some Communist countries, Stalins name is 
still being used to extract production pledges from workers and peasants in a strength 
through grief campaign.
At the 23rd Congress of the CPGB in April, 1954 there was virtually no mention 
of Stalin from delegates and none at all from the Partys leadership. In its report to the 
Congress, the Executive Committee took just four lines to mention that Stalins death 
was the occasion for a nationwide expression of g r i e f . A t  the Congress, John Gollan 
referred to the role of the leading Communist Party of the world, the Party which is a 
model to all communists, but did not mention Stalin or his death. Whether such an 
omission constituted part of a coherent policy is unclear.^
Within the Soviet Union, several events coincided with the retreat from 
identification with Stalin. Malenkov, who, like Stalin, had occupied the dual posts of 
Prime Minister and First Secretary (CPSU), resigned from the second of these jobs 
almost immediately on 14 March 1953 and was replaced by Khruschev. One of the
See T. Barman and A. Birse, The Death of Mr Stalin, The Listener (12 March 1953) 413-4.
^  How Divided Germany Heard of Stalins Death; Some Bitter Comments in the W est, 
Manchester Guardian (7 March 1953), 7.
 Less Adulation of Stalin, The Times (6 April 1953), 5.
' Ibid.
 Report of the Executive Committee to the 23  Congress of the CPGB [EC circular] (1954) 5. 
 J. Gollan, Reply to Discussion at 23"  Congress CPGB (16-19 April 1954), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Cong/08/06.
^  Nothing in the Executive or Political Committee minutes between Stalins death and the 24*' 
Congress suggests that such a policy existed.
 Malenkov survived as Prime Minister until February 1955. He was replaced by Bulganin.
first acts of the new regime, before Malenkovs resignation, was what Alexander Werth 
referred to as The Malenkov Amnesty.  Prisoners with sentences of not more than 
five years were released, along with prisoners in a number of other categories.^ 
According to New Statesman, such action constituted something more significant, an 
emphasis on civil rights and the guarantees of personal freedom.
The response to state terror
According to Harrison E. Salisbury, Stalins death could not have come at a 
better time for some, as I thought to myself that morning [4 March 1953, the day of 
Stalins stroke]...if Stalin was dying a natural death it was the luckiest thing that had 
ever happened to the men who stood closest to him. Commentators such as 
Salisbury had identified the existence of a new Stalinist terror as early as 1948. 
Salisbury described a grim and fear ridden atmosphere, when it seemed to me that by 
now I could recognise fear in the streets...it was quite apparent that Russia stood on 
the brink of a reign of terror beside which that of the thirties would seem trivial.  The 
key feature of this latest terror was anti-Semitism. The majority of arrests between 1948 
and 1952 were of people with Jewish names or known Jews, including Vyacheslav, 
Molotovs wife, who was banished to Siberia. Salisbury noted that any Jew was a fair 
target.'*  Alexander Werth commented that it is certainly true that there has in recent 
years been a good deal of ambiguity in the Soviet Governments attitude to the Jews.  
Also during this period, the regime closed both the Jewish theatre and the Jewish 
newspaper in Moscow. It also closed the Jewish publishing house and dissolved the 
Jewish anti-fascist Committee between 1948 and Stalins death."*
 A. Werth, T h e  Malenkov Amnesty, New Statesman (11 April 1953), 418.
  Ibid. These included prisoners convicted of crimes committed in their official capacity, 
mothers of small children, pregnant women, offenders under 18, women over 50, men over 55 
and the incurably sick.
 See T h e  New Soviet Phase [editorial]. New Statesman (11 April 1953), 413. Also H E. 
Salisbury, An American in Russia (New York, 1955) 30. Salisbury was Soviet Correspondent 
for the New York Times.
 Ibid., 157. Salisbury offered no more than this implication that Stalins death may have had 
other than natural causes.
Ibid., 22 and 141-2.
Ibid., 152.
A. Werth, Jews in Russia, New Statesman (4 January 1953), 87.
Also see Dr I. Brodie [Chief Rabbi], The Listener (22 January1953), 136.
"* Salisbury, An American in Russia. 23. Einheit was the only Yiddish paper in Moscow. The 
All Jewish anti-Fascist Committee was founded to organise against the threat of Nazi 
aggression before World W ar II. Mikhoels, a leading Soviet actor, had been Chairman until 
1948, when he was suddenly dismissed. It was later discovered he had been murdered. In 
1957, Hyman Levy discovered that the entire Committee had been liquidated by arrest and 
murder in 1949, their families deported to labour camps. Following the 20** Congress, they 
were rehabilitated. World News 4: 42 (12 January 1957), 20.
The British Party journal, the Jewish Clarion, however, was emphatic in its 
persistent denial of the claims of anti-Semitism. The journals attitude provides an 
insight into the way the CPGB often responded to uncomfortable information about the 
Soviet Union. Although aimed at Jewish Socialists, the Jewish Clarion was more 
concerned with sustaining an uncritical view of the Soviet Union than with investigating 
the validity or otherwise of claims about the regimes anti-Semitism.
As early as 1948, when rumours about the new terror were emerging, Hymie 
Fagan wrote why is it that in Russia, once the graveyard of the Jews under the Tsar, 
there is no longer anti-Semitism?.' '* Two months later, Ivor Montague and Phil Piratin 
wrote two articles under the headline Lies that can lead to Genocide.'*  Montague 
began, suggesting that a glance through the pages of the Jewish press finds ten-a- 
penny anti-Soviet slanders. Not one can stand the least contact with reality.'* He 
admitted that it is correct that the Jewish Committee Against Fascism no longer exists 
as a separate body, but concluded why now should there be such a special committee 
and not one for every other national group in the USSR?'*  Montague identified false 
witness, evil tongue; thoughtless repetition of anothers rumour directed against the 
USSR as propaganda attacks constituting a crime against humanity.'* Phil Piratin, MP 
for Stepney at this time, continued, responding to the Vienna Correspondent of the 
Zionist Review who had accused the Soviet Union of anti-Semitic practices. Piratin 
claimed that the rumours had emanated from the State Department in Washington and 
its unofficial Jewish Division, the All American Jewish Committee. '*
In 1950, H.C. Creighton dismissed the possibility of anti-Semitism in the USSR 
in disingenuous terms, assuring readers that the truth, of course is that anti-Semitism 
is a criminal offence in the USSR. Reuben Falber asked, in 1952, what is the 
purpose of the intense campaign being conducted among Jews alleging the existence 
of anti-Semitism in the Soviet Union.* As late as 1953, Jack Gaster defended The
'*'* H. Fagan, Strong Communist Party for Peace, Jewish Clarion. 30 (May 1948), 3.
'* I. Monague, The Slanders and the Facts, Jewish Clarion. 42 (December 1949), 4.
'* Ibid.
'*  Ibid.
'* Ibid.
'* P. Piratin., ibid. Stepney was an East London constituency with a large Jewish population. 
 H.C. Creighton, Britain Needs Soviet Friendship, Jewish Clarion. 49 (July 1950), 2.
R. Falber, Warmongers and anti-Semitism, Jewish Clarion. 61 (February 1952), 1.
Prague Trial, accusing Rudolf Slnsk, its chief victim and a Jew, of being a Zionist 
who, in 1927, showed Trotskyist deviation.
The Jewish Clarions advocacy of the Soviet Union continued throughout a 
particularly unpleasant episode at the beginning of 1953, known as the Doctors Plot. 
On 13 January, nine doctors who worked in the Kremlin were imprisoned for being 
members of a diversionary group of criminals and terrorists whom Pravda accused 
of having connections, through Zionism, to British and American intelligence.^ The 
doctors, six of whom were Jewish, were tortured, imprisoned and finally sentenced to 
death for a number of crimes and assassination attempts, including the murder of 
Zhadanov who, it was claimed, had been deliberately prescribed the wrong medication 
for his weak heart. The doctors were denounced by a colleague, L.F. Timashuk, who 
was rewarded for her efforts with the Award of Lenin. According to Salisbury, the plot 
was invented by Stalin as a move against Chief of Secret Police, Lavrenti Beria. 
Salisbury cited in evidence, the initial report in Pravda which suggested, pointedly, that 
the coalition of western intelligence and the doctors was able to carry out its operations 
through the slackness of the Soviet Security O r g a n s . The Times supported this 
interpretation and, upon the release of the Doctors, reported both Pravda and Izvestia 
as referring to the Former Ministry of State Security .
Hymie Fagan reported in the Jewish Clarion, that nine doctors have been 
arrested on charges which include espionage and murder...some of these men are 
stated to be political Zionists who committed their crimes under direction of the 
Joint. Fagan demanded a more accurate interpretation of the facts, calling for proof 
of anti-Semitism in the USSR. The charges, claimed Fagan, contained no attack on 
Jews or accusations against Jews as Jews. The charges stated the accused were 
members of a Jewish bourgeois nationalist organisation -  an entirely different thing, 
especially when as it is well known, anti-Semitism is a crime in the USSR.
 J. Gaster, The Prague Trial, Jewish Clarion. 70 (January 1953). Slnsk was General 
Secretary of the Czech Communist Party (CPCz) after February 1948. In October of that year, 
following exhortations from Moscow, he introduced a Law for the Protection of the Republic, 
introduced Labour Camps and forcibly removed "reactionaries from the towns. Despite such 
Stalinist credentials, following economic difficulties in 1951, he was deposed by Gottwald and 
Zpotock. In November 1951, Stalin sent Mikoyan to Prague to demand Slnsks arrest. 
Along with 13 other defendants (11 of whom were Jews), Slnsk was tried and hanged.
 Russian Doctors Released, The Times (4 April 1953). On their release, it was revealed that 
there had been 15 doctors.
 Salisbury, An American in Russia. 151.
 Russian Doctors Released, The Times.
 H. Fagan, Anti-Soviet Slander and the Press, Jewish Clarion. 70 (January 1953), 2. The 
Joint was the Joint Distribution Committee- a charitable Jewish Organisation.
 Ibid.
According to Alison Macleod, although the facts about Stalins anti-Semitism 
were becoming pretty well known in the West...the only people who wouldnt admit 
them were Communists.R eferring to the Doctors Plot, she recalled an evening over 
a Chinese meal with Alexander Baron while he told us what was happening, and we 
said no it couldnt be, it simply couldnt be true,. When the Doctors were released, 
however, Macleods husband. Jack Selford, said tell them to come to dinner...theyll 
eat chicken and well eat humble pie.
A process of absolution?
The Jewish Clarion did not report the release of the Doctors and barely 
mentioned anti-Semitism for the next three years. In the middle of 1956, however, the 
journal reproduced an article, Our Anguish and Our Solace, which had appeared in the 
Polish Jewish Workers paper, Folksztvme. The article suggested that the tumour of 
the cult of personality...enabled the Beria clique to provoke inter-nation conflict (in the 
Soviet Union) and led to a certain growth of nationalism and anti-Semitism. The 
Folksztvme article referred to the Jewish anti-Fascist Committee, asking how did it 
happen then that this representative Jewish body...was suddenly liquidated after the 
war without rhyme or reason, and its leaders sentenced to death?
The editorial in the subsequent edition of the Jewish Clarion stated that 
condemnation is not enough.'  The journal offered a characteristic response by British 
Communism once it had accepted the truth about Soviet practices. Adopting a 
confessional tone, the editorial said responsibility to our readers...to every Jew who 
has admired, however grudgingly, the Soviet Unions nationalities policy, and our 
responsibility to ourselves...as Jewish Communists require that we call for the fullest 
details of what occurred and the fullest explanation of how such things could have 
come about in the land of Socialism. The editorial offered some defence of its own 
actions, saying that it would have found it incredible that there could be racial 
discrimination in the land of Socialism. Such a thing, it continued, was inconsistent 
with Communist principles and with the practices of the USSR. The editorial referred 
to the All Jewish anti-Fascist Committee saying, when we were asked from 1948
 Alison Macleod, interview, 15 October 1997.
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
 Our Anguish and Our Solace [editorial], Jewish Clarion. 8 [New Series] (June 1956), 2.
Ibid.
 Ibid.
 "After the 20*  Congress [editorial], Jewish Clarion. 9 (July-August 1956), 3.
 Ibid.
lbid., 8
onwards: Where are Mikhoels and Feffer? we did not claim to know the answer. It 
justified its disinterest in the committees disappearance, adding obliquely, but we did 
know there was a cold war and that those who were most prominent in making these 
allegations against the Soviet Union were the least willing to campaign against German 
rearmament. The journal admitted that its defence of Soviet practices had been 
based upon an assumption that while we were aware that certain Jewish cultural 
institutions had closed, that Yiddish cultural activities had ceased and that there was 
uncertainty about the whereabouts and doings of some leading Jewish figures they 
had, nevertheless, presumed that all was in order and that everything that had 
occurred could have nothing less than the fullest justification. The journal confessed 
that its scant treatment of the Doctors Plot...at the time reflected some uneasiness. 
In the same issue, Hyman Levy, in a letter entitled Blot on the History of 
Socialism, referred to an editorial in the previous issue as a mere bandage across a 
deep and festering wound.R ep ly ing  to Levy, however, a less repentant Max Druck 
cited the great economic advances, the transformation of a backward peasant country 
into a great world industrial power .Druck  agreed that because of our historical 
background it is understandable that Jewish Communists should feel more deeply hurt 
than others.  He continued, however, I do feel that both the Editorial and Professor 
Levys letter, whilst genuinely expressing the emotional upset felt by many of us, tend 
to give a distorted picture and suggested, not to see these abuses alongside the 
unprecedented difficulties in building the first socialist country in the world is to place 
them out of context. "* By March 1957, the confessional was, once again, vacated as 
Party Chairman Willie Gallacher declared, as a result of my inquiries I am satisfied that 
at no time was there, or is there, anti-Semitism in the Soviet Union.
In 1957, eight years after Salisbury had made his initial observations about 
Soviet anti-Semitism and despite Gallachers protestations, the CPGB addressed the 
question of anti-Semitism within the Soviet Union. The Party published a statement in 
World News sub-titled Jews in the Soviet Union.  The task of investigating specific
  Ibid. Feffer succeeded Mikhoels in 1948.
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
Ibid.
H. Levy, Blot on the History of Socialism [letter], Jewish Clarion. 9: 2.
M, Druck, Socialism Will Triumph-A Reply to Hyman Levy, Jewish Clarion. 10 (September 
1956), 3.
Ibid.
Ibid.
W. Gallacher,. There was no Anti-Semitism in the Soviet Union says Willie Gallacher, 
Jewish Clarion. 12 (March 1957), 2.
British Communists and the Soviet Union 2; Jews in the Soviet Union, World News. 4: 2 
(12 January 1957), 20-21.
charges in the Folksztyme' was assigned to Hyman Levy/^ The statement said that the 
charges specifically named a number of Jewish writers, artists and intellectuals as 
having been tortured and physically destroyed, particularly during the period 1948-52/ 
Levys report noted that the 1952 edition of the Soviet Encvclopaedia did not refer to 
the fact that Marx was a Jew. 1948-52 became known to Jews in Russia as The Black 
Years...the period during which many Jews were dismissed from their posts.  Levy 
concluded that since the death of Stalin, tremendous efforts are being made to make 
amends for this terrible state of affairs, and to prevent it ever happening again. The 
report ended, however, with the news that Suslov (Chair Central Committee CPSU) 
was still refusing to reinstate the Jewish Theatre and the Yiddish newspaper.^
In April 1957, Levy wrote it is easy to understand the dilemma in which the 
leadership of the British Communist Party was placed when, if they knew the facts, their 
public admission might have weakened Soviet defence. But during the past seven 
years such considerations have had no weight. To persist in hiding such important 
historical data was, therefore, a betrayal of Marxism. Levys journey towards this 
conclusion was shared by those who left the Party between the end of 1956 and 1957 
as well as by some who, for a variety of reasons, stayed in.
The long-term decline of British Communism
The cause of this biggest exodus in the Partys history has been laid at the 
double doors of Khruschevs secret speech and his subsequent invasion of Hungary in 
the same year. There had, however, been a steady decline in membership since the 
war. Although the figure fell from 33, 236 for "those registered at or about March, 1956 
to 24, 670 in February 1958, it had already fallen by 23 per cent from a claimed figure 
of 43,000 in 1948. CPGB historiography has emphasised the dramatic impact of 
1956. This has had the effect of minimising the reality of this previous decline as writers 
like George Matthews, for example, have, characteristically, described 1956 as a 
Watershed Year."* Matthews focused upon the Suez crisis in which British
Ibid., 20.
 Ibid.
Ibid.
 Ibid., 21.
' Ibid., 20 and 21.
  H. Levy, A Marxist Party? New Statesman. (27 April 1957), 535.
 A. Hutt, Review of Daily Worker Circulation (22 June 1956), 5, Manchester, 
CP/lnd/misc/Hutt/2/1. 1956 figure: Newton The Sociology of British Communism. 160. 1948 
figure: Dailv Worker (1 May 1948). Newton gave figures for 1947 and 1950 as 38,579 and 
38,853 respectively. The drop in membership between 1948-1957 was around 30% with a 
drop of around 20% between 1956 and 1957.
Imperialism has suffered a major defeat, before mentioning the secret speech, 
however On Hungary, Matthews admitted that, at the time the Party supports the 
Soviet intervention in Hungary, in 1980, however, with the benefit of 24 years 
hindsight, he continued to insist that the intervention was 'to defeat the 
counterrevolution and preserve socialism.
In 1986, Marxism Todav. in its introduction to Gareth Stedman Jones interview 
with Eric Hobsbawm called 1956 a turning point which, it stressed, is a label which 
can be attached without a shade of embarrassment. In this interview, Hobsbawm 
judged that the events of 1956 began to represent a potential break-up of the 
international communist movement, and thats what happened. Katherine Hudson, 
whilst acknowledging the longer term nature of the CPGBs problems, nevertheless 
perceived of 1956 as the cause of the Partys subsequent decline, saying until... 1989, 
and the disintegration of the Soviet Union in 1991, no single year in the history of the 
international communist movement had had such a powerful negative impact on the 
movement itself, and on its standing in the world, as 1956. These perspectives 
characterise 1956 as a unique moment of discontinuity in the history of the CPGB. 
They also see the events of that year as being the cause of the subsequent protracted 
decline of Communism, rather than as an effect of Stalinisms irreconcilable 
contradictions. Although 1956 represented a particularly acute crisis within this decline, 
it was, nevertheless part of a long-term process.
In a broader periodization, Willie Thompson in The Good Old Cause, applied the 
epithet Watershed to the period 1951 to 1957. This spanned the life of the first 
edition of The British Road to Socialism, whose explicit statement of reformism was 
modified in a version produced in 1957. The years 1951 to 1957, beginning with the 
loss of the two Communist MPs in 1950, ending with the Special Congress and the 
subsequent revival of the Party in the midst of increased strike activity in 1957, also 
marks an important period of crisis. It should be borne in mind, however, that Pollitts 
Looking Ahead had appeared in 1947 and was, if anything, more explicit than the 
British Road to Socialism, both about the parliamentary road and the model of the
 Matthews, All for the Cause The Communist Party 1920-1980. 22. Matthews was Assistant 
Secretary of the Party in the 1950s and 1960s and succeeded Campbell as editor of the Dailv 
Worker.
Ibid., 22.
 Ibid.
  1956, Marxism Todav (November 1986), 16.
 E. Hobsbawm, interview with G. Stedman Jones, 1956(November 1986), 23.
 K. Hudson, T h e  Double Blow; 1956 and the Communist Party of Great Britain.
 W . Thompson, The Good Old Cause British Communism 1920-1991 91-113.
Peoples Democracies. Whilst Thompsons extended perspective has merit, it 
probably does not go far enough in identifying the long term continuities within CPGB 
history that contributed towards its decline. The major discontinuity within this history 
was World War II, rather than 1956. The war represented an unprecedented and 
unique set of circumstances, where arguments about Marxism and revolution became 
secondary to all out support for the Soviet Union and anti-Nazism. For the first and last 
time in its existence, the Party cut with, rather than against, the grain of public political 
sentiment. This had an enormous impact upon the Partys popularity and credibility. 
Perhaps it was the experience of the war years and the sweet taste of relative 
popularity which encouraged the Party to mitigate its revolutionary position by an 
appeal to the more comfortable and familiar concepts of parliamentary representation 
and reform.
Many writers, including Willie Thompson, have tended towards a mono-causal 
perspective when diagnosing the reasons for the Partys decline. Moreen Branson, for 
example, wrote that the main mistakes which the party made arose from its attitude to 
the Soviet Union.S im ila rly , Thompson wrote that the binding element which tied 
together all the political and organisational strands was less the Partys vision of a 
socialist Britain...than its relation to the existing homelands of socialism and most 
importantly the USSR...which ultimately determined its policies, its practice and its 
standing among the British public. Whilst this was undoubtedly true, this view which 
emphasises the external pressures of the Soviet Union, has minimised the British 
Partys internal contradictions between Marxist and Stalinist ideologies, Bolshevik 
structure and reformist practice. Thompson reinforced Hudson and Hobsbawms view 
of 1956 as being of unique significance as he wrote, it is not too fanciful to see the 
remainder of the CPs history as representing the working out of the consequences of 
its 25'*  Congress.'
Analyses which view 1956 as a political bombshell, reflect the response of 
members such as Eric Hobsbawm for whom Khruschevs revelations had come 
absolutely out of the blue. This may, in turn, reflect the fact that much of this history 
emanated from within the CPGB and, on the whole, represents a biographical 
perspective which has tended to concentrate upon how Party members reacted to 
events, rather than focusing upon longer term causes.
 Pollitt, Looking Ahead. 85-97. J. Gollan, Peoples Democracy For Britain (London, 1952).
 N. Branson History of the Communist Party of Great Britain [2 vols.], vol.2, 1941-1951 
(London 1997), 239.
 Thompson, The Good Old Cause. 93 
^lbid., 113.
 Hobsbawm, interview with Stedman Jones, 1956, 17.
These writers have also adopted a perspective in which the Soviet Union 
constituted an ever present feature within the political consciousness of individual 
Communists. Whilst Stalinism was a determining factor in this political consciousness, 
many members remained only dimly aware of events within the Soviet Union. Several 
members agreed with John Hostettler, who said I personally knew nothing about the 
problems in the Soviet Union until Khruschevs speech and I think most others were in 
the same position. Hostettler suggested that it may have been different for the 
leadership, however, asking whether leaders like Harry Pollitt who would go to the 
Soviet Union could feel anything, I dont know, but those I mixed with Im sure knew 
nothing, and just felt we were hard pressed with our backs to the wall. Morris Schaer 
agreed, saying that we were worried about this, the ordinary Party member didnt like 
what he was hearing, but he was so involved in his own struggles, that it didnt have 
much effect on them. Dennis Ogden answered that it was not the case that all 
Communists supported the Soviet Union unconditionally and unreservedly...many 
spoke with two voices...one voice for the public...but in private there were all kinds of 
doubts.
Ruth Fisher had been a telephonist at the Dailv Worker until she left the Party 
after Hungary. She wrote of the period before Khruschevs secret speech, saying prior 
to that all stories people tried to tell about what might be happening in the Soviet Union 
were discounted as part of cold-war propaganda. S h e  went on to speculate about 
how Dailv Worker editor J R. Campbell had what might be called hostages to fortune 
its more understandable that they might put the personal safety of friends and family 
before coming clean about what they knew.  Ruth Fisher was referring to Campbells 
stepson, William, who had become a Soviet citizen in 1939 and performed in Soviet 
theatres as Villi the Clown. In the years preceding Stalins death, William was banned 
from performing because of his British or ig ins.Ruth Fisher believed that Campbells 
silence about Soviet anti-Semitism may, not unnaturally, have been connected to these 
circumstances. Bob Leeson who joined the Party in 1949, wrote, my concerns were 
only indirectly with the Soviet Union...what troubled me was the departure of the
96 John Hostettler, interview, 25 June 1997.
  Ibid.
 Morris Schaer, interview, July 9 1997.
 Dennis Ogden,-interview, 3 November 1997.
Ruth Fisher, written reply to author 30 November 1997.
Ibid.
W . Campbell, Villi the Clown (London, 1981). Macleod, The Death of Uncle Joe. 268.
Labour Government from the policies of 1945...my focus, essentially was this 
country'.
Stalinism, in its ideological guise of Marxist-Leninism and with its highly 
bureaucratic organisational structure, exerted a powerful, if sometimes only vaguely 
perceived, influence over British Communism. Members felt bound to defend the 
activities of the Soviet regime when it became necessary. Where, however, did the line 
exist between the perception of Stalinism as the ideological and concrete expression of 
Marxism and Leninism and the acceptance of Stalinist practices within the Soviet 
Union? Stalinism, as the foundation upon which British Communism had developed, 
determined, not only its ideology, discourse and practice, but had a determining effect 
upon the political consciousness of its members. This ideological determining, however, 
is not the same as saying that the Soviet Union dominated members lives. Members 
defended, excused or justified its practices as and when they needed to, but their day 
to day activities as Communists were dominated by national and local circumstances. 
Stalinism determined the particular species of British Communist political 
consciousness. The true nature of this consciousness, however, can only be 
understood when such a species is seen in relation to its own political environment.
Criteria of decline
Numerous indicators demonstrate a decline in British Communism before 1956. 
The selection of criteria to measure decline during this period is, of course, a matter of 
availability and preference. However, three such indicators, Dailv Worker paper sales, 
membership numbers and the level of the popular vote all point in the same direction. 
The following table is taken from a report by Allen Hutt who in 1954, was appointed 
Circulation Manager at the Dailv Worker.
Bob Leeson, written reply to author, 5 November 1997. Leeson had written for the 
magazine World-Youth and was a prominent member of the VOL. He stayed in the Party after 
1956, working in the features department of the Morning Star until the early eighties.
A. Hutt, Review of Daily Worker Circulation [Report to EC] (22 June 1956), 5, Manchester, 
CP/lnd/misc./Hutt/2/1.
Table 3. Membership and Daily Worker Sales105
Membership Daily Sales Saturday 
Extra Sales.
1950 38, 853 89, 001 229% 55, 473 143%
1951 35, 124 91, 147 259% 50, 220 143%
1952 35, 671 84, 168 236% 51, 068 143%
1953 35, 054 77, 533 222% 46, 233 132%
1954 33, 919 72, 994 215% 42, 745 127%
1955 32, 627 67, 524 207% 37, 486 115%
1956 33,236 62, 547 188% 32, 562 98%
* Sales as a percentage of membership (eg. 200 per cent indicates that each 
member sold two papers on average). For Hutt, this indicated that the degree 
of activity has diminished more than the drop of membership and the table 
also reveals what can be regarded as the most serious feature of all, namely; 
the reduced ratio of readers relative to the membership.
Mutts figures demonstrate a combined and steady decline in both membership 
and paper sales between 1950 and 1957. There had already been a drop of around 15 
per cent in membership between 1950 and 1955 and a decline in Dailv Worker sales of 
more than 21,000, representing nearly 25 per cent. The Party also had a persistent 
problem of high membership turnover. Kenneth Newton drew attention to this saying 
the high rate of membership turnover suggests that the Party life of many is short.   A 
high level of recruitment was necessary, simply to retain membership levels. As the 
leadership commented following the 23  Congress, the total number of new members 
...is in the region of 7-800. This is very small indeed and...barely offsets the normal 
turnover due to deaths, lapses, transfers and many other reasons.There  were many 
resolutions to Party Congresses under the heading "Building the Party and the Party 
issued several pamphlets in the early 1950s such as Build the Communist Partv and 
Forging the Weapon.
The leadership were aware of this decline. Pollitt referred to the period following 
the 23'   Congress, saying that after the Congress the membership decline 
continued. T h e  direct effects of the Cold War are unclear. Membership fell sharply
Ibid., 4 
Ibid.
Newton, The Socioloqv of British Communism. 153.
"Follow up of Party Congress [23   Congress 16-19 April 1954] (1954), 4, Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Cong/08/05.
See "Resolutions to 23'   Congress, Manchester, CP/Cent/08/04. Forging the Weapon 
(1962), Manchester, 329.20.
Ibid. H. Pollitt, "Political Report to 24** National Congress' (March 1956), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/09/02. Reprinted in H. Pollitt, J. Gollan, G. Matthews The People will Decide (1956), 
Manchester 329.23.
between 1950 and 1951, when reports about anti-Semitism in the USSR emerged/ 
Alison Macleod was certainly convinced that the rumours about anti-Semitism had had 
an effect. When asked if many Jewish members had left the Party after the news began 
to break, she replied, simply Oh yes. ^  June 1950 was also the month when North 
Korea invaded the South and in February 1951, China was declared guilty of 
aggression by the United Nations. The Party consistently claimed that its declining 
popularity was due to anti-Soviet and anti-Communist propaganda. As Pollitt said 
during the years of the cold war, we suffered a decline in our membership as the 
pressure and hysteria developed against Communism and the Communist Party. 
Whilst there was certainly truth in this, it was nevertheless a perception which appeared 
to blame British workers for their peculiar susceptibility to the propaganda of the British 
press.
Another indication of decline was the fall in the popular vote for Communist 
candidates. In Hornsey, North London, for example, the vote in 1945 for G.J. Jones, 
had been 10,058. By 1950, this had been slashed to 1,191 and remained around this 
figure at the 1955 e lec t i on .The following figures indicate a decline in the Partys 
popular vote during this period. This decline, however, was less than it appears due to 
the fact that the Party stood 100 candidates in 1950, which gave it a larger total vote for 
that year.
Table 4. General Election, 1950 
Party Votes gained % of
Number 
Of MPs
Conservative 12, 502, 567 43.5 298
Labour 13, 266, 592 46.1 315
Liberal 2, 621, 548 9.1 9
Communist 91, 746 0.3
Others 290, 218 1.0
Membership fell from 38,853 in 1950 to 33,963 in 1952; Newton, The Socioloqv of British 
Communism. 160.
Alison Macleod, interview, 15 October 1997.
H. Pollitt, Political Report to 24*   National Congress (March 1956), 22, Manchester, 
CP/Cent/09/02.
Electoral statistics [to the Executive Committee] (8-9 January 1955), Manchester, 
CP/Cent./EC/03/17.The highest Communist vote in 1955 was for Willy Lauchlan (5,389) in 
W est Fife. Annie* Powell in East Rhondda achieved 4,544 and Solly Kaye in Stepney, 2,888. 
Two other seats in Scotland yielded over 2,000 votes but nationally, the rest of the candidates 
all scored below 2,000 or below 1,000.
Sked and Cooke, Post-War Britain. A Political History. 85.
Table 5. General Election, 1951"*
Party Votes gained % of Number
vote Of MPs
Conservative 13,717, 538 48.0 321
Labour 13, 948, 605 48.8 295
Liberal 730, 556 2.5 6
Communist 21,640 0.1
Others 177, 329 0.6
By 1955, the Party had been relegated to the Others column. In 1951 It stood 
just ten candidates, but its share of the vote in the constituencies it contested, 
increased to 3.8 per cent.^^   In 1955, the Party stood 17 candidates and scored 3.4 per 
cent in its respective constituencies. The departure in 1951 and 1955 from the 
ambitious project of 1950, may indicate that the poor results of that year undermined 
the leaderships confidence about its electoral prospects. Noreen Branson suggested a 
reason for the experiment, saying when the party decided to put up 100 candidates in 
the 1950 general election, it was assumed -  quite wrongly -  that Tory governments 
were a thing of the past."*
Poor electoral performance was a persistent cause for concern. The leadership 
commented in 1953, in the twelve Parliamentary constituencies where the position 
should give rise to the most serious concern...little consistent attention is being given to 
the work in them by the District Committees and the Party Centre."* The resolution 
continued, it would be fatal for the Party to continue in this way any longer.B e c a u s e  
of fluctuating electoral tactics, it is difficult to come to a precise conclusion about the 
decline or otherwise of the Partys vote across the country. Figures for individual 
candidates, however, demonstrate a clear decline in popular opinion.
ibid. 99.116
Newton, The Sociology of British Communism. 166.
" *  Branson, History of the Communist Partv of Great Britain 1941-1951. 239.
" *  Executive Committee Resolution on Electoral Activity (December 1953) 3, Manchester, 
CP/Cent/EC/06/03.
Ibid.
Table 6. Communist Party candidates In three constituencies In 1945 and 1955 ^  
West Fife Stepney Hornsey
Vote % Vote % Vote %
1945 Willie
Gallacher
17, 636 
won seat
42.1 Phil
Piratin
5,075
47.6 GJ Jones 10,058
third
1950 Gallacher 9, 301 
third
21.6 Piratin 5,991
third
12.5 Jones 1,191*
fourth
1951 W.
Lauchlan
4,728*
third
10.5 EF
Bramley
3,436*
third
7.3 No Communist 
Candidate
1955 Lauchlan 5, 839 
third
12.6 S. Kaye 2,888*
third
7.6 Jones 1,442
third
^Indicates lost deposit.
(NB. Phil Piratins vote of 5,075 in 1945 was on a total vote for the constituency of 
10,658. In 1950, after reconstruction, demobilisation and boundary changes, the 
total vote had increased to 47, 809. As the percentages indicate, this puts the 
increase from 1945 into perspective.)
In terms of the national vote, the CPGB declined from 102,780 in 1945 to 
21,640 in 1951. This is a more significant fall than between 1950 and 1951 as, in 1945, 
the Party stood only 21 c a n d id a te s .1945 was, of course, an exceptional year. The 
war had inspired such high expectations that Quintin Hogg was moved to pronounce in 
the House of Commons that If you do not give the people reform, they are going to 
give you a revo lu tion .There  was still a significant decline during the 1950s itself, 
however, in Stepney and West Fife. Much of this may reflect the fact that Gallacher and 
Piratins successors did not enjoy the same personal credibility.
The situation in local councils was not very different. In the Municipal elections 
of May 1953, for example, the Party lost eight seats in Scotland and 12 in London, 
compared to 1949.^^   As the Resolution on Electoral Activity put it, the complete 
absence of Comrnunist representation in Parliament and in the main authorities has 
been a major weakness. A s  discussed above, it is not clear why the 91,000 who 
voted Communist in 1950 did so. It may be that this figure represented the Partys 
periphery; those who were sympathetic but unwilling or unable to commit to the 
considerable demands of membership. Apart from 1945, this represented the highest 
national vote the Party ever achieved. For a Party whose programme was about to be 
launched on the basis that it could constitute a Peoples Government and manoeuvre
F.W.S. Craig, British Parliamentary Election Results 1918-1949 (Chichester, 1983), 624, 
52, 148 and Craig. British Parliamentary Election Results 1950-1970. 646, 41,163.
Newton, The Sociology of British Communism. 166.
Q. Hogg, House of Commons Debates. 5 Series, col. 1818, 7 February 1943.
Report to Political Committee (7 May 1953), 7, Manchester, CP/Cent/PC/02/15. Also, 
London Report to the Political Committee (2 October 1953), Manchester, CP/Cent/PC/02/20. 
Executive Committee Resolution on Electoral Activity (1953), Manchester,
CP/Cent/EC/03/06.
for power along the line of the Communist Parties in the Peoples Democracies of 
Eastern Europe, the result hardly provided grounds for optimism.
The same optimism which had impelled the Party to stand 100 candidates and 
to persist in its electoral strategy regardless of the results, however, continued into the 
1960s. Phil Cohert remembered his own childhood, when his father stood for local 
elections in London in 1968. Cohen wrote, Dad got very nervous near to the election 
as he hoped to increase his vote from the 200 odd...anyone...got when they stood for 
the CP. On the night of the count we...were woken...they were all shouting something 
about 303...the next day I realised the Labour candidate won with over 5000.^   Max 
Morris recalled fighting two elections as a Communist candidate. What a bloody waste 
of time. Oh God. 
Occasionally it is worthwhile to judge the Partys strategy and practice against 
its claims to represent Marxism and Leninism. Although Lenin had advocated 
parliamentary action as a tactic, he opposed the notion that socialism could be 
instituted through parliamentary m e a n s .A s  he made clear, a democratic republic is 
the best possible political shell for capitalism and, therefore, once capital has gained 
possession...it establishes its power so securely, so firmly, that no change of persons, 
institutions or parties in the bourgeois democratic republic can shake it.  Marx was 
equally against what he referred to as the Parliamentary Republic.E n g e ls  identified 
the democratic republic as part of the bourgeois state, saying the state is nothing but 
a machine for the oppression of one class by another, and indeed in the democratic 
republic no less than in the hereditary monarchy which the victorious proletariat cannot 
avoid having to lop off at once. 
For a Marxist Party, electoral activity was, at best, a necessary tactical evil and 
a marginal side of the Partys over-all activity. The leadership remained adamant, 
however, that we have as our aim a firm Parliamentary majority...using Parliament to 
legislate for the people, and not for the monopolists.  This, as Pollitt and Dutts 
response to the class against class perspective of the late 1920s made clear, was not 
an entirely new position for the Party. Noreen Branson suggested that the change had
The British Road to Socialism (London. 1951), 12-14.
Cohen, Children of the Revolution. 26.
Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998.
Lenin Left Wing Communism an Infantile Disorder. 77-88.
 Lenin, The State and Revolution. 15.
 Marx, The Civil W ar in France. 66-86.
' Engels, ibid. 17. '
 H. Pollitt Political Report to 24*  Congress (March 1956) Manchester CP/Cent/Cong/09/02.
corne about 'over the previous 15 years between 1935 and 1950/^ Over this period, 
continued Branson, the Partys views about the way forward had greatly changed...in 
its programme For Soviet Britain adopted in 1935, it had been assumed that, if a 
socialist society was to come about, the existing Parliamentary structure would have to 
be abolished and replaced by workers councils or sovie ts.S im ila rly, John Callaghan 
characterised this new found Parliamentary reformism as a relatively abrupt turn. ^ He 
went on to say that the new strategy had emerged from Stalin and stealth rather than 
Lenin and revolution and commented, Stalin had prodded the Party to adopt the British 
Road to Socialism...Dutt and company had simply been directed to give the 
appearance of democrats.  Callaghan, however, underestimated, both the degree to 
which this leadership was committed to a parliamentary road in the 1950s and the 
extent to which the strategy had, in reality, been significant for a number of years.
Since 1928, the Partys emphasis on Parliament had implied something more 
than a tactic to reduce it to absurdity while ostensibly defending it.  The electoral 
strategy had been developing steadily since 1928 and, when the Party finally sloughed 
off its withering commitment to revolution in 1951, emerged as an already fully formed 
strategy. It was not the abrupt turn characterised by Callaghan and Branson, but was 
part of a developing process which represented a long-term retreat from revolutionary 
Bolshevism throughout world Communism. Pollitt and Dutt, in their statement against 
the British leadership following Stalins class against class thesis, proclaimed a left- 
sounding strategy which called for the withdrawal of support for a second reformist 
Labour Government in subsequent general elections.  The CPGB had, until class 
against class, followed Lenins strategy of participation in Parliament, so that the 
majority will be disappointed in their leaders and begin to support communism. 
According to Pollitt and Dutt, by 1928, British workers were already sufficiently 
disappointed in consequence of the experience of the Labour Government and the 
General Strike and repeated exposure of the entire reformist leadership and, 
furthermore, in consequence of the...increasing mass influence of the Communist 
Party . T h e  situation since 1924 had basically changed and the pair, echoing Stalins
Branson, History of the Communist Partv of Great Britain 1941- 1951. 232. R. Page Arnot, 
[preface] For Soviet Britain [Resolution to 13th Congress] (1935), Manchester, 329,22.
Branson, History of the Communist Partv of Great Britain 1941-1951. 232.
Callaghan, Raiani Palme Dutt. 242 and 244.
Ibid.
Lenin, Left Wing Communism an Infantile Disorder. 59.
R. P. Dutt and H. Pollitt, Ourselves and the Labour Party: Alternative Proposals to the 
Thesis of the Central Committee, The Communist (1928), 144, Manchester, CP/Ind/Dutt/15/1. 
Lenin, Left Wing Communism An Infantile Disorder. 82.
Dutt and Pollitt, .Ourselves and the Labour Party, 146.
rhetoric, called for a direct fight against the Labour Party leadership'/"*^ This 
confrontation, however, was to be fought at the ballot-box where the open fight 
between the Communist Party and the Labour Party leadership would involve placing 
Communist candidates against the nationally prominent Labour Party leaders/"*   The 
new strategy, in which the entire propaganda and press of the Party should focus 
working class attention on these fights consisted of placing a selected number of 
candidates in the field...on the election programme of the Communist Party. "*"* At the 
1929 election, Pollitt stood against Ramsey MacDonald in Seaham Harbour. Later, 
Pollitt stood in a by-election in Clay Cross, Derbyshire in 1933 and in the Rhondda at 
the General Election in 1935. The contradiction between parliamentary and 
revolutionary means was emphasised in Clay Cross, when Pollitt, charged with 
wanting violence...replied I dont want you to get rifles, I want you to get trade union 
cards.
By the late 1940s, the emphasis on a parliamentary road to socialism was 
beginning to correspond conveniently with the rise of Stalinism in countries under the 
Soviet sphere of influence. As Pollitt wrote in Looking Ahead, in a number of countries 
where popular democracies have been established, a new road to Socialism has 
opened before the People.*"* In 1955, Pollitt reassured the Labour movement, that the 
Communist Party considers that, in British conditions, this battle of democracy can be 
won by democratic means.*"*  John Mahon, in a pamphlet published in 1955, wrote that 
the role of the Communist Party which is the advanced section of the working class... 
works to develop a united movement of the people to elect a Parliament and a 
Government which will...take all the measures necessary to make Socialism 
possible.*"*
John Callaghans suggestion that the CPGB leadership had simply been
directed to give the appearance of democrats is also brought into question as the
following notes towards a report from a Party Electoral Commission suggest.*"* The
notes related to the Executive Council Resolution on Electoral Activity, discussed in
September 1953, and were probably Pollitts.
EC dissatisfied slow growth and stagnation Party But no aspect so 
unsatisfactory as Electoral. Party existed 33 years -  advanced many 
respects... But no voice today in H of C. -  smaller no of Councillors.
*"*" Ibid., 145.
*"* ibid.
*"*  Ibid., 150.
*"* J. Mahon, Harry Pollitt: A Biography (London, 1976), 180-181.
*"* Pollitt, Looking Ahead. 90.
*"*  Pollitt, The Communist Partv and the Labour Partv (London, 1955), 10, BL, W PD  617/1. 
*"* J. Mahon, The Partv of Socialism (London, 1955) 8, BL, W PD 617/1.
*"* Callaghan, Raiani Palme Dutt. 242 and 244.
British Road quotes. If these mean anything -  that we must be in 
Parliament. Discussed many time next step re Programme. Shd. 
have led to big advance our electoral work...our work last Local Elns. 
at lowest possible ebb...Impossible to think of any adv. into Parliament 
without big development local elections activity. If cant win Council 
seats -  never win Parliamentary.^^
The notes stated the importance of elections, Dont win because dont regard 
Elns, as vital as T.U. and concluded, saying In the end the vote that counts ...cannot 
allow to go on.  The resulting resolution stated, our electoral position is in sharp 
contrast with the general position of the Party...of its influence in the Labour Movement, 
as well as among the general public and the extension of its mass activity and 
organisation.  Although this represented an optimistic assessment, if the leadership 
believed it to be correct, it called into question the wisdom of its electoral strategy. 
Finally, if, as Callaghan implied, the British leadership were reluctant about Stalins 
reformist instruction, it is not clear why they did not allow it to pass away with the rest of 
him in 1953. Following Stalins death, the Party intensified its focus upon elections. The 
Organisation Department saw its function as providing assistance and guidance to 
districts and branches in campaigns -  particularly during elections.  The Party sold 
out of the first edition of the pamphlet Win the Local Councils and, in 1954, issued a 
statement entitled The Boundary Commissions proposals for altering Parliamentary 
Constituencies. '* In a speech to the 24* Congress, Pollitt concluded that the Party 
must develop still further the basic principle contained in the British Road to 
Socialism.*
Many members felt at ease with the parliamentary strategy. Morris Schaer, after 
suggesting that The British Road to Socialism was our get out went on to say that it 
demonstrated that we were...pursuing socialism in this country in the English way. * 
Similarly, Stan Turner was asked if The British Road to Socialism provided an easier 
argument than the one about revolution, and replied I dont think we ever articulated 
about the revolution...we never spoke about it.* Some members, however, were 
concerned at the Partys move towards electoralism, demanding that the Executive
* Notes towards Report of Electoral Commission [19-20 September 1953], Manchester, 
CP/Cent/EC/03/06. "H Pollitt is underlined at end.
** Ibid.
*  Executive Committee Resolution on Electoral Activity (1953), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/EC/03/06.
* Departments at the Party Centre, Report of Executive Committee to 24* National 
Congress. 11.
Ibid., 11. 12, 19.
* H. Pollitt, Speech to Closed Session of the 24* Congress of the CPGB (April 1956), 
Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/09/09.
* Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997.
*'' Stan Turner, interview, 9 July 1997.
Committee must be firm in its attitude and not allow candidates to go forward merely 
because it has become a tradition for the Party to put up a candidate in a certain ward 
receiving the same few or even a declining number of votes. 
This chapter has demonstrated that some of the worst practices of Stalinism 
were supported by British Communism. The influence of Stalinism, however, was 
complex and operated on a number of levels. Although members felt bound to defend 
the Soviet Union, for much of their lives, they remained only dimly aware of what was 
going there. It is not clear whether Stalinism, with its impatience about ideas and its 
incongruous contradictions between abstract notions about determinism in historical 
development and applied voluntarism can be characterised as an ideology at all. 
Perhaps, more accurately, it was a counter-ideology, utilising Marxism as a theoretical 
justification for the crudest utilitarianism in which almost any means were justified by 
the proposed ends. This counter-ideology had a determining effect upon the political 
consciousness of British socialists who had sought expression for their principles within 
the Party. This created a particular kind of political consciousness where, as Raphael 
Samuel said the writ of the Political Committee went unchallenged and where, as he 
continued. Party meetings were not a forum for debate, but...a kind of refuge from 
politics itself. 
Some members seized upon the ideas within the British Road to Socialism as a 
less challenging argument with work colleagues and others outside the Party. The 
move from revolutionary Party to one of reformist opposition, however, began a 
process whereby the basis of the Partys existence, the self-emancipation of the 
working class, ultimately disappeared. Once this process had begun, the Partys 
decline as a Marxist organisation was assured. It was no accident that all the 
formations which emerged from the splits of the 1960s and 1970s, were attempts to 
recapture this revolutionary heritage from its relentless eclipse by popular front 
reformism. As Mike Power, a member for 32 years said, we werent really a 
revolutionary party at all...we had the rhetoric...we were part of the anti-Tory 
movement.
In a statement reinforcing Max Morriss earlier observation. Power also said of 
Party electoral work that I now look back on [it] as a complete waste of time.  The 
question about the decline of the CPGB remains, however; was it caused by the malign 
influence of the Soviet Union or by its own internal contradictions? Both, as discussed
Prestwich Branch, Resolution to 23   Congress CPGB (April 1954), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Cong/08/05.
Samuel The Lost World of British Communism, Part One, 13 and 65.
M. Power in Cohen, Children of the Revolution. 177.
Ibid.
above, were the result of Stalinism. The Party vowed to de-Stalinise following the 
Khruschev revelations, a process through which it promised to put political distance 
between itself and the Soviet Union. The next chapter looks at how the Party 
responded to Khruschevs secret speech in 1956 and how it failed to seize this critical 
moment to reconstruct itself as the representative of British Marxism. The chapter 
charts the intriguing exposure of the speech in Britain and how attempts were made to 
minimise its impact and then its importance.
Chapter 3
1956: Revelation, Counter-Revolution and the Response of
British Communism
the principle editorial task of the Dailv Worker in the days of the 
cold war...was the need to defend the Soviet line.
This chapter analyses the events of 1956 and their immediate impact upon 
the British Party. The chapter concentrates upon the leadership's response to 
Khruschevs secret speech and its attempts to deal with its implications. The 
emergence of an opposition within the CPGB is dealt with in the two subsequent 
chapters. The invasion of Hungary by Soviet forces at the end of 1956 accelerated 
the development of anti-leadership, anti-Soviet feeling amongst some members. In 
terms of the growth of an oppositionist current within the CPGB, the secret speech 
and Hungary were two events which were not only linked, with coincidental ill 
fortune, by their chronology, but became linked within the minds of many 
Communists as proof of the malign nature of Stalinism. For some members, 
Hungary was the last straw in the sense that it finally broke the back of residual 
Party loyalty.^ For others, it brought them into opposition with their leadership for 
the first time although they did not leave the Party.^ Still others either rallied 
around the Party over Hungary - believing the Soviet invasion to be defending 
socialism against counter-revolution - or remained loyal, largely because of their 
need to remain within what they perceived as the hegemonic organisation of British 
socialism."*
As discussed in the previous chapter, the events of 1956 should be seen 
within the context of the long-term decline of British Communism. This should not 
suggest that the events themselves and the way members received news of them, 
was not as devastating as Max Morris suggested.^
Within the context of the Partys long-term decline, the year began relatively 
well. Membership had fallen from 38,853 in 1950 to 32,627 by 1955, but at the 
beginning of 1956, this decline showed signs of levelling off. A slight rise to
* R. Samuel, The Lost World of British Communism. Part T, 20-21.
 E.P. Thompson to Howard [Hill], (9 November 1956), Manchester, C P /0 rg /18/04. 
 See Hobsbawm, interview with Stedman Jones, 1956, 17-19.
 John Hostettler, interview, 25 June 1997.
 Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998.
 Newton, The Sociology of British Communism. 160.
33, 236 in March 1956 might even have provided grounds for optimism/ Sales of 
the Dailv Worker, however, fell from 67,524 per day in 1955 to 62,547 in 1956. For 
the first time since before 1950, average sales per member dropped below two, 
possibly suggesting a fall in membership activity. Allen Hutt, when discussing 
circulation problems, diagnosed that the main problems are within the Party and 
will need to be resolved by the efforts of the Party leadership. He also noted the 
weakness of Party branch life and the lack of collective work and commented on 
the sectarianism which isolates comrades from the mass of workers. 
Hutts observations imply that the Party lacked the confidence it would 
require to face the problems generated by 1956. It was an eventful year. 
Sandwiched between the twin body blows of Khruschevs speech and the Soviet 
invasion of Hungary, were calls for increased dmocratisation in Poland. This, 
despite the deaths of several hundred protesters in June, could have been 
presented as evidence of a new spirit of compromise by Moscow when, in October, 
the reformer Gomulka was drafted in.  As well as this, there was the accession to 
power of Gamal Nasser in Egypt, the subsequent nationalising of the Suez Canal 
and the exposure of Britain and Frances true world status as they were forced into 
humiliating withdrawal in December.
For British Communists, the news that Khruschev had delivered a speech 
denouncing Stalin, seeped slowly through a wall of obfuscation between February 
and its publication in the Observer in June.^^ The Party held its own closed session 
at its 24  Congress in April. Delegates were aware of the nature of Khruschevs 
speech following the release of a copy of Soviet News, which reprinted an editorial 
from Pravda. addressing the content of the speech/ Details of how the British 
Party first heard news of the speech from Moscow, tried to repress it, and finally, 
discussed it openly, are set out below. As John Saville wrote, the lid was certainly 
intended to be kept tightly shut within the British Party.A cco rd ing  to Jean
 A. Hutt, Review of Daily Worker Circulation (22 June 1956), 5, Manchester, CP/I nd/m isc/ 
Hutt/2/1.
 Ibid.
 A. Hutt. Letter to Executive Committee (May 1956), 4-5, Manchester, CP/lnd/misc/ 
Hutt/2/1.
Ibid., 5.
N. Bethel, Gomulka His Poland and His Communism (Harmondsworth, 1972) 208-224.
C. Harman. Class Struggles in Eastern Europe 1945-1983 (London. 1988), 88-119.
The Speech was reprinted in the New York Times (5 June 1956) from which the 
Observer took its copy.
Why the Cult of the Individual is Alien to the Spirit of Marxism-Leninism [from Pravdal
Soviet News (29 March 1956) [published by Soviet Embassy).
J. Saville, The 20  C 
1976 (London. 1976), 2.
J. Saville, The 20  Congress and the British Communist Party, The Socialist Recister
Pronteau, a member of the Central Committee of the French Party (PCF), the 
French leadership was equally obstructive. Following the CPSU 20  Congress at a 
meeting of the French Central Committee, Duclos, the Partys Assistant Secretary 
General, summarised the Congress without revealing anything more than we 
could have read in LHumanit. Pronteau travelled to Poland following this 
meeting. There, he met a leader of the Polish Party who asked about the 
discussion of the K. report in the French Central Committee.^ Pronteau looked at 
him astounded: A secret report? What secret report?. On his return to Paris, he 
met with Maurice Thorez, the PCF Secretary General, and confronted him about 
the secret speech. Thorez replied. There is no secret report before going on to 
explain in a pontifical manner: Anyway just remember one thing. This report 
doesnt exist ...soon it will never have existed.
Revelation from above
Khruschevs speech to took place on 24 February 1956. Whether it was a 
sincere attempt to lay the ghost of the recent past or a cynical political manoeuvre 
goes beyond the scope of this thesis.^ The speech had been due at six oclock in 
the evening but arguments between Khruschev and Stalins remaining supporters 
meant it was postponed until midnight. Anatole Shub has referred to a paradoxical 
dualism in Khruschevs speech where from start to finish...Stalins crimes against 
his Communist associates are vividly spelled out and deplored while at the same 
time his infinitely greater crimes against the Russian people are applauded in the 
name of Socialist construction.  By directing his criticisms at Stalin, the 
individual, Khruschev avoided criticising the system he had dominated. The effect 
of this, wrote Shub, was to reaffirm the basic Stalinist policy line...although now it 
is affirmed in Lenins name.  As discussed below, the British leadership adopted a 
similar tactic.
Khruschev began by quoting from a letter, which Krupskaya had passed to 
the Central Committee just before the Partys 13*  Congress in 1924.^   This
J. Pronteau to Paul Noirot [interview in Politique Hebdol T h e  Khruschev Speech, The 
PCF and the PCI, The Socialist Register 1976. 58.
Ibid., 59.
Ibid.
The relevant Party archives in Moscow are, even now, subject to limited access.
A. Shub, Introduction to N. Khruschev, The Crimes of the Stalin Era [Special Report to 
the 20*   Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union], New Leader. A. Shub, ed.
(New York, 1956), 5, BL: X709/14/36.
Ibid.
See Tucker, Stalin as Revolutionarv. 288-289.
consisted of notes, dictated by Lenin in December 1922 which, according to 
Krupskaya, he had insisted should be revealed to the next Party Congress.T h is  
became known as Lenins Testament and had been withheld from public gaze 
since 1924. Quoting Lenin verbatim, Khruschev read out, after taking over the 
position of General Secretary, comrade Stalin accumulated in his hands 
immeasurable power, and I am not certain whether he will always be able to use 
this power with the required care.  He continued, because of this, I propose that 
the comrades consider the method by which Stalin would be removed from this 
position and by which another man would be selected for it. "* Khruschev then 
quoted a letter from Krupskaya to Kamenev from December 1922 in which she 
complained about Stalin, saying during all of these thirty years I have never heard 
from one comrade one word of rudeness...I am turning to you and to Grigory 
[Zinoviev] as much closer comrades of Vladimir lllych and I beg you to protect me 
from rude interference with my private life and from vile invectives and threats.
In March 1923, shortly before his third and fatal stroke, Lenin wrote to 
Stalin, I ask you therefore, that you weigh carefully whether you are agreeable to 
retracting your words and apologising or whether you prefer the severance of 
relations between us.  Although much of this appears trivial, had Lenins health 
not deteriorated, his opposition would have been sufficient to remove Stalin from 
the position into which he had moved. By 1953, Stalin not only embodied the 
socialist aspirations of Communists, but also had a reputation as a highly moral 
figure. Morris Schaer recalled that he had been seen as a kindly uncle whilst 
Willie Gallacher, who had experience of him in commissions, still saw him in 1956 
as a quiet, kindly unassuming comrade.   Khruschevs picture of a spiteful boor 
upsetting a sick man and his wife was in stark contrast to such perceptions.
Khruschev described Lenin as a leader with the ability to induce people to 
follow him without using compulsion, but rather through the ideological influence on 
them of the whole collective.  He contrasted this with Stalin who discarded the 
Leninist method...for that of administrative violence, mass repressions and 
terror.  Khruschev provided lurid details of Stalins terror, asking in relation even
Ibid., 289.
Lenin, cited in Khruschev, T h e  Crimes of the Stalin Era, 9.
Ibid.
Krupskaya, cited in ibid., 10-11.
Lenin, cited in ibid., 12.
Morris Schaer, interview, 19 July 1997. W. Gallacher. Speech to Closed Session of the 
24*  Congress CPGB (April 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/09/09.
 Khruschev, The Crimes of the Stalin Era, 15.
Ibid.
to Trotskyists, was it necessary to annihilate such people?. H e  later quoted 
Lenin on capital punishment, saying we were forced to use terror...when strong 
world powers threw their hordes against us...but as soon as we attained a decisive 
victory...we gave up the use of the death penalty . I n  contrast, said Khruschev, 
Stalins terror was actually directed, not at the remnants of the defeated exploiting 
classes, but against the honest workers of the Party and of the Soviet State. H e  
described Stalin as a very distrustful man, sickly suspicious...he could look at a 
man and say: Why are your eyes so shifty today? or Why are you turning so 
much today and avoiding to look me directly in the eyes? . ^
Khruschev admitted that Stalin had actively encouraged the NKVD in the 
application of physical pressure and referred to the investigative Judge, Rodos, 
whom he described as a vile person, with the brain of a bird, and morally 
completely degenerate.R o d o s  told a subsequent investigation about two cases 
involving Kossier and Chubar and of how, having been informed they were 
enemies of the people, it was his job to make them confess they are enemies. 
Khruschev continued, he would do this through long tortures...receiving detailed 
instructions from Beria. 
Khruschev questioned the myth of Stalins military acumen, contrasting his 
inactivity just before the German invasion with the role of the Party as a whole, the 
Soviet Government, our heroic army, its talented leaders and brave soldiers, the 
whole Soviet Nation...who assured victory in the Great Patriotic War.  This was 
greeted with tempestuous and prolonged applause. Khruschev then asked where 
were the members of the Politburo of the Central Committee? Why did they not 
assert themselves...in time?.  He answered this, saying that many on the Central 
Committee had supported Stalin because he was one of the strongest Marxists. 
He compared him to skeptics and capitulators, Trotskyites, Zinovievites, 
Bukharinites and Kamanevites against whom the leading core of the Party 
...upheld the great banner of Lenin. T h is  cohort, in which Khruschev included 
himself, was led by the guiding force of the Party and the State...Comrade
^lbid., 16-17.
Lenin, [At the All Union Central Executive Committee (2 February 1920)] cited in ibid., 25.
Ibid., 25. 
Ibid., 34. 
^  Ibid., 35. 
Ibid.
Ibid., 43. 
Ibid., 60. 
Ibid., 54. 
Ibid.
Stalin/ Stalin was, therefore, essentially correct, but had begun abusing his 
power more and more'/^ Khruschev thus reduced this system of repression to the 
slogan, cult of the individual.
The impact of Khruschevs speech was slow to materialise in Britain. 
Members of Cominform were the only foreign delegates at the Congress allowed to 
see a copy. Access was denied to the British delegation of Pollitt, Dutt and George 
Matthews. Pollitt claimed that the first and only information I have received about 
what was said at that session was on March 18 from...Sam Russell. *  He later 
claimed that, at the time of the speech, I was being conducted round a French 
letter factory. At my age, I suppose that was a compliment.  John Seville was 
certain that leading members of the British Party knew the main facts...by the 
middle of April at the latest.'* ' Alison MacLeod claimed that later Pollitt said that he 
had first heard of the existence of the speech on March 11, which was not true.'  
Dennis Ogden, however, the first British member to hear an account of the speech, 
confirmed that Pollitts claim coincided with the timing of Russells despatch.'* 
Ogden also felt that Pollitts initial ignorance about the speech was genuine. He 
met him and the other British delegates just after the speech and there was a 
great sense of bewilderment...Harry said, I cant understand whats going on -  I 
wish I did.'*
Dennis Ogden had learned Russian at Cambridge before leaving after nine 
months because of his pro-Soviet sympathies. In 1952, after obtaining his degree 
at Manchester, he went to work at the Daily Worker as a librarian before moving to 
the foreign desk. At the end of 1955, he went to work at the Foreign Language 
Press in Moscow. From 1955 to 1959, he worked on a journal called International 
Affairs, before succeeding Sam Russell as Daily Worker Moscow correspondent; a 
position he held until 1962. At the Daily Worker. Ogden began to develop doubts 
about the Soviet Union which, he felt, was typical, saying to say that all 
Communists supported the Soviet Union unconditionally and unreservedly is not 
the case. Such doubts began in 1951 on a visit to the USSR about which he 
remarked, it was impossible not to see that there were serious
Ibid.
Ibid., 60.
H. Pollitt, Speech to Closed Session of the 24**  Congress CPGB (April 1956), 
Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/09/09. Sam Russell; Moscow correspondent. Daily W orker.
H. Pollitt, cited in K. Morgan Harry Pollitt. (Manchester, 1993), 171-2.
Sayille, 'The 20** Congress and the British Communist Party", 2.
Macleod, The Death of Uncle Joe. 66.
Dennis Ogden, interview, 3 December 1997.
Ibid.
problems...summed up in the whole question of political discussion, democracy 
and so on."* Alison Macleod, however, remembered that British Communists 
visiting the Soviet Union went on looking at what was in front of them and not 
seeing it."
Ogden gave an example of the attitude of British Communists towards the 
Soviet Union. Peter Fryer, who became a leading critic of Stalinism after his 
experiences in Hungary, also worked at the Dailv Worker and, in the early 1950s 
was, in relation to Party matters, according to Ogden, more Catholic than the 
Pope. Fryer approached Ogden, who had been reading a copy of Pravda. and 
remarked. One day the Daily Worker will look like that to which Ogden replied, 
Peter, you must be mad. During this period, Ogden had contact with visiting 
Soviet artistes and musicians, such as David Oistrach and ballerina, Raisa 
Stoychova. The discussions with these people were frank and they would say, 
Dont have any illusions, we have serious problems...they would talk mainly about 
living standards, housing, food and consumer goods. In Moscow, he quickly 
became aware that one was in a society which really had terrible problems... 
among the people in the publishing house, at least half a dozen had recently come 
back from prison camps.
Ogden is the only remaining Brit who heard a reading of that speech. He 
described how, along with colleague, John Gibbons, he was invited to a special 
meeting of the Publishing House Branch of the Soviet Communist Party by chief 
editor, Vladimir Pavlov, on the first Friday in March, about two weeks after the 
speech. Pavlov had been Stalins translator at Yalta and Potsdam and if you see 
photos...you see a rather slight figure in an overcoat, many sizes too big, standing 
or sitting very close to Stalin...that is Pavlov. Ogden recalled that, although 
Moscow was full of talk and rumour...we never dreamt what it was going to be... 
we were told not to take notes. At the meeting, first Pavlov, then a chap called 
Misha read out the speech, verbatim, over a period of nearly four hours. Ogden 
recalled that Pavlov read the whole thing in a rather detached way but Misha read 
it with feeling...he was absolutely delighted that this was confirming something 
hed known. Ogden estimated that there were about 200 people in the hall and
Ibid.
Alison Macleod, interview, 15 October 1997. 
Dennis Ogden, interview, 3 November 1997. 
Ibid.
Ibid.
 Ibid.
recalled that one third were absolutely stunned, just silent...one third actually wept 
and the other third rejoiced'.
Ogden described how he informed Sam Russell of the details. Asked if 
Russell was at the meeting, he replied, No Christ no Nobody told Sam anything. 
Ogden typed out a summary and on the Saturday I gave it to Sam. Russell spent 
time attempting to confirm the story and eventually despatched it to the Dailv 
Worker on 18 March, about a week later. Alison MacLeod recalled that Malcolm 
MacEwen got hold of the first page as soon as it had been typed and rushed 
through the office waving it and crying; Look what Sams sending over  Campbell 
snatched the page from him and told him to shut up. It was Russells version 
which the British leadership saw. Another version was smuggled out of the Soviet 
Union by Reuters news agency. Dennis Ogden guessed that this version was 
deliberately leaked because it was given to him by a translator that Reuters 
employed. The KGB vetted such people and the fact that he gave it to Reuter... 
implies that he was told to. This, however, left the Reuters correspondent with the 
problem of despatching it; bourgeois correspondents were subject to censorship 
and...the censors would simply have vetoed it. This correspondent eventually sent 
it to the USA via Helsinki, whilst the Dailv Worker was getting dribs and 
drabs... bits...and they didnt know what to do.
Confused reactions
During the open sessions of the CPSU Congress, Mikoyan had referred to 
the cult of the individual. As early as February 1956, George Matthews, in an 
article based on these sessions, took the opportunity to emphasise that criticisms 
of the Stalin era should not wipe out everything from the past.  Matthews had not 
seen Khruschevs speech but his report set a pattern for the British leadership 
which persistently contextualised Stalins mistakes in terms of his positive 
services to the Soviet Union and the cause of Socialism. On Wednesday 29 
February, the Dailv Worker invited readers to submit letters arising from the 20^ 
Congress.   Malcolm MacEwen, who was responsible for Readers Forum,
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
 MacLeod, The Death of Uncle Joe. 69.
 Dennis Ogden, interview, 3 November 1997.
 Ibid.
 G. Matthews, Report on the 20'^ Congress of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union, 
Daily Worker (25 February 1956), 2.
Ibid.
Dailv Worker. (29 February 1956).
recalled how during this period before members knew the details of the secret 
speech, letters on Stalin flooded into the Daily Worker, and I had the utmost 
difficulty...getting them published. One of the first of these letters came from 8.A. 
Edmonds who asked, as Marxists should we accept everything that happens in the 
Soviet Union uncritically as the best of all possible worlds? As early as 12 
March, however, editor J.R. Campbell proposed a guillotine on questions 
connected with the cult of the individual,' as they had been dealt with and the 
letters are tending to be repetitive...we now invite letters dealing with the coming 
Congress of the CP in this country.
The Dailv Worker published a small piece on 17 March headlined Stalin: a 
strange story and on the following Monday carried the headline, The Khruschov 
[sic] Speech. This referred directly to the report given by the First Secretary of 
the Soviet Communist Party...to a special private session of the Congress on the 
cult of the individual and its consequences. It talked of the mistakes of Stalin 
following the 17  Congress of the CPSU, with the apparently legitimate objective of 
anti-Trotskyism, an epithet barely used by Khruschev.   In the same issue, the 
paper published an editorial emphasising the enormous economic advances in the 
Soviet Union which, since Tsarist times when it had been amongst the poorest 
countries, had brought it to second in the list.  Following the news that there had 
been a speech by Khruschev, Malcolm MacEwen said that the Readers Forum 
had to be re-opened...and the flood of letters became a torrent.
Campbell met the Dailv Worker staff on Friday 23 March to explain his 
views on the speech/ Staff at the paper were a close-knit group. Alison Macleod 
recalled, we were all chummy...in the same boat...living on a very small salary... 
bringing out the paper on a shoestring and there was great camaraderie.   The 
day after the secret speech had been leaked in Bonn, the Hungarian Government 
announced the rehabilitation of former Party Secretary, Lazio Rajk, who had been 
shot in 1948. At Campbells meeting, MacEwen referred to Rajk and proposed that 
the Dailv Worker publish an article on judicial murder.  Campbell overruled this.
M. MacEwen, T h e  Day the Party had to Stop, The Socialist Register. 1976. 26.
 S.A. Edmonds to Dailv Worker (29 February 1956).
^  J.R. Campbell, Dailv Worker. (12 March 1956).
 Stalin: A Strange Story, The Khruschov Speech, Dailv Worker (17 and 19 March 1956). 
 The Khruschov Speech, Dailv Worker (19 March 1956).
 Ibid.
 The Role of Stalin, Dailv Worker (19 March 1956), 3.
 MacEwen The Day the Party had to Stop, 26.
See MacLeod, The Death of Uncle Joe. 70-73.
Alison Macleod, interview, 15 October 1997.
MacEwen, The Day the Party had to Stop, 26.
with one columnist, Walter Holmes, dismissing the idea with who the hell cares 
about Rajk?.   Campbell admitted that we defended the indefensible...but we 
also defended the Socialist achievements. "* Alison Macleod recalled that Phil 
Bolsover was incensed because Pollitt was still making speeches about Stalins 
mistakes,... Phil said Mass murder is not just a mistake. 
Discussion continued throughout Party press, up to and beyond the 
Partys 24^ Congress at the end of March. Two letters from Felicity Crump and J. 
McD. were typical of this correspondence. Both appeared the day after the Dailv 
Worker published The Khruschov Speech.  Felicity Crump complained that In 
Britain...the Soviet Union is always right, even in detail, and if it proves to have 
made a mistake it is not our place to say so until afterwards because it is perfectly 
capable of correcting any mistakes it may make.  J. McD. wrote that the errors of 
the past...are directly attributable to the slavish adherence to a policy of not 
criticising anything in the Soviet Union -  in face of the facts.  Two days later, a 
letter signed by four members called for a full debate and condemnation of Stalins 
murder of innocents.  The next week Bridjit [sic] and Christopher Hill identified a 
tendency within Communism to put loyalty to Party before loyalty to Socialism. J. 
St. John continued this theme, writing of Communists throughout the world [who] 
either shut their minds to things which were unpleasant or, whatever they thought, 
kept silent.*
At the time, according to John Hostettler, many Party members continued 
to believe the speech had been rigged in some way. Ralph Russell said that 
many took the line that it had been an unreliable text. Morris Schaer recalled 
members blaming the capitalist press for conducting a propaganda exercise."* 
Schaer added, we tried to justify it, because if we didnt justify it, we were lost ...so 
youd try and find ways round it. Max Morris recalled greater and greater anxiety 
on the Executive Committee, it was pretty clear...that these leaks were
 Ibid.
'""* Macleod, The Death of Uncle Joe. 71.
 Ibid., 72.
Nothing of the speech itself was in this report.
F. Crump to Dailv Worker (20 March 1956).
 J. McD., ibid.
J. Bradley, V. Bradley, J.L. Redding, M. Redding to Dailv Worker (22 March 1956). 
 B. and C. Hill to Dailv Worker (27 March 1956).
* J. St. John to Dailv Worker (27 March 1956).
  John Hostettler, interview, 25 June 1997.
 Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
"* Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997.
 Ibid.
authentic. Mprris admitted that at first it was all denied. Even in our own Exec, it 
was all denied. Ralph Russell speculated that the leadership may have hoped 
that Khruschev might be out before the knowledge about the speech really gained 
any head of steam.
The Executive Committee met on 9 and 10 March, the weekend before 
Pollitt claimed to have first heard about the secret speech. The meeting drafted a 
resolution on the 20* Congress, confirming that many within the leadership had 
only a hazy idea about the detail of the speech, but were, nevertheless, aware of 
its existence as well as its theme. The resolution welcomed the decisions of the 
20* Congress as an outstanding contribution to the cause of peace and 
Socialism. It gave details of optimistic economic forecasts following the adoption 
of the sixth five-year plan. The resolution declared that by 1960 industrial 
production will increase by 65 per cent, consumer goods output by 60 per cent, 
agricultural output by 70 per cent. It continued, saying that the seven hour day will 
be introduced. Real wages will go up by 30 per cent...4,000,000 scientists and 
technicians will graduate. Towards the end, however, the resolution said that 
Past mistakes and weaknesses were frankly and boldly recognised and corrected 
and referred to criticism and self-criticism. It went on to mention that the re
establishment of collective leadership had been warmly endorsed by the 
Congress.
This emphasis formed the basis of the leaderships tactics throughout the 
following week. Its failure to mention Khruschevs speech during this period is 
difficult to understand. Much of the anger expressed by members throughout 1956 
focussed upon the fact that their leadership knew of things that were going on in 
the Soviet Union about which they had kept silent. Roger Simon remembered that 
members were shocked at the way our leadership handled it...they seemed to 
keep it quiet as long as they could.* Similarly, Margot Heinemann wrote, if our
 Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998. 
 Ibid.
 Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
 Draft Resolution of the Executive Committee of the Communist Party on the 20*  
Congress of the CPSU (10 March 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/ EC/03/23.
 Ibid. The word outstanding is handwritten [possibly by James Klugmann] and replaces 
the word important.
 Ibid. On official figures, between 1951 and 1970, industrial production grew by 10.1 per 
cent, agricultural production by 4.5 per cent and real income per head by 5.8 per cent. 
Figures: M. Haynes, Understanding the Soviet Crisis, International Socialism. 2: 34 
(Winter 1987), 14.
Draft Resolution on the 20* Congress of the CPSU, 2.
 Ibid. The prefix re before establishment was added by hand.
* Roger Simon, interview, 10 December 1997.
leaders had felt it possible to make at the time...sharply critical statements...some, 
though not all, of the later divisions, resignations and waste might have been 
avoided.
Whilst the leadership appreciated the explosive potential of the secret 
speech, they do not appear to have calculated for it being so much more volatile 
once the charge of their own dishonesty was placed alongside it. In the Dailv 
Worker of Monday 12 March, George Matthews in his report of the CPGB 
Executive Committee meeting did not mention the secret speech. Neither did 
Pollitt in a speech at Friends Meeting House in London where he applauded the 
increase in technicians and scientists in the Soviet Union and, whilst mentioning 
the cult of the individual, did not refer directly to the secret speech.Neither did 
Campbell who, following his guillotine the previous Monday, wrote on Thursday of 
that week that most of the letters arriving at the paper were concerned with the 
cult of the individual"  rather than with the tremendous prospects which the 
congress has opened not only to the people of the Soviet Union but throughout the 
world.
The 24*  Congress of the CPGB
This Congress took place at Battersea Town Hall between 30 March and 2 
April 1956 and was notable for its own Closed Session from which press and 
observers were excluded. This was on Sunday 1 April, but before this, Khruschevs 
speech was barely mentioned. Pollitts political report concentrated on the issues of 
Peace and the Fight against the Tory attacks. He outlined the issues over 
which the CPGB should take a lead in the struggle against the government and 
called for an immediate programme...to defeat the Tory offensive. I n  spite of 
the rising mass struggle which is developing, Pollitt, nevertheless, referred to the 
Partys decline, saying that in 1954, it was stated that the entire Party and every 
leading comrade would be judged by the efforts made to overcome the decline in
M. Heinemann, 1956 and the Communist Party, The Socialist Register 1976. 45-46.95
 G. Matthews, Dailv Worker (12 March 1956).
 H. Pollitt, Speech at Friends Meeting House [reported], Dailv Worker (13 March1956).
 J.R. Campbell, Dailv Worker (15 March 1956).
 H. Pollitt, Political Report to the 24'*  Congress CPGB (March 1956), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Cong/09/02. Also, H. Pollitt, J. Gollan, G. Matthews The People Will Decide 
(London, 1956), 8 and 14, Manchester, 329.23.
Ibid., 14.
Party membership and Daily Worker sales'T^ Similarly, John Gollans reply to the 
discussion did not refer to Khruschevs speech.
Copies of Soviet News were circulating around the congress, having been 
issued the day before its open ing .T he  article, reprinted from Pravda. included a 
transcript of The resolution of the 20^ Party Congress on the report of the central 
committee of the Soviet Union.A lo n g s id e  Marx, Engels and Lenin, the 
resolution cited leading Menshevik, Plekhanovs, condemnation of attempts at 
personal exaltation. I t  accused Stalin of encouraging such personal exaltation 
...even resorting to self-glorification. T h e  resolution talked about eliminating the 
vestiges and survivals of the cult of the individual from our life and can have left 
little doubt in the minds of delegates about the new regimes attitude to its 
p redecessor.A t the Congress, Maurice Cornforth referred to the article, saying 
pointedly, to read Pravda on the cult of the individual, one wouldnt think that 
Pravda itself was the main vehicle of that cult. 
On the Saturday of the Congress, the CPGBs weekly journal. World News, 
published an extract from Togliattis statement on Khruschevs speech to the Italian 
Communist Party Central Committee. Ralph Russell said that, once he began 
hearing rumours about the speech, he phoned up George Matthews to try and 
persuade him to publish Togliattis s ta tem ent.The Dailv Worker had published 
some reports from Italy in March and, Russell said, Togliatti was much more 
forthcoming than anyone had been.  George Matthews agreed to publish it as a 
supplement to World News...he never agreed very readily.T o g l ia t t i s report 
was, according to John Saville, more detailed and much more sophisticated than 
George Matthews account and did much to encourage speculation and 
discussion.
At the closed session, Pollitt claimed that on 18 March, when they spoke 
about the speech, Sam Russell had stated that his information was confidential
Ibid., 22.
J. Gollan, The People Will Decide. 30-38.
Why the Cult of the Individual is Alien to the Spirit of Marxism-Leninism, Soviet News.
Ibid., 1 
^lbid., 1-2.
'lbid., 1-2.
Ibid. 3.
M. Cornforth, Speech to Closed Session of 24'^ Congress CPGB (1 April 1956), no.5, 
Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/09/09.
Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
Dailv Worker (16 March 1956). Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998. Also see 
Defending the Innocent, World Marxist Review. 32:7 (July 1982) and J.B. Urban, Moscow 
arid the Italian Communist Party (London. 1986)
Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
J. Saville, The 20 Congress and the British Communist Party, 3.
and under no circumstances had to be published. T h i s  was more than a week 
after Dennis Ogden had heard the speech on the first Friday in March. Pollitt, 
however, emphasised his ignorance, reminding delegates that the Communist 
International was dissolved in 1942 and no facilities for connections between 
Communist Parties existed. He reminded delegates that their own closed session 
...should not be given any outside publicity. Following a summary of Khruschevs 
speech, he asked What lessons have we to draw from this re-assessment of 
Stalin?. He stressed that we have to be strong and resolute...and defeat the 
efforts of the capitalists and elements like Gaitskell, who seek to exploit the 
situation in their campaign against Communism. Pollitt asked delegates to avoid 
underestimating the confusion and doubt about the policy of the CPSU and of our 
own Party. He also warned against refusing to face it or to understand why it has 
taken place, and...why it has been necessary to make this new assessment of 
Stalins role. Pollitt mitigated this, however, warning the Party against going to the 
other extreme and not recognising the positive contribution which Stalin has made 
to the developments in the Soviet Union.
Two themes dominated the leaderships arguments at the congress and 
throughout 1956. One was to refer consistently to the Soviet Unions 
industrialisation in terms of socialist advance. The other was to justify Stalins 
mistakes in terms of the historical circumstances under which he had been forced 
to operate. Dutt, for example, just a month before his notorious spots on the sun 
blunder in Labour Monthly, suggested that Stalins abuses were perfectly 
understandable due to the fact that he had been brought up in a harsh school, a 
school of revolutionary struggle, a training which apparently led him to see 
enemies everywhere. H e  also talked of the direction of socialism pitched 
against capitalist critics and echoed Pollitt as he called for just a little humility 
when we see how much...the Soviet Union has done.  He concluded that in the 
bounds of history that achievement of theirs a hundred times outweighs the costs -  
however heavy those costs accompanying it. ^  J.R. Campbell reiterated this, 
saying I want to shout...dont forget that capitalism has vanished...that the Soviet 
Union...is now the second greatest industrial power, without capitalists and
H. Pollitt, Report to Closed Session of the 24** Congress CPGB (1 April 1956), 
Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/09/09. [Subsequent speeches to Closed Session: 
Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/09/09]. Sam Russell declined to be interviewed.
H. Pollitt, Report to Closed Session of 24** Congress.
R.P. Dutt, Speech to Closed Session of 24*  Congress, no.8.
^^lbid.
Ibid.
landlords.M a u r ic e  Cornforth agreed that, for all his mistakes, Stalin appeared to 
have presided over the development of socialism. He began by admitting an 
extraordinary state of affairs, not allowed for in any of the books...that it became 
possible for the workers power under which socialism was to be built to be 
distorted into a quite different sort of dictatorship.  Despite this distortion, 
however, under this system, socialism was built, the first socialist country did 
become a great world power. How this contradictory situation had developed was, 
said Cornforth, something which calls for a great deal of new thought as a problem 
of contemporary history.
Pollitt dealt with another aspect of the deviation from Marxism Leninism, 
for which he blamed Beria and his men. ^  This was the schism between the 
Soviet Union and Yugoslavia in 1948. Pollitt admitted that we too, in the Executive 
Committee of the British Communist Party, supported the resolutions of the 
Communist Information Bureau, and have, therefore, to take our share of the 
blame. T h e  CPGB leadership, added Pollitt, unreservedly withdraw all the 
statements and books which contained unjust accusations, including the statement 
made by Harry Pollitt at the London membership meeting in 1948 and, with his full 
agreement, the book of James Klugmann.
Pollitt concluded by stressing that, for British Communism, The Soviet 
Union is and remains the greatest Socialist power in the world...[where]...the 
exploitation of man by man has been abolished. H e  asked finally, are we 
ashamed of the fact that we defended the Soviet Union? and answered No -  this 
was the essential basis of the victories of Socialism. The task for the British Party 
was to develop our theoretical basis -  applied in British terms and conditions. 
Discontent, both with the British and Soviet leaderships, did emerge during 
the debate, however. Speakers expressing unease and criticism were, in general, 
from the branches and were called alternately with those from the leadership. 
Derek Robinson, a branch delegate, referred to the blind acceptance of theoretical 
ideas from the Soviet Union. H e  complained that no discussion is allowed to 
take place on an extended scale in the Daily Worker and asked do our members
J.R. Campbell, Speech to Closed Session, no. 12. 
M. Cornforth, Speech to Closed Session, no.5. 
Ibid.
H. Pollitt, Report to Closed Session.
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid.
D. Robinson, Speech to Closed Session, no.1.
have to be treated like dummies? Do we have to accept the party line on such 
problems as the cult of the individual, Tito etc., without adequate explanation, 
because it is claimed that not enough information is available'.
Willie Gallacher followed, describing Stalin as a quiet unassuming 
comrade. H e  reassured delegates that all of us can make mistakes, some 
slight, some serious, before uttering the bewildering analogy that Comrade Stalin 
was the steel sprung mattress around which the best comrades gathered. 
MacFarlane, from Maudsley Hospital Branch, read out a resolution criticising the 
series of excesses which appear to have been committed by Stalin and his 
assoc ia tes .Th i s  resolution made a qualitative shift towards criticism of the 
British leadership, deploring the complete failure of the EC...to admit to the British 
public the responsibility of the Party for its uncritical support of all aspects of Soviet 
Policy since 1934. MacFarlane demanded full acceptance by the EC of 
Khruschevs account of the errors and crimes of Stalin and attacked its failure...to 
admit its share of responsibility for such gross violations of Communist principles. 
The Maudsley resolution expressed its most serious dissatisfaction with the Party 
leadership in its handling of the present critical situation.
Khruschev had identified 1934 as the beginning of the Stalinist period of 
terror following the assassination of Kirov.^^   Khruschev, however, had omitted to 
mention the first five-year plan, collectivisation and the exile of most of the early 
leading Bolsheviks which had all occurred before this date. Peter Fryer 
nevertheless, agreed with him. After insisting that we should base our policies and 
our conclusions only on facts, as revealed and tested by science. Fryer held rigidly 
to the period between 1934 and 1953 as the years of the cult of the individual and 
the substitution of one-man rule. ^  Like Khruschev, Fryer reduced the problem to 
one of the cult of the individual, ignoring the role of others within the Soviet 
leadership whose personal position had depended upon their association with 
Stalins methods. McLaherty of Glasgow referred to this question of individual 
versus collective responsibility, saying it would have been better had Stalin died at 
that earlier period because another leader would have been found. A n d r e w  
Rothstein took up the possibility of Stalins early death asking, obscurely, that
W . Gallacher, Speech to Closed Session, no.2.
Ibid.
McFarlane [Maudsley Hospital Branch], Speech to Closed Session, no.3. 
Ibid.
Khruschev, The Crimes of the Stalin Era, 21.
P. Fryer, Speech to Closed Session of 24^ Congress, no.Sa.
McLaherty, Speech to Closed Session, no. 10.
comrades consider this question...from the point of view of the class struggle. 
Pollitt, rounding up the debate on Sunday evening, pledged the British leadership 
to a continuing commitment to defend the Soviet Union at any price.R e fe r r i ng  
to the CPGB leaderships persistent support for Stalin, Pollitt posed the, 
presumably rhetorical, question to delegates, asking in such a situation what 
would you have done?. ^
After the 24*' Congress
The Dailv Worker published a transcript of Pollitts opening speech on the 
day before the closed sess ion.This  did not engage with the secret speech, but 
talked of the amazing new perspectives now opening up for the Soviet people. 
Peter Zinkin wrote a report on the following Monday, entitled Frank Criticism is 
Congress Keynote. P e t e r  Fryer was more concerned with reporting Gollans 
standing ovation, as he called for unity in action with Labour, than the debate 
about Khruschevs speech/^ Although members did not see a copy of the speech 
until the Observer published it on 10 June, Pollitt wrote a long article for World 
News at the end of April and beginning of May."*  This could be interpreted as 
evidence that the leadership was not attempting to repress the speech. It does not, 
however, explain why they did not publish Russells report. What seems likely is 
that the closed session and Pollitts article represented attempts to forestall the 
impact of Khruschevs candour upon members. Much of the debate following the 
Congress, focussed upon the question of the British leaderships honesty, rather 
than on the broader political questions about Stalinism raised by the speech. H. 
Silver wrote it is not a minor question of whether we did or did not know what was 
going on in the last twenty years -  the entire question of whether British 
Communists think for themselves, are prepared to discuss and apologise openly 
and honestly is involved.
Again, Pollitts article began by pointing out that since the Comintern had 
been dissolved, the British Party had not been a member of Cominform. Like
A. Rothstein, Speech to Closed Session, no.14.
H. Pollitt, Speech to Closed Session, no.21.
Ibid.
H. Pollitt, Dailv Worker (31 March 1956), 2.
Ibid.
P. Zinkin, Frank Criticism is Congress Keynote, Dailv Worker (2 April 1956).
P. Fryer, Report on Congress Debate, Dailv Worker (2 April 1956).
H. Pollitt, The 20*   Congress of the CPSU and the Role of Stalin, World News 3:16 and 
18 (21 April and 5 May 1956), 246-248 and 278-280.
H. Silver to Dailv Worker (24 April 1956).
Khruschev, he identified 1934 and the CPSUs Congress as the point at which 
the 'series of purgings and wrongful arrests took place and when Party rules were 
violated'^'' Pollitt identified the rise of Fascism and capitalist threats and 
interventions as part of the reason for Stalin placing himself above the Party. 
Stalin had, during this period, looked towards intensification of the class struggle 
and the continuing Dictatorship of the Proletariat meant greater and greater 
dependence on the security forces instead of on the people. H e  identified the 
capitalist agent, Beria, as responsible for this who, along with others, had wormed 
their way into the CPSU...to build up unfounded accusations and take measures of 
persecution and repression against innocent comrades.
Under the sub-heading, Cult of the Individual, Pollitt reassured members 
that following Stalins death, the Leninist principle of collective leadership has been 
restored. The adoption of the sixth five year plan by the CPSU was, according to 
Pollitt, as important as its reassessment of the role of Stalin. H e  went on to say 
We are all deeply shocked to learn that many of those presented as traitors were, 
in fact, devoted Communists, victims of...deliberately organised violations of 
justice. S u c h  errors and abuses, however, had occurred within the framework 
of profound socialist advance. Like Khruschevs speech, Pollitts article was 
characterised by the paradoxical dualism identified by Shub, as it regretted the 
attacks on leading Party members whilst ignoring the millions who were executed, 
starved or imprisoned by Stalin and the people around him. Under the sub-heading 
What Were They Doing?, Pollitt justified their collusion, suggesting that Stalins 
prestige in the eyes of the people was such, that any inner or open fight...would 
have divided the people and the nation. Justifying his and his own leaderships 
implicit collusion in not protesting against Stalins mistakes, Pollitt declared There 
are enough hostile capitalist forces in the world attacking the USSR without our 
bringing grist to their mills. This defiance was mitigated by the claim that we have 
never said that there was nothing wrong with the Soviet Union or claimed it was a 
paradise. P o l l i t t  stressed the political independence of the British Party and, in 
a posture frequently adopted by the leadership throughout 1956, proclaimed that
H. Pollitt, The 20 Congress of the CPSU and the Role of Stalin, World News. 3:16, 
Ibid. 246-7.
Ibid. 247.
Ibid.
H. Pollitt, The 20'^ Congress of the CPSU and the Role of Stalin, World News, 3:18 (5 
May 1956), 278.
Ibid., 279.
Ibid., 280.
we are engaged in the class war...international solidarity is absolutely essential. 
The CPGB needed to improve our theoretical understanding, improve Party 
democracy as well as its own collective leadership. The British leadership, he 
concluded, had not listened sufficiently sympathetically or carefully to points and 
criticisms raised.Fo l l ow ing  Pollitts article, beginning with a letter from John 
Saville, the debate within World News continued virtually unabated until the 
Special 25^ Congress in April 1957.^^   Much of this is dealt with in the following 
chapters.
In May, 1956, following Dutts spots on the sun article in Labour Monthlv. 
the debate took an acrimonious turn.^^ Max Morris recalled terrific anger amongst 
some members about this article, I actually moved on the EC that he be removed 
from the Political Committee but got no support for that at all.  John Hostettler 
also recalled that the article had made a lot of people furious. Dutt really put his 
foot in it there. A n g e r  over Dutts comment forced him to publish a statement 
apologising for his incidental remarks. I n  this, he admitted that A number of 
letters of criticism have reached me. . . I should like to take the earliest opportunity of 
stating that I regard the criticism as justified.
In the same issue of World News as Savilles letter, the Executive 
Committee published a resolution, following its meeting on 13 May. ^ It was at this 
meeting that the Executive Committee received Pollitts resignation as General 
Secretary on the best medical advice. John Gollan, the Partys National 
Organiser, replaced him. Whilst the medical grounds cited by Pollitt for his 
resignation were genuine, its timing suggests that recent events and their potential 
consequences may also have been a factor in the decision. Pollitt was sixty-six 
and, according to John Mahon, had suffered a haemorrhage behind the eyes in 
A p r i l . H e  had suffered from ill health since 1953 and in July 1954, was admitted 
to a Soviet c l inic.Ralph Russell, however, felt that Pollitt probably felt unable to
Ibid.
Ibid.
J. Saville, Problems of the Communist Party, World News. 3:20 (19 May 1956), 314. 
R.P. Dutt The Great Debate, Labour Monthlv 38: 5 (May 1956), 194.
Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998.
John Hostettler, interview, 25 June 1997.
R.P. Dutt, Dailv Worker (23 May 1956).
Ibid.
Executive Committee, CPGB, The Lessons of the 20*  Congress of the CPSU in World 
News. 3:20 (19 May 1956), 316-317.
H. Pollitt to Executive Committee CPGB (9 May 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/03/24.
J. Mahon, Harrv Pollitt A Bioaraohv (London, 1976), 404.
Ibid., 411
carry the Party at that s t a g e ' . M a x  Morris said, we all would have preferred 
Pollitt to continue, and felt that the secret speech had expedited his retirement. 
Although this meeting was the first for the new Executive Committee elected at the 
24** Congress, there were only seven new members out of a total of 42. 
The draft resolution agreed at this meeting was reprinted in its essentials in 
World News and followed a similar pattern to Pollitts article. It talked of amazing 
economic, social, cultural and political advances...in the USSR, Peoples China 
and the Peoples democracies.  The resolution was less sure-footed, however, in 
its attempt to explain the contradiction between such practices and socialism. The 
lapses in democratic functioning of the Party...violations of socialist law, and grave 
injustices to loyal comrades, whilst they were alien to socialism, were 
nevertheless carried out within the framework of gigantic socialist advances.  As 
with Maurice Cornforths congress speech, this resolution suggested that the 
achievement of socialism had been in spite of, rather than because of, means 
identified as alien to it. The Executive Committee apologised to members for its 
previous mistaken attacks on Yugoslav Communists. It, nevertheless, pronounced 
itself proud of our long record in the field of international working class 
solidarity.  The resolution welcomed the fully free atmosphere in which 
discussions about the 20^ Congress were taking place, but was concerned about 
a certain lack of balance in which discussions tended to concentrate on the 
weaknesses revealed at the 20   Congress rather than...the great advances, new 
perspectives, and new theoretical approaches. It was wrong to see nothing but 
errors and abuses as this would result in a purely negative attitude. The lessons 
the Party should draw from the 20  Congress included steps to improve the 
theoretical work of our Party from top to bottom. T h e  resolution outlined three 
main lines for forthcoming discussion.
Regarding the first of these, Problems of Unity, the leadership committed 
itself to initiate a discussion on...relations [with] the Labour Party...the Popular 
Alliance, etc.. The second heading for discussion was The British Road to 
Socialism over which the Executive Committee admitted, it had not done enough
 Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998. 
* Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998.
 Draft of EC Resolution: Lessons of the 20*'
 Executive Committee Meeting, 12 and 13 May 1956, Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/03/24.
Congress of the C PSU, 1, Manchester, 
CP/Cent/EC/03/24.
'  Ibid., 2. 
 Ibid., 2-3.
' Ibid., 4.
^lbid., 5
to carry the analysis further and committed itself to preparing a new edition. 
The third line headed, The Communist Party began by claiming 50,000 
members...and 5,000 members of the YCL and continued by announcing a 
special Commission on Party democracy.The resolution correctly predicted a 
great wave of struggle...on economic and social issues, a mounting anti-Tory 
feeling and urged members to build to make the CPGB a credible alternative to 
Labour. ^
By hand or by brain -  a false dichotomy?^
Following the 24*  Congress, arguments about Stalinism were in danger of 
being lost within an argument about workers versus intellectuals. Throughout 1-956 
and 1957, intellectuals were identified as responsible for the splits. This had been 
a perceived dichotomy throughout the Partys history, its roots going back to the 
Plebs publications of the early 1920s. John Lewis, for example, wrote in 1922 that 
I dont think Im altogether up the pole when I suggest that the PLEBS has been 
much too full of...the intellectual squabbles of very clever cranks and the 
irrelevancies of brainy specialists who are not doing the spade work and are doing 
too much thinking. L e w i s  described these intellectuals...as a lot of conceited 
asses. T h e  debate took a serious turn in the 1930s when Freda Utley wrote, we 
have hardly any intellectuals worthy of the name...those in our movement who 
could be the revolutionary socialist intelligentsia" are, for the most part, only 
anxious to show that they are as good as anyone else at bowing to the 
spontaneity of the masses. T h e  leadership, writing as the Politbureau, replied 
to Utley, admitting that no-one will dispute the British contempt for theory which 
exists in our ranks...including the leadership. B r i a n  Pearce, when asked if there 
was an anti-intellectual atmosphere within the Party, replied, In the Party generally.
Ibid., 5-6.
Ibid., 6. Allen Hutt put Party membership at 33,236 at the beginning of 1956, Review of 
Daily Worker Circulation (22 June 1956), 5, Manchester, CP/lnd/misc/Hutt/2/1. Newton put 
the figure for February 1956 at 33,054.
Draft of EC Resolution; Lessons of the 20*   Congress of the CPSU, 7. 1957 was the 
most strike-ridden year since World W ar II, with the highest strike rate until 1969-70.
See H. Pollitt, The Communist Party and the Labour Party (London, 1955), 6., In the 
interests of the working class and all workers by hand and brain".
J. Lewis, Plebs 14:2 (February 1922).
Ibid.
F. Uttley, Economism Today: The Iskra Period and Ourselves, Communist Review 2:5 
(May 1930), 200. MML.
The Theoretician of the Left": Sectarianism and Spontaneity, Communist Review 3:1 
(January 1931), 12. MML.
I think there was'/^^ A number of delegates at the 24  Congress, referring to their 
own credentials as workers, made the distinction between themselves and 
intellectuals within the Party/
In 1956, A.R.L. of London began the argument in the press, writing. In 
connection with the recent revelations in the Soviet Union, Harry Pollitt is reported 
to have drawn attention more than once to a division between intellectual 
members...and Working Class members. L e n i n s view that, in a revolutionary 
party, all distinctions as between workers and intellectuals...must be effaced, was 
largely ignored in the subsequent de ba t e . J .  Marsh from Bristol wrote that The 
Party is based on the Working Class struggle and a group which is opposed to 
what is consciously felt by the workers must be incorrect. N e a l  Wood felt that, 
following the twenties the political activities of the Party intellectuals were 
curtailed and identified the entrenchment of a Stalinist bureaucracy with its natural 
suspicion of intellectuals as being responsible for this. "* Ralph Russell agreed. 
When asked to give his views on Harry Pollitt he replied I felt for a long time that 
he was anti-intellectual and anti-theory for that matter. 
This argument had two beneficial effects for the CPGB leadership. As it 
carried through into the period of the publication of The Reasoner. it diverted 
discussion about the nature of both Soviet and British Stalinism into a fruitless 
debate about intellectuals in the Party, as well as the rights and wrongs of the 
journals publication. Secondly, it successfully marginalised one group within the 
Party as trouble makers, whose criticisms of the leadership and of Stalin were 
characterised as attempts at dissolving our Party.  Contrary to this idea that 
dissatisfaction was the creation of recalcitrant intellectuals, a small piece appeared 
on the front page of the Dailv Worker in November. George Sinfields article 
announced the resignations of John Horner, General Secretary of the Fire 
Brigades Union and Alex Moffatt, District Secretary of the Lothian District of the 
National Union of Mineworkers. Sinfield said of Horner that for six months he had 
had his doubts and that Hungary was the culmination.  Horner spoke later
Brian Pearce, interview, 1 February 1999.
 See Sam Taylor [Brierly Pit, Yorkshire], and Comrade Wilson [Surrey], Speeches to 
Closed Session 24*  Congress CPGB no.1 and no. 13.
 A.R.L. to Dailv Worker ( 25 April 1956).
 Lenin, What is to be Done? 109.
 J. Marsh to Dailv Worker (30 April 1956).
"* N. Wood, Communism and the British Intellectuals. 167.
 Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
 S. Taylor, Speech to Closed Session 24*  Congress CPGB, no.1.
 G. Sinfield, John Horner and Alex Moffatt Quit Party Dailv W orker. (14 November 
1956).
about how painful the process of leaving was, saying People who were leaving the 
Communist Party -  had their lives ruined.
Many intellectuals joined in the debate, however. Rodney Hilton, for 
example, asked why it was that 'in the social sciences, much of our discussion has 
been bedevilled by the imposing of a straitjacket in the form of formulations by 
Stalin.  E.P. Thompson wrote to James Klugmann as early as March, saying the 
leadership of our Party is opportunist and lacking in socialist principle and called 
into question Klugmanns own intellectual integrity regarding his retraction of From 
Trotsky to Tito.  Thompson insisted that in order to re-establish confidence 
...nothing less than an apology to the Party is due and informed Klugmann that he 
was "moving to a position of opposition within the Party. T h o m p s o n s article 
Winter Wheat in Omsk which appeared in World News at the end of June, was 
also a significant moment in the debate.
Eric Hobsbawm saw a process developing throughout 1956, which he 
described as a continuum involving virtually everybody on the intellectual side 
and a good many other people too, trade unionists for instance [who] were 
dissatisfied.  Such a process, although articulated by people like Thompson and 
the various correspondents to Party organs, was largely leaderless. Alison 
MacLeod suggested why dissidence in the Party was not organised, saying, Party 
rules prevented it...it isnt really possible to organise anything if, as soon as you 
write anything down and start duplicating and circulating it, youre told to stop.  
The nature of this opposition and the way in which the leadership responded to it is 
the subject of the following two chapters.
By mid-October, events in Poland were reaching a crisis. At the time, these 
events drew more attention than Hungary. As Nicholas Bethel wrote, An 
announcement on 17 October that Imre Nagy had been readmitted to the 
Hungarian Communist Party merited only a small newspaper paragraph.  In 
Warsaw on 19 October, Khruschev met with members of the ruling Polish 
Communist Party, which restored the formerly imprisoned Wladislaw Gomulka to 
power.
John Horner, interview with Louise Brodie, 16 August 1994. British Library National 
Sound Archive [Henceforward NSA] 0609/13/03, F4101 Horner joined the CPGB in 1945.
 R. Hilton to Dailv Worker (12 April 1956).
 E.P. Thompson to J Klugmann (22 March 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
 Ibid., underlining in original.
  Thompson, Winter Wheat in Omsk, 408.
 Hobsbawm, interview with Stedman Jones, 19.
Alison MacLeod, interview, 15 October 1997.
 Bethel, Gomulka. 208.
Revolution from below
It is beyond the scope of this thesis to detail the events in Hungary between 
October and November 1956. Imre Nagy, towards whom many Hungarian radicals 
and intellectuals looked for leadership was a moderate reformer, and not the 
counter-revolutionary of world Communist demonology.^ Even the Petofi circle of 
Hungarian young Communists, maligned within Communist literature as counter
revolutionary, was, little more than a dissident discussion group. This did not 
prevent the British Party from describing rebels and students who had 
demonstrated in Budapest as Formations of counter revolutionaries and as class 
enemies. T h e r e  were demonstrations of unarmed people in Budapest on the 
evening of 22 October in support of Polish workers and students. They also 
demanded the formation of a government under Nagy. These demonstrations grew 
to revolutionary proportions when the police fired into a crowd attempting to storm 
the radio station. This was the cue for Russian tanks, waiting near the edge of 
Budapest, to enter the city. They were fought by youths with stones and petrol 
bombs. By 24 October, Nagy had been installed as Prime Minister with a policy to 
restore order, but two days later, Budapest workers were forming councils. Nagys 
government attempted to contain the situation by granting concessions and asked 
the Russian troops to leave Hungary. 
A period followed in which revolutionary councils governed in parallel with 
the official government, before Russian troops again entered Budapest on 4 
November and took over Hungary. Strikes continued to plague the government, 
however, now under the control of Moscows preferred leader, Janos Kadar. By 
December, this regime, backed by 200,000 Soviet troops, began arresting 
members of the Central Workers Council of Greater Budapest, the main 
representative body of the uprising. On 11 December, the regime arrested the 
entire Council and the revolution was effectively defeated.
The account of Dailv Worker journalist Peter Fryer, who was in Hungary 
from the end of October until the middle of November, described, not only the 
situation itself, but also the response of the British leadership.^ By the time he 
arrived in Hungary, Fryer had already become more sceptical about Communism.
 Harman, Class Struggles in Eastern Europe. 144-146.
 Hungarian Workers Answer and Nagy Promises Reforms, Dailv Worker (25 and 26 
October 1950).
 Harman, Class Struggles in Eastern Europe. 119-186. Ben Fowkes, The Rise and Fall 
of Communism in Eastern Europe (London. 1995).
P Fryer, Hungarian Tragedy (London, 1997).
He quoted a fellow journalist who, returning from Eastern Europe, appalled at what 
he had witnessed, approached Pollitt and told him everything that had distressed 
him. Pollitt replied, My advice to you is to keep your mouth shut. 
On 28 October, a week after the uprising in Budapest, Fryer was in the 
town of Magyarovar. On the previous day, Hungarian secret policemen had 
machine-gunned a peaceful demonstration for four minutes. J . R .  Campbell 
suppressed Fryers account of this massacre. Fryer blamed those who led the 
Hungarian Communist Party for eleven years, insisting this was no counter
revolution. W h e n  Fryer came to telephone the despatch to London, however, 
the call was cut off after twenty minutes. The first ten minutes of the call had been 
taken up by three different people giving me contradictory instructions as to the 
line I should take. Mick Bennett insisted on giving me a long extract from a 
resolution of the Central Committee of the Polish United Workers Party.
The debate within the Party reflected members confusion about how 
Communists should characterise the uprising and its suppression. John Warwicker 
wrote that the prevailing fashion which saw the Soviet Army as the villains of the 
piece is disgusting. A t  the beginning of November, Peter Fryer broke the news 
that former Dailv Worker correspondent, Edith Bone, had been languishing in a 
Hungarian prison since 1949.  The paper expressed condemnation but denied all 
knowledge. Two days later, with the paper still referring to the uprising as a 
counter-revolution, S.M. Dublin called for the Party to face the facts that the 
Hungarian regime had been tyrannical and dishonest and a legacy of 
Stalinism. O n  7 November, John Gollan continued to blame counter
revolutionary planning for the u p r is in g .T w o  days later, D.N. Pritt, QC, 
advocated thinking quietly a little about Hungary and you will realise that nearly all 
the information you have heard about it comes from the capitalist press...it is 
plainly fantastic. Pritt complained that many British Communists had been 
nearly had by the press. Eric Hobsbawm suggested that although the uprising had
^  Ibid., 14.
Ibid., 23.
Ibid., 27.
Ibid. Polish United Workers Party (PZPR) was formed from the Polish Workers Party 
(PPR) and Polish Socialist Party (PPS) which united in 1948 on Moscows instructions. It 
formed the basis of the Communist Party of Poland (KPP).
J. Warwicker to Dailv Worker (29 October 1956).
P. Fryer, Dailv Worker (3 November 1956).
S.M. Dublin to Dailv Worker (5 November 1956).
J. Gollan, 'Hungary -  The Choice for Socialists, Dailv Worker (7 November 1956).
D.N. Pritt to Dailv Worker (9 November 1956).Pritt, a CPGB fellow traveller, was 
Labour MP for North Hammersmith between 1935 and 1950.
been a wide popular movement, its suppression by Soviet troops was, 
nevertheless a tragic necessity.
At an emergency meeting, the Executive Committee declared that Soviet 
troops had rescued Communism from the forces of reaction.Malcolm MacEwen, 
who had been invited to attend, produced a statement from several Dailv Worker 
journalists, condemning the imprisonment of Edith Bone in solitary confinement 
without trial for seven years and stating that the lack of protest from our Party 
...involves us in its crimes.   The Executive Committees response to Hungary is 
detailed in the following chapters. The crucial meeting on the subject, however, 
was not until 15 December, when a resolution characterising the first Soviet 
intervention as a mistake was defeated by 27 votes to seven.
1956 was a wasted opportunity for British Communism. Not only did its 
concentration on internal problems mean that it found it difficult to bring in support 
around Suez, but it forfeited the opportunity to de-Stalinise itself and create the 
conditions under which it could have tackled its post-war d e c l in e .T h e  Party 
survived the period and the loss of members largely due to a fortuitous upsurge in 
industrial militancy during 1957, within which, the Partys strongest quality, its 
effective intervention into the trade union rank and file, asserted itself. The 
increased confidence this gave to the leadership, however, may have contributed 
to the fact that the free and open debate wed been having did close up to some 
extent in the period immediately following the 25 *  Congress of 1957.^^   Many in 
the Party saw this tightening up as a result of the quite rigid political personality 
of G o l la n .A s  the following two chapters discuss, however, the return to a more 
rigid policy may also have been an intuitive impulse by the leadership, which 
responded to the disorientation of 1956 with a reassertion of familiar structures and 
hierarchies. Mick Bennett at the 25   Congress, for example, summed up the 
leaderships position with regard to the handful of people who have dropped 
away, saying I dont think we need to waste time worrying about these people.
E. Hobsbawm to Dailv Worker (9 November 1956).
Executive Committee Statement on Hungary (3 and 4 November 1956), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/EC/04/01.
Signatories included MacEwen, John Gritten, Gabriel (Jimmy Friel. Cartoonist), Cayton 
(Racing Tipster), Llew Gardner, Leon Griffiths, Sheila Lynd, Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/04/ 
Minutes of Executive Committee Meeting (15-16 December 1956), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/EC/04/03.
John Hostettler, interview, 25 June 1997.
Ibid.
Ibid.
M. Bennett, Speech to Special 25^ Congress, CPGB (20 April 1957), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Cong/10/07.
Bennett talked of the rebirth of militancy and how the Party was again marching in 
the vanguard. D e s p i t e  the Partys admissions of its mistakes, its gestures 
towards de-Stalinisation and the efforts of many who took up a position of 
opposition in the Party, little changed between the time that Khruschev made his 
speech and this 25^ Congress. The fact that the Party, for whatever reason, was 
able to reconstitute itself in its previous form, rendered 1956 a lost opportunity. 
Those who moved into a position of opposition during this period, are the subject of 
the following two chapters.
217 Ibid.
Chapter 4
Managing the Crisis; The leadership and its critics, March 1956 to
April 1957
The Party was pathetically, almost criminally slow in 
absorbing the lessons of the Twentieth Congress/
Following the impact of the secret speech, John Hostettler recalled, my 
impression was that there was a considerable loosening in discipline as far as 
debate and discussion were concerned...and this continued over the Hungarian 
situation, although, of course, the Dailv Worker gagged Peter Fryer.  Hostettler 
continued by referring to 1957, however, saying that after the Special Congress, 
there was very much a tightening up. If this impression is correct, it suggests that 
the period between Khruschevs speech and the 25th Congress of April 1957 
represented an opportunity for those wishing to reform the CPGB. Who these 
people were, how they went about proposing reform and the leaderships response 
to their criticisms is the subject of the next two chapters.
To characterise, as an opposition, the discontent expressed during this 
period, implies a level of organisation which did not exist. Although occasionally 
and erratically. The various strands of criticism and dissent looked as if they might 
coordinate into an organised opposition, the very structure against which they were 
directed militated against such a development. Alison Macleod said of such 
potential organisation, the Party rules prevented it and, as the editors of The 
Reasoner discovered, the whole culture of the Party viewed duplicating and 
circulating and even private letter writing between members as factional.^ Edward 
Thompson wrote of the processes of written discussion and sustained theoretical 
debate being clogged or under the editorial censorship of the leadership.'  He 
articulated a dilemma for the opposition, asking how are we to present a fair 
challenge at a Conference...if facilities to raise and sustain the arguments ...are 
denied to us?. Those, like Thompson, who were potential leaders of such 
opposition, moreover, consistently forbore from responsibility for leading an
  Dennis Ogden, interview, 3 November 1998 
 John Hostettler, interview, 25 June 1997 
 Alison Macleod, interview, 15 October 1997
 E.P. Thompson to Howard [Hill -  Yorkshire District Committee] (20 August 1956), 
Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
 Ibid.
organised alternative. As late as March 1957, four months after leaving the CPGB, 
Thompson continued to protest that he and John Saville were not political 
leaders. As discussed below, the denial of this responsibility may have had long
term implications for the British left.
There were discernible developments within these oppositional currents. In 
the months before the Hungarian uprising, they were characterised by confusion 
and a general commitment to reform from within the Party.  Many expressing 
concern following Khruschevs speech and Hungary, but who nevertheless 
remained in the Party, shared John Hostettlers view that although things had gone 
wrong, thats what it was, theyd gone wrong and it could be put right. Eric 
Hobsbawm said that those of us who stayed...were fighting for the same things as 
those who left and that whilst he had been prepared to get expelled...we still 
believed...it was more important to stay in the Communist Party than not. Roger 
Simon saw himself as a dissident member from that time on, feeling that the 
leadership was not critical enough of the Soviet Union and our own structures 
were too authoritarian.  He nevertheless felt it was right to go on belonging to a 
Party.''
For many, the Soviet invasion of Hungary exacerbated the concern and 
disillusion engendered by the secret speech. For some, however, the effect was 
the opposite. John Hostettler recalled, although I was full of disquiet about 
Khruschevs speech, I rallied around the Party about Hungary.'^ Brian Pearce 
recalled local reaction to the uprising and was shocked at the way in which many 
people in my branch treated that automatically...it must be fascist or counter
revolutionary.' Ralph Russells impression was different. When asked if there was 
more anger over the Soviet invasion than there had been over the secret speech, 
he replied yes -  there was.'"
Critics expressed themselves in a variety of ways. Comrade Connor from 
Liverpool, took a clear revolutionary line, declaring at the 1957 Special Congress, I 
believe this revisionism came about because of political degeneration in the Soviet
 E.P. Thompson, cited in Report on London Socialist Forum to Organisation Committee 
of the CPGB [15 March 1957] (undated), 4, Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/06.
 See E.P. Thompson to J Klugmann (22 March 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
 John Hostettler, interview, 26 June 1997.
 Hobsbawm, interview, Stedman Jones, 21.
' Roger Simon, interview, 10 December 1997.
"  Ibid.
John Hostettler, interview, 26 June 1997.
' Brian Pearce, interview, 1 February 1999.
Ralph Russell, interview, 25 May 1998.
Union, which led to the development, internationally, of a counter-revolutionary 
theory now known as Stalinism'/^ Connor continued, internationally this theory led 
to many working class defeats. In particular the defeat of the Chinese Revolution in 
1925.'^ This line of opposition drew Trotskyists, such as Gerry Healey, into the 
argument, whilst some members such as Brian Pearce and Peter Fryer, went on to 
join Trotskyist organisations. In general, however, the opposition avoided Stephen
F. Cohens quintessential historical question about the relationship between 
Bolshevism and Stalinism and concentrated upon structural defects within British 
Communism; focused upon inner party democracy, the role of the leadership and 
the need for more open discussion.
The leadership made several positive responses. It ordered a Commission 
for Inner Party Democracy and a Commission to re-draft The British Road to 
Socialism. I t  also organised a Special Congress at Hammersmith on 19-21 April 
1957, specifically on the crisis. In advance of the congress. World News published 
monthly Discussion Supplements designed as forums for debate about the 
problems facing the Party.
The diffuse political focus of the opposition
The leadership and the majority of its critics at this time, did not divide over 
the question of whether Stalinism was a continuation of revolutionary Bolshevism 
or whether it represented a fundamental break with such principles. Eric 
Hobsbawm said about any analysis of Stalinism before 1956, that although there 
were people who took an interest in contemporary Soviet history...there wasnt 
much chance of dealing with this in public without stepping on somebodys toes, or 
being stepped on.  At a Socialist Forum conference, organised in April 1957 by 
dissident Communists and Trotskyists, ex-Communists remained guarded about 
the Soviet Union. Others were less coy. Eric Heffer, for example, was reported as 
saying that in order to protect the interests of the bureaucracy in the Soviet Union 
the Stalinists had been prepared to hold back the class struggle in country after
Comrade Connor [Houghton, Liverpool], Speech to Special 25  Congress (21 April 
1957), Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/06.
Ibid.
Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet Experience. 38
Details of the Commission on Inner Party Democracy appear below.
World News Discussion Supplement, 1 (26 January 1957), 2 (23 February 1957), 3 (23 
March 1957), Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/05.
Hobsbawm, interview, Stedman Jones, 19.
country' .Mart in Flannery, an ex-Communist from Sheffield, sounded a more 
familiar note, saying that the economic basis of socialism had been laid in the 
Soviet Union despite all the bad things that happened. ^
The first number of The Reasoner was published in July 1956. Thompson 
and Saville produced a second issue in September before they were suspended in 
November after insisting on publishing a third. The first issue called for an analysis 
of Stalinism unless we are to succumb once again to the error which has dogged 
us for so long...failing to make a Marxist analysis of the developments in 
Communist movements...and in the socialist countries in particular. R a l p h  
Russell saw no sign of this, saying it would have depended very much on whether 
such a Marxist analysis would have been accepted by the British Communist Party, 
but there was never any prospect of that happening. "* Saville and Thompsons 
ideological position remained unclear even following The Reasoners publication. 
Saville wrote to Pollitt in September, saying I want to get across my passionate 
conviction in our Party...I feel certain, for example, that the developments in the 
Soviet Union and the socialist countries are going to provide us with the kind of 
political framework in which to operate which would enable us to transform the 
political situatio'n here. 
Although The Reasoner called for an analysis of Stalinism, the debate 
nevertheless focused, as Thompson colourfully described it, on how much seed 
from Omsk, Tomsk and Irkutsk had been ploughed into British furrows...raising a 
thin and straggling crop of dogmatism and opportunism.  Thompson framed his 
arguments throughout this period in essentially parochial terms, focussing on the 
question of Stalinisms importation into Britain as an alien political culture, rather 
than assessing whether or not it represented a force for change throughout the 
world. Thompson betrayed this parochialism as early as March 1956. Writing to 
Klugmann, he accused the leadership of being opportunist...declassed, remote 
from the working class...contemptuous of theory. H e  continued, however, 
referring to the 20**  Congress only in terms of the monolithic party in relation to 
British conditions. This parochial tendency exposed Thompson to the accusation
E. Heffer, cited in D. Widgery, The Left in Britain 1956-1968 (London, 1976) 80. Reprint 
of Report of Socialist Forum Conference [27, 28 April 1957] The Newsletter. (10 May 
1957).
M. Flannery, ibid., 82.
E.P. Thompson and J. Saville, Taking Stock [editorial]. The Reasoner. 1 (July 1956), 4. 
Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
J. Saville to H. Pollitt (5 September 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
Thompson, Winter Wheat in Omsk, 408.
E.P. Thompson to J. Klugmann (22 March 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
from George Matthews that he was veering towards a narrow type of 
nationalism. 
By the time they published The Reasoner. Thompson, Saville and their co
authors were beginning to cut dangerously close to the ideological bone, implying 
that the present problems lay within the creation of the Party itself and related 
particularly to 1922 when it restructured on the basis of the Cominterns 
conditions.^ This located the antecedence of British Stalinism within the Partys 
acceptance of revolutionary Bolshevism, and remained a feature of The 
Reasoners polemic. It was an assumption which ignored the counter-revolutionary 
aspects of Stalinism noted by Connor and, crucially, failed to recognise the 
historical discontinuity this represented. Although, as discussed above, this was 
not unusual, from a tactical point of view, it remained problematic. Diagnosing the 
problem as Leninism was fundamentally different from calling for the Partys 
rehabilitation from Stalinism and took The Reasoner perilously close to challenging 
the basis of the CPGBs existence. The principles behind this are not in question 
here but, whereas many members were sympathetic to a polemic which continued 
Khruschevs condemnation of Stalin, they could not accept that the logical outcome 
of his speech was to throw out the Leninist baby with the Stalinist bathwater.
The potential perils of this position were illustrated within the Commission 
on Inner Party Democracy. This Commission split between a minority that wanted 
thoroughgoing reform of democratic centralism, and a majority which held to the 
leadership line of no fundamental change. Joe Cheek, a teacher, had originally 
allied himself with the minority but later supported the Majority Report with 
reservations. Cheek criticised the majority, saying it has not been sufficiently 
critical of the present application of Democratic Centralism. He also referred to 
the Minority Report, however, and whilst conceding that much of it was of great 
value, disagreed with subjecting the aims and ideals of Communism to re
examination, saying that Party members should regard these as beyond 
criticism. Like Thompson and Saville, the minority had located the problem within 
Leninism rather than as a result of the victory of Stalinism. This, according to
G. Matthews, A Caricature of Our Party [reply to Thompson, Winter W heat in Omsk] 
World News. 3; 26 (30 June 1956), 409.
See K. Alexander, Democratic Centralism, The Reasoner. 1 (July 1956), 6. Also, 
Alexander, W e Must Adapt Democratic Centralism, World News. 3:38 (22 September 
1956) 608.
 J. Cheek, Joe Cheek has now decided to sign the Majority Report with the following 
reservations,' Report of Commission on Inner Party Democracy to Executive Committee, 
Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/04/04. When the Reports were first presented. Cheek signed with 
the minority. By early 1957, he had decided to support the Majority with reservations.
 Ibid.
Malcolm MacEwen, allowed the full-timers in the majority to succeed in detaching 
...Joe Cheek from Christopher Hill, Peter Cadogan and m y s e l f S u c h  an 
analysis, as Cheek implied, was not one which would lead to the reform of the 
CPGB, but was a rationale whose trajectory appeared to by-pass the theory and 
practice of Leninism altogether, would invalidate the Partys foundation and was, 
therefore, unacceptable even to those who harboured misgivings about the Soviet 
Union and the British leadership.
Within a Party whose membership had, as Morris Schaer said, accepted 
Stalin as one of the real leaders of world socialism', his role and the system with 
which he was associated had to be addressed if members were to break with such 
ideas.Khruschev had sought to exculpate the system by focusing upon the role 
of the individual. Many Communists remained convinced that the reason for the 
mistakes was, as Saville said, the assumption of personal power by Stalin. T h i s  
was close to Khruschevs message that saw Stalins mania for greatness as the 
problem and only one step away from Pollitts reassurance that, following Stalins 
death, the Leninist principle of collective leadership has been fully restored.
In their eagerness to scourge the Party of Stalinist phraseology, Thompson 
and Saville appeared to question principles which, whilst often expressed as 
monotonous slogans, nevertheless remained fundamental verities for any Marxist. 
They criticised John Gollan, for example, saying that to argue...that We do not 
believe (that) the interests of the British working class and people conflict with the 
interests of the working class and people of other countries...is to include the 
complexities of the real world within a platitude.  Whilst Gollans statement 
appeared like sloganeering, the message was essentially that of The Communist 
Manifesto that the working men have no country. Marx and Engels characterised 
the role of communists saying, In the national struggles of the proletarians of the 
different countries, they point out and bring to the front the entire proletariat, 
independently of all nationality. Years of presenting such ideas as dogma had 
rendered them virtually meaningless. Rather than rehabilitate the internationalist
MacEwen, T h e  Day the Party had to Stop, 31.
 Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997.
^  J. Saville, 'Problems of the Communist Party, World News. 3: 20 (19 May 1956), 314.
Khruschev, The Crimes of the Stalin Era, 48.
H. Pollitt, The 20*   Congress of the CPSU and the Role of Stalin, World News. 3:16 (21 
April 1956), 2'47.
Thompson and Saville, Taking Stock, 5. J. Gollan, End the Bans (London, 1956) 11. 
Marx and Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Partv (London, 1983), 48.
 Ibid., 38.
principles behind Gollans platitude, however, Thompson and Saville were 
provoked into appearing to attack the principles themselves.
Occasions when Party members engaged directly with Stalinism were rare. 
When they did, it was often qualified or all but immediately retracted. Maurice 
Cornforth, for example, author of such works as In Defence of Philosophv. asked 
how it became possible for the workers power under which socialism was to be 
built to be distorted into a quite different sort of dictatorship.  Cornforth ended his 
speech, however, with a vindication of the British Party, saying we have nothing to 
be ashamed of in this country.'* The lack of a critique of Stalinism left dissenting 
members staring into an ideological vacuum with no choice but to leave the Party 
or remain wedded to the twin formulae of The British Road to Socialism and 
unconditional, if marginally more critical, support for the Soviet Union. In May 1956, 
Thompson, attacking the crack-pot religious dogmatism of the leadership, added I 
suppose we must wait for some Communist Luther.'*  Luther, however, had 
remained clear that his argument was with Rome and not with the higher authority 
it claimed to represent. It was never clear to many within the CPGB, whether the 
critics of the leadership were attacking deviant Stalinism, revolutionary Bolshevism 
or the fundamental principles from which Marxism had evolved. Some members 
saw Thompson and Saville as unwitting stalking horses for Trotskyism. Jack 
Beeching and Jack Lindsay, both of whom had some sympathy for Thompsons 
overall position, wrote, warning of Trotskyites...who use a Marxist or quasi-Marxist 
analysis to explain, or objectively to defend, capitalism.'*
The Party had imported its structure, believing that replicating Bolshevik 
practice would replicate Bolshevik success. The Party failed to recognise the 
limitations of this rationale but, more crucially, it failed to appreciate the 
qualitatively different situation following Stalins victory. Both were the results of 
flawed and lack of, political analysis, which L. Marks identified as the undisputed 
...low level of our theoretical understanding.'* Ralph Russell was similarly critical 
of the theoretical level, seeing a tremendous contrast between the British Party
 M. Cornforth, Speech to Closed Session 24* Congress CPGB. M. Cornforth, In Defence 
of Philosophy (London. 1950).
M. Cornforth, 'Speech to 24**  Congress.
E.P. Thompson to Bert Ramelson [Resignation from Yorkshire District Committee] (28 
May 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
'*  J. Beeching and J. Lindsay to E.P. Thompson (undated) [? July 1956] Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Org/18/04. Beeching, by the end of 1956, supported the publication of The 
Reasoner. Se Unity is not a Tactic World News. 3:44 (3 November 1956), 702. Jack 
Lindsay, in 1957, contributed to New Reasoner. discussing Edward Thompsons call for a 
socialist humanism, 1:3 (Winter 1957-58), 95.
'* L. Marks [London] to World News 3:22 (9 June 1956), 369.
and the American Party'/'* Brian Pearce agreed, saying generally speaking, 
looking back, the level of theory was not particularly brilliant. A great deal was 
taken on trust.'* Thompson and Saville wrote, if we turn to our political appraisal -  
and compare R.P. Dutts analysis in...Labour Monthly with the recent statement of 
Togliatti, it is unfortunately clear that the seriousness of the situation has not been 
matched by our understanding.'* The leadership were also aware of such 
shortcomings, as the Executive Committee said in May 1956, we need to take 
steps to improve the theoretical work of our Party from top to bottom.'*  Harry Pollitt 
agreed, saying that we have to develop our theoretical basis.'*
The consequences of The Reasoner
The Reaoner was published...in a situation when the democratic 
processes, and especially the written processes...of our Party were 
being obstructed by the leadership of our Party.'*
Members reactions to The Reasoner and the suspension of its editors were 
varied. Discussion rarely focused upon the journals political content, but oriented 
upon whether members had the right to publish separately and whether the Party 
had the right to discipline them as a result. This, in itself, represented a victory for 
the leadership as political discussion became marginalised in favour of a debate 
about the Partys disciplinary procedures. The Political Committee which met 
Thompson and Saville on 31 August 1956 said that such journals would be 
completely beyond the control of the Party membership...produced by individuals 
not elected or responsible. Thompson and Saville responded by complaining that 
discussion about Stalinism had scarcely even begun in our Party, and it would be
'*'* Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
'* Brian Pearce, interview, 1 February 1999.
'* Thompson and Saville, Taking Stock, 4. Togliatti gave an interview to non-Communist 
journal Nuovi Arqumenti in which he initiated an attack on the inadequacies of the secret 
report and on the concept of the personality cult  [The Khrushchev Speech, The PCF 
and The PCI, Socialist Register 1976. 61]. He said that in so far as the attack is limited to 
denouncing the personal defects of Stalin as the cause of everything, we remain within the 
compass of the personality cult., cited in I. Birchall Workers Against the Monolith (London, 
1974), 107.
'*  'Lessons of the 20**  Congress of the CPSU [Draft Resolution] (12-13 May 1956) 5, 
Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/03/24.
'* H. Pollitt, Report to Closed Session of 24** Congress CPGB.
'* E.P. Thompson to Howard (20 August 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
 Executive Committee Statement on The Reasoner , World News. 3:38 (22 September 
1956), 600-602 and 612.
a very serious setback...if it was now curbed or guided into channels decided 
beforehand by considerations of expediency.
Sam Taylor, a miner from Barnsley, was clear that The Reasoner 
constituted a b,reach of discipline, describing it as anarchy at the least. I n  
support, Ken Andrews complained that the current organs are inadequate and 
that it is difficult for new ideas to get a fair hearing. 8. Bloom of Leeds, on the 
other hand, accused Thompson and Saville of unintentionally creating a cult of the 
individual. Gerald Marks from London wrote to the Dailv Worker in September 
asking how dare the executive committee instruct comrades Thompson and 
Saville to cease publication and, talking of the high handed impudence of the 
Popish executive, concluded his letter with down with the systematic suppression 
of conscience. With J.R. Campbell on holiday, Malcolm MacEwen as features 
editor replied to Marks. Despite being a leading critic of the leadership and 
notwithstanding his role within the minority on the Commission on Inner Party 
Democracy, MacEwen toed the bureaucratic line, reinforcing the impression of 
ambivalence amongst the opposition. He wrote that as the matter you raise is one 
affecting the internal affairs of the Communist Party...we do not feel it would be 
helpful for a discussion to be opened in the columns of the paper.
From elsewhere, the West of England District Committee wrote that it 
deeply regrets the publication of a separate journal and considered Thompsons 
and Savilles action a departure from Communist principles. The District 
Committee asked the EC to call upon them to cease publication forthwith. Solly 
Kaye, Communist Parliamentary candidate for Stepney, declared I cannot for the 
life of me see how our Party can allow this...how much longer they are going to 
allow this to go on? The debate continued within the Party press and through 
private correspondence. Raphael Samuel, for example, wrote to Johnny [Gollan 
or Campbell] saying, I disagree with much of the tone and argument in the 
Reasoner. but from the experience of the Oxford branch...the publication...has 
done much good for the Party. As Thompson and Saville themselves wrote, on
 E.P. Thompson and J. Saville to World News 3:43 (27 October 1956), 681.
 S. Tavlor to World News 3:44 (3 November 1956), 702.
 K. Andrews, ibid.
  S. Bloom to World News. 3:45 (10 November 1956), 723.
 G. Marks to Dailv Worker (11 September 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/19/04.
 M. MacEwen to G. Marks (17 September 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/05.
  Extract from Minutes of West of England DPC (22 July 1956), Manchester,
CP/Cent/Grg/18/04
 Ibid.
 S. Kaye to Political Committee, CPGB (20 July 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
 R. Samuel to Johnny (undated), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/05.
announcing their decision to cease publication, the attention concentrated upon 
the...Reasoner may divert comrades from the general question of securing their 
basic rights within the Party.
Thompson recognised the weight of the argument that the right of unofficial 
publication is in doubt and offered to suspend The Reasoner...until the Party 
Conference if the leadership agreed to certain conditions.   These included the 
leadership, himself and Saville collaborating on a duplicated or printed journal/ 
booklet (not entitled the Reasoner)...debating the question of the right of 
publication. Again, the question of the right or otherwise of publication was to 
take precedence over political arguments about Stalinism and the Soviet Union.
The Yorkshire District Sub-Committee summoned Thompson and Saville 
on 10 August."* The full District Committee met on 18 August and passed a 
resolution by 21 votes to 19, asking Comrades Thompson and Saville to cease the 
publication of The Reasoner". Following several meetings, both with their District 
Committee and with members of the Executive and Political Committees, Gollan 
wrote to Thompson with an order which specifically instructs you not to bring out a 
third number of The Reasoner. In a letter to Howard Hill, following their 
suspension, Thompson wrote that both decided the right course would be to resign 
and carry on the journal. This was largely because this Hungary business is the 
last straw...I dont see how I, or you, can stay in the Party beyond this coming 
weekend.
Surprisingly, the Dailv Worker agreed to publish an advertisement for the 
first issue of The Reasoner but refused to continue after the first print run was 
exhausted. Initially, this limited run hindered circulation and, as Saville wrote to 
bookshops at the time, it was sold out within a fortnight of publication.  Initially, 
The Reasoner was sold through Collets in London and Glasgow, bookshops 
affiliated to the CPGB, but the leadership quickly intervened to inhibit its sale 
through such outlets. In August, Iris Walker of Key Books in Birmingham sent
E.P. Thompson and J. Saville to World News. 3:43 (27 October 1956), 681.
E.P. Thompson to Howard (20 August 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
 Ibid.
"* Saville was unable to attend this meeting.
 Cited in Saville, T h e  20** Congress and the British Communist Party, 10. Saville wrote 
that Thompson was one of two who voted against the resolution. Thompson had already 
written to Bert Ramelson in May, however, to confirm my earlier resignation from the 
District Committee, Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
 J. Gollan to E.P. Thompson (16 October 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
 E.P. Thompson to Howard (9 November 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
Ibid.68
 J. Saville, T h e  20** Congress and the British Communist Party, 9.
J. Saville, Circular to Bookshops (10 August 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
Savilles circular letter to James Klugmann, saying I should be interested to know 
what the attitude of the Centre is, since there has been no information in the 
blurb7  George Matthews replied, saying we do not think that you should sell this 
publication as it is not authorised by the Party The next day W. Wainwright, 
Central Propaganda Department, wrote to bookshops in Belfast, Chatham, 
Glasgow, Leeds, Liverpool, Manchester, Sheffield and Swindon, with the order 
from Matthews that this publication is not authorised by the Party7  This prompted 
J. Field to write to the Dailv Worker, asking why does the executive ...take it upon 
itself to act in such an arbitrary, absolutist and antidemocratic manner?. "  A 
Political Committee meeting in September indicated the urgency with which the 
leadership viewed The Reasoner. Handwritten notes reported Gollan as saying if 
EC retreats on this issue will be making greatest mistake of its life...well make it 
worse for them and for intellectual sections. We must get clear on the one thing -  
which unites Saville and T and Hill and Co.'J^
Much of the acrimony centred on an argument about who was responsible 
for the revisionism within the Party. Many members associated the Mr Let-downs, 
Mr How-could-k-happens, Mr Why-wernt-we-tolds and Mr Whats-going-to- 
happen-nows with the intellectuals and particularly with The Reasoner.  Whether 
or not this was the case, critics of the leadership, as Raphael Samuels letter to 
Johnny implied, were not always in accord.Peter Fryer, for example, although 
contributing an article to New Reasoner in 1957, does not seem to have been an 
uncritical supporter of Thompson and Savilles original journal.^ In 1986, Eric 
Hobsbawm discounted The Reasoner saying, its wrong to focus on the New 
Reasoner [sic.]..'.the most massive expression of dissidence was a letter which the 
Party refused to publish, and which subsequently appeared in Tribune and New 
Statesman'7^
I. Walker to J. Klugmann (13 August 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/05.
G. Matthews to I. Walker (16 August 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/05.
W . Wainwright (17 August 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/05.
R. Field to M. MacEwen (17 September 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/05. 
Handwritten notes [anonymous, undated] Political Committee meeting. Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Org/18/05.
Hackney Town Hall Branch, Have we time for further polemics?, World News. 3:43 (27 
October 1956), 689-690.
R. Samuel to Johnny (undated), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/05.
P. Fryer, Hungary in Retrospect, New Reasoner. 1:1 (Summer, 1957). In Hungarian 
Tragedy. Fryer mentions neither Thompson, Saville nor The Reasoner. despite detailing the 
CPGBs response to Hungary and the secret speech.
Hobsbawm, interview with Stedman Jones, 19.
This letter appeared in New Statesman on 1 December 1956. It began, 
saying that the following letter was sent to the Daily Worker on November 18. As it 
appears it will not be published there, the signatories would be grateful if you could 
find space for it. The authors referred to Khruschevs speech as the exposure of 
grave crimes and abuses in the USSR and talked of Hungary as a revolt of 
workers and intellectuals against the pseudo-Communist bureaucracies. After 
claiming that the CPGB had previously based its political analyses on a false 
presentation of the facts, however, the letter concluded in a way which again, 
reinforced an impression of incoherence, saying, not all the signatories agree with 
everything in this letter, but all are in sufficient sympathy with its general intention 
to sign with this reservation.
Hobsbawms own inclusion in this emphatic rejection of the Soviet invasion 
was, in itself, symptomatic of ambivalence. The signatories must have composed 
their letter before 18 November, when they sent it to the Dailv Worker. As recently 
as 9 November, however, Hobsbawm wrote to the Dailv Worker, identifying a 
Mindszenty Hungary as a potential base for counter-revolution and intervention 
and concluding that although the uprising was a wide popular movement, however 
misguided", its suppression was, nevertheless, a tragic necessity.
Much of the discussion following the secret speech focused upon the two 
articles Harry Pollitt had published in World News on 21 April and 5 May and which 
are discussed in the previous chapter. One of the first replies came from John 
Saville, who blamed the Partys loss of membership on the leaderships inability to 
admit mistakes.'* Saville identified our political honesty as a Party, the Partys 
attitude to the USSR, the political forms of the transition to socialism and the 
preservation of inner-Party democracy as being aspects of theory and practice 
requiring discussion.
Ralph Russell said that, as far as the leadership was concerned, the 
important thing was to...maintain the structure. Although nominally, Khruschevs
 Chimen Abramsky, E.J. Hobsbawm, Hyman Levy, Robert Browning, Paul Hogarth, Jack 
Lindsay, Henry Collins, George Houston, Hugh McDiarmid, Christopher Hill, V.G. Kiernan, 
Ronald L. Meek, R.H. Hilton, Doris Lessing, E.A. Thompson to New Statesman. (1 
December 1956), 701.
 Ibid.
  E. Hobsbawm to Dailv Worker (9 November 1956). Jzef Mindszenty, Catholic Primate of 
Hungary, was imprisoned in 1949 and released in 1956 by Nagy. He became a focus for 
many in the anti-Soviet uprising.
 Pollitt 'The-20**' Congress of the CPSU and the Role of Stalin, 246-248 and 278-280.
* Saville, Problems of the Communist Party, 314 
 Ibid.
 Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
speech had intended to accelerate an uneven process of de-Stalinisation begun in 
1953, the British Party proved reluctant to disengage with old habits. Whilst, as 
John Hostettler said, the leadership did temporarily make its various forums 
available to criticism and self-criticism', in almost every case, the Party responded 
to such criticism within the terms of its own bureaucratic structure.   John Saville 
referred to the leaderships response to The Reasoner. noting that the Political 
Committee made a wholly constitutional reply to our points; and the publication of 
The Reasoner was considered entirely within the context of Party rules and 
regulations. Yhe leadership also reacted to Peter Fryers claims about the 
Hungarian uprising, not with political argument, but by denying everything he had 
reported and expressing support for the invasion. The London District Committee 
then suspended Fryer following an interview in the Dailv Express. Describing the 
District Committees statement as bureaucratic... concerned with form and not 
content. Fryer went on to characterise it as not merely a bureaucratic statement, 
but a dishonest and inaccurate one.
Saville and Thompson described the shock and turmoil engendered by the 
revelations. The intensity of this shock, not only appears to have militated against 
organisation, but may also have rendered the initial responses of members less 
articulate than they otherwise might have been. John Sayille, following the first 
issue of The Reasoner. described the 'widespread discontent as vague, 
unformulated, often very emotional. The debate took place across a range of 
forums. The Party press, for example, gave space to members within its various 
letters pages, although Thompsons Winter Wheat in Omsk was the only 
substantial article published.
Eventually published in World News. Winter Wheat in Omsk only appeared 
following a cantankerous exchange between Thompson and the editor, Bert Baker. 
Thompson set the irascible tone, writing, along with his initial submission of 1500 
words, I hope tjiat it cannot be said that our Party press prefers to fill up space 
with third rate Russian articles, in preference to allowing real controversy on issues 
fundamental to our whole political advance.'* Despite the Executive Committees
  See Pollitt, T h e  20** Congress of the CPSU and the Role of Stalin, 279.
 Saville, The 20* Congress and the British Communist Party, 10-11.
 Fryer, Hungarian Tragedy. 94-116.
 Ibid., 100.
* Thompson and Saville, 'Taking Stock, 4.
 J. Saville to Yorkshire District sub-Committee, cited in Saville, The 20*** Congress and 
the British Communist Party, 10.
 Thompson, Winter Wheat in Omsk, 408-409.
* E.P. Thompson to Bert Baker (undated), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
resolution to open out our Party periodicals to more discussion, Baker offered to 
include the article only at a reduced length of 800 to 900 words.Thompson 
replied, you know perfectly well that to accept an article and request it to be cut 
by 50% is the same as a rejection.  The truncated article which eventually 
appeared was, in fact, more sharply polemical than Thompsons original 
submission. It is not clear whether this was a direct result of Bakers 
procrastination, which had obviously annoyed Thompson, or whether it was 
indicative of his own hardening attitude.
In the branches, the extent of discussion about the crisis remained uneven 
across the country. John Hostettler, who was in Coulsdon in Surrey, said of 
discussion in his branch I just dont remember whether we did or not, which may 
mean we did not ...I dont remember a branch meeting about it. Roger Simon, on 
the other hand, who was in Holborn Branch, remembered the period up to the 
Special Congress as a turbulent one when they had terrific discussions in the 
lawyers group and in our local Party branches. Stan Turner recalled we did have 
Party meetings to discuss [the issue]...Gollan came down to our meeting...the 
room packed with people there for a discussion...over the question of the CPSU 
and the twentieth congress. A l i s o n  Macleod recalled, in the Muswell Hill Branch, 
one member lamenting when Labour Party people speak to me these days, I cant 
answer back. I just cry and cry.  Fellow branch member, R.P. Dutt, however, 
responded to anger about Fryers suspension by explaining that what Peter Fryer 
had done was exactly like what Zinoviev and Kamenev had done in 1917.   
Thompsons branch, Halifax, expressed profound dissatisfaction with the totally 
inadequate re-action to the revelations following upon the 20  Congress. 
Communist Party members in Nottingham wrote one of the most powerful 
anti-leadership polemics. The Nottingham Marxist Group published a statement 
entitled Why we Left the Communist Partv."  Signatories included four Area 
Committee members, three Branch Secretaries and two YCL District Committee
Executive Committee CPGB Draft of EC Resolution. Lessons of the 20 Congress of the 
CPSU (12-13 May 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/03/24.
 E.P. Thompson to B. Baker (9 June 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
 E.P.Thompson, Suggestions for statement of EC (undated), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/ 
18/04.
 John Hostettler, interview, 25 June 1997.
 Roger Simon, interview, 10 December 1997.
 Stan Turner, interview, 9 July 1997.
 Macleod, The Death of Uncle Joe. 188.
^ lbid., 189.'
 Halifax Branch Resolution to Executive Committee (undated), Manchester, CP/Cent/ 
Org/18/04.
  Nottingham Marxist Group, Whv W e Left the Communist Partv.
members. The statement began by referring to Khruschevs speech saying, we 
started to realise that we were not merely fighting a local leader, or even Pollitt 
and Co. but that there was something wrong with the international Communist 
movement" .After suggesting that twenty years after the Moscow trials, it 
became clear that Bukharin and many other leaders of the October Revolution 
...were really framed, the statement accused the British leadership, saying it was 
impossible to believe that they had not seen the monstrosities of the leader-cult, 
had not noticed ,the complete lack of democracy. It accused Harry Pollitt, Palme 
Dutt, Campbell and Gollan, saying they had simply cheated the Party and the 
people.  Describing Hungary as the last straw, the signatories went on to say 
that the Peter Fryer incident demolished any doubts. They concluded, describing 
the British leaders as no more than the agents of the Russian Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs and diagnosed the reason why the Party is a despised sect as being not 
because it is loyal to the principles of Socialism, but because it has betrayed 
them. 
Many branches, 25 in all, sent resolutions to the December meeting of the 
Executive Committee, calling for a Special Congress before the end of 1956.  
Other resolutions indicated the level of unease throughout the Party during this 
period. There were 27 resolutions demanding that the Executive Committee 
criticise the Soviet intervention in Hungary. Manchester University Graduates 
Branch warned That the CPGB is exposing itself to complete and irremediable 
isolation through its uncritical support of the Soviet U n ion .John  Gollan replied, 
expressing sorrow that your Branch does not find itself in agreement with...the 
Executive Committee on the events in Hungary. G o l l a n ,  however, remained 
certain that the Executive Committee is correct in its attitude; that further 
developments will show this, and that many comrades who are now critical...will 
realise later on -that the Executive Committee has taken up a correct attitude on 
this question.C a m b r id g e  Senior University Branch called for the current 
Executive to be suspended and a caretaker Political Committee elected. There 
were 27 resolutions criticising the Dailv Worker, whilst 14 branches attacked the
'lbid 1.
Ibid., 3.
^lbid 5-6.
Executive Committee Minutes (12 and 16 December 1956), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/EC04/03.
'Resolution of Manchester University Graduates Branch [Secretary P.J. Wexler] 
(November 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/04/02.
J. Gollan to P.J. Wexler (15 November 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/04/02.
111 Ibid.
suppression of Fryers articles on Hungary. Although seven branches supported 
the Executive Committee, nine criticised the leadership over the imprisonment of 
Edith Bone and its failure to protest.
At this December meeting, Dutt introduced a resolution on Hungary calling 
for broad support for the Soviet action. An amendment characterising the 
intervention as a mistake was defeated by 27 votes to s e v e n . A  further 
amendment supporting the first Soviet intervention as necessary lost by 29 votes 
to four. '  According to Arnold Kettles son Martin, I subsequently realised that my 
father actually voted on the EC against support for the invasion of Hungary; he was 
in a minority of two with Gollan.  The minutes show, however, that, following the 
failed amendments, there was only one dissenter from Dutts resolution and it is 
not clear who this was. Max Morris claimed to be one of the two members of the 
CP Executive who voted against the Soviet invasion of Hungary at the time -  
myself and Arnold Kettle.  Morris added, Arnold Kettle stopped his criticisms as 
long as he remained on the EC. He was a very close friend of the Gollans. ^
The impression of confusion worsened with the Executive Committee 
qualifying the vote on the second amendment, stressing, incongruously, that it was 
made clear that comrades voting against this amendment were not necessarily 
against the viewpoint expressed in it.  They, nevertheless, felt bound to support 
Dutts resolution, saying that the Executive Committee as a whole should support 
the paragraph in the resolutions suspending judgement on the first intervention.  
The leadership had moved from its position of early November when it had 
supported intervention because the Hungarian government had called on the 
Soviet forces...for assistance in preventing the victory of the counter-revolution.  
Peter Fryer characterised this vacillating position as one confused between 
explaining the uprising as a fascist plot prepared outside Hungary and a mass 
movement whose leadership was taken over by reactionary forces. B o t h  
positions were some distance away from Fryers own view of Stalinism as counter
revolutionary. His experiences in Budapest and Magyarovar led him to conclude
E C. Minutes (12 and 16 December 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/EC04/03.
 Resolution on Hungary, E C. Minutes (12 and 16 December 1956), item 6.
  Ibid.
 M. Kettle, interview with Cohen, Children of the Revolution. 182.
 Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998.
  Ibid.
 E.G. Minutes (12 and 16 December 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/EC04/03.
 Ibid.
The Events in Hungary [Executive Committee Statement], World News. 3:45 (10 
November 1956), 713.
Fryer, Hungarian Traoedv. 131.
that the Hungarian revolution was a bold attempt to solve...by the setting up of 
workers councils, the problems which the bureaucracy creates when it usurps 
working-class power.
In general, the leaderships response to criticism, whilst bureaucratic, was 
characterised by respect. As John Saville wrote of a meeting with Gollan and 
Matthews, as always, they listened to what we had to say and the discussion was 
conducted in a civilised way. ^  The leadership deflected criticism by referring to 
proposed changes within the Party, such as to inner party democracy or the 
introduction of a new journal, Marxism Todav. As John Gollan wrote to Thompson 
in October 1956, the Executive Committee is giving full facilities for discussion in 
the Party press', is encouraging the maximum discussion of Party policy and 
organisation in every Party organisation and has convened a National Party 
Conference. G o l l a n  continued, saying that the Executive Committee has the 
duty to protect the Party, uphold its rules, a position which Thompson perceived of, 
as precluding the possibility of real change.
The leaderships continuing defensive attitude towards the Soviet Union 
resulted in the. Party adopting contradictory positions throughout the 1950s. 
Support for Soviet hydrogen bomb testing, for example, created a contradiction 
where many of its members supported, intervened in, and led sections of the 
Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament (CND), whilst the official line remained 
opposed to unilateral disarmament.^^ Unilateralism remained a stumbling block 
between the CPGB and CND throughout the 1950s. Although Wolf Wayne, a 
Communist engineer in London, could claim it was the Partys Peace Committee in 
Hendon which first coined the slogan Ban the Bomb, according to Max Morris the 
British Party was slow to adopt a thoroughly anti-nuclear attitude.
The leadership characterised the opposition as revisionists, accusing them 
of attempting to liberalise the Party and lead it in the direction of reformism. Few 
critics, however, pointed out the incongruity of such an accusation coming, as it
Ibid., 154.
Saville, T h e  20  Congress and the British Communist Party, 12.
J. Gollan to E.P. Thompson (16 October 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
Ibid.
The Soviet Union had offered a moratorium on H Bomb testing. This did not prevent it 
exploding one in April 1957. Jimmy Reid, a future strike leader on Clydeside, reflected the 
confusion at the 25*   Congress; The Soviet Union would probably strengthen its leadership 
on this issue if they could come out and state they were not for any more tests, J. Reid, 
Speech to 25  Congress, April 20 1957, Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/05. The CPGB did 
not see the USSR as its main responsibility, but concentrated upon persuading the UK 
government towards its own ban.
Wolf Wayne, interview, 10 February 1999.
Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998.
did, from a leadership so persistently oriented upon elections. Unlike the 
leadership, which after the loosening identified by John Hostettler, retrenched on 
the basis of traditional structures, the oppositions criticisms tended to be abstract 
and, to many members, woolly headed. T h e  Minority Report of historian 
Christopher Hill, journalist Malcolm MacEwen and teacher Peter Cadogan, which 
the leadership agreed to addend to the Report on Inner Party Democracy, was, to 
a limited extent, the exception to this but appeared too late to provide a pole of 
attraction around which opposition might have coalesced.The leadership, on the 
other hand, presented unsure and confused members with the security of 
structures to which they had, over a number of years, become accustomed. As 
John Hostettler again observed, halfway through the discussions of the Committee 
on the British Road to Socialism...the line...stiffened...the free and open debate 
wed been having did close up to some extent.^  This may have been partly to do 
with leadership style. In contrast to the gregarious Pollitt, Hostettler considered 
Gollan quite rigid. W h i l s t  Helen Mason thought him an excellent chap...a quiet 
and unboastful man, she contrasted him with Pollitt, who, of course was someone 
who...everybody knew. ^  Similarly, Max Morris said he was much colder...but 
Gollan was a very able chap. ^
The 25   special Congress
At its 25th Congress, the leadership argued that the working class needed 
the Party and its paper to reorient towards fulfilling our duty and away from 
internal b a t t l e s . McGehey articulated this argument, saying it is necessary to 
understand this point, that without the Communist Party there can be no real 
leadership for the workers. T h e  possibility of the Party reconstructing on the 
basis of the upturn in strike activity in 1957, was raised by Tom Hopkins from 
Bedwas Colliery. Hopkins complained, we spend so much time on our
J. McLoughlin, [Briggs] Speech to Special 25 Congress CPGB (19 April 1957) no.12. 
McLoughlin was defending Peter Fryer.
C. Hill, M. MacEwen, P. Cadogan Minority Report, addendum to J. Mahon, Report on 
Inner Party Democracy [25*   Congress] (April 1957), 45-60, Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/ 
10/05. Following the Special Congress, the Party published a pamphlet, Inner Partv 
Democracy (1957). This did not include the Minority Report.
John Hostettler, interview, 25 June 1997.
Ibid.
Helen Mason, interview, 9 July, 1997.
Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998.
M. Benhett, Speech to 25*' Congress CPGB (20 April 1957), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Cong/10/07. Bennett was Assistant Editor, Dailv Worker.
McGehey [probably Mick McGahey, future President of the Scottish National Union of 
Mineworkers] Speech to 25" Congress (20 April 1957), Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/07.
contradictions that we do not forge ahead with our a c t i v i t y R e g  Birch asked the 
intellectuals...how do you see yourselves in assisting in this particular battle? 
Frank Turner referred to the strike at Metro-Vickers in Lancashire, saying there 
never was such unanimity. Another delegate saw potential for unity on the basis
of binding the widest sections of the labour movement. J o h n  Gollan, in his
Political Report, referred to the great mass movement against Suez...against the 
proposed H Bomb tests...the struggle against the Rent Bill as aggregating to an 
entirely new political situation in Britain with a nation-wide revolt against the 
Government.
Despite being an initiative by the Political Committee in July 1956, some 
interpreted the agreement to hold a Special Congress as a concession to the
opposition and a response to critical pressure. Ralph Russell, however, saw the
whole thing as a tactical mistake. Many who had criticised the Party had already 
decided to leave by 1957 and so it was obvious the leadership would win. '*  Peter 
Fryer was one who was eventually expelled by the Party. The London District 
Committee had suspended him on 26 November 1956 for making attacks on the 
Communist Party, both in an interview in the Dailv Express and in a letter 
resigning his post at the Dailv Worker which the paper refused to publish, but 
which appeared io the Manchester Guardian. A s  the number of resolutions 
calling for the lifting of Fryers suspension indicate, many members saw his stand 
over Hungary in contrast to the denials and confusion of the leadership. His case 
acquired totemic significance for many disillusioned members. In April 1957, Fryer 
sold copies of his appeal against expulsion outside the annual Dailv Worker 
shareholders meeting at Conway Hall, London .P r io r  to this meeting, George 
MacDougall, Allen Hutts deputy, resigned in protest against the papers reporting 
of the exploding of the Soviet Unions second H bomb. '*'* According to Alison 
MacLeod, Fryer, at this time, was staying with MacDougall and rumours were
T. Hopkins [Bedwas], Speech to 25*   Congress (19 April 1956) no.4, Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Cong/10/06.
R. Birch, ibid., no.3.
F. Turner [Lancashire], ibid., no.5. The strike lasted from 23 March until 3 April 1957.
L. Monby [SE MidlandsJL ibid., no. 17.
J. Gollan, Report to 25 Congress (20 April 1957), Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/05.
Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
For details, see Fryer, Hungarian Tragedy. 97-116. Once Fryers letter had appeared in 
the Manchester Guardian. J R. Campbell agreed to publish. Also see P. Fryer to New 
Statesman. (24 November 1956).
The Daily Worker was owned by the Peoples Press Printing Society to which each 
member of the CPGB contributed a minimum of 1.00 a share. See W . Rust The Story of 
the Dailv Worker (London, 1949), 114 -  127. See Appeal Against Expulsion, Fryer, 
Hungarian Tragedy 94-96.
MacDougall resigned on Saturday, 5 April 1957, the morning after the explosion.
flying around the Party'/'*^ At the 25th Congress, Fryer handed out a daily 
Congress Special, produced each night on a duplicator at the home of Trotskyist, 
Gerry HealyT^ The opposition remained fragmented, however, and, apart from 
The Reasoner and the occasional recalcitrant communication to the establishment 
press, the opposition was remarkable for its adherence to Party discipline.
A heterogeneous monolith? Democracy and the CPGB
Never, for a single moment, have the Bolsheviks conceived of the 
Party as anything but a monolithic organisation hewed from a single 
block, and possessing a single will and in its work, uniting all shades 
of thought into a single current of practical activities.
The common description of the British Communist Party as a monolith, 
whilst reflecting the omnipresence of Stalinism in world Communism, can, in 
practice, prove misleading. "* The idea of the monolithic party was qualified by 
Raphael Samuel who wrote, the unity of the Party was naturally never as 
monolithic in practice as it was in theory. "* Samuels qualification reinforces 
George Matthews characterisation of Winter Wheat in Omsk, as A Caricature of 
our Party. T h e  British Party, like other world Communist organisations, was in 
the habit of ruthlessly mobilising its centralised structure whenever it needed to 
justify or deny unpalatable Stalinist practices. Peter Fryer wrote in 1957, it is only 
liars who could be afraid of branches communicating with each other. It is only liars 
who could wish to canalise discussion...for whom the process of hammering out a 
policy is a strictly one-way process.
Although superficially, a different type of organisation, the CPGB was hardly 
less democratic than the Labour Party. There was more political discussion within 
its branches compared with the organisational meetings and savagely guillotined 
conference debates typical of the Labour Party. In the 1950s, the parliamentarians 
and their advisors who constituted Labours leadership were drawn largely from an 
Oxbridge and public school milieu, giving it a class ridden coloration which, for a
MacLeod, The Death of Uncle Joe. 245.
Ibid., 256.
Stalin, Collected Works, vol. 6, 23.
See Thompson, Winter Wheat in Omsk: 'the monolith...from its cave somewhere inside 
For a Lasting Peace, For a Peoples Democracy has droned on in a dogmatic monotone, 
Samuel, The Lost World of British Communism. Part T, 79.
Matthews A Caricature of Our Party", 409.
Fryer, Hungarian Traoedv. 144.
working class party, was an incongruous replication of British society at this time. 
Following the St Paneras Labour Partys condemnation of Woodrow Wyatt for 
making a BBC Panorama programme about the ETU, the North London Press 
commented that the incident demonstrates the split in the socialist ranks between 
the starched shirts and varsity accents of the respectable right-wing of the [Labour] 
Party...and the red-blooded, cloth capped Keir H a rd ie s .T h e  CPGB, on the other 
hand, was consciously -  not to say self-consciously -  proletarian. It paid 
considerable, if sometimes condescending, attention to the views of its working 
class membership as opposed to those of its frequently vilified intellectuals. The 
Labour Party saw its role as reforming capitalism on behalf of the workers who 
supported it. Ideologically, it viewed workers as passive objects, rather than, in 
Marxs terms, as the active agents of their own emancipation. The structure of the 
Labour Party and the trade unions reflected this. Members were mobilised only to 
canvas during elections but, for most of the time, their views were subordinated to 
those of trade union bureaucrats and MPs.
Marxs position was that 'the emancipation of the working classes must be 
conquered by the working classes themselves. A s  discussed earlier, the 
CPGBs adoption of electoralism militated against this idea of self-emancipation 
towards that of social democracy which envisaged emancipation through the 
election of MPs. This constituted another contradiction within the CPGB between 
the revolutionary structure it had inherited and idealised and the reformist method 
demanded by its programme. On the one hand, members saw themselves as the 
vanguard of working class self-emancipation. On the other, the Partys electoral 
practice encouraged a surrendering of grass-roots sovereignty to institutionalised 
political bodies and trade union bureaucracies.
Within the Party itself, Stalinism distorted the balance between democracy 
and centralised control which militated towards the negation of one, and the 
predominance of the other. Stalinist centralism encouraged all ideas and 
discussion to be channelled towards the Party centre through Area Committee, 
Executive Committee, or Party press. Despite Lenins subsequent association with 
such centralisation, he had called, even 'in an autocratic country, for all 
revolutionary organisations to maintain the most continuous...contacts with each 
other, thus creating real Party unity. L e n i n  also emphasised the flexibility
North London Press (31 January 1958). See below for details of this incident.
Marx, "General Rules of the International Working Mens Association, Marx and Engels, 
Selected Works [2 vols.], vol.1 (Moscow, 1958), 386.
Lenin. What is to be Done?. 173-4.
required of a militant Social Democratic organisation'/^^ Without the coercive 
methods to which Stalin had recourse, centralised control was based partly, as 
Don Hunter put it, on information not having been given to the Party as a whole' 
The Party also relied upon the bureaucratic traditions which the British labour 
movement had fostered within its membership, a habit of surrendering decision
making to higher bodies. The structure of the CPGB resembled the inflexible 
structure of a British trade union, with its bureaucracy acting on behalf of its 
members. This appealed to those who had grown up in this tradition and, in turn, 
informed a particular interpretation of democratic centralism. Don Hunter 
expressed this, saying the best trade unions have undoubtedly got a structure 
resembling that of democratic centra l ism'.The Party nevertheless retained a 
nominally democratic culture within which anyone and everyone could have their 
say. As Thompson, Fryer and the Nottingham Marxists discovered, however, it was 
unusual for such debate to affect policy or direction. As Morris Schaer said, I don't 
think, when you think back, it was as democratic as we thought it was.' 
The Party introduced this centralised structure in 1922.  It superseded the 
federal basis of the Party, whereby geographical branches organised into districts, 
sent delegates to the Executive Committee, and replaced it with a small and 
strong Executive...bringing together the most capable members irrespective of 
where they l ived ' .T h is  was prompted by Zinoviev's 21 Conditions.^   Condition 
12 stated that All the Parties belonging to the Communist International should be 
formed on the principle of democratic centralisation'.^  Such a structure, however, 
could only function when the party centre enjoys the confidence of the members of 
the party'.'
The British Party formed a Special Commission, including R.P. Dutt, Albert 
Inkpin and Harry Pollitt, to bring itself into line with these objectives. The fifth 
Congress of October 1922 unanimously adopted a system of Central Committee,
' Ibid.,171.
' D. Hunter, Speech to 25*  Congress (19 April 1957), Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/06. 
Ibid.
' Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997
A Commission was appointed following the Partys Fourth Congress in March 1922. This 
was in response to The Organisational Structure of the Communist Parties, issued at the 
Third Congress of the Comintern in 1921. The CPGB Commission reported to the Fifth 
Party Congress in October 1922, Klugmann, History of the Communist Partv of Great 
Britain. 1919-1924. 202.
Cited in Klugmann, History of the Communist Partv of Great Britain. 1919-1924. 205.
'' Report of Proceedings of the Second Congress of the Communist International 
(Moscow, 1920), 531-537, MML.
'  Ibid.
' Ibid.
Political Bureau and Organising Bureau. As Ken Alexander said in 1956, these 
forms of organisation...presented problems in the first year of the Partys 
existence.A lexan de r  quoted Tom Bell, the Partys first National Organiser, who 
said it was not an easy job getting the comrades to understand the meaning of 
centralised direction...we had to combat the Federalist and constituency notions 
of the comrades who came from the provinces, and to try and get them to think 
executively. 
The guidelines on decision making within the Party introduced at this time, 
however, were generalised and imposed little institutional discipline upon the 
leadership. This put responsibility upon the leadership itself as to how it interpreted 
its executive power and to what extent it deferred to the views of members. The 
1922 Commission stressed the importance of political and polemical discussion 
within the Party, but stressed that once the decision has been reached, it should 
be loyally accepted by the whole Party. T h e  use of the passive tense was 
crucial. It neatly avoided specifying by whom, in which forums, and to what 
mandatory extent, such discussions should take place and apply. As was 
discovered during 1956, the interpretation of such guidelines varied enormously.
Revolutionary Bolshevism had relied upon the fact that its members and 
leaders were socialists as proof against abuses of power. The structure of their 
Party tried to avoid the bureaucratic checks and balances which cynicism about 
leadership within traditional party structures had made obligatory. This, however, 
placed enormous responsibility on those within positions of leadership. By the 
1950s, however, as Khruschev pointed out, the abuse of power in the Soviet Union 
had evolved to an almost unprecedented extent. Adherence to such a model, 
therefore, meant that, despite Pollitts claim that no other Communist Party in the 
world has such regular meetings of its Central Committee...or more democratic 
reporting of its discussions, the CPGB had evolved, in parallel, towards a rigidly 
conservative practice.
Brian Pearce described the CPGB as something like a military 
organisation, and something like a religious organisation...you took the line and 
you carried it out and you didnt question it.  Most members, however, accepted
' K. Alexander, Democratic Centralism, The Reasoner. 1 (July 1956), 7.
 Ibid., 7. T. Bell, The British Communist Partv: A Short History. 83.
 Commission Report, cited in Klugmann, History of the Communist Partv of Great 
Britain. 1919-1924. 207.
Pollitt, Report to Closed Session 24**  Congress CPGB. Cohen, Rethinking the Soviet 
Experience. 63.
Brian Pearce, interview, 1 February 1999.
the need for discipline. As Morris Schaer said, discipline was the main thing that 
made our Party different from everybody elses. Pearce expanded upon his 
military-religious characterisation, seeing the one as a strategic function and the 
other as ideological. He said youre like a soldier who obeys the orders he 
receives from above...And the religious, of course...the idea of the dogma that you 
mustnt question closely. P e a r c e  observed that the military religious aspect 
...was very important for some people.S u r r e n d e r  to Party discipline was, of 
course, entirely voluntary and is perhaps best described as volitional obligation.
In spite of its apparently established structure, it was not always clear who 
was in charge of the Party. Alison MacLeod did not believe that sovereignty within 
the Party lay within its formally created bodies. As she said, the rules said that the 
governing body of the Party was the Executive Committee. Well it wasnt, the 
governing body was...the Political Committee or whatever it was called at the 
time. ^  She claimed that decisions made at Political Committee level were never 
known and suggested that the Politburo wasnt the real power because Pi rati n 
belonged to that and he said he never felt he was part of the inner circle. 
Executive Committee member. Max Morris, agreed, describing the idea that the 
Political Committee was a sub-committee of the EC as utterly phoney. M o r r i s  
claimed that the show was run by the General Secretary, Industrial Organiser, 
Propaganda Secretary, Nora Jeffries, and Deputy General Secretary, George 
Matthews.
By 1956, a Panels Commission consisting of outgoing Executive members 
provided a recommended list of names to Congress. This operated along with 
limited balloting, whereby delegates voted for or against the list as a whole, but 
could also call for the deletion of individual names. In addition, there was a secret 
ballot of names nominated by the branches which, in theory, could be added to the 
recommended list. ^ According to Wolf Wayne, even after 1956 the recommended 
list still almost always got voted on. ^  The organisations 20 district committees 
were elected by the recommended list method, although area, borough and city 
committees were considered in a different category, since their powers are
Morris Schaer, interview, 9 July 1997.
Brian Pearce, interview, 1 February 1999 
Ibid.
Alison MacLeod, interview, 17 October 1997.
Ibid.
Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998.
Ibid.
Source, Mahon, Report on Inner Party Democracy. 
Wolf Wayne, interview, 10 February 1999.
determined by the district committees which authorise their fo rm a t ion .W i th  this 
level of centralised control, separate organisation was difficult. Communication 
between individuals by writing was considered potentially factional. As Alison 
MacLeod said It isnt really possible to organise anything if you cant write anything 
down...you got expelled.
Although the Party made various changes over the years to the 
maintenance of its structure, such variations did not make the structure less rigid. 
In fact, the more reforms the Party introduced, the more complex and bureaucratic 
its structure became. The Report on Inner Party Democracy, however, declared 
that merely to state the many variations in the election procedure...and the 
frequent changes...is to expose the falsity of allegations that any particular method 
has been imposed upon the Party. W h i l s t  the system had, to some extent, 
evolved in response to changing circumstances, the 1922 blueprint not only 
became atrophied, but as Stalinism entrenched itself, it became a vehicle for 
authoritarian forms of decision-making. For some, this structure remained the 
essence of the problem. As the Minority Report stated, our impression is that in 
fact hardly any changes are made at any stage in the list recommended to it by the 
Political Committee.
Thompson and Saville carried with them into the New Left, a trepidation 
about organisation born from their opposition to Stalinist practice. Subsequently, 
the association of organisation with Stalinism, meant that much of the British left 
expressed antipathy towards it. This may have contributed towards the lefts limited 
success in focusing the militant energy of the late 1960s into a coherent political 
movement. The Mav Dav Manifesto, produced largely by Thompson, Raymond 
Williams and Stuart Hall between 1967 and 1968, is one example of this. As one 
sympathetic author has said, the Manifesto called for a realignment of the left in a 
coalition of single-issue groups, political campaigns and autonomous, local 
Manifesto cells. E v e n  with the intellectual triptych of Hall, Thompson and 
Williams towering in the foreground, however, the project fell apart through lack of 
serious organisation and ultimately failed as a political movement.
Mahon, 'Report on Inner Party Democracy, 24.
Alison MacLeod, interview, 17 October 1997.
Inner Partv Democracy (London. 1957), 16-17. [Published following 25*  Congress].
0 . Hill, M. MacEwen and P. Cadogan Minority Report, addended to Report on Inner 
Party Democracy", 54.
M. Kenny.'The First New Left: Britains Organic Intellectuals? (London. 1995), 161-162. 
Also see D.L. Dworkin, Cultural Marxism in Postwar Britain: History, the New Left and the 
Origins of Cultural Studies (Durham NC, 1997)
' '^Ibid., 162.
Thompson continued to pedal so softly on the subject of organisation that 
he remained virtually immobile. As late as 1980, he noted that a part of the Left 
was turning away in disgust from national political life and opting for building an 
alternative culture. H e  highlighted the feminist movement as one section who 
for evident reasons, has taken a similar option. While Thompson was able to 
identify such movements which confronted the ineluctably advancing official 
culture of power with only a disgusted back, he was loath either to criticise such 
fragmentation or to offer an organisational alternative.^ Thompsons perspective 
involved exhorting these alternative cultures to find ways of influencing...in active 
ways, the national political life. In his eagerness not to offend anyone with even 
the most faintly audible echo of What is to be Done?. Thompson assured his 
readers that he was not asking any group or movement to surrender its values or 
its autonomy and emphasised his belief that there was not only one correct or 
useful way to act. Whilst challenging sisters and black movementists to think 
more urgently of their roles as citizens, jurors, trade unionists or electors before 
the primary existential facts of their colour or gender, however, he failed to offer 
any organisational means through which their experience of oppression might 
generalise into a wider political movement.^ Thompson, of course, was as 
susceptible as any other white male at this time to accusations of political 
imperialism or of patronising women, but his experience of the political leaderships 
of Stalin, Pollitt and Gollan may well have contributed to his apology for meaningful 
political organisation.
This chapter has summarised some of the disparate strands of criticism and 
opposition that emerged during the period between the secret speech and the 
Congress of April 1957. These critics, whilst taking advantage of this window of 
opportunity, never coordinated into a coherent opposition within or outside the 
Party. The leadership responded to criticism with a combination of comradely 
condescension and bureaucratic stonewalling through which it bought itself enough 
time to retain both its own position and the structure of the Party. The oppositions 
failure to confront the question of Stalinism and the nature of the Soviet Union left 
an ideological vacuum which the leadership were able to fill by appealing to deep 
seated loyalties and traditional habits of mind within the membership. A fortuitous 
upturn in industrial activity in 1957 allowed the leadership, for the first time since 
the war, to reaffirm the Party as a significant force within rank and file trade
184 E.P. Thompson, Introduction, Writing by Candlelight (London. 1980), xi.
' Ibid., xii. 
 Ibid.
unionism. The next chapter records how the opposition within British Communism 
during this period asserted itself. It did this in two ways; through its own initiatives, 
such as The Reasoner or the Socialist Forums', and by attempting to utilise the 
opportunities presented by the leaderships own response to the crisis.
Chapter 5 
Responding to Criticism
While we have made some errors in the course of our defence 
of the Soviet Union, we have been overwhelminalv correct when 
capitalist and right wing Labour critics have been slanderously 
and continuously wrong/
This chapter discusses the various forms of opposition which emerged 
within the CPGB between the secret speech and the 25^ Congress in April 1957. It 
is impossible to know exactly who, to what extent, and upon what basis, different 
members opposed the leadership of their Party. As is shown below in the meetings 
of the Socialist Forums, opposition was often, in John Sevilles words, emotional, 
often unformulated and, in many cases, flared up only for as long as it took the 
leadership to control it.  This chapter deals with those aspects of this disparate 
opposition which coalesced, albeit temporarily, into something which, whilst not 
coordinated, can be described as collective. For some, it was rather like a Roman 
Catholic...suddenly discovering unequivocally the non-existence of God.  The 
confusion felt by many, probably best explains the inability of these oppositional 
elements to build successful alternatives to, or to reform, British Stalinism.
Whilst the Party gave an impression of homogeneity, it nevertheless, 
contained variegated aspects. The disparate nature of the opposition reflected this. 
It should not, of course, be surprising to find diversity, even within an apparently 
homogenous being such as the CPGB and the epithet monolithic has often 
disguised its existence. There was often tension between the tightly unified 
structure presented to the world and the Partys capacity to accommodate 
diversity. When such diversity seriously threatened the appearance of unity, 
however, the leadership moved to bring it into line.
Some members saw the chance to discuss the Partys traditional centralist 
structure as an opportunity to challenge received Stalinist verities. Ralph Russell, 
for example, cited Rosa Luxemburgs critique of centralism, emphasising that this
  Executive Committee CPGB, Draft of EC Resolution. Lessons of the 20'^ Congress of the 
C PSU (12-13 May 1956), 3. Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/03/24.
 Saville, The 20'^ Congress and the British Communist Party, 10.
 Ruth Fisher, written reply to author, 30 November 1997.
wasnt public knowledge at the time and constituted forbidden fruit for most CPs/  
Ken Alexander had referred to Luxemburg as a critic of what she described as 
Lenins ultra centralism.  This provoked a revealing response from Jack Beeching 
and Jack Lindsay who, writing to Thompson, seized upon this reference and 
associated it with anti-Communist spies recruited by MI5, who, whilst still in the 
CPGB, were losing their conviction and contemplating leaving. Lindsay and 
Beeching were not on the Stalinist end of the Party spectrum and were, in many 
ways, sympathetic to The Reasoner. Whilst insisting it was not a Stalinist fantasy, 
they associated Luxemburgs criticism with arguments the Trotskyites have worked 
extraordinarily hard in the past and added, did you know that?.  Such implicit 
condescension provoked Thompson into responding, you really do not credit John 
and myself with the political responsibility or understanding of mice.
Ralph Russell saw the centralising tendency...everywhere in world 
Communism. It presented a dilemma which, notwithstanding the cloud-screen of 
Trotskyists, loyal comrades, and police, was a real one for Party members.^ Most 
recognised that there should be strong discipline within a Party opposing the 
stifling political consensus which prevailed after World War II. As The Reasoner 
said in its first issue, we accept the need, as do all members...for a degree of self- 
imposed discipline in action, based upon collective decisions.M e m b e rs  
surrendered themselves to collective discipline, believing that this translated into a 
unity of purpose and action that made their organisation stronger. Even as recently 
as 1982, the Party declared that the Communist Party...must be able to act as a 
single unified force and continued to insist upon a centralised leadership capable 
of directing the entire Party.
The validity or otherwise of democratic centralism is not at issue here. 
Unlike in the Soviet Union and Eastern Europe, however, members careers.
  Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998. The Partys attitude to Luxemburg reflects the 
discontinuity between its Leninist foundation and its Stalinist development. In 1923, one of 
the first 'campaigns of the newly formed YCL was the commemoration of Karl Liebknecht 
and Rosa Luxemburg. (Klugmann, Historv of the Communist Party of Great Britain. 1919- 
1924. 224). By the 1950s, as Beeching and Lindsay indicated, she had become 
synonymous with Trotskyism.
 Alexander, Democratic Centralism, 7.
 J. Beeching and J. Lindsay to E.P. Thompson (undated) [?July 1956], Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
  Ibid.
 E.P. Thompson to Jack Beeching and Jack Lindsay (1 August 1956), Manchester 
CP/Cent/Org/18/04
 Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998 
Thompson to Beeching and Lindsay.
Thompson and Saville, Why we are Publishing, 3.
Aims and Constitution of the Communist Party of Great Britain (London, 1982), 4.
livelihoods and lives in Britain were, in general, not dependent upon their 
submission to the Party. As Beeching and Lindsay said it was voluntary 
discipline.T h is  situation demanded qualities of leadership which were in contrast 
to the punitive disciplinary practices associated with Stalinism. Given the 
persistently inadequate size of the CPGB, the sanction of expulsion was, 
ultimately, self-destructive. Under such conditions, it might appear that the only 
recourse for the leadership would be to engage in constructive dialogue with 
dissident or recalcitrant members. Although attempts in 1956, to impose discipline 
from above, provoked Thompson into declaring Thank God there is no chance of 
this EG ever having power in Britain, it is by no means clear that members were 
unanimous in their attitude towards authoritarian practices.
The barrier between voluntarily opting in to the rigours of organisational life 
and voluntarily opting out again was secured by a combination of individual loyalty 
and political commitment. The leadership relied heavily on both during this period, 
but also appeared to delude itself about the nature of its own authority. Mick 
Bennett at the 25* Congress, for example, railed against the leaderships critics, 
talking of their conceit, their moral and political cowardice.  That some delegates 
were unhappy with this approach was indicated by an insertion at the end of 
Bennetts speech, noting from the hall -  is the statement made in Mick personal 
capacity.  Similarly, Arnold Kettle appeared oblivious to the recent decimation in 
the Party as he attacked his fellow intellectuals as disgusting and compared Peter 
Fryer and Daily Worker cartoonist, Gabriel, to scabs...poisoning the minds of 
many thousands by showing those claiming to be innocent people, being shot 
down by Soviet tanks.
Much of this affected ferocity, however, served to clarify the disciplinary 
parameters of Party membership. Bennett and Kettle reflected an illusion about the 
reality of leadership authority. The fact that the Party retained three-quarters of its 
members, however, may indicate that many members also colluded in the 
propagation of this illusion and that the Party sustained a myth of authority on the 
basis of its mutual acceptance by both sides. It was an illusion which emanated 
from two sources. Firstly, it was born of the persistent misconception of the CPGB, 
about its own importance within British and world politics. Max Morris referred to 
this when he recalled how the Executive Committee became involved in Chinese
Beeching and Lindsay to Thompson [underlining in original].
E.P. Thompson to Bert Ramelson (28 May 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04. 
"  Ibid.15
Ibid.
17 A. Kettle, Speech to 25 Congress CPGB (19 April 1957), No.22.
affairs and I often used to think the Party a bit absurd -  what the hell could we do 
about
Secondly, it resulted from the very strength of purpose which had motivated 
people to join the Party in the first place. Brian Pearce admitted that his own 
authoritarian tendency' had attracted him to the Party.Raphael Samuel agreed, 
saying that the Principle of unity [was] indissolubly linked to that of authority'.The 
volitional obligation to which members surrendered, could not, in all cases, be 
sustained on the basis of self-discipline alone. For most members, in a position of 
permanent opposition within work and community, the private little world of our 
own...tight...self-referential group' was a reaffirming structure without which, such 
activity would have been more difficult.^^ Party discipline and the knowledge that it 
would be ruthlessly applied, provided this private world with a defined and, 
crucially, a familiar landscape. Some members implicitly demanded that their own 
self-discipline be augmented by a reciprocal discipline imposed from above. In this 
way, leaders and members entered into a mutually supportive concordat, in which 
the significance of the Party and the indispensability of belonging to it, were 
continually reaffirmed by the illusion of leadership authority. The illusion was further 
sustained by repeated reference to an actually existing historical model; faith in 
which demonstrated that submission to such authority had led to a mutually 
desired goal. It may be that the real fault line between opposition and supporters of 
the leadership at this time, lay between those who accepted this illusion of 
leadership authority and those who began to see it for what it really was.
Raphael Samuel referred to the destructive potential of the uncompromising 
attitude reflected within Bennett and Kettles contributions. Samuel asked, at the 
time, with regard to Thompson and Saville, isn't it pure gain over the past that 
such devoted comrades have stayed within our ranks instead of leaving?^  He 
continued, regretting that in the Oxford student branch...every one of the seven 
recruits we had made over the past three years was on the point of leaving the 
P arty.M em bers such as Eric Hobsbawm and Ralph Russell, took a fatalistic 
attitude to discipline during the crisis. '* Russell, who chaired the Joint Staff 
Committee of Communist University lecturers which included people like Kettle and
Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998.
Brian Pearce, interview, 1 February 1999.
R. Samuel, Staying Power: The Lost World of British Communism, Part 2 , New Left 
Review. 156 (March to April 1986), 65.
Samuel, The Lost World of British Communism, Part T, 11.
R. Samuel to Johnny" (undated), Manchester CP/Cent/Org/18/05.
Ibid.
Hobsbawm, interview, Stedman Jones, 21.
Brian Simon, felt that the 'committee should continue in existence and put forward 
their views regardless. If the Party chose to discipline them, then so be it. 
Discipline was not always consistent. As discussed above, John Saville 
stressed that Gollan and Matthews listened to what we had to say and the 
discussion was conducted in a civilised way.  Thompson reinforced this 
impression, saying Gollan was very much more reasonable and even friendly than 
any EC member we had had to deal with be fo re .T hose  who had written a 
Reasoner-type letter to New Statesman, however, were each in turn addressed 
by John Gollan in tough language of a kind never used to Edward and myself.^
A challenge to Stalinism or co-option of dissent?
Discipline and democratic centralism were the most important questions 
throughout the period between the secret speech and the 25   Congress. As 
discussed in the previous chapter, meaningful debate over the ideological nature of 
Stalinism was marginalised in favour of this argument about structures. 
Subsequently, Malcolm MacEwen, referring to the Commission on Inner Party 
Democracy, made a link between arguments about Party structure and Stalinism, 
saying 'although the Commission was confined to an abstract debate about 
democratic centralism within the British Party, the thoughts of the minority were 
dominated by...the degeneration of democratic centralism in the Parties of the 
Soviet Union and Eastern Europe.  The Executive Committee ordered this 
commission to examine the methods and working of our Party Congress, its 
committees, methods of discussion and election, and criticism and self-criticism. 
The Commission on Inner Party Democracy, however, was an exercise in 
bureaucratic choreography, forestalling, from the outset, the possibility of 
meaningful reform.
The Executive Committee conceived the commission in May 1956.  The 
resolution declared, 'we need at all levels to learn to listen more attentively to those 
who raise points, suggestions, criticisms. The Commission first met in September
1956.
Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
Saville, The 20*  Congress and the British Communist Party, 12.
E.P. Thompson to Howard [?Hill] (9 November 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04. 
Saville, The 20*  Congress and the British Communist Party, 16.
MacEwen, The Day the Party Had to Stop, 34.
 Executive Committee CPGB, Lessons of the 20*   Congress of the CPSU [Draft of EC 
Resolution] (12-13 May 1956) 6, Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/03/24.
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
Table 7. Composition of the Commission on inner Party Democracy33
Name Years in 
Party
Occupation Position in Party
Emile Burns 33 Full-time writer EC
Kevin Halpin 6 Vehicle inspector Factory Branch Secretary 
District Comm. Chair
Christopher
20 University Lecturer Grads Branch Sec
Nora Jeffrey 21 Full-Time, Nat 
Womens Organiser
James
Klugmann
23 Full-timer EC
William
Lauchlan
21 Full-timer EC
Malcolm
MacEwen
16 Journalist Daily Worker Journalist
John Mahon 
(chair)
35 Full-timer EC
Betty Reid 20 Full-timer EC
Appointed by Party Districts
Joan Bellamy 11 Full-timer Area secretary
Harry Bourne 21 Full-timer District Secretary
Peter
Cadogan
10 Teacher Dist. Sec., Branch Sec.
Joe Cheek 5 Teacher Branch Membership 
Organiser
Alex Clarke 13 Full-timer District Organiser
Charles Miles 17 Full-timer District Organiser.
Those members not working full-time for the Party are shown in bold type.
Only Kevin Halpin was an industrial worker. Cadogan, Hill and MacEwen 
already had reputations as critics of the leadership. Chair of the Commission was 
London District Secretary, John Mahon. Described by Malcolm MacEwen as an 
inflexible Party functionary with limited imagination, Mahon had emerged as a 
supporter of class against class in the late 1920s. '* He was Pollitts official 
biographer following his death in 1960.^ MacEwen wrote that Mahon did not see 
his role as leading an investigation; he saw it as securing the defeat of the 
revisionists who were critical of democratic centralism. 
The Commission received 104 communications from branches, districts and 
individuals within the Party. It did not investigate individual views on Party 
democracy but discussed a series of draft statements on the problems and the
Report on the Commission for Inner Party Democracy to 25** Congress (April 1956), 1, 
Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/05.
MacEwen, The Day the Party had to Stop, 29. 
Mahon, Harry Pollitt A Biography.
MacEwen, The Day the Party had to Stop, 29-30.
principles on which the Party should operate.F ro m  the beginning, Kevin Halpin 
supported the minority over their criticism of the unbalanced composition of the 
commission. Halpin eventually attached his own addendum to the Majority Report, 
detailing his reservations about its conclusions, but refused to sign with the 
minority. According to MacEwen, "immense moral and political pressure was 
exerted on Halpin and Joe Cheek by the full-time members, appealing to their 
loyalty at a time when the Party was under attack.^ The opposition was further 
undermined following Peter Cadogans suspension by his District Committee for 
writing in News Chronicle attacking the Party. After agreeing not to repeat such an 
action, he was reinstated, but not before Betty Reid had emphasised the divisions 
by refusing to sit down with a traitor.
There is no need here to examine minutely the differences between the 
majority and minority positions within this commission. John Mahon accused the 
minority of launching proposals...which would mean a retreat...from democratic 
centralism.  Notionally, the difference between the two sides was one of 
emphasis rather than substance. As the Minority Report said, we support the 
broad principles of democracy and of centralism as the basis of Party organisation, 
provided that there is a proper balance between the two."*  As with the split 
between Bolsheviks and Mensheviks, however, within Communism, apparently 
marginal disagreements over forms of words often represented more fundamental 
differences. The gulf in this instance was between the Stalinist method, the self
perpetuation of an authoritarian leadership, on one side, and, on the other, a 
perception that lack of democracy within Bolshevism had led to Stalinism.
When the Executive Committee discussed the two reports in December 
1956, MacEwen presented the Minority Report, signed by himself. Hill and 
Cheek.Peter Cadogan was, at this time, under suspension. Mahon presented the 
'Majority Report, which was signed by all the full-timers. The Executive Committee 
agreed that the reports should be printed with an introduction by the EC as a
Ibid.
Ibid., 31 
 Ibid.
J. Mahon, Report on Inner Party Democracy, (April 1957) 43, Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Cong/10/05.
MacEwen, Hill, Cadogan Minority Report, 47.
M acEw en,'The Day the Party had to Stop, 34. MacEwen was indirectly quoting Jack 
Beeching, one of those who sent his views to the Commission.
Minutes of Executive Committee CPGB. (15-16 December 1956), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/EC/04/03.
Congress document, open to amendments'/'* Just one member of the Executive 
Committee voted for the Minority Report with 33 backing Mahons majority/ The 
minutes do not specify who voted for MacEwen. Max Morris said of the minority, 
that he supported a number of things they stood for, but got little or no support.'*
As outlined in the previous chapter, Joe Cheek eventually agreed to sign 
the Majority Report...with...reservations, saying that it had not been sufficiently 
critical of the present application of democratic centralism, nor has it recommended 
sufficiently the extension of democratic rights to meet the needs and demands of 
the membership.'*  In fact, the Minority Report called for little more than that 
individual members should be allowed to discuss issues in opposition to the line 
laid down by the Party centre. In a five point conclusion, the authors called for the 
Executive Committee to recognise the right of branches to receive speakers from 
other branches representing minority points of view.'* The final point asked that 
congress time be allowed for opponents of the leadership position to put their case, 
as long as a clear trend in opposition emerges.'*
As limited as these demands appear, the 25**  Congress conceded no 
ground to them. Arnold Kettle, in his attack on the minority, neatly avoided political 
argument whilst demonstrating an ingenuity with semantics. Kettle seized on ideas 
within the Minority Report which addressed the potential problem of individual 
conscience coming into conflict with the Party line. Kettle said, it is a curious way 
of fighting the cult of the individual to be constantly playing down the validity of 
collective leadership and majority decisions and substituting an appeal to individual 
conscience. As preposterous as Kettles formulation was in equating questions of 
individual conscience with the Stalinist cult, it nevertheless found a resonance 
amongst members who had surrendered to the collective disciplines of the Party.
Confronting the demon
Near the beginning of the crisis, perhaps in an effort to forestall potentially 
damaging interaction between dissident Communists and Trotskyists, the London 
District of the Party took the uncharacteristic step of organising a series of
^  Ibid.
'* Ibid.
'* Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998.
'*  Minutes of E.G., Early 1957 (undated), Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/04/03.
'* MacEwen et al, Minority Report, 60.
'* Ibid.
 Arnold Kettle, Speech to 25** Congress of the Communist Party, reprinted in World News 
4:18, (10 May 1957), 279.
meetings with groups of Labour Party left-wingers. Most of these people 
constituted an interventionist Trotskyist group which coalesced around John 
Lawrence. Lawrence was leader of St Paneras Council which, in 1957, confronted 
government housing policy, as it cut rents and embarked on a policy of house 
building; a practice widely supported by council tenants but for which Labour 
councillors were surcharged.^
The first of these meetings took place as early as July 1956 and, apart from 
Lawrence, around ten Labour Party members met Communists from the London 
District Committee, including Dennis Goodwin (London District Industrial 
Organiser), Claude Berridge (London District Chairman), Sam Aaronovitch and 
John M ahon.A lthough the Communists at the meeting restrained our 
contributions, Mahon appeared surprised that the other side were not all agreed 
amongst themselves and argued quite freely. Lawrence, who chaired the 
meeting, gave the opening address and made immediate reference to the 
incoherent politics behind the CPGBs electoral strategy. Whilst admitting that 
intervention by Trotskyists had, under current conditions, remained not effective, 
he identified the Labour Party as the mass electoral party of the working class.  
Under these conditions, especially as the CP said clearly their aim was to bring 
Labour into power, the CPGBs tactic of standing candidates raised doubts as to 
whether this was what they wanted. This raised the question; was the CPGB an 
electoral party involved in a hopelessly unequal competition with Labour, or a 
revolutionary party? Was it, Lawrence asked, to be an alternative to Labour party 
and if not, what was the role the CP would play?.
Lawrence gently referred to the Communist Partys tendency to over-inflate 
its significance within British politics, quoting a favourite Party phrase that every 
Left was a potential CP member and contrasting this with the dominant left trend 
within the Labour Party, represented by Nye Bevan.  The report continued, saying
 Florence Keyworth A Council that is Cutting Rents, Daily Worker. (4 January 1957), 2. 
The Councillors were not only surcharged, but many, including Lawrence, were expelled 
from the Labour Party, partly because they had attacked Labour MP Woodrow Wyatt for his 
accounts of ballot rigging within the Electricians Trade Union. See below, chapter 7, 220. 
Lawrence had collaborated with Gerry Healey on a publication called Socialist Outlook, but 
the two men split, following a threatened libel action by Imperial Tobacco. Also see B. Pitt, 
Red Flag Over St. Paneras, Bulletin of the Marx Memorial Library. 132 (Autumn 2000).
 J. Mahon to Johnnie [? Gollan], Memo of meeting on Sunday July 22"'* 1956 (27 July
1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/06.
 Ibid.
* J. Lawrence, cited in ibid.
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
that all present agreed that sooner or later there would be a revolutionary situation 
in Britain. None of the Communists appeared to notice any contradiction between 
this and the Partys retreat from a revolutionary strategy. Mahon, in his notes, 
followed up the reference to a revolutionary situation with a, presumably 
unconscious, echo of Stalinist political banality as he added without naming the 
date. Although another meeting was planned, it is not clear how many took place 
nor whether these initiatives were repeated across the country. Following their 
expulsion from the Labour Party, Lawrence and about 20 of those who had 
coalesced around him, joined the CPGB.
Oppositionist attempts at coordination
Although discontent did not coordinate into an organised opposition within 
the Party; through private communication or through what became known as the 
Reasoner list, an uncertain number of members made attempts at convening 
meetings of dissidents. The leadership sent observers to some of these meetings 
whose job was to report to the Partys Organisation Department. These reports 
reveal that opposition to the leadership was split in several ways. Firstly, it was 
divided between those wishing to remain within and attempt to reform, the Party. 
Secondly, there were divisions between those who planned to stay, form a faction 
and wait for expulsion. Finally, there were those members who saw the existing 
structures of the Party as being adequate. There were more fundamental splits, 
however, between those like Fryer and Pearce who saw revolutionary salvation in 
Trotskyism, those like Les Cannon who inclined towards the Labour Party and 
those like Thompson and Saville who saw the future for the left as lying within a 
specifically British conception of Marxism, labelled socialist humanism.
Between 1956 and 1957, this divided opposition cooperated around 
antagonism towards the leadership of British Communism. Apart from the fact that 
most, though not all, of these people remained socialists, however, this antagonism 
was their only unifying factor and did not last beyond 1957. Once the respective 
tendencies of British Trotskyism and the New Left had plundered what they could 
from stubbornly unreconstructed Stalinism, they went their separate and mutually 
hostile ways.
One of the Organisation Departments anonymous observers wrote a report 
of a meeting at The Pindar of Wakefield public house in Kings Cross on 7 
December 1,956. The reports tone, throughout, betrayed a contempt which, if in
58 J. Mahon, Ibid.
any way reflective of the CPGB leadership, reinforced accusations of arrogance. 
The report identified the Swinnertons as the organisers of this meeting, describing 
Dennis Swinnerton as ex I BA [International Brigade] ex-Party functionary etc. 
etc..  It dismissed Jane Swinnerton as wife to the above, adding that she 
appeared to wear the trousers in this matter...she kept chipping in..."Don't be silly, 
Denis -  you know we decided etc. etc.  According to the reports author, the 
number present at the meeting was 15. Alison Macleods husband. Jack Selford, 
counted 17 com rades... from 12 different branches, which meant they were 
forming a faction and thereby defying Party discipline. Some, like Frank Brown, 
Tulse Hill; age 74; Foundation member of Labour Party, were from outside the 
CPGB or (?Andrew) Pickering. Labour Party member from Birmingham -  told by 
Christopher Hill of this meeting. Most were Communists, however, including 
Brenda Chalmers who, the report continued, left meeting before end in company 
with Pickering adding gratuitously, the connection might be sexual rather than 
geographical. The report continued in this sordid tone, noting that this information 
was an extraneous bit of dirt gleaned from later knowledge. What the leadership 
hoped to gain from this exercise is not clear and, in retrospect, it appears as a 
distinctly unsavoury caricature of the worst Stalinist practices.
The report, however, provides insight into the politics of the opposition and 
reinforces the impression of a critique in some confusion about whether it was 
aimed at Leninist fundamentals or Stalinist deterioration. Referring to Dennis 
Swinnertons opening remarks, the report quoted him as saying need for great 
changes in party -  ever since its foundation under the influence of Lenin, modelled 
itself too much on Russian pattern.
The discussion, as it was reported, revealed the groups inclination to 
remain within the Party and focused initially on whether or not they were, or should 
be, a fraction within the CPGB. Frank Brown, who was reported as saying there 
are so many of us that the EC would never dare to discipline us, was supported by 
Jane Swinnerton who agreed there are so many like us in the party that the old 
methods of organisation will have to be changed, whether the EC like it or not."* Dr 
Brierley, however, was concerned that as a minority we are completely at the
 Report to Organisation Department CPGB [meeting held, 7 December 1956] 
(undated), 1, Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/06.
Macleod, The Death of Uncle Joe. 198.
 Report to Organisation Department, 1.
^lbid.,1.
 D. Swinnerton, cited in ibid., 2.
 F. Brown and J. Swinnerton, cited in ibid.
mercy of the machine and accurately predicted that the majority of the party is 
loyal to the EC who would...not be in the least adverse to letting a number of 
malcontents go. The discussion revealed the diversity of members response to 
the crisis. Brenda Chalmers, for example, saw the loyalty of the mass of members 
as terrifying, but there are a lot like us, and so we have to continue the fight within 
the party. Mr Knapp from Islington agreed, saying when it comes to a vote 
loyalty triumphs...we must continue fight within party.
Dick Goss, described as an arch-liquidationist, however, called for some 
kind of organisation of scientific socialists, saying the Party is no good -  it has 
learnt nothing and its name is mud...we need an independent Marxist organisation, 
independent of but associated with the Labour Party. Another contributor, 
Armstrong, revealed that the Uxbridge Labour Party Sec. had informed him of 
resigning Communists applying to join the Labour Party. Following a longer 
contribution about the re-drafting of The British Road to Socialism from someone 
identified only as YYY, a general discussion ensued over whether those prsent 
were prepared to risk expulsion. Judith Todd, who described herself as a non- 
liquidationist and non-leaver', felt that the democratic centralist structure of the 
Party was satisfactory if interpreted in the right spirit.  This, she continued, 
needed a new executive which would interpret them in that way.
According to the report, these proceedings were informal, not to say 
anarchic...there was no positive statement of aims...but there was a general 
assumption that everybody was pro-Reasoner and anti-EC on inner-Party 
democracy, Hungary and everything else.   The meeting closed with Swinnerton 
reading a note from John Saville saying that he was worried about the slackness 
of Abramsky and Hobsbawm...they would have to get a move on if they wanted to 
make any impression on the EC.  The report suggested that other groups of this 
type were in existence, including one in North London attended by 60 people, and 
another in the East End. This particular group also discussed further meetings, 
formed a committee and arranged another meeting for the beginning of January.
 Dr. Brieriy, cited in ibid.
 B. Chalmers, cited in ibid. 
  Mr Knapp, cited in ibid.
 D. Goss, cited in ibid. 2.
 Armstrong, cited in ibid. 3. 
J. Todd, citd in ibid. 3. 
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ibid., 4.
The report provided an estimation, describing the group as a clueless lot 
of scruffs, potentially quite dangerous from nuisance value point of view/"* The 
final remarks are interesting, however, as they identify with cynical clarity, the 
confusion of those opposing the leadership. The observer noted no clear idea 
what they want except freedoms leading to party anarchy, or what kind of an 
organisation they want and who is to be in it, or the consequences of fighting as a 
faction within a party whose rules exclude factions'.
The leadership carried out a similar exercise at the London Socialist Forum, 
held in Holborn in March 1957. The report was characterised by a similar cynical 
tone. This meeting was wider in political scope than the Swinnertons and was 
attended by around 500 people with an impressive list of celebrities including 
Thompson and Saville, Hyman Levy, Gerry Healey, Les Cannon, Raphael Samuel 
and Peter Fryer. The report noted that the meeting was mainly middleclass 
elements -  sprinkling of beards -  all ages. Trots very plentiful.  Significantly, the 
report continued, Thompson and particularly Saville not political leaders (on own 
admission).   This, the report concluded, meant that Trots will take over the 
Forum or steer it from behind and reinforced the impression of the oppositions 
lack of political focus, saying the four OPers didnt seem to have a clue of where 
theyre going. 
The report outlined speeches by Saville then Thompson. Saville pointed to 
the political development of the CPGB having been subordinated to the CPSU and 
called for an analysis of contemporary capitalism as well as Stalinism. Saville went 
so far as to suggest that an evaluation of Trotskys work is needed -  will help 
analyse Stalinism.  Thompson called for de-Stalinisation especially in SU and for 
a move towards socialist humanism.
The report of the discussion, again revealed a range of perspectives, both 
of the current position and the way forward. A mid-aged woman...fluent speaker... 
(Shields or Sheets) asked dont these groups add up to a new Party? What kind of 
Party? A Party of critics...Marxist critics or just critics?. The report referred to 
Paddy McMahon who said the speakers give impression that Marxism has no
74 Ibid.
Ibid.
Report of London Socialist Forum to Organisation Department CPGB [held, 15 March
1957] (undated), 1, Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04.
Ibid.
78 Ibid.
J. Saville, cited in ibid., 2.
 E.P. Thompson, cited in ibid., 2-3. 
 Cited in ibid., 3.
future...but as a rail worker my wage packet etc. etc. (applause). After Peter 
Fryer had exhorted the meeting to read Trotskys works a big built baldish 
man...moved successful resolution to Hungarian authorities...Set Lukas [sic] 
free.
A Party member called Kendall accused the speakers of errors, calling for 
them to explain...by economic causes the purges etc and bureaucracy. An 
exchange followed which helps to explain Fryers unenthusiastic attitude towards 
The Reasoner and the New Left tradition it generated. Saville replied to Fryers call 
to read the works of Trotsky, by saying we must evaluate Trotskys works -  Trots 
are dogmatic and which Trot group is being referred to?. Thompson, in a more 
ameliorative tone, agrees to read Trotsky and discuss with them and replied to 
Shields or Sheels, saying the Forum is not a new Party but similar in idea to L/B 
[Left Book] Club and emphasised we are not political leaders. The meeting 
ended with an announcement about the Socialist Forum Conference at Sheffield, 
to which the CPGB observer added another Trot field day?. In fact, Gerry Healey 
was not reported as contributing to this meeting which, given his reputation for 
logorrhoeic intervention, was significant.
An inconvenient history
In the midst of the crisis over the secret speech and just after the 
publication of the first number of The Reasoner. the Executive Committee ordered 
a Commission to write the Partys history. In August 1956, Frank Jackson wrote to 
several members, reminding them of an informal meeting for exchange of views 
on the method of compiling the History of the Party to be held on 28 August. This 
was the result of an EC decision of 16  July to proceed with the preparations for 
the publication of the history of the Party, and the consequent setting up of an 
Editing Commission by the Political Committee in August. The history of what
 P. McMahon, cited in ibid., 3.
 Cited in ibid. Gyorgy Lukaks wrote mainly on cultural and literary subjects, but produced 
a collection of essays in 1923 called Historv and Class Consciousness (London, 1971) 
which was attacked by Zinoviev and repudiated by Lukks at a public confession in 1930. 
The work re-emphasised, as central to Marxism, the role of alienation in the creation of 
false consciousness. He had been People's Commissar for Education in the 1919 
Hungarian Soviet Republic and was Minister for Education under Nagy between October 
and November 1956. He was briefly interned as a result.
 Kendall, cited in Report of London Socialist Forum to Organisation Department, 3.
 J. Saville, cited in ibid., 3.
 E.P. Thompson, cited in ibid., 4.
  Ibid., 4.
 F. Jackson, Circular (21 August 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Comm/10/01.
 Ibid.
Brian Pearce called this short-lived...you might say, aborted commission", took 
place at a time when the leadership was attempting to reinforce an impression of 
listening sympathetically" and carefully to its membership. Within this context, 
the history of the commission reinforces the impression of an obsessive 
preoccupation with control as the leadership fretted about how the respective 
difficult periods of class against class" and 1939 were to be interpreted. 
Throughout the discussions, despite the fact that the Communist Party Historians 
Group contained some highly respected figures, the leadership consistently 
manoeuvred to marginalize them. Eric Hobsbawm wrote that this was because the 
gap between what historians thought it necessary to write and what was regarded 
as officially possible and desirable...proved too large".Apart from A.L. Morton, 
who had published the well received Peoples Historv of England in 1938 and 
Christopher Hill who had gained a considerable reputation as a historian of the 
English Revolution, the Historians Group, between 1946 and 1956 had published 
34 books and 61 historical articles outside of Communist Party media.Ignoring 
the classic exhortation, from each according to his ability, however, the leadership 
favoured the more ideologically reliable talents, firstly of Robin Page Arnot, then 
James K lugm ann.As Hobsbawm added, Pollitt and some of the others, for 
reasons which are quite incomprehensible, seemed unenthusiastic about any 
history other than what might be called the regimental variety".
According to Hobsbawm, a weekend school had been organised as early 
as 1952 to discuss writing a Marxist history of the movement".  The planned book 
was never written, however, as the political requirements of the Party appeared in 
danger of being compromised by a too perceptive historical analysis. The same 
concerns emerged in 1956. Point four of the Executive Committee Report", 
ordering the commission, requested that it submit to Political Committee step by 
step the main political problems for discussion -  eg, 1929-30 period or attitude to 
war in 1939."
 Brian Pearce, interview, 1 February 1999. H. Pollitt, The 20*   Congress of the CPSU and 
the Role of Stalin, 280.
 E. Hobsbawm, T he  Historians Group of the Communist Party", Rebels and Their 
Causes. M. Cornforth, ed. (London, 1978) 29.
Ibid., 35.
 Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme", Marx and Engels, Selected W orks, vol.2 
^o sco w , 1958), 24.
Hobsbawm, 'The Historians Group of the Communist Party", 30.
 Ibid., 29. '
 Ibid.
 Executive Committee CPGB, Report on Party History" (July 1956), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Comm/10/01.
The meeting in August 1956 chose an Editing Commission which included 
Hobsbawm, Brian Pearce and A.L. Morton from the Historians Group. A working 
party of four also emerged from this meeting, consisting of Robin Page Arnot, 
Frank Jackson, Harry Pollitt and Andrew Rothstein, none of whom were members 
of the Historians Group. The Commission met formally on 10 December with two 
Party historians, Pearce and Morton, present; Hobsbawm having sent apologies. 
Chairman, Harry Pollitt, read out a note from the Historians Group communicating 
their desire to assist in the writing of the history and expressing regret that the 
Executive Committee had not consulted them prior to the setting up of the 
Commission. The meeting decided that in view that there were three members of 
the group on the Commission, that the group be consulted and brought in if 
necessary on special items or periods. In it ia lly , Page Arnot was given the job of 
writing the history. He had represented the British Party in the Comintern in the late 
1920s and had remained a firm supporter of the Stalinist faction throughout the 
1930s. He had been a member of G.D.H. Coles Guild Socialists, but was part of a 
small group who renamed themselves Guild Communists and went on to become 
founding members of the CPGB. The four man working party met on 24 January
1957. Pollitt, now a sick man, sent apologies, and the Committee consisted of 
Andrew Rothstein, Page Arnot and Frank Jackson. Hobsbawm described Jackson 
as an ancient, stubborn, droopy-moustached building worker whose loyalties and - 
sometimes sectarian -  memories went back to the days of the SDF [Social 
Democratic Federation].A c c o rd in g  to his notes, Jackson joined the SDF in 
1903, when I was 16 years old. He continued, in 1912 I joined the SLP and was a 
member for some months, and then rejoined the BSP. 
Andrew Rothstein was the son of Anglo-Russian historian Theodore 
Rothstein, who was later to become Soviet Ambassador in Persia.  Andrew was 
a leading intellectual figure in the CPGB and a member of the Central Committee 
as early as 1923, when he was known as C M. Roebuck. He had worked in 
Moscow for the Soviet News Agency, TASS, and lectured at the School of Slavonic 
Studies in London University. In 1950, the school refused to renew Rothsteins
 The full list was sent in a letter from Gollan to Hymie Fagan (14 September 1956); Harry 
Pollitt (Chair), Robin Page Arnot, Emile Burns, R.P. Dutt, Hymie Fagan, Hobsbawm, Allen 
Hutt, Frank Jackson (secretary), James Klugmann, A.L. Morton, Brian Pearce, Andrew 
Rothstein, Bob Stewart, Manchester, CP/CENT/Comm/10/01.
 Minutes of meeting of Editing Commission, (10 December 1956) note 1, Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Comm/10/01.
Ibid.
Hobsbawm, T h e  Historians Group of the Communist Party", 29.
F. Jackson, Some Recollections (71956-7), Manchester, CP/Cent/Comm/10/03.
See Deutscher, The Prophet Armed. 223.
contract on the basis of 'a lack of scholarship. T h e  truth of this is not clear. 
Rothstein may have been a victim of Cold-War nerves on the part of the university 
authorities. The Educational Bulletin pointed out that the authorities had cited his 
work for TASS as preventing him from treating his subject with scholarly 
detachment and impartiality. I n  1953, Rothsteins case was discussed in 
Convocation, where the result was a heavy vote in favour of an enquiry, but the 
University Senate refused to act on Rothsteins b e h a l f . A s  a contemporary 
Sovietologist, Rothstein carried an uneven reputation. Ralph Russell described him 
as one of the great falsifiers. P e t e r  Fryer said of him that he defended Stalinism 
and routinely slandered its victims.
In 1956, he became involved in an argument over an alleged attempt to
tailor history to fit political exigency which appeared in New Statesman, and
involved another member of the commission, Brian Pearce. The journal had cited 
E.H. Carr who accused Stalin of altering lines in Lenins Testament from I 
propose to the comrades to remove Stalin from that position to The comrades 
should discuss the question of dismissing Stalin.R o th s te in  claimed that the 
translation Carr had used was by Eastman, an American Trotskyist, and that the 
original translated to the milder I propose to the comrades to think over a means of 
transferring Stalin from this position.  In Khruschevs speech, however, Lenins 
language was more direct than Rothstein claimed. According to this version, Lenin 
wrote I propose that the comrades consider the method by which Stalin would be 
removed from this position and by which another man would be selected for it. ^
Two replies to New Statesman followed. The first came from Marxist,
accusing Rothstein of misrepresentation.   Another, from Communard on 4
August expressed surprise at Rothsteins admission that a Testament even 
existed. Inside the Party, the reply continued, it was usual, I found to tell the 
innocents (skilled workers...and keen bright eyed university students) that there 
never was a Testament.  Rothstein, wrote Communard, had done our Party no 
service by his zealousness in arguing about the Partys treatment of Lenins
The Rothstein Case, Educational Bulletin. 6: 2 (November-December 1953), 5.104 ,
Ibid.
Ibid.
Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May, 1998.
Fryer, Hungarian Tragedy. 182.
Cited in A. Rothstein, Lenins Testament, New Statesman. (21 July 1956), 70. 
  Ibid.
Khruschev, The Crimes of the Stalin Era, 9.
Marxist, Lenins Testament, New Statesman, (28 July 1956), 104.
  Communard, Lenins Testament, New Statesman. (4 August 1956), 136.
testament.^ It has since emerged that Brian Pearce was the author of this 
correspondence and although, at the time, the leadership did not know this for 
certain, he was nevertheless held in suspicion on the history commission.
Pearce wrote to the working party, complaining that the minutes of the 
December Commission meeting were Not true r e c o r d ' .T h e  Commissions 
Secretary, Ted Jackson replied, reminding him of the promise to raise the 
assistance to the Commission by the Historian Group. P e a r c e  also wrote a letter 
to the Daily Worker, which J.R. Campbell refused to pub l ish .The letter dealt with 
the class against class period and asserted that Harry Pollitt and R.P. Dutt 
became the most important leaders of the Communist Party in 1929...as a result of 
Comintern intervention in Party affairs. P e a r c e  related the history in much the 
same way as it appears above, citing the CPGBs act of defiance when it attacked 
supporters of the Comintern "line.^  It was this that provoked the Comintern to 
demand that the British Communists appoint a leadership which could be counted 
on to carry out consistently the line of the Communist International .
Following Pearces interventions, on 4 March 1957 the full Commission 
agreed that members should treat the business of the Commission as private, not 
discuss our affairs with other committees, except by agreement with the 
Commission. I t  is not clear why the writing of the Partys history should be 
subject to such secrecy, but this was reinforced at the next meeting in May when 
James Klugmann moved and it was accepted that: it should be accepted by all 
members of the Commission that the proceedings of the Commission are 
confidential and should not be reported without the consent of the Commission. 
This meeting decided, finally, to ask the Historians Group for their views and 
suggestions once the main lines our actions have been worked out and agreed by 
the Commission. D u t t  was deputed to write political introductions to the two 
periods raising concern. This followed the line of the Political Committee which
Ibid.
Brian Pearce, interview, 1 February 1999.
Minutes of Working Committee on Party History (24 January 1957), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Comm/10/02.
B. Pearce to J.R. Campbell (15 December 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Com m /10/02. 
Campbells refusal is contained in a note to Frank Jackson (24 January 1957), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Comm/10/02.
B. Pearce to J.R. Campbell (15 December 1956).
Ibid.
Ibid.
Minutes of Editing Commission (4 March 1956)
Minutes of Editing Commission (2 May 1957).
Ibid.
believed that as an essential preliminary to the writing of any history of the Party, a 
series of scrupulously careful studies of the chief episodes in the Partys struggle 
since its foundation must be prepared.
The Commission had planned to utilise members for research and placed a 
letter in the Party press calling for volunteers. Finally, however, in February 1958, 
Page Arnot proposed that the present plan of the Commission should be 
abandoned in view of the failure up to date to obtain the necessary help in 
gathering factual details. I t  was also suggested that James Klugmann should be 
appointed, full-time, to write the history, that a time limit of one year be placed upon 
the writing and that the draft should then be submitted to the Executive 
Committee. H o b s b a w m  asked if this would mean the ending of the 
Commission, but was told that although it would not be wound up, members need 
not hold themselves available.^^ Klugmanns openly partisan Historv of the 
Communist Partv of Great Britain was published in 1968 and ran to two volumes. 
The Historians Group, according to Hobsbawm was not to be associated with the 
actual history. I n d e e d ,  in his Preface, Klugmann, whilst acknowledging the 
assistance of several Party figures, did not cite any of the CPGB Historians Group. 
The writing of the Partys history is one example of how the leaderships 
preoccupation with control during this period meant that its practice persistently fell 
short of its rhetoric.
New formations
Although over 7,000 left the Party during the period between the secret 
speech and the 25 *  Congress, a coherent opposition or sustained alternative to 
established British Communism did not emerge. The Reasoner put itself in the 
forefront in terms of the debate, arguing that this is the time to examine our 
mistakes. Their effect has been to isolate us from the Labour movement, to 
diminish our political influence and to hinder the devoted work for Socialism of a 
generation of Communists. A p a r t  from The Reasoner and the New Reasoner
Minutes of Political Committee CPGB (15 April 1957), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Comm/10/01.
Minutes of Editing Commission, (27 February 1958).
Ibid.
Ibid.
Klugmann, Historv of the Communist Partv of Great Britain. 1919-1924. 11. Klugmann 
published the second volume on the period. The General Strike 1925-1927. in 1969, after 
which Noreen Branson took the history up to 1951.
Hobsbawm, T h e  Historians Group of the Communist Party", 30.
Thompson and Saville, Taking Stock, 6.
which superseded it, another journal emerged in 1957, edited by four Labour Party 
members, two of whom were ex-Communists, with the aim of creating a mass 
basis in the universities for socialist thought. T h e  proposed title was New 
University Left, but it appeared as Universities and Left Review. I t s  editors 
included Raphael Samuel and Stuart Hall and it boasted an impressive range of 
contributors for its first two issues, including Saville, Thompson and Hobsbawm, as 
well as Richard Crossman, Michael Foot, Lindsay Anderson and Issac 
Deutscher.This journal merged with New Reasoner in 1959 resulting in New 
Left Review, but the tendency which these publications represented never 
recaptured the political influence for which The Reasoner had called.
Driven as they were, by powerful intellects, these journals more than held 
their own in the political debates of the period, both with the CPGB and within the 
established political culture. The headquarters, a coffee shop in Soho, became a 
centre for organising the Aldermaston Marches and New Left writers frequently 
engaged in discourse with the fashionable media. Despite these considerable 
achievements, the New Left made little appeal to the organised working class.
Its clear position on unilateralism found a resonance, particularly amongst 
students. Calls for other political objectives such as workers control, however, 
were heeded only by those for whom, in any practical sense, the idea would 
always remain abstract.
The Communist Party, by contrast, retained genuine roots within British 
trade unionism. Although probably not an accurate reflection of CPGB 
membership, statistics showing the occupational composition of National Congress 
delegates, indicate that the Party had a real relationship with the British working 
class.
R. Samuel to Kim (undated), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/05.
Ibid.
Ibid.
See M. Kenny, The First New Left. 44-46. Kenny's language, it has become 
commonplace among later critics of this formation to comment upon its lack of connections 
with the working class, implied that such critics were incorrect in this assumption. Under 
the sub-heading An Industrial Wing of the New Left?, however, Kenny devoted just over 
two pages to the subject focusing upon a New Reasoner conference in April 1959, 
attended by thirty trade union officials., 45. Following this, the New Left released a bulletin. 
Searchlight, which ran for only four issues, from January to April I9 6 0 .
Table 8. Occupational Composition of National Congresses, 1952-1963 136
Year 1952 1954 1956 1957 1959 1961 1963
Number of delegates 520 615 486 547 492 455 461
Occupations percentage of total delegates
Engineering 26 23 25 18 22 25 25
Building 6 8 10 7 10 9 8
Teaching 6 6 7 11 9 8 8
Mining 6 6 7 6 8 10 5
Transport & Rail 7 7 6 6 5 4 6
Housewives 5 6 6 6 5 5 4
Clerical & Admin 3 7 5 4 3 6 7
Professional & Technical 2 4 2 5 3 3 5
CPGB Officials 14 7 8 8 6 ? 5
Clothing/Textiles 3 4 3 3 4 2 2
Distribution 2 2 2 3 2 2 1
Medical 1 0 1 1 1 1 2
Printing 2 2 2 3 2 2 1
Agriculture 1 1 1 1 1 ? ?
Unemployed ? ? ? ? ? 1 1
Attending as women 
delegates
14 15 14 15 15 14 15
A fall in the manual trades, such as engineering and building around 1957, 
coincided with a rise in occupations such as teaching and professional and 
technical. It is not clear whether university lecturers are represented under 
teaching or professional. There were several lecturers such as Christopher Hill, 
Ralph Russell and Arnold Kettle at the 1957 Congress. Kettle, however, as a 
member of the Executive Committee may be represented as a CPGB official. 
Bearing such uncertainties in mind, it can be seen that those occupations broadly 
described as manual were represented by 53 per cent of delegates in 1952.^^  This 
fell to 44 per cent in 1957, but climbed back to 52 per cent in 1959. If teachers and 
housewives are included, the figures increase to 64, 61 and 66 per cent 
respectively. Across the period as a whole, 51 per cent of delegates, on average, 
were manual workers, a figure increasing to 64 per cent when teachers and 
housewives are included.
Comparisons between the CPGB and the work of the New Left are 
problematic.^^ The New Lefts repudiation of structures and organisation made it a 
qualitatively different organisation from the highly structured CPGB. It is impossible
Source; Newton, The Sociology of British Communism. 162.136
Engineering, Building, Mining, Transport, Clothing, Distribution, Printing and Agriculture 
are included ih this calculation.
 The First New Left lasted from 1956 until 1962, when Perry Anderson began editing 
New Left Review. Universities and Left Review, was, in part, a response to the large 
Trafalgar Square demonstration against British intervention in Suez in 1956.
to say who read the journals of the New Left and who they may have influenced, 
but there is little evidence that those who had repeatedly surrendered claims to 
political leadership, were able to appeal to sections of the trade union movement, 
either at a bureaucratic or rank and file level. This is not to devalue the work of this 
much looser affiliation but in its own terms, by 1959, it did not appear to have won 
anything like the loyal support throughout the country that the CPGB had retained.
Figures for membership are not available, but the final issue of New 
Reasoner listed ten Left Clubs, with another five in active formation throughout 
the British Isles. ^ David Widgery calculated that between 30 and 40 local Left 
Clubs ran on a modest scale outside London with a number of loosely 
autonomous sections operating throughout the capital at various t im e s .S tu a r t  
Hall recalled that the London Club attracted to its weekly meetings audiences of 
three and four hundred drawn from across the whole spectrum of the left. '*  It is 
unclear whether these figures refer to political meetings or to the clubs skiffle and 
jazz socials. Such activity was, of course perfectly respectable, but could hardly be 
said to be fulfilling the objective of a return to the main highway of British 
revolutionary traditions which had been prescribed in The Reasoner. '*  Although 
Thompson may have been correct that the British people do not understand and 
will not trust a monolith without a moral tongue, they were even less prepared, it 
would seem, to support the moralism of the New Left. "*  Thompson, in 1963, gave 
his own verdict on the early New Left as he wrote I am not, I think, betraying a 
closely guarded state secret when I say that the movement which once claimed to 
be The New Left...has now, in this country, dispersed itself both organisationally 
and (to some extent) intellectually. We failed to implement our original purposes, or 
even to sustain what cultural apparatus we had. ' '
One particularly active area under the auspices of the New Left was the Fife 
Socialist League, founded by former Communist, Lawrence Daly in 1957. Daly left 
in 1956, along with around 25 per cent of local Party membership, in an area which 
had traditionally been one of the partys strongholds.Daly, a County Councillor 
and an area delegate for the National Union of Mineworkers, stood in the General
New Reasoner. 1:10 (Autumn 1959).
D. Widgery, The Left in Britain 1956-1968. (London, 1976), 132.
S. Hall, T he  First New Left: Life and Times in Out of Apathy. Voices of the New Left 
Thirty Years On. R. Archer, D. Bubeck, H. Clock, L. Jacobs, S. Morgan, A. Steinhouse, D. 
Weinstock, eds. (London, 1989), 28.
Thompson and Saville, Taking Stock, 6.
Thompson, Winter Wheat in Omsk, 408.
E.P. Thompson, Review of C. Wright-Mills, Peace News (29 November 1963). Cited in 
D. Widoerv The Left in Britain Since 1956.132.
Ibid. W est Fife had been Willie Gallachers constituency.
Election of 1959 as a Fife Socialist League candidate. According to Michael Kenny, 
this provoked debate in the New Left, with Saville and Dorothy and Edward 
Thompson supporting, but a number of people, whom Kenny described as 
devotees', unhappy about standing candidates against the Labour P a r t y ' . A s  
Daly absorbed himself more in the NUM, the League published its last journal of 
The Socialist in May 1961, and had ceased to exist by the end of the year.^^^
The other pole of attraction for the opposition was Trotskyism. Brian Pearce 
and Peter Fryer were two prominent members who joined Gerry Healy around this 
period. The Trotskyist tendency came together with CPGB oppositionists in April 
1957, at the Socialist Forum Conference near Sheffield. Such interaction was 
short-lived, however, and Healy went on to form the Socialist Labour League in 
1959. Whilst demonstrating a more profound -  if often impenetrable - 
understanding of Marxism than either the CPGB or the largely empiricist New Left, 
the SLL and its successor, the Workers Revolutionary Party (WRP), retained a rigid 
perspective, based almost to the letter, on Trotsky's final writings. Apart from these 
two tendencies, many oppositionists, far from finding that we were under suspicion 
as ex-Communists...were warmly welcomed by the Labour Party. "*
Opposition within the CPGB had its roots in an increasing awareness 
throughout the 1950s, that Stalinism, both in the Soviet Union and Britain, was in 
crisis. The secret speech and the invasion of Hungary confirmed these suspicions, 
provoking both anger and a desire to reform the British Party and its relationship to 
the Soviet Union. Those, like John Hostettler and Ralph Russell, who believed that 
such reform was possible, stayed inside the Party. Those who did not, left. Most of 
the oppositionists, however, right up until the time they left or were expelled, and in 
many cases afterwards, continued to believe in The Party' as the hegemonic 
expression of British socialist aspiration.
The opposition continued to work from a political analysis that 
characterised Stalinism in terms of a Bolshevik revolutionary heritage. It retained a 
remarkable and self-defeating adherence to British Stalinism's methods and 
practices. As long as the opposition stuck to the rules, the Party leadership would 
win. In the years following 1956, the inability of any alternative to relate to the 
organised working-class, meant that British Communism retained a real, if 
politically sterile, hegemony within the trade union movement. The following 
chapters investigate how British Communism survived in the late 1950s on the
Kenny, The First New Left. 41.
Ibid.
MacLeod, The Death of Uncle Joe. 266.
basis of two related factors -  one fortuitous and the other the result of years of 
hard work and sacrifice by a large proportion of its membership. The first was the 
rise in industrial struggle which culminated in 1957, the most strike-ridden year 
between 1945 and the turbulent years of 1969 -1973. The other was the Partys 
roots within the trade union movement, both at rank and file and leadership level. 
The Partys rank and file intervention boosted its credibility during 1957, enabling it, 
in time, to replace members lost during 1956. The Partys belief, however, that it 
could substitute for socialist leadership of the working class by manoeuvring 
individuals into positions within the trade union bureaucracy, not only did not work, 
but in the case discussed in detail below, proved disastrous. If 1956 can be viewed 
as the seminal moment in the political decline of British Communism -  the point 
from which it never recovered -  then 1963 and the trial of Communists within the 
Electrical Trades Union, can be viewed as its industrial equivalent.
Chapter 6 
Trade Unionism and Communist Poiitics
to be effective, Social Democracy must take all the positions she 
can...However, the prerequisite for this is that these positions 
make it possible to wage the class struggle from them.^
The area of activity which did most to sustain the Party through the crisis of the 
mid-1950s was its work within the trade unions. The following three chapters discuss 
Communist intervention into British trade unionism. The variegated nature of this 
movement reflected British society and affected this intervention. The Teachers Union 
(NUT), for example, lay between popular perceptions of working and middle-class. 
Party members trod a difficult line between professional responsibility and 
responsibility to the militant traditions of Communism. Marguerite Morgan, for 
example, a Communist teacher in Coventry, discussed how, following her election as 
representative to a Womens Assembly in Geneva in 1954, her head-teacher insisted 
that she make up the lessons to be missed...so that I could not be accused of a 
dereliction of duty.  C.H. Darke described how a teacher in his Hackney Branch was 
regarded as an intellectual, who was concerned with the Party activities within 
parent-teacher organizations...she will be astute enough to show the proper humility 
before her proletarian comrades.  Max Morris was on the Executive Council of the 
NUT in the 1960s. He alluded to the dilemma between militancy and professional 
responsibility when he discussed how NUT Communists got the union involved in 
action, but we were never strike happy...I dont think we ever engaged in an unofficial 
strike at any time."*
The Electrical Trades Union (ETU), on the other hand, consisted of skilled and 
semi-skilled workers and was formed in 1889 following the merger of two established 
unions.^ Communist intervention in the ETU was its most successful under what can 
be described as its leadership strategy. According to notes written towards a report on
  R. Luxemburg, Selected Speeches and Writings. 61.
 M. Morgan, Part of the Main (London 1990), 70.
 Darke, The Communist Technique in Britain. 27-28.
 Max Morris, interview, 16 March 1998.
  The ETU was the result of a merger between the Amalgamated Society of Telegraph and 
Telephone Construction Men and the Union of Electrical Operatives. In 1968, the ETU merged 
with the Plumbers to form the Electrical, Electronic, Telecommunications and Plumbing Union 
(EETPU). In 1992, it merged with the AEU, to form the Amalgamated Engineering and 
Electrical Unioh, D. Bishop, Modern Records Centre Catalogue (February 1999) MSS. 387.
Party cadres, Communists, in January 1955, occupied the positions of General 
President and Assistant General Secretary. Four out of five National Officers were 
Communists, as were six Executive Council members and 19 Area Officials. This did 
not necessarily translate either into industrial militancy nor into political advantage for 
the Party, however. As these notes' continued, today, it is hardly an exaggeration to 
say that there is barely enough speaking time at the Conference for the able 
advocates of a militant line of policy to express themselves.
Party intervention at this level was also successful in other unions. Leo Pan itch 
described how the ETU and AEU were led by Communists and Communist influence 
was appreciable in the TGWU, NUM, NUR and USDAW. Wolf Wayne referred to the 
North London District of the AEU, saying that the vast majority on that district 
committee...and the full-time organisers of the union in that district were Communists. 
Wayne suggested that in the London AEU you couldnt get there unless you held a 
Party card, because the weight of the Party machine would be fighting for its 
nominee...these people really went to town. He also referred to the ETU, suggesting 
that here was a particular example of the Party being used as a kind of scaffold 
around the union and you climbed the scaffold to get wherever you wanted in the 
union.
Despite Communist leadership, between 1953 and 1959, electricians were not 
the most militant group in Britain. Shipbuilding, for example, accounted for 12.7 per 
cent of strikes during this period, whilst motor and allied trades and non-electrical 
engineering accounted for 10.8 and nine per cent respectively.^^ Electrical 
engineering, on the other hand, accounted for just 2.6 per cent of all strike activity
 L. Cannon, Notes on Cadres (1955), 5, Papers of Sir Leslie Cannon [Henceforward referred 
to by MRC file number, MSS/137], Modern Records Centre, Warwick [Henceforward MRC], 
MSS/137/9. Frank Haxell (CPGB) became General Secretary in 1955 following Communist 
Walter Stevens death In 1954.
  Ibid., 6.
 Panitch, Social Democracv and Industrial Militancy. 33. AEU; Amalgamated Engineering 
Union, TGWU; Transport and General Workers Union, NUM; National Union of Mineworkers, 
NUR; National Union of Railwayman, USDAW; Union of Shop, Distributive and Allied Workers.
 Wolf Wayne, interview, 10 February 1999. Wayne became Hendon CPGB Borough Secretary 
on 22 April 1952 whilst remaining President of his Union Branch in the industrialised area 
around Cricklewood and Edgware in North London. As he said, while I was a full-time Party 
worker and everyone knew I was a full-time Party worker, I was president of my union branch, 
ibid.
Ibid.
J.W. Durcan, W.E.J. McCarthy, G.P. Redman, Strikes in Post-War Britain -  A studv of 
stoppages of Work due to industrial disputes. 1946-73 (London, 1983), 64.
over the period.Similarly, within the coal industry, there was considerably more 
strike activity throughout this period than in electrical engineering. Between 
nationalisation in 1946 and 1960, the mining industry lost, on average, 513 days a 
year through, largely unofficial, str ikes.This equated to 20 per cent a year, on 
average, of all days lost to British industry. In spite of this, and although the NUM had 
Communists Arthur Horner as General Secretary, Abe Moffat as Scottish President 
and Will Paynter as Welsh President during most of this period, the union remained 
one of Hugh Gaitskells key supporters in the fight with Nye Bevan for both Treasurer 
and later leadership of the Labour Party.Bevan, an ex-coalminer, complained to 
Sam Watson, the Durham miners leader, how can you support a public schoolboy 
from Winchester against a man born in the back streets of Tredegar?  Just as 
Communist bureaucracy did not necessarily equate to a militant rank-and-file, a 
militant rank-and-file did not automatically translate into support for left-wing policies 
and figures.
A rise in mining industry strikes during the mid-1950s coincided with a general 
rise in strike activity. The Economist identified this trend in 1955 as it noted more 
working time was lost in industry through strikes last year than in any year since the 
war -  nearly two and a half million working days.  According to Durcan and 
MacCarthy, between 1953 and 1959, on average, 1,087 of these strikes related to 
wages whilst 1,253 were over non-wage issues. In terms of days lost, an average of 
4,690 were lost through wage related strikes, whereas 1,028 were lost through non
wage related issues. The ETU was involved in 16 strikes with 138 days lost between 
1953 and 1959. Shipbuilding, by contrast, lost 594 days in a series of 77 strikes over 
the period.  Notwithstanding The Economists protestations about the guerrilla strikes 
called by the Communist Electrical Trade Union, the proportion of strikes involving 
electrical workers was unremarkable.^
Ibid.
M. Jackson, Strikes Industrial Conflict in Britain. USA and Australia (Brighton, 1987), 84.
The key figure in this process was Sam Watson, the Durham Miners leader. See B. Brivati, 
Huch Gaitskell (London, 1997), 186 and J. Campbell, Nve Bevan (London, 1997), 290.
B. Brivati, Hugh Gaitskell. 186.
The Economist. (29 January 1955), 398.
Durcan, McCarthy, Redman, Strikes in Post-war Britain. 66.
Ibid., 62. The total number of strikes during the period was 608. The total number of days lost 
to strike action was 3407.
The Economist. (18 June 1955), 1013.
The following chapters analyse the Partys industrial intervention in the light of 
one of its most traumatic ordeals. This was the civil action in 1961, brought against 
Communist leaders of the ETU by Jock Byrne and Frank Chappie over accusations of 
ballot rigging in the election of union officers. Byrne and Chappie won the case which 
resulted in a ban on Communists holding office. Although the Party repudiated the 
veracity of the judgement, it nevertheless accepted the resignation of Frank Haxell, the 
ETUs Communist General Secretary, in 1961.^ The Party attempted to distance itself 
from what it characterised as aberrant practices and unacceptable tactics.
The Cold War introduced a set of institutional and political circumstances in 
Britain which encouraged the resolve of those launching the attacks on the ETU. The 
role of the trade union leadership and the TUC General Council was critical to this as it 
sought to consolidate its position within the quasi-corporatist consensus into which it 
had been co-opted during World War II. The most effective anti-Communists were 
sections of the Labour Party and the trade unions. Clement Attlees witch-hunt of civil 
servants, Woodrow Wyatts targeting of the ETU as well as Ernest Bevin s creation of 
an anti-Communist propaganda machine, the IRD, all sought to promote corporate 
social democracy against what was characterised as an alien political form. Although 
these politicians and union leaders were backed by an often histrionic Conservative 
supporting press. Conservative politicians were not generally at the cutting edge of 
anti-Communism. In a parliamentary debate provoked by Attlees attack on 
Communist civil servants, for example, C.E. Mott-Radclyffe was concerned to protect 
the individual from victimisation, saying "I think the House will agree with me that it is 
clearly desirable to avoid a kind of witch hunt in which anybody who had ever had any 
association with the Communist party in the past, however temporary, becomes 
automatically suspect.
Trade union intervention; Class against Class to the post-War period
Historically, the CPGBs orientation on the unions was characterised by 
dualism. Nina Fishman described a culture [which] contained two generalised guides
Press Statement from the Executive Committee of the Communist Party of Great Britain (4 
December 1961), Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/08/04.
C.E. Mott-Radclyffe, [Conservative, Windsor], House of Commons Debates. series, vol. 
448, col. 339^-3396, 25 March 1948.
to action... "trade union loyalism and rank-and-filism Fishman defined trade union 
loyalism as an acknowledgement of ones place in the order of things, a voluntary act 
of allegiance to one's primary social institution.   Rank and filism concerns those 
elements associated with militant shop-floor organisation, often in conflict with its 
leadership. According to Fishman, during the 1920s, Harry Pollitt and J.R. Campbell 
seized on the rich vein of rank-and-filism in British trade union culture and audaciously 
appropriated it for the Communist Party while accepting as its first commandment, 
the culture - and solidarity of trade union loyalism. ^ There were tensions for 
Communists between loyalty to the institution on the one hand and shop-floor 
opposition to its leaders and their policies on the other. At the end of the 1920s, the 
class against class perspective exacerbated these tensions. Fishman described 
people like Bill Rust and John Mahon in this context as Young Turks who exhorted 
Party members to lead mass revolts of workers against the capitalists [and] forge new, 
red trade unions. 
A breakaway trade union movement was the logical outcome of this strategy. 
The apparent revolutionary nature of this shift requires qualification, however. Fishman 
viewed class against class uncritically as a Comintern call to world revolution, seeing 
the actions of its most zealous adherents in the same light. Stalins perspective, 
however, was explicitly non-world revolutionary when he addressed students at 
Sverdlov University in 1925. He repeatedly emphasised the importance of the Partys 
decision at its 14  Congress in April 1925, which adopted his slogan Socialism in one 
country.  Stalins perspective between 1925 and his eventual victory was dictated by 
the struggle within the Politburo and on the Central Committee. Socialism in One 
Country remained the political premise of his faction, a premise which demanded the 
gradual subordination of Comintern policies to the needs of Soviet diplomacy.^  Class 
against class, far from representing a left turn was a typically Stalinist utilisation of 
Marxist-Leninist discourse through which the first five year plan and collectivisation
N. Fishman, The British Communist Party and the Trade Unions 1933-45 (Aldershot, 1995) 
9-10.
Ibid., 10 
Ibid.
Ibid., 33. Bill Rust was imprisoned along with 12 others, in 1925. He had lived in Moscow 
with his wife and three year old daughter, Rosa. See Macleod, The Death of Uncle Joe. 3-12. 
Rust worked for the Youth Section of the Comintern. In the late 1920s. He led the YCL in 
Britain and later became editor of the Daily Worker.
Stalin, The Foundations of Leninism. On the Problems of Leninism. 228- 246.
Deutscher, Stalin. 389.
gained revolutionary credibility. Whilst the policy was extreme in its sectarianism, it 
was neither revolutionary nor left wing.
The other aspect of Fishmans thesis which requires comment is her coupling 
together of Pollitt and Campbell as the key figures in formulating and overseeing the 
Party policy towards the trade unions.  Campbell "became habituated to translating 
Pollitts emotional and subjective reactions, wrote Fishman, claiming that non-Party 
historians...failed to discern their partnership.  This partnership rescued the Party 
from "class against class as "Pollitt pulled the British Party back from the brink of 
repudiating trade unions. Whilst there is no doubt about each mans contribution, the 
idea that they acted consistently in tandem does not always coincide with the facts. 
Noreen Branson referred to the London District Committees response in April 1928 to 
J.T. Murphys proposal calling for a dilution of "class against class. On the question 
of affiliation to the Labour Party, "the ... Committee responded with a resolution urging 
that the affiliation fight be abandoned, a view...supported by Harry Pollitt. Branson 
continued, "Campbell and Gallacher both urged continuation of the...fight for 
affiliation. On the Central Committee, Campbell was one of nine voting in favour of 
continuing to seek affiliation, whilst Pollitt was one of nine voting against. Far from 
pulling back from the brink, Pollitt further argued that in by-elections, "if the Labour 
candidate rejected the Partys united front demands, electors should be urged not to 
vote for him or her. Only three members agreed with this expression of the Stalinist 
line. At the Partys 1929 Congress, "it was decided, this time unanimously, that the 
demand for Communist affiliation to the Labour Party be dropped. Branson 
described Pollitt as the member of the Central Committee most convinced of the 
correctness of the new policy. Brian Pearce said of Fishmans characterisation, "Its 
all presented in a Manichean way. Everything she approves of is associated with Pollitt 
and Campbell, everything she disapproves of is associated with Dutt and Rust. 
Pearce suggested that Fishman appeared to want to "exonerate Pollitt and Campbell
Fishman, The British Communist Party and the Trade Unions. 4.
Ibid., 6.
 Ibid., 10.
 Branson, History of the Communist Party of Great Britain 1927-1941. 31. 
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
"* Ibid., 32. Published italics.
 Ibid., 33.
 Ibid., 34.
 Brian Pearce, interview, 1 February 1999.
from any activities which she thinks were a mistake.  The significant partnership 
during this period, as John Callaghan implied, was between Pollitt and Dutt.
This was the only time that the CPGB attempted to break with traditional trade 
unionism. For most of its life, the Party retained trade union loyalism which people 
like Pollitt, Gallacher and Campbell had imbibed...with their first experiences of work 
and economic conflict.'  The Party attempted to reconcile the often conflicting ideas of 
loyalty to the institution and rank and file militancy. As time passed, however, it 
avoided locating where the potential for this conflict lay. The Party consistently 
attacked right wing union leaders. It saw potential conflict, however, as arising from 
these expressed political positions of right and left, rather than as a conflict inherent 
within the very different social conditions of a trade union bureaucrat on the one hand 
and a rank and file activist on the other.
The two poles of British trade unionism were expressed, in the 1920s, by the 
National Minority Movement (NMM) and Mondism. The NMM had grown in the South 
Wales and Fife coalfields, which recorded support for the Red International of Labour 
Unions.'*  It held its founding conference in August 1924 with Tom Mann as President 
and Pollitt as Secretary. Addressing this conference, Pollitt cited the aims of the 
movement in specifically Soviet terms as he stated Our sole object is to unite the 
workers in the factories by the formation of factory committees. *  On the other hand, 
he stressed that the movement was not out to disrupt the unions, or to encourage any 
new unions, but continued to talk of the creation of a real General Council which 
would lead to complete workers control of industry. * Following the General Strike, 
the TUC urged unions against affiliation to the NMM. The 1926 TUC Congress at 
Bournemouth began a series of bans and proscriptions on Communists and NMM 
members from holding office in some unions."*
In 1927, at the TUC in Edinburgh, President George Hicks invited  a direct 
exchange of practical views between those entitled to speak for both sides of
 Ibid.
 Callaghan, Raiani Palme Dutt. 116.
Fishman, The British Communist Party and the Trade Unions. 10.
A. Hutt, British Trade Unionism (London, 1975), 99-100.
Cited in ibid., 99 n.1.
"* Ibid.
^  In 1926 these included National Union of General and Municipal Workers, the Railway 
Workers, Transport Workers, the Electrical Trades, as well as the Boilermakers (Pollitts own 
union). Hutt, British Trade Unionism. 117.
industry'/^ This was accepted by Lord Weir, who wrote to Ernest Bevin on behalf of a 
group of leading industrialists. The result was the Mond -Turner talks of 1928, which 
sought to rationalise collective bargaining and to standardise agreements across 
industries. In opposition, the Minority Movement convened in April 1931, a Convention 
in London endorsing the NMMs Workers Charter. A month later 2000 delegates met 
in Manchester to demand the 40 hour week and to pledge resistance to wage-cuts.
Largely through the NMM, the CPGB had influenced the calling of the General 
Strike. Its limitations were exposed, however, following the TUCs ending of the strike 
in May 1926. The Party had neither the numbers nor the influence to exploit rank and 
file disillusionment with its leadership. Class against class exacerbated the effects, 
both of the TUC bans and of Mondism. The CPGB either had to accommodate to the 
official move to more formalised negotiations or attempt to initiate a new alternative on 
the basis of remaining rank-and file organisation. The Partys failed attempt at the 
latter coincided with class against class. Following its abandoning of the NMM, it 
adopted a dual strategy which attempted to reconcile rank and filism with trade union 
loyalism. The CPGB, according to Fishman, became expert in dispensing token 
formal rhetorical obeisance to Independent Leadership and then directing members 
attention to the mundane practical issues of the economic struggle.'*
Programmatically, the Partys trade union strategy fell into two phases following 
World War II. These two phases were marked by the 1951 and 1958 versions of The 
British Road to Socialism.'*  The second phase, following 1956, coincided with rising 
industrial struggle within Britain. This programmatic change was a shift in emphasis, 
however, and did not correspond to a change in the Partys practice. This 
programmatic realignment was articulated, in 1957, by Abe Moffat, the Scottish 
Miners President who wrote that there was a tendency in our Party that our new 
approach in the use of Parliament to achieve the peaceful transition to socialism 
...would come through this means only and without mass struggle of the people 
outside Parliament. '* The revised text said Moffat, must emphasise the centrality of 
mass struggles...to take power from the present ruling class.'* The 1951 programme
'* A. Bullock, The Life and Times of Ernest Bevin [2 vols.], vol.1. Trade Union Leader 1881- 
1940 (London. I960). 392.
'* Fishman, The British Communist Party and the Trade Unions. 39.
British Road to Socialism (London. 1951 and 1958).
'* A. Moffatt, Mass Struggle and Peaceful Transition, World News Discussion Supplement [In 
preparation for 25** Congress] (23 February 1957), 2, Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/05.
'* Ibid.
emphasised that the path forward...will be to establish a Peoples Government on the 
basis of a Parliament.  Whilst delegating a key role for the unions, this version 
proposed confining this role within specifically trade union limits. The one paragraph 
devoted to the unions envisaged them restoring full powers of collective bargaining 
...ensuring the basis for steadily advancing wages and conditions. They would also 
participate in the work of the ministries of Labour and National Insurance and ensure 
the operation of the labour laws, functions similar to those they had undertaken during 
World War II. The 1958 version, by contrast, was clear that working class power is the 
essential condition for far reaching change. The new  version continued to 
emphasise the centrality of Parliament where a socialist Labour and Communist 
majority would establish a Socialist government. It now stated that this change can 
only be brought about through struggle and, in two pages devoted to The Communist 
Party and the Labour Movement, said that the advance to socialism requires the 
building up of the movement in struggle. The 1958 version saw trade unions leading 
the working class from the immediate struggles under capitalism right up to the 
struggle for political power and the building of socialism.
This shift in emphasis did not represent a change in policy, as the Party 
retained its commitment to a general election fought on the issue of a socialist 
solution. It was, however, a response to changing circumstances within Britain. It 
was also a response to 1956 and represented part of the Partys attempt to de- 
Stalinise. As discussed above, the first British Road to Socialism was specifically 
Stalinist, as it referred explicitly to the achieving of socialism through Peoples 
Democracy...as in the Peoples Democracies of Eastern Europe.  The Party 
expunged reference to the Eastern European states from the 1958 version and 
replaced the term Peoples Democracy with Socialist Government. Another factor 
militating towards the emphasis on struggle was the Partys increasingly poor record at
 The British Road to Socialism (1951). 14.
 Ibid., 16.
 The British Road to Socialism M958). 10.
 Ibid.
 Ibid., 10 and 28
 Political Resolution to the Twenty Fifth Congress (April 1957), 71, Manchester, 
CP/Cent/CONG/10/05.
 The British Road to Socialism (1958). 10.
 Branson, History of the Communist Party of Great Britain 1941-1951. 232. The British Road 
to Socialism (19511. 14.
 The British Road to Socialism (1958L 10.
the polls. Moreover, during the 1950s, with Gaitskells victory in the Labour Party and a 
continuing Conservative majority, the prospect of a parliamentary road looked 
correspondingly bleak. A rightward shift at the top of British politics coincided with an 
increasing recalcitrance in the rank and file of many trade unions, which culminated in 
1957;*
Although the Party continued in the 1960s, to note uncontentiously that trade 
unions are mass organisations of the working-class' and advocated the greatest 
possible measure of trade union activity, it drifted away from the 1958 emphasis on 
unions as organisations of political struggle and repositories of workers power. By 
1961, the Party had become somewhat vague as it explained that wages, hours and 
conditions of work are determined by trade union power and spoke of unions as 
forums where Communists have been more concerned with convincing the workers 
...of the necessity for a socialist transformation. It would be over simplistic to see a 
direct relationship between levels of strike activity and the Partys emphasis or 
otherwise on trade unions as vehicles for socialism, but there is no doubt that this was 
a factor.
A consistent feature of the Partys industrial orientation in this period was that it 
continued to support the institution of trade unionism rather than challenge it as the 
ideological enslavement of the workers by the bourgeoisie. The Party concentrated 
its fire on right-wing leaders, seeing these individuals as the main barrier to militant 
organisation. At the same time, it continued to support and participate, along with such 
people, in those bureaucratic structures and procedures which represented the most 
conservative aspects of British trade unionism.
Lenin wrote that the Social Democrats ideal should not be the trade union 
secretary, but the tribune of the people. In 1961, the Party claimed that its objective 
was not the winning of trade union posts for Communists...not the winning of official 
positions, but the winning of the support of the workers for a progressive policy. The
Durcan, McCarthy, Redman, Strikes in Post-war Britain. 66. The authors noted that the 
number of days lost in 1969 exceeded five million for the first time since 1957.
 Industrial Department, CPGB, Did Communists Control the ETU? (1 September 1961) 15, 
Manchester, CP/Cent/IND/1/5.
 Executive Committee CPGB, The Communist Party and the Trade Unions (8 July 1961), 2, 
Manchester, CP/Cent/Math/05/02.
 Lenin. What is to be Done?. 41.
 Ibid., 80.
 Did Communists Control the ETU? (1 September 1961), 15, Manchester, CP/Cent/IND/1/5.
Partys leadership strategy, however, was confused between a political strategy, which 
represented Communist trade union leaders as a socialist leadership of the working 
class, and the election of Communists to office as an end in itself. Wolf Wayne 
suggested of these leaders, there was no question of enlightening the people about 
the aims of socialism. The Party, having discovered a formula through which its 
members could attain office, utilised it routinely with minimal regard to political 
conditions or implications. Stalinism and The British Road to Socialism had closed the 
revolutionary door at the same time as working-class resignation towards the 
governing consensus appeared to choke off Parliamentary possibilities. Under such 
circumstances, the Partys leadership strategy represented a barely coherent retreat 
into the one corner where apparent power still seemed available. Whether it served 
any useful purpose or not, it remained the only place the Party retained apparent 
institutional credibility.
Anti-Communism
Following the World War II, the TUC supported the Labour government in its 
increasing antagonism towards the Soviet Union. The TUC owed its influence in the 
Cold War to three specific circumstances. First was its crucial role during the war 
under Walter Citrine as General Secretary and Ernest Bevin as Minister of Labour. 
The second was the fact that it was a Labour government which, through the Foreign 
Office Committee on Policy Towards Russia, initiated Britains early belligerence 
towards the USSR. The third circumstance lay in the position and political personality 
of Bevin who, along with Citrine, was one of the architects of modern trade unionism. 
Bevin had formed the National Transport and General Workers Union in 1921, had 
been its General Secretary between 1921 and 1940 and had been a leading figure in 
the General Strike. He took these credentials into the wartime coalition, where 
Churchill had requested his services as Minister of Labour. As Foreign Secretary in 
Attlees administration, his perspective in which Britain still had its historic part to play 
in the world, included showing the Soviets that there is a limit beyond which they
 Wolf Wayne, interview, 10 February 1999.
 Bullock, The Life and Times of Ernest Bevin. 651-654. After Churchill met the King on 10 
May 1940 he offered a third of the places in his government to Labour. He spoke to Attlee 
requesting four men whose services in high office were immediately required. The first name 
on the list waS that of Ernest Bevin, 651.
cannot safely go. According to Allen Hutt, Mr Bevin...personified those forces... 
which were able...to harness the trade union movement, by and large, to a Churchillian 
foreign policy.
In 1946, Attlees government conceded that the Soviet Unions popularity 
inside the labour movement remained too strong to allow Bevin to come out openly 
against it. The Labour Party, nevertheless, in July, again rejected the CPGBs bid for 
affiliation. According to Peter Weiler, although criticism of the Soviets was still to be 
regarded as exceptional, requiring Bevin s approval, the CPGB remained a legitimate 
target. 
Following the war, under Vincent Tewson, the TUC continued supporting 
Attlees government. It supported, for example, the White Paper, Statement on 
Personal Incomes, Costs and Prices, which emerged at the beginning of 1948 as 
continuing wartime austerity was exacerbated by the harshest winter in living memory. 
Sam Watson, the Durham miners leader, said I would advocate a reduction of wages 
to save the Labour Government.  The TUC, at this time, ascribed all opposition and 
unrest to the activities of the Communist Party and issued two anti-Communist 
pamphlets.^^
By this time, signalled by the Truman Doctrine on the one side and Zhadanovs 
two camps characterisation on the other, anti-Soviet Communism was becoming as 
acceptable as it had been domestically.^ The most important institutional expression 
of anti-Communism during this period was the formation by Bevin s parliamentary 
under-secretary, Christopher Mayhew, of the Communist Information Department in 
1948. Bevin identified this organisations remit as ranging across the Middle East and 
...Far Eastern countries and articulated its objective, saying that Communism will 
make headway unless a strong spiritual and moral lead...is given against it, and we 
are in a position to give such a lead.' * This evolved into the Information Research 
Department (IRD) and for three decades poured out a stream of anti-Communist
 E. Bevin, cited in P. Weiiler, British Labour and the Cold W ar (California, 1988), 192-193.
 Hutt, British Trade Unionism. 173.
 Weiiler, British Labour and the Cold W ar. 200.
Ibid., 202.
Cited in Panitch, Social Democracy and Industrial Militancy. 31.
Ibid., 33. See below, 221-2.
D. Reynolds, T h e  Big Three and the Division of Europe, 1945-48: An Overview, Diplomacy 
and Statecraft. 1:2 (July 1990). A. Zhadanov, Report on the International Situation to the 
Com inform'. The International Situation and Soviet Foreign Policy, ed. M. Rush (Ohio, 1970). 
Cited in Wiler, British Labour and the Cold-War. 206-7.
propaganda for domestic and (primarily) foreign consumption/ According to Weiler, 
the IRD utilised British Council auspices to include the TUC in its work. This involved 
trade unionists visiting from abroad, mainly from backward countries, with the object 
of instilling the right kind of British trade union practice. 
In December 1947, Labour Party General Secretary, Morgan Phillips, initiated 
a campaign to remove Communists from leading positions in the unions. The Times 
and the Dailv Telegraph ran articles about Communist influence. In January 1948, The 
Times reported, Yesterday a committee within the Civil Service Clerical Association 
[CSCA] announced a campaign to unseat the whole of the present executive 
committee...on the grounds that they follow Communist policy. T h e  CSCA was 
committed to correcting the anomaly of having a communist-dominated National 
Executive Committee in a movement which has not more than 3 per cent Communists 
or fellow travellers. The article revealed that L.C. White, CSCA General Secretary, 
was on the editorial board of the Dailv Worker and concluded that the struggle is 
going on in trades councils as well as in the trades unions...there will be special 
interest this year in the election of officers and committees of the London trades 
council, in which Communist influence is particularly strong. 
During autumn of 1948, the TUC responded to accusations of Communist 
domination of affiliated unions. It released two circulars called Defend Democracv and 
Tactics of Disruption.  The pamphlets directed the serious attention of all trade 
unionists to the malignant character of Communist agitation and organisation. The 
TUC urged affiliated unions...and District and Branch Committees and responsible 
officers and loyal members, to counteract every manifestation of Communist 
influence. It stopped short of recommending a ban, however, suggesting it was a 
matter for...the unions whether it is consistent with the policy of the union and to the
Ibid.. 207.
Ibid., 210. The British Council, a nominally neutral disseminator of British culture abroad, was 
described by Labour Colonial Secretary Arthur Creech Jones as an agency of His Majestys 
Government. Cited in ibid., 210.
'Communists in the Unions, The Times (6 January 1948), 4.
 Ibid. L.C. White was on the editorial board of the Dailv Worker. He also sat on the National 
Council for Civil Liberties (NCCL).
Cited in Finance and General Purposes Committee [F and GPC] of the TUC, Communist 
Party Fractions in the ETU (24 November 1958), 8, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
Movement as a whole that any member should serve...the Communist Party whilst 
holding executive or delegate office in the union.
Anti-Communism in the late 1940s culminated in a purge of the civil service. 
This was prompted by W.J. Brown, Parliamentary representative of the CSCA. Brown 
accused E.J. Hicks, the unions president, of being a Communist sympathiser. This 
was a repercussion from an internal dispute between the union and Brown, who had 
moved from the left to an independent quasi-religious individualist position.   His 
objections provided the government with a lever with which to prise Communists out of 
the civil service. Brown called for an advisory committee to operate between the 
individual and the minister or a committee of three or four persons of standing to 
subject the facts to assessment before a decision is made.* Willie Gallacher made a 
protracted intervention in this debate. Quoting St Paul to the Corinthians, he accused 
the combination of Tories and Tory-dominated Labour leaders of using the same low, 
vile slanders against the Communists. The Communist Party said Gallacher, fights 
for the complete independence and economic prosperity of this country, while the 
Tories and Labour leaders are selling this country to the big dollar boys of America 
and asked the uncomfortable question, is this attack...connected with a demand from 
Marshall that wages in this country must come down? Attlee insisted, however, I 
think there is a prima facie case against members of Communist and Fascist 
organisations that they have a divided loyalty. He supported Browns system in 
which accused Communists should attend before their Departmental Head who must 
consider whether it is a matter in which action must be taken...they will then consider 
whether or not there is a prima facie case for transferring this man...or... for dismissing 
him.
The legislation put pressure on the TUC as both representative of workers 
interests and supporter of the Labour government. Tewson and his deputy, George 
Woodcock, eventually dampened down disquiet at the 1948 congress by promising a 
union representative on the committee of three deputed to hear evidence of
 Ibid.
 Weiler, British Labour and the Cold W ar. 223.
 W.J. Brown [Independent Rugby], House of Commons Debates. 5 Series, col.3409, 25 
March 1948.
 W. Gallacher [Communist West Fife], ibid., coIs.3398-3402.
 Ibid.
 C. Attlee ibid., cols.3419-3421.
 Ibid., col.3423.
Communist involvement. Despite protests at successive congresses, the General 
Council held to the government line and between 1948 and 1955, 135 civil servants 
were investigated. Of these, 24 resigned, 25 were dismissed and 86 were 
transferred.
The politics of productivity
The continuing effort to conquer the bureaucratic heights had implications for 
Communism under the conditions of quasi-corporatism following World War II. Was it 
possible to remain a Party of opposition when a section of its membership were 
associated with trade union leaders closely involved in increasing the efficiency of the 
post-war neo-Keynesian project? According to Chris Wrigley, trade union leaders 
backed what they felt to be their government during the immediate post-war period.  
Clearly, however. Communist trade union leaders could hardly view any liberal- 
democratic government in this way, however left wing it may have appeared. Keith 
Middlemas wrote that, in this period the TUC made a considerable effort to increase 
production, and responded to Cripps first Export Conference in September 1947 by 
accepting that industry should benefit from Marshall Aid rather than the social 
services. The CPGBs leadership strategy should be viewed within this context.
Following the Labour Partys inclusion in the coalition government in 1940, the 
TUC was incorporated into the National Joint Advisory Council which gave rise to the 
Joint Consultative Committee. The JCC consisted of ministers, industrial leaders and 
the trade unions, whose function was to direct policy on productivity and conditions. 
During the war, the TUCs relationship with its members was often resonant of the 
antagonisms associated with worker versus employer, rather than of fraternal trade 
unionism. After Hitlers invasion of the USSR had evoked a tidal wave of pro-Soviet 
sentiment inside Britain, Citrine concocted the Anglo-Soviet Trade Union Committee. 
According to Weiiler, this was a success from the TUCs point of view because the
 Weiler, British Labour and the Cold W ar. 228.
 C. S. Maier, The Politics of Productivity: Foundations of American International Economic 
Policy after WWM. Cited in A S. Milward, W as the Marshall Plan Necessary?, Diplomatic 
Historv. 13: 2 (Spring 1989), 231-253.
 C. Wrigley [ed.], British Trade Unions 1945-1995 (Manchester, 1997), 2.
 K. Middlemas, Power Corruption and the State. [2 vols.], vol.1, Britain in Search of Balance 
1940-61 (Basingstoke, 1986), 162.
 Weiiler, British Labour and the Cold W ar. 55.
Soviets agreed not to deal with the British Communist Party.Br i t ish workers, 
however, failed to heed demands for increased productivity, refusing to respond to 
the pleas of their nominal leaders.C i t r in e  responded by inviting Soviet trade 
unionists to visit British factories. Having as usual, put national self-interest ahead of 
any loyalty to an international Communist movement, the visitors were insistent that 
more and still more production should be the order of the day.
In 1947, the TUC recommended re-forming the Joint Production Committees 
(JPCs), following a fuel crisis. The TUC spelled out its attitude to increasing 
productivity in a situation in which the whip  of unemployment which some 
employers held in order to enforce discipline had disappeared. The TUC called for a 
genuine effort to establish Joint Production Committees and in 1948 organised a 
conference on improving production which was, according to Wrigley, attended by 
representatives from 144 unions. Following the Conservative victory in 1951, the 
TUC continued this role as it participated in the British Productivity Council (BPC). 
According to Les Cannon, then a Communist, the BPC consisted of the Federation of 
British Industry, the British Employers Confederation, the Association of Chambers of 
Commerce, the National Union of Manufacturers, representatives from the 
Nationalised Industries as well as members of the General Council of the TUC.
Productivity had become the lingua franca of government, opposition, industry 
and the trade union leadership and constituted the focus for consensus across this 
spectrum. J.N. Browne emphasised productivity in 1954, as he commended the 
Gracious Speech to the House. Browne said that by its reference to the 
encouragement and expansion of industry, the speech recognised the need to 
increase the national w e a l t h . Les Cannons pamphlet pointed out that increased 
productivity, however, did not equate to higher wages. Under the Work Study 
Incentive Schemes, designed to measure the rate at which an operator is working, a 
pieceworker could produce twice as much and only receive a third increase in
 Ibid., 56.
 Ibid., 57.
 Ibid., 57 and cited in ibid., 58.
TUC General Council, Report of Proceedings at the 79 Annual Trades Union Congress, 
1947 in C. Wrigley, British Trade Unions 1945-1995. 38.
 Ibid., 38 and 39.
 L. Cannon, Productivity for Whom? (London, 1955), 3.
J.N. Browne [Con. Glasgow Govan], Reply to Queens Speech, House of Commons 
Debates 5  Series, vol.535, col. 10, 30 November 1954.
wages.Cannon produced the following table to show how productivity increased 
during the period.
Table 9. Productivity growth in Britain between 1947 and 1954
Industry Percentage Growth
Chemicals 71.7
Wood and cork 49.5
Paper and Printing 49.5
Motor cars 75.0
Shipbuilding, engineering,
electrical 52.0
He asserted that productivity increases not only outstripped wages, but that 
overtime alone sustained workers' purchasing power. Robin Blackburn confirmed that 
real wages did not increase. Blackburn quoted Guy Routh, the author of a report for 
the National Institute for Economic and Social Research, who said of wages 
throughout the twentieth century, As with Alice, it is sometimes necessary to run faster 
and faster to stay in the same place.B lackbu rn  also confirmed that increased 
purchasing power owed less to rising wages than to increased overtime working, 
"despite nominal reductions of the working day...the average number of hours worked 
was the same in 1965 as it had been in 1938 (i.e. 47 hours a week)'.^^ The Economist 
offered further support for the assertion that real wages did not increase. Under the 
heading Facts About.Real Earnings, the journal said it will be seen that wage rates 
have kept in remarkably even step with consumer prices.
Frank Haxell had referred to the danger of the co-option of the leadership when 
he said, It is necessary to recognise that when trade unions become part of 
management they become committed by the decisions taken and to that extent lose 
their independence and freedom of action.  Such pronouncements notwithstanding, 
John Lloyd described how the ETU Communist leadership were, during the 1950s,
Cannon, Productivity for Whom?. 7.
Ibid., 11.
G. Routh, cited in The Incompatibles: Trade Union Militancy and the Consensus. R. 
Blackburn and A. Cockburn, eds (Harmondsworth, 1967), 26.
Ibid., 44.
Facts About Real Earnings, The Economist. (13 February 1955), 446.
F. Haxell, Speech to 25*   Congress (21 April 1957), no. 18, Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/ 
10/05.
negotiating constantly with the National Federated Electrical Association under the 
corporate auspices of the National Joint Industrial Council, over issues of productivity 
and bonus rates/Haxel l  urged Mr Penwill, the employers negotiator, to accept that 
"individual companies or area JICs could pay site or company bonuses, a drift away 
from the unifying principle of national wage negotiations/
The co-option of union leaders into the corporate directing of the economy 
exacerbated an already existing gulf them and their membership. The Economist 
recognised the existence of this gulf. Discussing the "consensus on unrest in industry, 
it wrote of the "really dud argument that workers were worse off under the Tories, as 
one "already being used by some of the rank and file (though not by its leaders). 
The journal suggested that "if small unofficial strikes...could be stemmed, then official 
strikes "might also be discouraged if "agitators were not constantly pressing "upon 
union officials who naturally want to keep their jobs.^ The state should contain 
pressure from below so that union leaders, released from the occupational need to 
respond to such militancy, could get on with the business of maintaining industrial 
order. Were Communist trade union leaders, in this regard, significantly different in 
practice from their "right wing counterparts, however? John Lloyd wrote that Les 
Cannon "never forgave the [ETU] executive for their abandonment of him and nine 
others, sacked from English Electric in Liverpool.^Despite a strike by 233 workers in 
support, Haxell and fellow Communist, Frank Foulkes asked for the strike to be called 
off and were supported by the majority Communist executive.
In 1957, The Economist praised left-winger Frank Cousins of the TGWU as a 
colossus...at heart a very moderate man.^  This was after Cousins had "pushed up 
London Transports offer of six shillings a week to London busmen to seven shillings 
and sixpence, although this did not cover inflation and the busmen had struck for a 
pound a week. ^ The journal also heaped praise on Albert Hallworth of ASLEF who, 
after conceding a three per cent rise following a claim of 15 per cent, "soothed the
 J. Lloyd, Light and Liberty The Historv of the EETPU (London, 1990), 378.
 Ibid.
 'Mr Butskells Dilemma, The Economist. (13 February 1954), 439.
Strikes and the Stricken, The Economist. (14 May 1955), 547.
Lloyd, Light and Liberty. 377. This was 1954, when Cannon was still a Communist.
Two Days Strike?, The Economist. (12 January 1957), 98.
Ibid. Cousins had asked for nine shillings, which, as The Economist pointed out, was the 
minimum to cover the cost of living increase...since the busmen last had a rise (12 January 
1957). Cousins represented a move to left in the TGWU, which had been led by Bevin and his 
equally tough but less gifted successor... Arthur Deakin. Campbell, Nve Bevan. 60.
delegates by pointing out that this left the executive free to make another claim when 
they judged the moment ripe'J^^ Such moderate leaders were lauded in contrast to 
Communists, it is evident that the Communists have heard some home truths from 
other Trade Union leaders in the course of the negotiations [during the London 
Newspaper strike] and left in no doubt of their considerable unpopularity.^ The 
journal added, without comment. But that has not prevented Mr Haxell...from being 
elected General Secretary of the ETU while the strike was on. 
Trade Union Bureaucrats or Tribunes of the Peopie?
The Partys leadership strategy demonstrated limitations in translating 
industrial influence into political influence. Lenin wrote that for the socialist, the 
economic struggle serves as a basis for the organisation of the workers into a 
revolutionary party...if the economic struggle is taken as something complete in itself 
there will be nothing socialist in it. ^  He later asserted that Class political 
consciousness can be brought to workers only...from outside the sphere of 
relationships between workers and employers.^ T h e  agency for bringing such 
consciousness from without was the Party. Lenins formulation was in contrast to the 
idealism implicit within Ted Jacksons statement that The outlook of the working class 
is superior to that of the capitalist class and it is this that makes socialism and 
communism possible.
It was not enough for Communists to be trade unionists, even very good ones, 
unless they could divert the working-class from trade unionism which means the 
ideological enslavement of the workers by the bourgeoisie.  This tension between 
trade union work as something complete in itself and as a means to bringing political 
consciousness from without was emphasised in the document Party Cadres, which 
stated there is a serious weakness among some of our cadres...a lack of political 
perspective, of sometimes sacrificing political principle to tactics. W o l f  Wayne talked
Tw o Days Strike?, The Economist. 98. ASLEF; Associated Society of Locomotive 
Engineers and Footplatemen.
Newspapers Return, The Economist. (23 April 1955), 756.
Ibid.
Lenin, Apropos of the Profession de Foi, Collected Works, vol.4, 293.
Lenin, What is to be Done?. 78-79.
 T. Jackson, Speech to 25*  Congress (21 April 1957), Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/06. 
Lenin, What is to be Done?. 41.
L. Cannon, Industrial Cadres (1953), MRC, MSS137/9.
about the ETU leadership, suggesting I doubt that they ever saw a local [Party] branch 
meet ing 'Wayne added, They werent contemptuous of the branch, but they had no 
relationship with what they were doing. I t  was also illustrated by successive 
resolutions to the 23"  Congress of the Party in 1954. Shipley Pit Branch called for 
more industrial branches and for the strengthening of the factory branch" so that work 
could be directed towards the trade union, the women, apprentices, rank and file, or 
shop-steward and trade union officials etc.^ '* Whilst it was possible, as with the ETUs 
series of guerilla strikes in 1954, to lead from the front in confrontations with 
employers, such activity was possible only on the basis of wages and conditions. The 
Partys Industrial Department alluded to such limitations when it noted that 
experienced Communists could get the support of active members...because it was 
widely known that they had no ambitions beyond being efficient officers of the 
union.
Communists in positions of leadership relied upon a credibility, gained through 
being efficient officers of the union. In the eyes of a trade union membership which 
was generally non-socialist and often conservative, the maintenance of this credibility 
could be in conflict with left wing ideas and positions. Communist leaders constituted 
the left wing of the trade union bureaucracy, but the imperatives inherent within 
membership of that bureaucracy meant that they remained closer to their fellow 
leaders than to the rank and file of their unions. They even, occasionally, scored 
victories. At the 1950 TUC Congress, for example, the ETU proposed a motion against 
wage restraint calling for a reasonable limitation of profits, a positive planning of the 
British economy in order to meet wage increases... without... increased prices. T h e  
motion won narrowly by 220,000 votes (3%) and, according to Wrigley, resulted in the 
first defeat for the General Council for many y e a r s . T h e  resolutions need to 
accommodate to the idea of profits and positive planning, however, demonstrates 
limitations as far as socialist leadership was concerned, for Communists operating 
within such circumstances.
Wolf Wayne, interview, 10 February 1999.
Ibid.
Shipley Pit Branch, Resolution to 23   Congress of the CPGB, no.71 (1954), 11, 
Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/08/05.
Industrial Department of CPGB, 'Did Communists Control the ETU? (September 1961), 
Manchester, CP/Cent/IND/1/5.
ETU Motion to 82"*  Congress of the TUC, in C. Wrigley, British trade unions 1945-1995. 2. 
Ibid.
Wolf Wayne emphasised that for Industrial comrades...it was union affairs, it 
was factory affairs they argued about.^ Asked if the Party ever attempted to translate 
industrial strength into political influence he replied, it did, but it never really got 
anywhere with it. He explained how he would attempt to draw political implications 
from the struggle for wages and conditions, but added it didnt cut much ice and not all 
our members did it, especially the industrialists.^ Wayne concluded that pressure on 
shop-stewards when union issues arose on a daily basis was such that you had no 
time and you had no thought for the higher ideas of Marx, Engels and Lenin...I think 
basically the Party gave up on that stuff...we just made a nod in that direction, but 
thats about it. This, Wayne added, was common to the Party...from the top to the 
bottom.  Similarly, former ETU Communist, Jim Layzell, recalled about 20 members 
of the Communist Party in his union branch, but they were not all political. Layzell 
added This was the peculiar thing about the CP...a lot of people in it are not political 
...they might manoeuvre a bit on different policies.
Stan Smith, a congress delegate in 1957, wondered why Communists are 
elected as shop stewards and convenors...not on the political line of the Communist 
Party but as ordinary workers and trade unionists.   This was. Smith continued, 
because workers think they are the best and they have been elected on the basis of 
this activity in industry. When it comes to winning the workers politically, let the same 
shop steward or convenor stand in the local election and he gets 100 v o t e s . T h e  
Party leadership admitted in 1961, that hundreds of thousands of miners voted for Mr 
Paynter as General Secretary of the miners...Quite a different result would have been 
registered if they had been voting for the Labour Party versus the Communist Party. 
Wolf Wayne, Interview, 10 February 1999. 
Ibid.
Ibid.
Jim Layzell, Interview with Louise B rod le (5 September 1995), NSA C739/01-05 C l F4901-
Ibid.
S. Smith (London), Speech to 25  'Special' Congress of the CPGB (19 April 1957), 
Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/05.
Ibid.
'Did Communists Control the ETU?, 3. Paynter was Communist President of the Welsh 
miners from 1951. He was elected NUM General Secretary In 1959. Paynter Introduced a book 
on British trade unionism with a section headed "A Personal Testament. Whilst referring to the 
National Unemployed Workers Movement and Its Communist Secretary, Wal Hannlngton, at no 
time did Paynter reveal his Communist Party membership. W. Paynter, British Trade Unions 
and the Problem of Change (London. 1970), 16-27.
The existence of the Party machine which allowed members to attain leadership 
positions obscured the reality of the Partys political weakness.
C.H. Darke described how the Party machine relied upon those Communist 
unionists [who] always attend meetings, and because they are always in attendance 
the donkey work of union business is willingly handed over to them.  Communists 
not only attended their own union meetings, but during crucial elections would attend 
non-Communist branches. During the 1959 General Secretary elections, the 
communist party organised visits by ETU communists to every single London branch. 
Their main purpose was to give us another nauseating dose of how good Bro. Haxell 
is and to vilify his opponent, Bro. Byrne.  Communists developed an intimate 
knowledge of union rules and procedures which they utilised at, often thinly attended, 
meetings in order to progress comrades through the bureaucracy or to achieve 
resolutions favourable to Communist policy. Darke recalled how Communists eased 
through...resolutions on Peace, on Korea, on Russia, long after the fixed time for 
union business to end [when] the men who might have opposed them...have looked at 
the clock and gone home.  The announcement in the Dailv Worker the next day 
might refer to Twenty thousand Hackney Workers in support of a particular 
position. 
The lack of real support for such resolutions indicated the lack of a political 
basis for the Partys leadership strategy. On the other hand, the fact that Communists 
were elected to such positions did reflect a reality about the way other trade unionists 
perceived them. This, as much as an inexhaustible stamina for bureaucratic tedium 
and committee work, was why workers frequently elected Party members. Even The 
Times admitted in 1948, when it was busy attacking Communists at Morgan Phillips 
behest, that good reasons are needed to justify the attempt to remove from office so 
many men who are active and industrious trade unionists.^ A knowledge of Citrines 
ABC of Chairmanship and the existence of the Party machine were not sufficient in 
themselves for Communists to progress through trade union bureaucracies. As 
effective trade unionists. Communists were often elected in spite of, rather than 
because of their politics. As a former Communist shop-steward in the building trade
Darke, The Communist Technique in Britain. 51.
T h e  Communist Technique, October, 1959 [Circular to ETU members], MSS 137/ 157. 
Darke, The Communist Technique in Britain. 52.
Ibid.
TheTimeS (10 February 1948), 5.
put it, the credibility was gained by our actions in support of their well being...they still 
elected us as their leaders, shop stewards and so on despite the fact that we were 
Communists.
Communist trade unionists met within what at different times were called Party 
Fractions or Communist Advisory Committees. In the ETU, the advisory committee 
was chaired by Frank Haxell and was attended by the Party's industrial organiser, 
Peter Kerrigan. With what, in retrospect, were bewildering tactics, the ETU 
Communists consistently denied the existence of this committee up to and including 
the civil action of 1961. As an anti-Communist circular had it, Bro. Haxell says that 
there are no Advisory Committees of the communist party dealing with ETU affairs. 
Yet many rank and file communists...have admitted their existence. We leave you to 
choose who is the liar. ^
Wolf Wayne recalled that nearly every industry had its own Advisory 
Committee but they had nothing to do with politics...they were to do with internal 
questions of the union...about standing for elections within the trade union 
movement . There were district advisories which included people from the shop- 
floor, but the national one was the one that set the tone. In an incongruous reflection 
of trade union bureaucratic hierarchy, the national committees were specifically for 
leading industrial comrades. At shop-steward and branch level you would have one or 
two people on, but mainly the Advisory Committees were people at the top. The 
leading people in the union.
Les Cannon gave some idea of the nature of such committees after his 
resignation from the CPGB in 1956. Cannon had been Acting Education Officer in the 
ETU while still a Communist and, in 1956, asked for his salary to be increased to that 
of a National Officer. After months of discussion. Bob McLennan, the unions 
Communist Assistant General Secretary, suggested outside arbitration. Cannon 
agreed, but was surprised to discover that in September the Communist Party 
National Industrial Organiser was asked to arbitrate on the matter. "* The consequent 
meeting led to no new agreement, but on the day of Cannons resignation from the
Stan Turner, interview, 9 July 1997.
How Much Longer [typed circular] (December 1959), MRC, MSS 137/150/2.
Wolf Wayne, interview, 10 February 99.
Ibid.
L. Cannon, Transcript of taped interview [Henceforward Transcript] (undated), 6, MRC, 
MSS 137/150/2.
Party, McLennan suggested arbitration by John Gollan. '* As Cannon had left the 
Party, Gollans arbitration was not acceptable, but this incident is indicative of the 
power that the CPGB could represent through its Advisory Committees.
Unity and the danger of liquidation
The British Road to Socialism stressed the need for unity of the Labour 
movement, whilst calling on the progressive forces of the nation to open up the way 
for the advance to socialism. T h e  terms on which the Party sought unity, however, 
were vague. Whilst the Party consistently criticised right wing leaders, the priority it 
gave to popular front building meant that it blurred the distinction between people with 
progressive social aims and Marxists. Although contradicted by much of its practice 
and even under its diluted programme. Communist discourse maintained that social 
and economic inequalities could not be resolved under capitalism. Patrick Seyd 
defined the difference as one where socialists are committed to the transformation of 
property relationships and social democrats are committed to the modification of 
property relationships; Managing Capitalism set against replacing Capitalism.Unity 
across the labour movement meant unity with the majority who believed that capitalism 
could be managed. Marxism, by far the weaker force in society, specifically denied 
this, but in the hands of an organisation pursuing unity at almost any cost, Marxism, as 
reformisms ideological alternative, was rendered vulnerable.Some were aware of 
the danger. Bert Ramelson wrote. The crucial question in discussing unity is -  unity 
for what?'^ Ramelson suggested that the Party should seek unity in action on issues 
directly affecting the people but warned against sectarianism on the one hand, and 
liquidation...tending towards minimising the role of the Party on the other.^^  
Ramelson did not identify the nature of the respective dangers, but in reality, the Party 
had constructed an iron curtain of sectarianism to its left whilst presenting a crumbling 
edifice to anything to its right. The Party called for unity across a wide spectrum of
Ibid.
The British Road to Socialism (1958), 29-30.
P. Seyd, cited in Brivati, Hugh Gaitskell. 146.
Marx and Engels opposed socialism" which did not understand the abolition of the 
bourgeois relations of production" but sought "reforms...that in no respect affect the relations 
between capital and labour." Manifesto of the Communist Partv. 67.
B. Ramelson, Problems of Unity", World News Discussion Supplement (23 February 
1957), 18, Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/05.
Ibid., 20.'
society. The 1958 version of the Partys programme said, a united Labour movement 
...would rally round it all the progressive forces of the nation including those not 
associated with Labour but who are striving for progressive social aims and a better 
life through tenants...associations, youth organisations, womens institutes, British 
Legion sections, church organisations.  The Partys weakness combined with its 
misconceptions about its strength to make the danger of liquidation even greater than 
Ramelson had envisaged.
Rank and fiiism
Emphasis on the bureaucracy ran alongside a continuing orientation on the 
trade union rank and file. Sometimes this orientation appears as a means towards 
success at the bureaucratic level. As with the Partys political electoralism, which 
directed members activity towards increasing the vote, CPGB trade union leaders 
owed their position largely to the credibility and effectiveness of their rank and file 
comrades. These rank and file members, however, were often successful in mobilising 
workers, as the significantly large number of unofficial strikes during this period 
indicates.
Despite historiographical caricatures of the 1950s as an age of equipoise, there 
was ample opportunity for such intervention. In 1955, for example, London was without 
newspapers for four weeks, there were strikes by miners, busmen, tugmen, 
bargemen, dockers and footplate men of varying duration and inconvenience to the 
public. The item continued, Mrs Braddock the Socialist MP spoke for the vast 
majority when she told an audience of strikers that British housewives were sick of 
unofficial strikes. '* Michael Jackson reinforced Bessie Braddocks description of this 
activity as unofficial when he observed, in the post-Second World War years up to 95 
percent of all strikes...were the result of unofficial stoppages. Harry Pollitt drew 
attention to less traditional militancy when he noted activity by bank clerks...
 The British Road to Socialism (1958), 29-30.
 P. Tabori, ed., Twenty Tremendous Years (London, 1961), 210. The Newspapers strike 
was by members of the AEU and ETU who worked in the Newsprint industry and were calling 
for parity with workers from the print unions. The strike ended in April. The Economist 
commented that All the strike has achieved is to demonstrate the power of Communist 
leadership in charge of small groups of men in key positions,' (23 April 1955), 756.
* Tabori, Twenty Tremendous Years. 210.
 Jackson, Strikes Industrial Conflict in Britain. USA and Australia. 81.
teachers...musicians [who] have attracted nation-wide attention and are something 
new in the political situation.
Occasionally trade union leaders endowed such activity with official sanction. 
Often this was due to sheer weight of rank and file pressure, though it also constituted 
part of the ongoing need for this leadership to reaffirm its position as representing 
working-class aspirations. This was a situation where CPGB members could often be 
particularly effective. Party members organisational skills could threaten bureaucratic 
control, often resulting in decisive moves by the leadership to regain it. The winter of 
1956-1957 marked the first serious down-turn in Britains economy since the beginning 
of the decade. The recession may have contributed towards the intervention of the 
trade union leadership as cracks in the corporatist consensus became perceptible.^  
In 1956, engineers, initially with the backing of their union, took action in response to 
employers plans to remove working practices deemed to be restrictive. The official 
strike lasted for only 24 hours, indicating the flimsiness of official support, but 
engineers joined shipbuilding workers in March 1957 in a strike embracing a million 
workers. The strike, a demonstration of mass lunacy, according to The Economist, 
was a key moment for many in the Party, which, as the figures for CPGB Congress 
delegates detailed above imply, contained a high proportion of engineering workers.  
May Halfpenny gave an account of action at the Singer Sewing-Machine 
factory in Clydebank. The media had targeted the 14,000 strong, largely female, 
workforce as a possible weak link in the national strike action and had sent in 
cameras and reporters to record the union's discomfort. As Halfpenny continued, 
however, they were very disappointed, because although a number of workers went 
into work, five or six thousand of them stayed out on that first morning, and picketed 
the gate  A 19 year old Arthur Skargile [sic.] anticipated future oratorical lan when 
he discussed how During the recent strike we got the apprentices to come out on
 H. Pollitt, Political Report to the 24** National Congress (30 March 1956), 14.
 T. Benn, Years of Hope-Diaries. Papers. Letters 1940-1962 (London, 1994), 176. Benn 
noted in 1954, that the trade union honeymoon with the Tories is over and they need us now -  
a good sign .
 Executive Committee Report to the 26  Congress (1958), 12.
 Two Days Strike?, The Economist. (12 January 1957), 98.
M. Halfpenny, Speech to 25'^ Congress, World News 4:18 (4 May 1957), 282.
strike with the engineers at Metro-Vicks in Manchester, they stormed the gates to get 
into work, and then came out on strike with the other engineers^\
A key group during this period were the London bus workers as 53,000 took 
official strike action at the end of 1956, demanding an extra one pound a week.   The 
following year. Chancellor, Peter Thorneycroft, formulated an incomes policy with the 
cabbalistic description of a guiding light policy for wages. Bus workers struck against 
this threat to free collective bargaining between 14 May and 20 June 1957. The bus 
workers gained support from 2,000 meat transport drivers, 4,000 Smithfield market 
workers, 3,500 cold-store workers and around 20,000 dockers.  The fragility of 
official support was again demonstrated, when the TUG, on 4 June, refused to extend 
the strike. "* The busmen eventually went down to defeat in May 1958, but both the 
engineering and busworkers strikes indicated the sharpening conflict during the latter 
part of the 1950s. As one commentator wrote, the engineers strike of 1957 and the 
London bus strike of 1958...developed into a major class conflict, dispelling the 
fashionable euphoria about a classless, affluent society.
The targeting of the ETU
Not surprisingly, the union in which the CPGB apparently had the most 
influence became the focus for the intensifying attack on Communism during the 
1950s. The High Court action of 1961 was part of the generalised attack on 
Communism. As an ETU pamphlet said of the anti-Communist attacks, until quite 
recently these efforts took the form of attacking the leadership and seeking to discredit 
the elected officials, but having failed to dislodge Communists from the leadership a
 A. Scarglll, ibid., 281. Seargill described how he organised a meeting of young miners at the 
pit bottom to protest against working an extra two hours, until 9 oclock at night. The next day, 
the ruling was overturned. Scargill never joined the CPGB but remained in the YCL until 1962, 
joining the Co-operative Party in 1963 and the Labour Party in 1966. After succeeding as 
National leader of the NUM in 1981, in 1984-5, he led one of the most bitter strikes against the 
Thatcher governments proposed pit-closures. Although the miners lost, they attracted massive 
support from the left, precipitating an unexpected and temporary, realignment of the Left in 
Britain. The CPGB in the form of Marxism Todav was ambivalent in its support. Industrial 
organiser, Peter Carter, accused the miners of believing that 'the strike can be won by picketing 
alone, by the miners on their own. (March 1985).
 Pay Row May Stop London Transport, Dailv Worker. (1 January 1957), 1.
 Widgery, The Left in Britain 1956-68. 164-5.
 'EC Report to 26'" Congress, 12.
 P. Foot, The Seamens Struggle in The Incompatibles. 169.
new angle had to be found -  one which it was hoped would prove more fruitful than 
previous attempts'/^
From within the union, Les Cannon and Frank Chappie, both ex-Communists, 
led the attack. Cannon left the Party, believing that in order to win a united British 
Labour Movement for the ideas of Marxism it is necessary to dissolve the Communist 
Party.  Although he left near the end of 1956, he later said that he had become 
disillusioned about the role of the British Communist Party...before the Khruschev 
speech and that on leaving the Party I had come not only to reject the role of the 
Communist Party but the efficacy of Marxism.  Cannon had been on good terms with 
the leadership. Fellow Lancastrian Harry Pollitt, for example, wrote to Cannon's wife, 
Olga, in 1950, referring affectionately to her husband, as that lad from Wigan.  In 
1949, Pollitt was to have been best man at their marriage in Prague. In the event, 
Pollitt, because of a mix up in the date of the wedding could not be there, and his 
place was taken by the equally prominent Willie Gallacher.  Cannon was not a 
peripheral figure within the Communist Party, nor, as Education Officer, was he on the 
margins of the ETU leadership.
Chappie remained in the Party until 1959 although, according to Cannon, this 
was so that he could continue 'the fight against the Party within the Party. U p o n  
resigning. Chappie declared I no longer regard the Party as the means whereby the 
Socialist organisation of society will be brought about. H e  described the CPGB as 
undemocratic, whose organisational form is conspiratorial. Whether his view that 
democratic centralism is a cover for a fascist type of leader referred to the CPGB or 
to Stalinism in general, was unclear, but it was certainly the CPs monopoly in any 
sphere which Chappie saw as fearful and stifling.Accord ing  to Morris Schaer, of 
all the Communist ETU leaders, Chappie struck me as the most militant and 
revolutionary I had ever met. '*
From outside the union, the attacks on the ETU began in 1956 with an article in 
Illustrated by ex-Labour MP Woodrow Wyatt. Wyatt, an ex-public schoolboy and
 The Unions Reply to the Press Attacks (London. 1957), 2, MRC, MSS 137/257/1.
 L Cannon to Maurice Cornforth (January 1957), 2, Cannons Papers, MRC, MSS/137/16. 
 L. Cannon, Transcript, 3 and 10, MRC, MSS/137/254.
 H. Pollitt to Olga Cannon, (22 September 1950), MRC, MSS 137/4.
L. Cannon, Transcript, 2, MRC, MSS/137/254.
Ibid., 29.
F. Chappie to CPGB (undated 71959), MRC, MSS 137/30.
Ibid.
Morris Schaer, written reply to author, March 2000.
Oxford graduate, was one of the younger friends of a similarly influenced Hugh 
Gaitskell. These included Tony Crosland, Roy Jenkins, Christopher Mayhew who, in 
1951, were organised to make sure the rights case was properly put/^^ Wyatt had 
written for New Statesman until 1948 and, despite his Gaitskellite loyalties, continued 
contributing to the Bevanite journal Tribune. Anxious to be seen at the centre of 
events, Wyatt claimed that, following pressure from Bevan over defence spending in 
1951, Gaitskell and I were the principal defenders of Labours rearmament 
programme.^ Wyatt discussed his role as Stafford Cripps assistant in the Cabinet 
mission to India in 1946. He again ascribed for himself a pivotal role in negotiations 
between Congress, Jinnah and the Bri t ish.Wyatt  utilised his literary exposition to 
great effect in his last job with the News of the World, a newspaper famous for 
titillating allusion rather than journalistic veracity. His prose, however highly coloured, 
may not have always merited his own fathers rebuke to his eight year old son that 
youre a liar, but a damascene conversion to Thatcherism in the 1980s did not 
suggest political consistency.^^
In 1958, Wyatt produced two BBC Panorama programmes on Communist 
influence in the trade unions. He also contributed an article to New Statesman which 
accused Communists of ballot fraud in the 1955 General Secretary e le c t io n s . It is 
easy he wrote, for an official who is a Communist or a fellow traveller... to fill in the 
votes in any way he likes -  and no questions asked -  provided he has access to the 
forms.  There was nothing in the article, however, beyond the inference that, 
because this was possible and Communists were involved, it must, therefore, have 
happened. He speculated about how easy it would be for such sympathetic 
secretaries to convert...63 votes...into 363 before posting the return. '' The final 
message to the TUC, to whom his hypothesis was directed, was that they should 
investigate the fact that in 1955, the national vote in the ETU increased from 19 to 34 
per cent. This contradicted The Economist, however, which said of Haxells election, it
Campbell, Nve Bevan. 262.
W. Wyatt, Cofessions of an Optimist (London, 1985), 224.
Ibid., 135-163.
^ Ibid., 28. Wyatt met Thatcher in 1975 and found her pleasantly appealing with pretty legs 
and complexion. Ibid., 343.
W. Wyatt, The  Case Against the ETU Leaders New Statesman. (18 January, 1958), 61-63. 
 Ibid., 62.
 At the subsequent trial, no evidence was brought to substantiate this accusation.
is perhaps significant that less than 25 per cent of the union bothered to vote either for 
or against him. 
The campaign against the Communist ETU leadership is detailed in the 
following chapters. As with anti-Communism generally, its impetus came, not from the 
Conservative establishment, but from Communist renunciants and Gaitskellite 
politicians. Although public accusations were spread across the politically affiliated 
spectrum of British journalism, the charge was led by the Fabian oriented New 
Statesman, whose editor, John Freeman, wrote an introduction to All Those in 
Favour? by one of the journals contributors, C.H. Rolph. 
The episode is interesting, not just as a feature of Cold War anti-Communism 
but also as an expression of the working of the corporatist consensus. As industrial 
relations in the mid-1950s began to deteriorate, those who had gravitated into the 
influential orbit where decisions were made and rewards, monetary and honourable, 
were potentially available, became concerned about rank and file militancy disrupting 
such a situation. The trade unions were also seen as the most unpopular institution in 
Britain, and there was significant pressure from many on the right of the Labour Party 
to end the traditional relationship. "  In reality. Communist union leaders posed little 
threat, either to British industry or the state. Militants, able to organise within the rank 
and file of trade unions did, however. The main challenge, both economically and 
politically, during this period, emanated from unofficial activity. Many within the British 
establishment, however, continued to perceive trade unions with Communist 
leaderships as a threat. As such, they were bound to be targeted.
 Newspapers Return, The Economist. (23 April 1955), 756.
 C.H. Rolph, All Those in Favour? (London, 1962). Tony Benn referred to Freeman as the 
real figurehead of humbug respectable rebelliousness. Years of Hooe (London, 1994), 163.
"* See Benn, Years of Hooe. 292. Benn cited Hugh Gaitskell who, following Labours defeat in 
1959 "thought we must review our relations with the trade unions, 317. He also cited Roy 
Jenkins who thought Labour should watch out for the dangers of the union links, 318.
Chapter 7
Turning off the Power: The Debacle in the ETU
Between April and July 1961, a High Court Action lasting 42 days, was fought 
between John Byrne and Frank Chappie and leaders of the Electrical Trades Union, 
including General Secretary, Frank Maxell and General President, Frank Foulkes/ The 
plaintiffs alleged that this leadership had rigged ballots to ensure the election of 
Communist or Communist supported candidates. The trial was terminal for Communist 
leadership in the ETU and destroyed the reputations of the individuals involved. The 
judge removed all the defendants from office before the new leadership set about 
banning Communists from all official positions.^
The following two chapters focus upon the history behind this trial. There is no 
doubt that the Communist leadership performed a series of semi-legal and 
bureaucratic manoeuvres in order to gain and retain power. Whether such 
manoeuvres amounted to conspiracy or merely strayed outside the parameters within 
which trade unions normally operated is open to question. This was largely unresolved 
by the often subjective judgements of Mr Justice Winn, the trial judge.^ Trade unions, 
bound and constrained by complex sets of, largely self-created, rules have always 
given the appearance of strict political and legal rectitude. Traditionally however, union 
leaders have been skilful at manipulating such rules to their own advantage. The ETU 
leaders appeared to have done this on behalf of Communism, and it was this which 
motivated the unprecedented campaign against them. The campaign was not the 
result of an outcry from union members, but was initiated and orchestrated by a few 
individuals led by ex-Communists and supported by the British press.
  Writ issued, 10 May 1960. There were 11 defendants.
  Justice Winn judged on 3 July that John Byrne was elected General Secretary ...in the 
December 1959 election, although no-one had scrutinised the returns and, as the defence 
lawyer, Lawson, contested, any other members of the ETU could now challenge the validity of 
the election.', Rolph, All Those in Favour?. 241.
  This was a civil trial. The burden of proof was decided on the balance of probability rather 
than beyond reasonable doubt. There was no jury, and judgement of guilt was left to the judge, 
whose Judgement was punctuated with personal observations upon which many of his 
decisions were based. Winn noted that Maxell answered questions about the 1959 General 
Secretary election in a firm, well controlled voice and with steady eyes. Winn was not taken in 
by such practice and will-power being used to produce such appearances, however, and 
was watching Mr Maxell very closely when he gave that last answer... distinctly saw on his 
face an expression not of indignation or repudiation...but of self-satisfaction over finding the 
supposedly convincing materialist answer, Rolph, All Those in Favour?. 231.
The history leading to this trial reveals much about the priorities and practices 
of Communists in the leadership of trade unions. It also exposes the limitations of the 
Partys leadership strategy. Consistent with the traditional duality of the CPGBs trade 
union orientation, members, throughout this period, remained active within the rank 
and file of the ETU. Whilst not ignoring this intervention, the following chapters are, 
however, concerned with the political implications of the Partys attempt to substitute 
trade union office-holding for the socialist leadership of the working class. Just as 
earlier chapters were not an attempt to present CPGB history as a sociological study 
or social history, the following chapters do not attempt to re-write labour history from 
the point of view of Communism. Whilst the Partys industrial intervention was certainly 
part of British labour history and influenced its development, such influence was 
relevant to a political party, only when and if it could be translated politically. As 
discussed in the previous chapter, this happened only to a limited extent and in an 
erratic way; broadly following the unpredictable vacillations between periods of 
industrial conflict and industrial peace. Although the Party appeared to recognise this, 
it remained committed to an industrial intervention which mirrored the practice of a 
party bedevilled by elections, as it focused upon achieving union office wherever and 
in whatever way, it could."*
Following the trial, the Partys Executive Committee, after censuring the ETU 
Communists for having gravely compromised the Communist Party, repudiated as an 
absolute lie that the practices of the ETU represented a normal feature of Communist 
trade union activity. The Party attempted to scapegoat the ETU leadership, 
presenting its activities as an aberration. Just as Khruschev had exculpated Stalinism 
by arrogating responsibility to one safely departed individual, the British leadership 
condemned such malpractices as completely against the principles of the Communist 
Party. This negated the need for meaningful analysis of the Partys industrial 
intervention and avoided uncomfortable questions, particularly with regard to the 
political basis for such office-holding. Although other Communist leaderships may not 
have engaged in ballot rigging, the same circumstances in which political argument 
was constantly under pressure from the bureaucratic imperatives of office-holding.
 Macleod, The Death of Uncle Joe. 13.
'Press Statement from the Executive Committee of the Communist Party of Great Britain' (4 
December 1961), Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/08/04.
 Ibid., 5 and Executive Committee CPGB The Communist Party and the Trade Unions (8 July 
1961), 1, Manchester, CP/lnd/Math/05/02.
were universal throughout the Partys leadership strategy. The main imperative, in all 
cases, was staying in office. The Party provided an unrivalled structure, which the ETU 
leadership, for example, used in a highly efficient way in order to achieve this. Whether 
this was a process of feathering their own nests or whether these people seriously 
believed they were offering socialist leadership, is unknowable.^ What is clear, is that 
despite, its post-trial protestations, the Party leadership encouraged bureaucratic 
office-holding and offered little argument against members involved in it, whether they 
were bending the rules or not.
It remains a matter of opinion whether or not the practice of the ETU 
Communists was merely an extreme manifestation of Communist and non-Communist 
bureaucratic practice or whether it was something unique. As Les Cannon said later, 
[the rules] were bent by both sides, because there were big branches led by 
Communists and big branches led by anti-communists. Jim Layzell, former ETU 
Communist Branch Secretary in East Ham, confirmed that ballot rigging had occurred. 
When still Assistant Branch Secretary, Layzell visited his secretary, Tom Vetterlein. He 
found Vetterlein filling in these ballot papers, and he said, oh you can give us a hand 
with this Jim. I said Oh whats that?. "Fill in some of these ballot papers. I said You 
cant do that and he said, oh both sides do it, they do it every election.
As the figures below suggest, ballot rigging, even at its most widespread, 
would not have been sufficient to overcome a concerted expression of rank and file 
discontent with the leadership. Had the anti-Communist case had real resonance 
amongst ETU members, the Communists would have been swept out of office with 
ease. The six year campaign was never a campaign against fraud, but against 
Communism. Once war on the leadership had been declared by Woodrow Wyatt in 
1956, the anti-Communists set out to ensure their victory by one method or another. 
For example, after Vincent Tewson had proposed that the TUC should publicly 
condemn the leadership of the ETU, Wyatt wrote suggesting it would be inadvisable 
...The next time I see you I would like to have a brief chat when I can explain certain
 Morris Schaer, written reply to author, 20 March 2000.
 Les Cannon interview with Nicholas Woolley, The Road From Wigan Pier -  Les Cannon 
talks, just before his death, to Nicholas Woolley, The Listener. (January 1971), 106.
 Jim Layzell, Interview with Louise Brodie (5 September 1995), NSA, 0739/01-05 C l F4901- 
5. Tom Vetterlein left the CPGB in 1958. He was an ETU Executive Councillor from 1949 to 
1957.
matters which lead me to the above conclusion Wyatt continued, ominously, There 
are alternative methods'/^
Against the odds
In 1961, membership of the CPGB was 27,341 whilst membership of the British 
trade union movement was around nine and a half million/^ If every Communist had 
been a trade unionist, as a group they would have constituted less than 0.29 per cent 
of this total membership, with nearly 350 trade unionists for every Communist. Had 
these nine and a half million members all been active, even to the extent of exercising 
their voting rights, such a minority position would have made Communist intervention 
in the unions extremely difficult. Had a significant proportion of this total membership 
expressed definitive anti-Communist views, intervention would either have been 
limited to general propaganda or proscribed altogether.
The disproportionate number of Communists achieving leadership within the 
unions during this period has been explained by reference to a general passivity 
amongst the majority of members. As C.H. Darke said, The British working-man has 
many fine qualities...but his tendency to let those he regards as his leaders...do his 
thinking for him is the Partys greatest opportunity.  Les Cannons biographers asked 
how the CPGB could control, or largely influence, great trade unions with 
memberships running into hundreds of thousands. T h e  authors asked. Did no one 
care? and talked of the appalling apathy which was the Communist Partys fertile 
ground.Whilst remaining a stereotype, this characterisation of British trade unionist 
passivity is not without foundation, as figures below imply. However, virtually every 
member, including Labour Party activists, would need to have been affected by apathy 
for it to serve as an adequate explanation for Communist success. The assertion of 
apathy, moreover, does not take into account the vacillating conditions in terms of 
industrial unrest, which characterised the latter half of the 1950s. Far from being a 
symptom of apathy, Frank Haxell was elected General Secretary during the London 
Newspaper strike of 1955, in which large numbers of ETU members were active.
W. Wyatt to Vincent Tewson (14 September 1956), MRC, MSS 292/91/90.
Ibid.
Newton, The Sociology of British Communism. 160. R.G. Lipsey, An Introduction to Positive 
Economics (London, 1966), 463.
Darke. The Communist Technicue in Britain. 54.
O. Cannon and J.R.L. Anderson, The Road From Wioan Pier (London, 1973), 178.
Ibid.
Those authors dismissing the British working man as apathetic were, to an 
extent, justified by voting figures in the ETU. According to Wyatt in a report to the TUC, 
around 1947 not more than 10% of the membership of the ETU voted in elections for 
National Officers.  Even this level of passivity, however, represented more than 
enough votes to overwhelm the ETU Communists. Accurate figures are not available 
for the number of Communists within the ETU. Based upon two sources provided by 
Newton, however, a figure of 900 to 1,000 can operate as an approximate guide.^^ By 
1959, according to Haxell, ETU membership had increased to 240,000.^ Wyatt later 
claimed that the national vote within the union had increased to 34 per cent in 1948, to 
get Haxell elected...to Assistant General Secretary.  According to the TUC, In the 
Division 9 election in September 1957, the total poll... represented about 13 per cent of 
the total membership.  On such figures, the lowest turnout of 10 per cent still equated 
to 24,000 members who could easily have out-voted the Communists, had they 
represented a definitive anti-Communist constituency.^^
W. Wyatt, 'Confidential Memorandum on the Electrical Trades Union (undated), MRC, MSS 
292/91/90.
Newton, The Sociology of British Communism. 164-165 and 162-163. Occupational and 
Industrial Composition of National Congress Delegates and Occupational Composition of 
South Midlands District 1964 are two sets of statistics showing that combined electrical and 
non-electrical engineering as a percentage of total CPGB membership between 1954 and 1963 
was 23.0 per cent. As a proportion of the 1961 figure, this equates to 6,288 members in 
engineering. In the South Midlands, this combined total in 1964 was 18.5 per cent - 4.5 per 
cent lower than the national figure. Members in electrical engineering in this area constituted 3 
per cent of this total which, if translated nationally would make a total of 850 members in 
electrical engineering. The South Midlands total for engineers can be rounded up by 5 per cent 
to equate to the national average giving an approximate figure of 900.
F. Haxell, Letter to the Finance and General Purposes Committee of the TU C  (23 January 
1959), MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
W. Wyatt, The Case against the ETU Leaders, New Statesman. (18 January 1958), 61-63.
TUC Report, Recent Events in the ETU (1959), 6, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
By 1961, British Communism was represented by General President, Frank Foulkes, 
General Secretary, Frank Haxell and Assistant General Secretary, Bob McLennan. Executive 
Council included Communists James Cosby, Ivor Davies, James Feathers, John Frazer, John 
Hendy and Ronald Sell. Between January 1956 and 1958, and 1958 and 1959 respectively, 
Samuel Goldberg, a Trotskyist supporter of the leadership and H. West, a Labour Party 
member with Communist sympathies, were also E C. members. J. Humphrey, a Communist, 
was, as well as being an Executive Councillor, the ETUs Office Manager until December 1959. 
J.W. Rengert and Charles Shipman, National Scrutineers who checked complaints about voting 
infringements, were cited as Communist sympathisers, as was George Scott, National Officer. 
Another National Officer, A C. Batchelor was a Communist.
Rank and file rancour or Cold-War campaign?
As early as 1943, some ETU leaders raised questions about Communist 
influence and called a special conference to deal with Communist intervention. A vote 
of 31 to 19 agreed that interference has taken place in the internal affairs of the ETU 
by the Communist Party of Great Britain.^ The General Secretary at the time, E.W. 
Bussey, tried to have all CPGB members debarred from holding office. The fact that 
Britain and the Soviet Union were the two European countries which remained allied 
against, and undefeated by Nazism, may have contributed to the quiet withdrawal of 
the resolution. Frank Foulkes was elected General President of the union in 1945.
Woodrow Wyatt wrote a series of articles in Illustrated and followed with a 
pamphlet called Peril in Our Midst.  By 1957, the Dailv Express was warning There is 
something sinister and alien about the affairs of the Electrical Trades Union, .now the 
iron curtain flavour is completed.T h e  Dailv Telegraph wrote of Communism being 
at the top and is ruthlessly determined to stay there and denounced the chief officials 
-  Mr Foulkes, Mr Haxell and Mr McLennan as in fact all zealots , cold, dedicated men 
who...crushed timorous hostility and silenced the isolated voices of daring 
malcontents.  The article warned that Power obsessed Communists will not 
voluntarily retreat.  Morris Schaer recalled that the ETU was a particular target for 
this daily propaganda being put out by the media.   Schaer saw this as being 
connected to the fact that "membership in the power industry had the ability to bring 
the country to a standstill. 
Such propaganda in the national press meant that ETU members were fully 
aware of the politics of their leadership. Had there been generalised discontent with 
the Communist leaders there was no substantial reason why such a constituency 
could not have been mobilised by the anti-Communists. In fact, from Haxells election 
in 1955, it took six years, unequivocal support from press and media and, finally, the 
weight of the judiciary, to achieve their removal. The fact that the anti-Communists 
were forced to rely upon the press and the courts, suggests that if membership 
discontent existed, it was not of a size or intensity which made it responsive to calls for
Cited in Cannon and Anderson, The Road From Wigan Pier. 82. 
Wyatt, Confessions of an Optimist. 254.
Dailv Express. (2 December 1957).
'How to Win Power and Keep it, Dailv Telegraph (2 December 1957). 
Ibid.
Morris Schaer, written reply to author, 20 March 2000.
Ibid.
the Communists immediate removal. It does not appear that the 240, 000 ETU 
members were especially disgruntled with Haxell and company as union leaders. 
Communists were eager to be seen as good officers of the union, both at rank and 
file and bureaucratic level and, in the main, they achieved this. Apart from a few 
committed anti-Communists, members, in general, do not appear to have been 
particularly concerned about their leaders Communist politics. There existed, within 
British trade unionism, an apolitical tradition and a habitual separation between politics 
and economics, both of which help to explain this lack of concern. As Morris Schaer 
put it, on site CP members were usually elected ...because they were the most active 
trade unionists.  According to Stan Turner, this was despite the fact we were 
Communists.  C.H. Rolph admitted of the rank and file that Most of them, probably, 
had never much minded...that their Union leaders were Communists.
Passivity of some members on the one hand, in combination with disciplined 
Party organisation on the other, goes some way to explaining how the leadership of 
the ETU could pass into the hands of Communists. It does not explain how this group 
could retain control if it were as universally unpopular, or if Communism was as reviled 
as the anti-Communists claimed. According to New Statesman, the tactics followed by 
the Communist leaders have...aroused discontent among the rank and file. Scant 
evidence exists for such a claim, however. The TUC found no evidence as to the 
attitude of the mass of ETU members towards the allegations of election 
irregularities. Letters were sent to the TUC or to people like Les Cannon, but over 
the period of the conflict, this never aggregated to generalised discontent. One 
member who wrote to Vincent Tewson was R.T. Reno, of Fulham Branch, calling for 
TUC intervention. Reno was a member of an increasingly lively group of genuine 
Trotskyists who moved into opposition against the Communist leadership. Reno 
wrote to Tewson in 1959 after the anti-Communist campaign had been in progress for 
some years, however. There is a significant paucity of material from around 1955 to 
1956 which would confirm that Wyatt was responding to rank and file discontent. Wyatt 
himself, having already attacked the AEU Communists from his position as Panorama
Ibid.
 Stan Turner, interview, 9 July 1997.
 Rolph, All Those in Favour?. 14.
 Democracy in the ETU, New Statesman (9 August 1958),161.
 TUC Report, Recent Events in the ETU (1959), 6, MRC, MSS 292/91/91. 
 R.T. Reno to V. Tewson (21 October 1959), MRC, MSS 137/40/1 and 2.
 Lloyd, Light and Liberty. 397.
presenter, had a letter from Mr Jock Byrne before being approached by Les 
Cannon.^ Despite the implication in New Statesman that he was responding to 
pressure from members, it was these two approaches which encouraged him to begin 
his investigation. Evidence suggests that, although members became discontented 
as the anti-Communist campaign progressed, the impetus for that campaign did not 
come from the rank and file. Manny Shinwell referred to the hazy origins of the anti- 
Communist crusade asking When the right hon. Gentleman referred to public concern 
about this matter, was that statement based on newspaper reports or because he had 
previously sought to make investigations into this matter and ascertain all the facts? 
Between September and December 1957, the TUC received letters from 9 
branches of the ETU -  Burnley, Kingswear, Portsmouth, Gosport, Bournemouth, 
Whitley Bay, Totnes, Middleton and Tenby demanding a full enquiry into irregularities 
in ETU ballots. This was a year after Wyatt had published Peril in our Midst, 
however, and also followed his Panorama broadcasts. It also represented a tiny 
proportion of a national membership constituted within 703 branches. The TUC also 
received, during this same period, letters from three Trades Councils asking for an 
enquiry into ETU ballots.'  During the same period, five Trades Councils wrote 
protesting against BBC Panorama spotlighting Communism in ETU.^
One letter to Vincent Tewson in 1956 came from W.W. Blackmore of Aldershot 
Branch. Blackmore wrote, saying I am appalled by the news of the gift of 20 to the 
Cyprus Fund and said of the ETU Communists, If the candidates for office in...the 
ETU -  had the guts to state their political views, I am sure the Communists would lose 
their hold. *  Although those Communists within the leadership demurred at public 
discussion of political questions, there is no evidence that they kept their Communist 
Party membership a secret. Similarly, whilst they consistently denied the existence of 
Communist Advisory Committees, most of them attended Party Congresses openly, 
which were covered by much of the Labour Party supporting press."* Despite Attlees
 Wyatt, Confessions of an Optimist. 251, 252 and 254.
 See 'Democracy in the ETU, New Statesman. (9 August, 1958), 161 and W. Wyatt, The 
Case Against the ETU Leaders', New Statesman. (18 January 1956), 61-63.
 E. Shinwell [Durham, Easington], House of Commons Debates. 5** Series, col.608, 5 
December 1957.
 TUC, 'Electrical Trade Union (undated), 1, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
"* Ibid.
Ibid.
W .W . Blackmore to Dailv Mail (29 June 1956), MRC, MSS 137/32.
"* See Demolitions in King Street, New Statesman (27 April 1957), 529.
purge of civil servants, Communists in Britain were never under the same pressure, as 
in the USA, to conceal their views and aims, although many remained reticent about 
declaring that their ends can be attained only by the forcible overthrow of existing 
conditions/'* The Party itself wrote that the Communist Party works in the open. It 
states its aims in scores of pamphlets...its members are known throughout the various 
unions. Helen Mason, a teacher, recalled one of her students saying Youre a 
Communist arent you, to which she replied Yes, how did you know? The student 
answered, you put something through our door.
How the anti-Communists mobiiised
C.H. Rolph characterised the anti-Communists as forces...that professed to 
see better than the membership what was good for them -  and...saw grave danger to 
the country in a Communist domination of the trade union movement.   Blackmore is 
indicative of those forces within the union. Whilst accusing the Communists of not 
having the guts to state their politics, in a letter to Cannon, he hinted at his own 
inclinations. Referring to an exchange between himself and Haxell, he stated You may 
guess that being a true and loyal supporter of the British Crown and Constitution I 
wrote and told him what he could do. If there is anything I can do to oust these 
Russian fifth columnists I will do so gladly.
One of the forces behind anti-Communism in this period was the Catholic 
Church. Cannons biographers cited the Roman Catholic Church and its association of 
Catholic trade unionists as perhaps the most eloquent of the anti-Communist 
forces. John Lloyd reinforced this, suggesting that much of their anti-Communist 
inspiration sprang from a profound Catholic belief. Lloyd, on the whole, highly critical 
of the ETU Communists, accused The Catholic Herald of recommending particular 
executive council nominees to the faithful.
 Marx and Engels, Communist Manifesto. 78.
 Industrial Department CPGB, Did Communists Control the ETU? (1 September 1961), 16, 
Manchester, CP/Cent/I nd/1/5.
 Helen Mason, interview, 9 July 1997.
Rolph, All Those in Favour?. 14-15.
 W .W. Blackmore to Cannon (18 December 1957), MRC, MSS 137/31.
 Cannon and Anderson, The Road From Wioan Pier. 179.
 Lloyd, Light and Libertv. 393.
* Ibid., 394.
Another loyal affiliate of Cannons was Richard Keill, Branch Secretary of 
Gillmoss Liverpool Branch who, in a letter to Cannon in 1961, reinforced the 
unpalatable aura characteristic of some of the anti-Communist constituency. Referring 
to a meeting at which Communist ETU members opposed his branch leadership, Keill 
wrote, As I forecasted they were all there in force last Monday night including a crowd 
of women and complained that Gillmoss Branch has now an ex-Dock labourer as a 
Branch Secretary. He ended by offering to give Cannon a story for the Dailv 
Express.   Olga Cannon described how Cannon, whilst working in Liverpool in the 
early 1950s, and still a Communist, had returned home one night dreadfully upset 
because he had hit another Party member for calling him a bloody liar.* Following 
this assault, Olga Cannon couldnt help laughing as she disliked the victim of Les s 
blow. My only criticism darling, I said, is that you should have done it ages ago. 
On the other side, Frank Haxell, for example, was orthodox in his Communism. 
At the 25th Congress, he spoke against workers control, saying, it would be no plan 
at all if it were merely a gathering together of the proposals of the workers in their 
respective industrial units. Haxell favoured central economic planning, looking to the 
Soviet Union where they have considerable experience of running of industry and of 
workers control...this problem is being critically examined in the light of experiences. 
Referring to Frank Foulkes, Les Cannon admitted that whilst the TUC General Council 
didnt have any particular love or regard for Haxell, many of them did have a personal 
friendship for Foulkes. Cannon referred to Financial Times correspondent, Ron 
Stevens, who wrote small biographies of Foulkes and Cannon respectively. Cannon 
admitted that Stevens had been highly critical of him, whereas the biography of 
Foulkes was a highly favourable one. Morris Schaer said I always felt that Foulkes 
was a good Trade Unionist.
 R.C. Keill to Cannon (31 March 1961), MRC, MSS 137/86.
 Ibid.
* Cannon and Anderson, The Road From Wioan Pier. 114. The victim may have been 
Lancashire and Cheshire District Secretary, Syd Abbott. Cannon had written a letter 
complaining about Abbott swearing at a meeting, ibid., 113 and MRC, MSS 137/10,11 and 12.
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
 F. Haxell, Speech to 25th Congress CPGB (20 April 1957), Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/ 
10/05.
 Cannon, Transcript, 34, MRC, MSS 137/254.
 Ibid.
 Morris Schaer, interview, 20 March 2000.
Despite their consistent criticism of the CPGB organising within the ETU, the 
anti-Communists managed their own constituency with remarkable efficiency. This 
included circulating a model resolution which specified a breach of rule 10 clause 4 by 
Brothers Haxell, Frazer...divulging ETU business inside the Communist Party ' .The 
resolution cited a statement by Bro. Cannon and called upon the Executive Council to 
institute charges. In 1961, in advance of the High Court action. Cannon began 
organising personnel in anticipation of the courts decision to reconstitute the union. In 
a letter to Tom, Cannon emphasised It goes without saying that all the work will 
come to nought unless we can bring about a change on the EC. Cannon wrote if 
Tom Breakell could get Widnes, Prescot, Liverpool East, Liverpool Instrument Makers, 
Gillmoss nominations it would be a great step towards winning the division. H e  
referred to the potential impropriety of such activity, however, saying As can be 
appreciated it would be unwise for me to write many of these letters so I would be very 
glad indeed if you could see that the word gets around to the people involved.
Writing to Bert Blore, Cannon asked What is the chance of getting a fair 
attendance at the quarterly meeting to ensure that Tom Breakell...gets the Executive 
Council nomination?. In a letter to Bob, Cannon admitted We are making a lot of 
preparations in other parts of the EC Division and revealed his role as organiser of 
this constituency, saying What is required however is for you to see that the whole of 
the South West of England is covered including Cornwall.  Confidence was clearly 
high after six years of media propaganda, as Cannon added If you can do this you will 
certainly win. This continued during the trial with letters to Alf, suggesting J. 
Sharman, secretary of Northampton Branch as a candidate able to secure very wide 
support and asking which other branches in EC Div 6...do you think you will be able 
to contact with this information?. All this might appear unexceptional were it not for 
the fact that much of the criticism of the Communists related to their ability to gain 
nominations via their nation-wide organisation. 
 In Cannons Papers (undated), MRC, MSS 137/62.
 Ibid.
 L. Cannon to Tom ? (23 May 1961), MRC, MSS 137/92.
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
 L. Cannon to Bert Blore (23 May 1961), MRC, MSS 137/92.
 L. Cannon to Bob [?Lawrence] (23 May 1961), MRC, MSS 137/93. 
 Ibid.
 L. Cannon to Alf ? (25 May 1961), MRC, MSS 137/94.
 The Communist Technique (October 1959), MRC, MSS 137/158.
The press characterised the battle as between the isolated voices of daring 
malcontents pitted against a small group, corrupted by power The Dailv Express 
asked rhetorically if there were any desire among members to change the present 
leadership, could it succeed?   Rather than suggest that members should vote 
against their leadership, however, the paper attacked The present ETU leaders... 
[who]...have, it seems, discovered the formula for which every dictatorship searches -  
the formula for permanent power.   Despite such support. Cannon characterised 
himself as one against the resources of the Union which were far greater than 
anything I could muster. * His biography is sprinkled with phrases such as Les was 
left to go it alone and This was the formidable fortress that Les set out to storm 
single-handed. 
The forces mustering behind Cannon during this period were, in fact, 
formidable and included most of the popular press, trade unions such as USDAW and 
politicians such as Herbert Morrison.^ Even Cannons biographers moderated, to 
some extent, the image of an isolated Cannon. Woodrow Wyatt, for example, 
responded with sufficient cash for Les to make what we called his grand tour of 
branches...travelling up the East coast as far as Dundee and back via Glasgow and 
the West c o a s t . The Times reported at the end of 1957 that Conservative MP Farey- 
Jones was to demand a tribunal into the affairs of the ETU.' Farey-Jones asked 
MacMillan if he was aware that there are millions of proud citizens in this country who 
...will not tolerate Communist domination in any of our traditional institutions?' At this 
stage, the Prime Minister was content to leave the matter which it is primarily the duty 
of the members of the union to cure. Farey-Jones concern for such traditional
How to Win Power and Keep it', Dailv Telegraph. (2 December 1957). Wyatt, The Case 
Against the ETU Leaders, 61.
Dailv Express. (11 December 1957).
Ibid.
Cannon, Transcript, 23.
Cannon and Anderson, The Road From Wioan Pier. 179 and 157.
Morrison spoke to the Colne Valley Labour Party in December 1957 and talked of a matter 
of Communist dictatorship, namely, the Electrical Trades Union., cited in Cannon and 
Anderson, The Road From Wioan Pier. 180.
Ibid., 182.
 ETU Claim on Breaches of Voting Rule, The Times. (4 December 1957).
 Farey-Jones, House of Commons Debates. 5*  Series, col.607, 5 December 1957.
 H. MacMillan, ibid.
institutions was shared by Conservative MP for Totnes, Mr Mawby who suggested the 
TUC should investigate.^
Apart from the Association of Catholic Trade Unionists, the ETU cited IRIS 
News, the Conservative Trade Unionists, the Economic League, the Peoples League 
for the Defence of Freedom as forces backing the anti-Communist campaign.  
Newspapers and journals accusing the ETU leadership of the systematic and vicious 
persecution of their political opponents ranged across the political spectrum. The 
Dailv Worker presented the campaign as being against trade unionism rather than 
Communism, saying The Tories, the Press and those who control the BBC are not 
just against Communist trade unionists. They are against any trade unionist and every 
trade union which puts up a real fight against the employers.
Power and purpose
According to Les Cannons biographers, Harry Pollitt, always sensitive to 
British working class feeling, tried to get the ETU Advisory Committee to soft-pedal on 
the election of Communist candidates...and to work for the election of more 
progressive Labour Party men. The Party had always allowed its industrial cadres 
a large degree of autonomy. Even at the height of the press and media campaign, the 
Partys report to its 26th Congress mentioned the ETU only briefly under the section, 
Industrial Department.  After discussing the 1957 strikes, the report referred to the 
ETU, saying only that Faced with unprecedented attacks and slanders against 
members of the Communist Party...our Party members have fought back well against 
all obstacles.
 Mr Mawby, ibid., 608.
 The ETU Replies To The New Statesman (March 1958), 3, MRC, MSS 137/258. IRIS 
(Industrial Research and Information Services) circulates to industry the names of militants and 
warns of the danger of employing subversives, T. Bunyan, The Political Police in Britain 
(London, 1977), 249. This organisation was active in the mid-1960s. Ex-Labour Minister for 
Labour, Ray Gunter, became Chairman in 1969. The Economic League has the stated aim of 
exposing the experiences, the intentions and strategy of subversive organisations and 
providing positive education to combat misrepresentation by industrial agitators. Cited in ibid., 
 The TUC Must Probe the ETU Scandal, Forward (19 September 1958).
 Dailv Worker (11 December 1957).
 Cannon and Anderson, The Road From VVi aan Pier. 33.
 CPGB, Executive Committee Reoort to 26 Congress (London, 1958), 12.
 Ibid.
One example of how ETU Communists dealt with politics arose at the London 
Area Committee in August 1958. Chiswick and London Electronic Engineers No. 4 
Branch submitted a resolution condemning the execution of Imre Nagy, the former 
Hungarian leader. E.J. Turner, the Communist London Area Secretary, dismissed the 
resolution, saying that the 'execution of Imre Nagy had been dealt with fully by the 
Millionaire Capitalist Press Lords who had been successful in splitting the Labour 
movement. Another Communist "Brother Humphreys added, Nagy was a traitor to 
his country.
The ETU leaderships persistent refusal to admit the existence Communist 
Advisory Committees, up to and including, the trial, proved particularly damaging. This 
fuelled the charges of dishonesty levelled by Wyatt and others. Frank Haxell was chair 
of the ETU Advisory Committee, whilst Executive Council member John Frazer acted 
as Secretary with the Partys Industrial Organiser, Peter Kerrigan, also in attendance. 
An ETU pamphlet in March 1958, responded to Wyatts article of 18 January. The 
pamphlet dealt directly with Wyatts allegation of special Communist committees 
within the ETU. This theme, the pamphlet declared, is nothing more than another 
figment of Wyatts extremely vivid imagination.  The union continued to refute claims 
about Communist-run committees in a reply to the TUC following allegations by Mark 
Young, secretary of Finchley Branch of the ETU and a recently expelled Party 
member. Young wrote to New Statesman in August 1958, alleging ballot-rigging and 
stating that The Communist Party maintains its control of the unions through fractions 
called Advisory Committees at the national and local level. Haxell replied to the 
TUC, saying The allegation is not new and I can only inform the General Council of 
the advice given to our members, that if any member has evidence of interference in 
the affairs of the Union by the Communist Party or any other political party...then it will 
be acted upon in accordance with the Unions rules. At the trial, the Plaintiffs
 Minutes of London area Committee Meeting (28 August 1958), MRC, MSS 387/6/1/3/1-15  
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
 The ETU Replies To The New Statesman. 10. New Statesman refused to publish Haxells 
reply because of its length. Haxell wrote to Tewson on 20 March 1959, W e anticipated that the 
New Statesman, which is regarded as a publication of the Labour Movement, would have given 
us sufficient space to deal with the allegations in detail...The farthest, however, they were 
prepared to go was to agree to publish an article up to 1, 200 words., MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
 M. Young to New Statesman (9 August 1958), 170. Young had recently been expelled from 
the CPGB.
 ETU to TUC (23 January 1959), MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
barrister, Gerald Gardiner, referred to evidence from seven ex-Communist ETU 
members as he put it to Haxell that They all say they saw you at meetings of the 
Advisory Committees.'^ Haxell replied, Well, they are wrong. The Communists 
persistent denial in the face of overwhelming anecdotal evidence, only served to 
increase doubts about their honesty.
TUC policy was ambiguous. Whilst it did not specifically proscribe Communist 
Party Fractions, a 1955 pamphlet stated that the Trades Union Congress has 
watched every twist and turn of Communist tactics over a period of 35 years. 
Congress has repeatedly issued warnings against the methods of the Communist 
Party out of the conviction that these constituted a threat to our democratic way of life 
and the independence of the Trade Union movement. Previous policy statements 
drew the attention of Communist agitation and organisation as being maintained not 
by means of open meetings but mainly by means of fractions. Such fractions, the 
statements continued determined whereby Communist policy can be projected inside 
the organisations with which they are individually connected.
It is not clear why the Communists denied the existence of these committees. 
Jim Layzell recalled an Advisory Committee meeting in Whitechapel to select 
candidates for Executive Council elections and said, although in later years this has 
been spoke about as if it was some great conspiracy... I didnt think there was anything 
in particular wrong with it and I dont...now.  Morris Schaer agreed, saying this was 
not unusual as all the main political parties did the same.  Justice Winn referred to 
Communist Committees, saying that, because the assiduity...of Communists is 
greater than that of those whose political and economic aims are different it would not 
be surprising to find candidates for office favoured by Communists...achieving success 
in the ballots.  Under the conditions of the Cold War, the Party remained consistently 
nervous about bans and proscriptions on Communists both by the trade union
* Rolph, All those in favour?. 121.
 Ibid.
 F and GPC, Communist Party Fractions in the ETU (24 November 1958), 8, MRC, MSS 
292/91/91.
 TUC, Defend Democracy and Tactics of Disruption respectively, cited in ibid. 8 
 Ibid.
 Jim Layzell, interview with Louise Brodie (5 September 1995).
Morris Schaer, Interview, 20 March 2000.
Mr Justice Winn Judgement [Royal Courts of Justice] no. 1846 (28 June 1961) 5, 
Manchester, CP/Misc/ETU/3/13.
movement and by legislat ion.The government would have faced considerable 
constitutional problems, however, had it attempted legislation proscribing political 
organisations. As Justice Winn observed, Communism...is not illegal in this 
c o u n t r y ' .A  ban on Communists would have had implications for all political parties.
Although the TUC published propaganda about Communist intervention, there 
is no evidence that it sought to ban Communists or their activities. The TUCs priority 
was to maintain the corporate status quo which had brought knighthoods for Vincent 
Tewson and Walter Citrine. As Woodrow Wyatt remarked, they wanted to avoid the 
agony of declaring themselves against evil for fear they would get hurt in the ensuing 
fracas. I n  a phrase which revealed as much about the Partys leadership strategy 
as it did about the TUC, Wyatt added, The horror of most of them was at me, washing 
their dirty linen in public...disturbing their amiable relations with the Communist rulers 
of the ETU, who were popular with the bulk of the TUC leaders. I t  was not until the 
anti-Communist crusade made such action unavoidable, that the TUC were forced to 
From propaganda to conflict
The battle for control in the ETU ended with its exclusion from the TUC in 1961 
and, finally, with a ban on Communists holding office. It began in the middle of 1956, 
following a visit to Prague by Cannon and his Czech wife. Cannon met a young 
Communist whom I had last seen in 1948 when he had been a great enthusiast for 
the Party. N o w ,  finding this young lawyer utterly disillusioned. Cannon hardly met 
a single person who expressed support for the Czechoslovak Communist Party.   
Following this, My wife and I discussed my decision to leave the Communist Party.  
Cannon wrote to Maurice Cornforth saying that in order to win a united British Labour
See Political Resolution to 27 Congress CPGB (31 March 1961), 10, Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Cong/13/02. Also Industrial Department CPGB, 'Bans and Proscriptions (7 June 
1961) Manchester, CP/lnd/Math/05/02.
Winn, Judgement 5, Manchester, CP/Misc/ETU/3/13.
Wyatt, Confessions of an Optimist. 254.
ibid.
L. Cannon, Transcript, 4.
 lbid. This was following the Slansky trial of 1952. 60,000 Communists were imprisoned in 
this period. 130,000 people were sent to labour camps, see Harman, Class Struggles in 
Eastern Europe. 187-8.
Ibid.
Movement for the ideas of Marxism it is necessary to dissolve the Communist
Party'J"
As Acting Education Officer in the ETU, Cannon was employed at the Unions 
College in Surrey and had already been in conflict with the leadership over his pay. 
The series of Engineering strikes in March 1957, in which ETU members were 
involved, cost the union around 200, 000.^^ In April 1957, the Executive Council 
discussed a report detailing these costs which showed how savings of 57,000 per 
year could be made by, amongst other things, closing the unions college. Cannon 
described this as an act of political victimisation that would never have been tolerated 
in any other union.^  At a meeting with Haxell, Cannon asked what was to become of 
his job as Education Officer. According to Cannon, Haxell answered, with ill concealed 
glee...You will be out of a job mate -  you will have to get a fresh job mate.^  Since 
the previous September, continued Cannon, my political beliefs had changed 
considerably...I had not only come to reject the role of the Communist Party but the 
efficacy of Marxism as a system for organising society.P o l i t i c a l  disillusionment 
combined with behaviour perceived as arbitrary, provoked Cannon into direct 
opposition with the leadership.
Cannon stood in the Executive Council elections against the Communist 
incumbent of Division Nine, John Frazer. This Division covered South West London, 
stretching westwards as far as Reading and south-westwards as far as Bournemouth. 
It had returned a Communist Executive Councillor since 1938. For elections within the 
ETU at this time. Branch Secretaries issued individual ballot papers to members. Next 
to the names on these ballot papers, appeared the names of the branches nominating 
that particular candidate. Woodrow Wyatt noted, As is well known in union elections 
...a preponderance of nominations is likely to secure a victory for the candidate.
The anti-Communists rightly argued that Communists acted under instructions 
from the Communist Advisory Committee which organised for Party members to be 
elected as officers of the union and, at the appropriate quarterly meeting, would 
nominate a particular candidate.^^ This Executive Council election was to be held in
L. Cannon to M. Cornforth (January 1957), MRC, MSS 137/16. 
Cannon, Transcript, 8.
Ibid., 8-9.
Ibid., 9.
Ibid., 10
W. Wyatt, Confidential Memo to the TU C , MRC, MSS 292/91/91. 
Morris Schaer, interview, 20 March 2000.
September 1957, but candidates were nominated at the June quarterly branch 
meetings. Cannon described his campaign as he began his 'odyssey...in an old car 
which I had bought for the purpose and travelled to places like Southampton, 
Portsmouth, Newbury, Basingstoke, Reading and so on' until he succeeded in 
receiving sufficient nominations.  Apart from Division Nine, out of the 11 divisions of 
the ETU, seven seats were actually contested. The anti-Communists believed that in 
three divisions, they had a realistic chance of defeating the Communist supported 
candidate. Hadley opposed Potter in Division three; Durham, Northumberland and 
Yorkshire, whilst in Division 11 ; NE London and East Anglia, Frank Chappie, still a 
Communist, was opposed by Bill Sullivan. During Executive Council elections, under 
rule, an Executive sub-committee was empowered to make decisions. This sub
committee, whose decisions had to be unanimous, was constituted by Frank Foulkes, 
Frank Haxell, Assistant General Secretary, Communist, Bob McLennan and two 
Executive Council members from the divisions closest to the ETUs Kent 
Headquarters. These were John Frazer and John Hendy, both Communists.
Election results were to be announced at quarterly branch meetings at the end 
of November 1957. Two weeks before this date, the News Chronicle reported that 
Cannon had beaten Frazer by 300 votes. The Executive Council, however, announced 
on 28 November 1957, that Cannon, Sullivan and Hadley, the anti-Communist ticket, 
had all been defeated. When the figures were finally released on 17 January 1958, 
Frazer had beaten Cannon by 552 votes (Frazer, 2003; Cannon, 1451). The Executive 
sub-committee had instigated an investigation into "election irregularities, particularly in 
the case of branch returns from Mitcham and LSE 14, two branches voting decisively 
in favour of Cannon. W . H .  Fairlam of Doncaster Branch wrote to Haxell, this branch 
deplores the action of the Gen sec in delaying the publication of the EC election 
results. W . T .  Sullivan of Dagenham also wrote in January and February appealing 
against the EC decis ion.Frazers majority followed the disqualification of eight 
branches throughout the division, six of which were known to have voted in favour of 
Cannon.
Cannon, Transcript, 12.
TUC, Recent Events In the ETU (1959), 2, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
W.H. Fairlam to F. Haxell (28 November 1957), MRC, MSS 387/6/1/1/2.
W .T. [Bill] Sullivan to Haxell (25 January and 13 February 1958), MRC, MSS 387/6/1/1/2. 
TUC, "Recent Events in the ETU (1959), 3, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
The anti-Communists were confused as to whether it was this sub-committee 
which faked the results of the said election by all or some of their usual methods or 
whether it was Haxell, who had no power to disqualify any of the said branches 
According to the ETU leadership, it was The National Scrutineers, Alfred McBrowse 
of Poplar and Mr. Rowles of Chatham who had reported to the Executive Council the 
final re s u l t .T h e  politics of these scrutineers is not known, but they were not 
Communists. According to Haxell, the National Scrutineers had the final say over 
disqualification; had they disagreed with the decision taken the Branch Return would 
have been accepted and the branches advised accordingly. H a x e l l  suggested to the 
TUC, You may want to interview the National Scrutineers.^ '*
The TUC did not take up this suggestion but McBrowse submitted evidence to 
the trial. This confirmed Haxells claim that National Scrutineers made the final 
decisions regarding disqualifications. McBrowses evidence appeared within the 
context of questions relating to ETU Head Office practice. He referred to a time when 
outgoing office manager, Robert Oliver, had allowed certain branch returns to pass. 
On this occasion, McBrowse and Rowles suspected that a Branch Secretary had 
acted as Branch President. The two scrutineers overruled Oliver and insisted that the 
warning was sent. And it was sent.^
In the Cannon versus Frazer election, the anti-Communists pointed out that 
The grounds for disqualification...were technical and minor. S t r i c t  adherence to 
bureaucratic technicalities was hardly unusual throughout British trade unionism, 
however. ETU rules were so complex that they required the maintenance of a 
Research Department. Most of the branches were disqualified, either because they 
failed to elect branch scrutineers in accordance with union rules, because they were 
late in posting their returns to headquarters or because members had voted outside 
the terms of the rules. Rule 20 Clause 5 (a) outlined rules for who could or could not 
vote, depending upon whether they were up to date with their weekly subscriptions. 
More than 12 weeks in arrears invalidated that members entitlement to vote. It was 
alleged that at 'Southampton Docks Branch, (a branch voting for Cannon), a
Plaintiffs, Statement of Claim to the High Court (10 May 1960), 4 and 6, MRC, MSS 
292/91/93.
F. Haxell, Reply to Plaintiffs Statement of Claim, (1960), 2, MRC, MSS 387/6/1/2/37.
Ibid., 7.
Ibid.
Rolph, All Those in Favour?. 147.
TUC, Recent Events in the ETU, 3, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
Communist named Gibbs, on discovering a majority in favour of the said Cannon', 
reported a breach of the rules with regard to his own election as a branch scrutineer 
for the EC elections/^^ Maxell replied that the matter was raised with HQ in a letter 
from the Southampton Docks Branch Secretary and had been raised at the wish of 
the scrutineers.^ The anti-Communists concluded that disqualified votes totalled 830 
in favour of Cannon and 223 for Frazer, which would have resulted in a victory for 
Cannon by 35 votes. Following the result, Wyatt presented another Panorama 
programme. Because the rules of the union prevented members disclosing union 
affairs outside of the union, all of those appearing but one had to conceal their faces 
and sometimes had their voices muted .
At the same time as the Executive Council election, there were elections for 
delegates to a Rules Revision Conference to be held between 29 and 31 November 
1957. According to the TUC, the Executive Council disqualified the Branch Secretary 
of Mitcham on this occasion and declared his communist opponent elected. 
Another London branch, LSE No. 4, was disqualified for voting irregularities. According 
to Maxell, the Mitcham Branch Secretary had claimed a membership of 1,084, all of 
whom were in benefit and entitled to receive a ballot paper and vote.  On examining 
the branch contribution ledger, however, the Executive discovered 'that 699 members 
were not entitled to vote because of arrears: that 699 ballot papers had been claimed 
and forwarded to the branch in excess of requirements. Only one of these papers was 
returned unused leaving 698 unaccounted for.  In the case of the other branch, 
Maxell wrote, a membership of 970 was claimed, of which 932 were in benefit and 
entitled to vote. According to the branch ledger, only 829 of these members had 
been entitled to vote.
In the same article, Maxell remarked on the violent press campaign against 
the ETU leadership following the conference and observed that the executive would 
not normally engage in public controversy on matters which were of direct concern to 
members only. "* As Maxell implied, such press interest in the affairs of a trade union
Plaintiffs, Statement of Claim, 5, MRC, MSS 292/91/93 
 F. Maxell, Reply to "Statement of Claim", S., MRC, MSS 387/6/1/2/37.
Cannon, Transcript, 21.Tapes of this programme are unavailable.
 TUC, Recent Events in the ETU, 4, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
 F. Maxell, ETU Claim on Breaches of Voting Rule, The Times (4 December 1957), 6. 
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
was virtually unprecedented. The Daily Express, for example, revealed a hitherto 
unexpressed concern for rank and file trade unionists as it accused the ETU 
leadership of changing the rules so that no non-Communist will ever be able to 
challenge their rulings. The Times claimed that the Communist leaders of the 
Electrical Trades Union...have secured support for a number of proposed changes in 
the rules of the u n io n .T h e  paper speculated that the effect of a number of the 
changes will be to make it much more difficult in the future to challenge their 
domination of the union .
Whilst the conference was an example of bureaucratic manoeuvring by the 
leadership, it did not add up to a matter of Communist dictatorship as Herbert 
Morrison suggested.The Conference increased the weekly subscription from one 
shilling and ninepence to two shillings and threepence. Cannon had previously urged 
such an increase and referred to numerous occasions when many of us were 
demanding the lifting of contributions in order to boost the reserves. H e  was 
opposed, both by the leadership of the ETU and the CPGB. Apart from this, rule 
changes included re-arranging the composition of the Executive sub-Committee, so 
that instead of co-opting Executive Council members from the two branches nearest 
the Kent Headquarters, they could come from anywhere. It is hard to see how this 
could have been to the advantage of the leadership as the two Executive Councillors 
nearest the Headquarters were both Communists. Qualification for voting in ETU 
elections was further restricted, however. Whereas it had been the case that 13 weeks 
in arrears would disqualify a member from voting, this was reduced to five.^^ This 
would render more branches susceptible to disqualification on this basis.
The Times exhorted members to protest against the executives decision and 
predicted that if this failed, it might still be possible to seek the protection of the 
courts. '*  The journal, Forward, claimed that the Rules Revision conference last 
week-end resulted...in various rule changes designed to clamp Communist control on 
the union more firmly than ever. '  At the trial, the significant aspect of this conference
Daily Express. (2 December 1957).
136 2TU Leaders Entrenched, The Times. (2 December 1957), 10.
Ibid.
Morrison, cited in Cannon and Anderson, The Road From Wican Pier. 180. 
Cannon, Transcript, 8.
TUC, Recent Events in the ETU, 4, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
The Times. (2 December 1957).
Forward. (6 December 1957).
was held to be a resolution from Sam Goldberg, a Trotskyist supporter of the 
leadership. Goldberg proposed that there should be no leave of appeal from branches 
disagreeing with the decisions of the National Scrutineers. Justice Winn accused 
Maxell of slipping this into the agenda by sleight of hand, including it only in a 
supplementary errata sheet which constituted a wicked fraud upon the members of 
the ETU.' "'^
A war of words
Following the 1957 Executive Council Elections and Rules Revision 
Conference, repercussions in the press became more widespread. The Dailv Express 
accused the leadership of something sinister and alien" and of being akin to a Police- 
State, whilst the Star led with the headline How Communists Fixed the Election so 
that Chosen Men were Ousted".Even the international press joined in. Newsweek 
alleged that Communist cells have grabbed control of ETU locals by the use of forged 
ballots...and outright falsifications of returns." "* It declared that a meeting of two big 
London locals swept anti-Communist Leslie Cannon...on the unions eleven member 
Executive Committee." Had the disqualified branches been included. Cannons 
majority would have been 35 votes. Newsweek also identified an outcry from the rank 
and file" which, as discussed above, is only discernible on a small scale in the 
evidence.The fact that an American journal took such an interest in these parochial 
affairs reflects the Cold War context within which this war of words took place. The 
ETU leadership was assailed from the right, as the Spectator objected that The 
Electrical Trades Union is pervaded with a nasty s m e l l .T h e  left-wing Tribune also 
spoke of methods of secrecy, evasion and contempt" as it attempted to find reasons 
as to why the ETU Communists [took] fright so easily when Leslie Cannon quit the 
Communist Party after H u n g a ry " .New Statesman claimed that If, indeed, the 
activities of the Communists...could be properly investigated, it is doubtful whether
Rolph, All Those in Favour?. 229
Daily Express. (2 December 1957). The Star. (27 November 1957).
Newsweek. (16 December 1957).
Ibid.
Ibid.
Spectator. (29 November 1957).
Tribune. (6 December 1957). This was inaccurate. Cannon said. T h e  document [of 
resignation] was submitted eventually to the Party coincident with the uprising of the Hungarian 
workers and so I have always been regarded as having left the party because of the events in 
Hungary., Transcript, 5.
one party member would ever again be elected to a union office.  It also suggested 
that Cannons election would have threatened a veto on the advice tendered by Mr 
Peter Kerrigan, the Industrial specialist of the Communist Party. 
The Communist leadership was not without support. Activists in Holborn and St 
Paneras South Labour Party sent a letter to members referring to a resolution passed 
by its General Management Committee on January 16.  The Committee wrote that it 
completely dissociates itself from the anti-working class activities of one of its 
members, Mr Woodrow Whyatt [sic] and whilst Wyatt had been well praised in the 
capitalist Press', the letter said we...condemn him.  The Committee called on the 
Labour Party National Executive, by a majority of 27 to 25, to have him removed from 
the list of Parliamentary Candidates.One activist, Bernie Holland, recalled it as a 
famous meeting, saying there had been so many complaints about Woodrow Wyatt 
...the question arose about his fitness to be a member of the Labour Party...and we 
carried the day, which was that he should be suspended or expelled. The local 
party, however, had to get the OK from further up...but this was just thrown out of the 
window and consequently, next thing we knew was this overnight suspension of the 
entire Holborn and St Paneras Labour Party. Members received letters from Barbara 
Castle, requesting them to say why we felt we could continue as members of the 
Labour Party...we were all expelled. They were given leave to appeal to the Labour 
Party Congress at Scarborough. Holland was sure that The basis of it all seemed to 
be that wed too closely associated with the CP. 
The unprecedented interest taken by the press was one of the most 
remarkable aspects of the battle for the leadership of the ETU. The Dailv Worker cited 
The Times as it discussed the benefits of regulation...public powers of supervision and 
investigation...in respect of trade unions. T h e  Dailv Worker called this capitalist 
intervention in the affairs of all unions and called for unity as the interests of all unions
How Communists Run a Union, New Statesman. (7 December 1957).
Ibid.
Cited in Cannon and Anderson, The Road From Wigan Pier. 171.
Ibid.
North London Press. (24 January 1958).
Bernie Holland, interview with Roy Gore and Louise Brodie (November 1997), NSA, 
0609/85/01-04. F6013-6.
 Ibid. John Lawrence was Chair of this branch. This expulsion may have been an opportunity 
to expel him and others associated with the St Paneras Councils stand on council house 
building.
The Times. (4 December 1957).
and all trade unionists are threatened.  The ETU journal, Electron, recognised that 
the press campaign must be unprecedented in the annals of newspaper journalism. 
and characterised it as an attack on the trade unions, rather than on the Communist 
P a r ty .T h e  journal continued, it would not be too wide of the mark to suggest that 
this outburst is directly connected with the present policy of our movement and its 
insistence on increased wages and the 40-hour week.  The perceived threat to trade 
unionism was also articulated in the Labour supporting Dailv Herald, which warned 
that such mysteries and innuendoes...leave mud sticking to the reputation of trade 
unionism as a w h o l e . New Statesman took up the theme warning that there are 
already signs, both in Parliament and the press, that boss rule can provide the Tories 
with an excuse for legislation which would gravely damage the trade union 
movement. 
In January, 1958, New Statesman published Wyatts article which, ignoring the 
size of the CPGB, characterised Les Cannon as one of those who are now in revolt 
...against the Communist methods of seizing and maintaining power in the trade 
unions that have worked so well in Czechoslovakia and other Eastern European 
countries.
Raising the temperature
The next stage in Cannons campaign was to stand for election for London 
Area Secretary against a Communist supported candidate, Tom Symms. Voting was 
to take place between IVIarch and April 1958 with counting at the June quarterly branch 
meetings. Another candidate, E.A. Nash, stood in this election. According to Cannon, 
the CPGB supported Symms, a Labour Party member, because it was so 
embarrassed by the number of Communist Officials it had, particularly in London. 
Cannon had taken a job at Kingston in Surrey. In June, he attended the 
election count at London Electronic Engineers Branch No. 2, a Communist led branch 
in Hayes Middlesex, whose entire membership worked at the EMI factory. Branch
 Dailv Worker. (5 December 1957).
Electron. (December 1957).
 Ibid.
 Dailv Herald. (29 November 1957).
 'How Communists Run a Union, New Statesman (7 December 1957).
 W. Wyatt The Case Against the ETU Leaders New Statesman (8 January 1958), 63. 
 Cannon, Transcript, 23.
Secretaries were supposed to post ballot papers to members unable to attend branch 
meetings.  This was introduced because of the number of electricians, either 
employed in small establishments which were part of a larger union branch, or who 
worked on building or dock-sites and were dislocated from the branch centre. For a 
branch such as LEE No.2, where the entire membership existed under one roof, such 
a practice was unnecessary. As Cannon watched the return envelopes being brought 
in, he remarked it occurred to me that the number of ballot envelopes were very few 
for a branch which ordinarily had a very high ballot.  The Branch Secretary, a 
Communist named James Maling, then entered with a hold-all bag full of envelopes 
which he emptied onto the table. Despite there being no need for postal votes. Cannon 
nevertheless observed that very few of them had a post-mark on them.  At this point 
Cannon made an, apparently impulsive, intervention, initiating a chain of events which 
further intensified the conflict. In Malings words. Cannon alleged during the course of 
the meeting...that I had posted ballot papers to myself.  This, despite Cannons 
observation that there were few post-marks. According to Cannons recollection I took 
a decision there and then, that it was necessary to...accuse this member of rigging the 
ballot.  Cannon also accused Maling of contravening Rule 16, clause 17...because 
my Branch meeting night had changed from alternate Tuesdays to alternate 
Wednesdays/^
Maling complained to the London Area Committee, claiming that Cannons 
allegation had caused injury to me and brought discredit upon me as a member of the 
U n io n .T h e  London Area Committee met at the end of June 1958 and decided to 
charge Cannon under Rule 38 Clause 1 (j), which went under the general heading of 
Complaints about members -  major offences. T h e  Committee notified Cannon of 
the charge on 1 July 1958 and asked him to attend a hearing of the Area sub-
 After the branch meeting at which nominations were taken, the Branch Secretary and 
President would examine the Branch ledger to ascertain who was entitled to vote. They then 
indented headquarters for the necessary number of ballot papers. Members voted at the 
branch meeting or if on shift or "working out, recorded their vote in a specially prepared 
envelope, which they either posted or sent to the Secretary via a steward.
 Cannon,Transcript, 23.
 Ibid., 24.
 J. Maling, Statement to London Area Committee ETU (June 1958), MRC. MSS 387/6/1/1/4. 
 Cannon, Transcript, 24.
^ J. Maling, Statement to London Area Committee.
Ibid.
Rule 38, MRC MSS 387/6/1/1/3.
committee on 8 July/^^ He refused to attend this hearing for domestic reasons' and 
drew the Committees attention to the fact that such matters were supposed to be in 
the hands of Branch Secretaries for one month in case one of them wished to make an 
appeal. He continued, I feel sure that my own branch will make such an appeal. 
Cannons Branch Secretary did launch an appeal, but Maling was supported by his 
Assistant Branch Secretary, Brother Treffory, his Branch President, Sister B. Williams 
as well as Sisters D. Mills, D. Elliker and Brother A H. Macolive. These members sent 
statements to the Area sub-committee effectively corroborating Malings and referring 
to a meeting of 31 December 1957, when Macolive had acted as Chairman. This 
meeting had agreed that meetings should be changed to Wednesdays.
The sub-committee wrote to Cannon, saying they were very sorry to hear of 
your difficulties and that the hearing had been postponed to 24 July. ^ Cannon 
contacted the sub-committee on 19 July, refusing to attend on domestic grounds and 
insisting that, because Kingston Branch have appealed against the EC decision...the 
complaint is therefore premature.^  The Area Committee decided, after consultation 
with the Area President, to hold the meeting on 24 July and to invite Cannon to make a 
written submission. In the event, Maling was on holiday, but the sub-committee found 
Cannon guilty. The penalty was that he be removed from any office he may hold in or 
on behalf of the Union and disqualified from holding all or any office...for five years 
and that he be fined 5. 
The decision provoked a flurry of letters from branches. Many, like R. 
Townsend of Finchley Branch, said We agree that charges must be dealt with -  fine 
them yes -  but deprive them of their rights as members we do not feel as correct. 
Several members wrote, however, supporting the decision, such as H. Howell of 
Deptford whose branch wholeheartedly endorses the...Area Committee's decision to 
endorse the findings of the Sub-Committee in respect of the charge brought against 
Bro. L. Cannon. H. Bacon, London South East Branch, also wrote to endorse the 
action, as did V. Elwood of Hendon and A.J. Aitkenhood who offered endorsement of
This date appears to have been changed to 15 July, 1958
Sub-Committee Meeting [London Area ETU], (15 July 1958). Extract from Cannons letter, 
dated 9 July.
Ibid.
Olga was on holiday and Cannon had to look after their young son.
"Sub-Committee Report, (September 1958), MRC, MSS 387/6/1/1/6.
^ Ibid.
R. Townsend to London Area Committee (17 October 1958), MRC, MSS 387/6/1/1/9.
 H. Howell to Maxell (1 October 1958), MRC, MSS 387/6/1/1/8
their decision. A p a r t  from Townsend, Bill Sullivan again wrote supporting Cannon, 
as did G. Tann of London Electrical Engineers who asked for more detailed 
information regarding the charges laid against Bro L. Cannon.
Shortly after the hearing on 9 August 1958, New Statesman received a letter 
from Mark Young, chairman of Finchley Branch of the ETU since 1953 and member of 
the CPGB. Young had already written to John Mahon, complaining about the ETU 
leadership and its methods. In the letter to New Statesman, he claimed that it is now 
four years since I first raised this issue within the u n io n ' .H e  also claimed that At 
least two executive councillors of the union -  both of them Communists -  have 
expressed complete disagreement with such practices, one before the London District 
Secretariat of the Party and the other at a meeting with Harry Pollitt himself. '  He 
further claimed that the CPGB maintains its control...through fractions called Advisory 
Committees".  The last advisory committee I attended, continued Young, in 
February 1958, the only topic of conversation was how to defeat our ex-comrade 
Cannon. The tactic, according to Young, was to go around the branches and 
characterise Cannon as the candidate of the capitalist press.
Youngs letter dealt a powerful blow to the ETU leadership and its 
repercussions are dealt with in the following chapter. Even more resonant, however, 
was the aftermath of the London Area Committees disciplining of Cannon. This 
expressed itself at the TUC Congress at Bournemouth in September 1958 when 
Cannons credentials as a rank and file delegate were withdrawn under the conditions 
of his disciplinary. This not only had the effect of involving the TUC directly, but evoked 
a great deal of previously unexpressed sympathy for Cannon. As Cannon himself said, 
it brought a qualitative change in the whole of the campaign. 
 V. Elwood to Maxell (18 September 1958), H. Bacon to Maxell (5 September 1958), A.J. 
Altkenhead to Maxell (9 September 1958). MRC, MSS 387/6/1/1/8. Aitkenhead was a 
supporter of the Communist leadership. The politics of the others is not known.
  W. Sullivan to Maxell (20 September 1958), G. Tann to Maxell (18 September 1958) MRC, 
MSS 387/6/1/1/9.
 M. Young, 'Communists and the ETU, New Statesman. (9 August 1958), 170.
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
 Ibid.
 Cannon, Transcript 29.
Chapter 8 
Turning off the Power II
Wolf Wayne described the aftermath of the 1961 High Court ruling as terrible 
...all power that was held in the ETU was smashed almost overnight.  For Morris 
Schaer, the victory of the anti-Communists was a blow to the whole trade union 
movement which has never recovered.  The consequences of the judgement for the 
defendants are detailed below. What, however, were the implications of Winns 
judgement for the CPGBs leadership strategy? Wolf Wayne cited John Gollan who 
considered that the question of the ETU was a self-inflicted wound .  Such a wound, 
whilst not disabling the Partys industrial intervention, nevertheless undermined the 
confidence it had expressed in 1957 about trade unions as vehicles for mass 
struggles, which would open up the way for the advance to socialism.
In response to the judgement, the Partys Executive Committee issued a public 
statement in July 1961 on its relationship with the trade unions. Before this, the Party 
had rarely, if ever, addressed the question of its leadership strategy. A series of 
pamphlets called Marxist Studv Themes, for example, was produced by the Partys 
Central Education Department. One pamphlet. Socialism and the British Labour 
Movement, attempted to clarify some of the main problems that are at present under 
hot discussion inside the British Labour movement. This proposed to help discussion 
in the factory branches of the Party. However, whilst the authors talked throughout 
about right-wing trade-union leaders and their role within the post-war economy, they 
did not discuss the role of Communist trade union leaders.^ Similarly, Harry Pollitt in 
1948 and 1953 and J.R. Campbell in 1953 did not discuss the Partys leadership 
strategy. In 1961, however, the Executive Committee addressed the question directly.
I Wolf Wayne, interview, 10 February 1999.
Morris Schaer, written reply to author, 26 March 2000.
 Ibid.
Abe Moffat, Mass Struggle and Peaceful Transition', World News Discussion Document (23
February 1957), 3. British Road to Socialism. (London, 1958), 30. 
 Executive Committee, CPG 
Manchester, CP/Cent/I nd/1/5.
 Socii 
  Ibid.
H. P(
J.R. Campbell, Socialism for Trade Unionists (London, 1953).
 Executive Committee, CPGB, The Communist Party and the Trade Unions (8 July 1961),
 Socialism and the British Labour Movement (London. 1954), 2.
 H. Pollitt, A Policy for Labour (London, 1952). T rade Unionists -  what next? (London, 1948).
saying that 'any attempt of Communists to secure a monopoly of union posts at any 
level would be entirely opposed to Communist policy. This was not just for the 
consumption of a sceptical public, following the Winn judgement. As Peter Kerrigan 
made clear to his Partys Congress in 1963, we Communists reject the slanderous 
accusations that we try to win union positions under false pretences, and then try to 
manoeuvre union committees to support policies in which they do not believe. 
Communist trade unionists as bureaucrats
Following the class against class deviation in the late 1920s, the CPGB 
faithfully emphasised the role of trade unions as "class organisations, that...must 
defend the interests of the working class. T h e  Party frequently reinforced trade union 
loyalism by reference to an idealised perception of The Old Role of the Trade 
Unions. T h i s  perception contrasted early trade unionists, who understood the 
nature of class war with those post-war union leaders who characterised increasing 
collaboration between the trade unions and the state as marking an advance for the 
working class.  Significantly, the authors had to go back to the Resolution of First 
Congress of the International Workingmens Association, drafted by Marx, to illustrate 
the class-war credentials of nineteenth century trade unionists. "* Most trade unions 
had, within their constitutions, rhetoric about socialism and although, historically, many 
members had identified with insurgent movements such as Chartism, as John 
Stevenson pointed out, piecemeal and sectional action had been the hallmark of trade 
union action almost from the beginning.The Partys romantic perspective reinforced 
its trade union loyalism. It was a perspective, however, which its own trade union 
leaders did little to enhance. The practice of Communist trade union leaders was more 
like the bureaucratic pragmatism of their post-war contemporaries than that of the 
idealised class warriors of the previous century.
 Executive Committee CPGB, The Communist Party and the Trade Unions (July 1961), 3, 
Manchester, CP/Cent/lnd/1/5.
P. Kerrigan, The Future of Trade Unionism [Report to 28th Congress] (London, 1963), 13. 
Socialism and the British Labour Movement. 29 
Ibid., 26 
Ibid.
Ibid.
J. Stevenson, Early trade unionism: radicalism and respectability" in Trade Unions in British 
Politics The First 250 Years in B. Pimlott and C. Cook, eds. (New York, 1991), 20.
The ETU case highlighted this bureaucratic tendency, particularly in the way in 
which the Communist leadership responded to activism outside its control and 
especially when that activity was led and initiated by others on the left. A distinct 
grouping of ETU Trotskyists had emerged by 1957. Some, like Dick Reno, were 
prepared to collaborate with people like Cannon in order to attack the Communist 
leadership.^ In general, however, Trotskyists in the ETU pursued a political line which 
allied a revolutionary critique of bureaucracy with a defence of the leadership against 
anti-Communist attacks. The majority of this group were associated with Gerry Healys 
Socialist Labour League, though some, like Dick Reno, coalesced around the Militant 
newspaper. Another, Sam Goldberg of Birmingham Central, had been a critic of the 
leadership in the early 1950s but, by 1955, had become an Executive Councillor and a 
supporter of Maxell. According to John Lloyd, in London in particular, the Trotskyists 
"gleefully chased after the executive for lack of real militance in wage bargaining. 
They also exposed Frank Foulkes who had condemned the siting of US rocket bases 
in Britain in line with CPGB policy, but had refused to call for strike action by 
electricians to stop them being built.  At the ETU trial, Foulkes, under cross 
examination from George Gardiner, rounded upon Reno, saying that our members 
have lost a lot of money through Mr Reno's activities, and one of them is that he 
supports what we now popularly call "wild-cat strikes." Foulkes moderate position 
was in contrast to the Partys declared objective which called for "the building up of the 
movement in struggle.  It also contrasted with Lenins view of strikes as "schools of 
war which he elevated to having "great moral influence bringing "thoughts of socialism 
very forcibly to the workers mind. ^
Such attitudes were not confined to the leadership. Morris Schaer, an ETU 
shop-steward throughout the 1950s, remembered his Communist London District 
Secretary being "a bit paranoid about Trotskyists.  Schaer considered this justified as 
"some of the ETU members in the building industry [wanted] to strike at the slightest 
excuse. Reinforcing Foulkes conservatism, Schaer continued, saying that as an
In 1957, Cannon attended the Socialist Forum at Wortley Hall on 27-28 April, 1957. He later
claimed, however, that by 1957, he had come not only to reject the role of the Communist
Party but the efficacy of Marxism as a system for organising society. Transcript, 10.
Lloyd, Light and Liberty. 397.
See Bill Wainwright, Close all US Bases. (London, 1957).
F. Foulkes, cited in Rolph, All Those in Favour?. 200 
The British Road to Socialism (1958). 28
Lenin, On Strikes [1899] in Lenin on Trade Unions. B. Koval, ed., (Moscow, 1970) 63-65. 
Morris Schaer, interview, 26 March 2000.
active shop-steward there were some occasions when I had a struggle to discourage 
strike ac t ion .The Partys bureaucratic pragmatism was in contrast to the Leninist- 
sounding rhetoric of its literature. The Party stressed that trade union leaders could 
never properly defend the interests of the workers unless they participated in the 
political struggle against capitalism'}^ Its leadership strategy, however, favoured the 
trade union objectives of wages and conditions over those of politics. Jim Layzell said 
of the leadership strategy in the ETU, it wouldnt have mattered two buttons if theyd 
lost the General Secretaryship, not politically...if Byrne had been elected -  it wouldnt 
have mattered.
Justice Winn asserted that leaving room for no greater differences of opinion 
than are represented by degrees of emphasis...not only was the ETU managed and 
controlled by Communists...but it was so managed in the service of the Communist 
Party...and the ideas of the Party.  Although Winn was correct in that the Party 
retained bureaucratic control, however, there is little evidence that this was put into the 
service of the Partys programme for socialism or even progressive political reform. As 
discussed above, despite the concern about its influence on the trade union block 
vote. Communist Party leadership in both the NUM and the ETU did not necessarily 
equate to support for progressive policies. Woodrow Wyatt revealed the concern from 
the point of view of the Labour Party in January 1958, warning that if democratic 
socialists do not win in the ETU the same pattern could be repeated in other unions. 
According to Wyatt if the CPGB could repeat its success in enough unions, the trade 
union vote at Labour Party conferences could be controlled by the Communist Party to 
decide Labour Party policy. 
The issue of the block vote had become crucial to Gaitskell between 1955 and 
1961. The Gaitskellites, working under the organisation of the Campaign for 
Democratic Socialism (CDS), failed in their bid to remove part of the Labour Party 
constitution, introduced in 1918 and known as Clause 4, largely because of trade 
union opposition.^ It was Frank Cousins of the TGWU, however, who led the battle
Ibid.
Socialism and the British Labour Movement. 29.
Jim Layzell interview with Louise Brodie.
Justice Winn Judgement, Royal Courts of Justice, No. 1846 (28 June 1961) 6. Manchester 
CP/Misc/ETU/3/13.
W. Wyatt, The Case Against the ETU Leaders , New Statesman. (18 January 1958), 63.
Ibid.
Brivati, Hugh Gaitskell. 330-348.
against Gaitskell on unilateral nuclear disarmament at Labours 1960 Conference. 
Communist policy on disarmament was ambiguous. Pollitt, in 1956, called for the 
banning of all nuclear weapons, no further tests of such weapons, and an agreed 
scheme of disarmament. I n  1958, The British Road to Socialism demanded an end 
to nuclear tests, called for a ban under the terms of an agreed settlement but 
stopped short of demanding unilateral disarmament.^^ Wolf Wayne remembered that 
the Party leadership was critical of CND, but soon learned they would have to support 
it.   At the ETU Conference on 17 July 1961, when Frank Maxell was exiled to the 
public gallery. Tommy Searle referred to him as being on the CND marches to 
Aldermaston with us, in the forefront of the ETU.^  In spite of this and despite the 
strategic potential for the Party of a clear position on nuclear weapons in opposition to 
Gaitskell, it was 1960 before such influence swung the Electrical Trades Unions
140.000 votes against the official policy.^  The miners union, despite having 
Communist Will Paynter as Secretary, voted against supporting unilateralism by
470.000 votes to 201,000. 
Communist leadership in many trade unions went back to the late 1930s and 
the war, when the Partys anti-Fascist position flowed with, rather than against, the tide 
of general political opinion. In the ETU, for example, following Operation Barbarossa, 
the London District Committee which, since the 1937 elections, had been left-wing and 
Communist dominated, began to urge a tremendous increase in the production of 
equipment to bring about the collapse of the Nazi regime.  Communist Walter 
Stevens, later elected General Secretary in 1948, called for unsparing effort in 
support of our gallant allies. Frank Foulkes criticised ETU strikers in Barrow-in- 
Furness, complaining that in the throes of a mighty conflict with Fascism such action
H. Pollitt, 'Political Report to 24'   Congress of the CPGB (March 1956), Manchester, 
CP/Cent/09/02.
British Road to Socialism (1958), 15.
Wolf Wayne, interview, 10 February 1999.
Cited in Lloyd, Light and Liberty. 462.
^  Brivati, Hugh Gaitskell. 354.
Dennis Ogden highlighted the CPGBs problem over nuclear weapons and its relationship with 
Moscow. At the 22" Congress of the CPSU, Khruschev announced the testing of another H 
Bomb. The entire hall exploded with applause as he proclaimed the superiority of the USSR 
bomb over the USA. John Gollan was the one fraternal delegate who stood silently -  his hands 
placed on the desk in front of him. Dennis Ogden, interview, 3 November 1997. Also see   
Bomb Tests -  End Them Now (London. 1957).
Brivati. Hugh Gaitskell. 366~
Cited in Lloyd, Light and Liberty. 256.
Ibid.
had to be the subject of the reverse of approbation.  Frank Maxell was elected on to 
the Executive Council in 1944 and Foulkes became General President in 1945. As it 
entered the Cold War and Conservative-dominated 1950s, this apparent power gave 
the Party a credibility beyond the appearance of a Marxist-Leninist sect. For those 
individuals who, under the conditions of anti-Fascism and war, had gained such 
positions, it may have been, as Jim Layzell, suggested, that they were so eager for 
power...they just didnt want to give it up.
An example of the Communist leadership in action arose during a disciplinary 
hearing for C.A.N. Walker, an ETU member and Conservative Councillor in Porthcawl, 
who had written to the local Western Mail about ballot irregularities and Communist 
connections. * Walkers case was heard in 1959 and illustrates a bureaucratic 
tendency within the ETU Communist leadership. Foulkes addressed Walker, saying 
we asked for an undertaking that you wouldnt commit what we consider to be a 
breach and you refused to give it [of] Rule 38, Clause (1) (b)...or acted contrary to 
Rule 10, Clause (4) and Rule 10, Clause (7) (a). Walker responded, Youve laid the 
charge as stated havent you? to which Foulkes replied yes weve made the charge. 
Walker then asked, why are the statements...that I wrote contrary to the rules? to 
which Foulkes responded, well if you would continue."** After repeating this exchange 
several times, Foulkes stated. Yes well we say that you violated the rule. If you can 
prove that youre not guilty...that will be part of your case. You see, were not here to 
answer questions...if you can prove to us youre not guilty under either of those two 
rules, well alright. Although Walker protested that he had not divulged union 
business, the Executive Council found him guilty as charged by unanimous vote."*  
The punishment was not recorded.
The Partys emphasis in 1957 to lead the workers...from the immediate 
struggles under capitalism right up to...the building of socialism, had shifted by 1963 
when the word leadership did not feature and instead, members were exhorted to 
support progressive policies and to actively co-operate with all progressive trade
 Ibid., 257.
 Jim Layzell interview with Louise Brodie.
"* ETU Executive Council Meeting, Minutes No.1. ( 7 and 8 February 1959), 42, MRC, 
MSS.387/1/1/1.
"** Ibid., 43.
Ibid., 46 and 63.
unionists'/^ Following the Winn judgement, the CPGB modified its ambitions with 
regard to the way in which it sought to influence the unions. In July 1961, for example, 
the Executive Committee released a statement on the ETU. The Party retained the 
idea that the Communist Party...endeavours to influence the policy of the trade 
unions and declared that this was one of its functions as a working class political 
party, which it will never renounce."*   By December, however, the Executive 
Committee released a Press Statement which omitted any mention of political 
influence.'
The Executive Committee asserted at this time, that the election of 
Communists to positions of responsibility in a trade union does not mean that that 
union is controlled by the Communist Party. It is controlled by the official bodies of the 
union concerned. Frank Maxell also pointed out to the TUC that the affairs of my 
Union are not controlled by the Communist Party, adding that delegates and 
representatives are elected by ballot vote and known members of political parties -  
Labour, Liberal, Communist, Conservative...are elected.'  Both statements, however, 
ignored the question as to whether this remained the case when such official bodies 
were constituted by a Communist majority. Maxells denials to the TUC about 
Communist control reflected a dilemma which the Party never resolved. British 
Communism had the necessary machinery to elevate its members into leadership 
positions at this time. Despite the perceived credibility this offered, however, the very 
bureaucratic methods needed to obtain it, militated against it translating to political 
influence. As the Party sought and fought for bureaucratic influence, it was forced to 
deny that such influence was for political ends, simply in order to retain it.
The Party attempted to resolve this dilemma in two ways. Firstly, it declared 
that Communists and non-Communists in the Union...are workers with a common 
interest.' Publicly, the Party declared that its policy was to build the unions so that 
they can win the best possible wages, conditions and supplementary benefits from the
' Political Resolution to 25 Special Congress CPGB (April 1957), 71. Manchester, 
CP/Cent/Cong/10/05. P. Kerrigan, The Future of Trade Unionism. 12-14.
Draft Statement adopted by the Executive Committee of the Communist Party (July 1961), 
4, Manchester, CP/lnd/Math/05/02.
 Press Statement from the Executive Committee of the Communist Party of Great Britain 
/December 1961), Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/08/04 
 The Communist Party and the Trade Unions (8 July 1961), 3.
'  TUC, Affairs of the Electrical Trades Union (23 January 1959), 262, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
' Ibid., 10.
employers. Justice Winn identified this as 'Double Talk, dismissing the idea that the 
CPGB served the ETU by aiming to achieve for its members the aims and objects 
regarded as optima by Communists. Secondly, the Party blurred the distinction 
between rank and file and bureaucratic influence, saying that the aim of Communist 
members is to win union members for Communist Policy...This is primary.
The claim that Communist interests were synonymous with those of the trade 
unions relied upon the Party accepting one of two things. It either had to accept the 
truth of the trade union movements traditional socialist rhetoric or it had to accept that, 
like the unions, it was limited to achieving progress only on the basis of wages and 
conditions. Again, the Partys imperative to protect its trade union credibility 
necessitated a discursive sleight of hand. It ignored the distinction between socialism 
which required the overthrow of capitalism, and the still acceptable idea within 
mainstream trade unionism of socialism being akin to corporate economic planning 
and welfare reform. As well as this, the Party stressed that members were hard 
working union officials who were the best at achieving trade union objectives.   It is 
not clear whether Justice Winn had read The British Road to Socialism, but he decided 
that the Communist Partys interest in building the unions must have amounted to 
more than just improving wages and conditions. These political ambitions, suspected 
by Winn and insisted upon by Lenin, however, were not always clearly stated and 
were often confused within trade union loyalist rhetoric about wages and conditions or, 
more commonly, added as an afterthought.
The consequences of bureaucratic leadership
Following the High Court judgement and the unsuccessful appeals against it, 
the Party leadership attempted to distance itself from the ETU, suggesting that ballot 
rigging was primarily a question for the trade union concerned. The Executive 
Committee adopted a judicial tone as it referred to the Party having completed its 
study of the case', stating that the Communist Party will never condone such
Ibid., 16.
 Winn, Judgement, 6.
 Executive Committee CPGB, Did Communists Control the ETU? (1 September 1961), 16, 
Manchester, CP/Cent/I nd/1/5.
 Ibid., 4.
 Press Statement From the Executive Committee of the Communist Party of Great Britain (4 
December 1961), Manchester, CP/Cent/EC/08/04.
practices.^ In the same document, the Party accepted the resignation of Frank 
Maxell. Two years later, Peter Kerrigan declared that ballot rigging...was a complete 
violation of the principles on which Communists have worked for over forty years. 
Kerrigan again attempted to distance the Party from the ETU leadership, saying that 
ballot rigging took place without our Party leadership being aware of it.
This attempt to portray the Party leadership as ignorant of the practices of 
some of its leading trade union members was contradicted by others, however. Mark 
Young, for example. Secretary of Finchley Branch of the ETU, in his letter to New 
Statesman, claimed that he had raised [the issue of ballot-rigging] at all levels in the 
Communist Party, and at a personal interview with Peter Kerrigan...three years ago. 
Similarly, Jim Layzell remembered that, having discovered evidence of ballot rigging in 
the East Ham Branch, I went to see Peter Kerrigan...and told him what was 
happening...I didnt think the national Communist Party, if they knew of it would 
tolerate it. Anyway, I went to see Kerrigan and told him what was happening and in my 
innocence at that time, I said to him...youd better tell them to put a stop to it Layzell 
then went to see London District Industrial Organiser, Dennis Goodwin. He continued, 
this was the first time it got into my brain box that they did know about it...because I 
would normally go to [King Street]...but on that occasion Goodwin said Ill meet you in 
a little Caf in Whitechapel...anyway I got the same story from him that both sides are 
doing it, it was difficult to stop. Wolf Wayne also suggested that Party leaders knew 
more than they had implied. Wayne remarked, whatever the Party leadership tried to 
say to these people in the ETU cut no ice. Peter Kerrigan was the industrial organiser 
at that time...whatever he tried to do, they told him to bugger off...and he was talking to 
national officials. Whether the Party condoned the practices of the ETU Communists 
or whether, as Wayne implied, it attempted to control them, any claim to have been 
ignorant of them was clearly disingenuous.
 Ibid.
 Kerrigan, The Future of Trade Unionism. 13.
 Ibid.
 M. Young, Communists and the ETU New Statesman (9 August 1958), 170. See above. 
Chapter 7, 211.
 Jim Layzell interview with Louise Brodie 
 Ibid.
 Wolf Wayne, interview, 10 February 1999.
The crucial corner leading to the High Court was turned in September 1958 at 
the TUC Congress in Bournemouth. Following his accusation that Communist James 
Maling had rigged the ballot at Hayes No 2 Branch during the election for London 
District Secretary, the London Area Committee, under Rule 38, suspended Cannon 
from holding office for five years and fined him five pounds. Cannon had travelled to 
Bournemouth early in order to spend a weeks holiday before the...Congress 
began. O n  the Thursday preceding the Congress he heard the news that the London 
Area Committee had ratified the decision of its sub-committee and that he would not 
be allowed to attend the Congress. The level of public interest in the ETU was 
demonstrated by the fact that Cannon was able to call an immediate press conference 
following this news. This was attended by nearly every British Industrial 
Correspondent as well as Industrial Correspondents and Political Correspondents from 
other countries. The following day the story appeared on the front pages of most of 
the national press. The Manchester Guardian theorized that Cannons treatment had 
come about as the result of personal rivalry...between Mr Haxell and Mr Cannon 
when Mr Cannon was still a member of the Communist Party. Walter Padley, 
President of USDAW, objected to the ban, saying it is not a question of death or 
sickness...the case of Brother Cannon arises from a row in the ETU. The Chairman 
at the Congress, however, ruled this okyection out of order as it related to an internal 
matter within the ETU.
Throughout the period between late 1958 and early 1959, the TUC and the 
ETU exchanged a series of letters. This was, in part, a response by the TUC to 
pressure from Woodrow Wyatt and the press to take action. Wyatt, during this period, 
was working closely with Cannon and Frank Chappie and had flung much of his 
evidence about ballot rigging in the direction of the TUC. Vincent Tewson, claimed 
Wyatt, brushed me off, but he also spoke to George Woodcock, Assistant General 
Secretary of the TUC who, because he pronounced the case insubstantial, was 
branded supercilious and weak. Incomprehensibly, Wyatt diagnosed Woodcocks 
character as having been enfeebled by his being under the influence of Dick
 Cannon, 'Transcript', 25.
 Ibid., 28.
 TUC Report. 'Recent Events in the ETU, (1959), MRC, MSS 292/91/91. 
 F and CPC, History of Case (?1960), 1, MRC MSS 292/91/91.
 Ibid.
 Wyatt, Confessions of an Optimist. 253.
Grossman. Wyatt did feel that he had the support of Vic Feather, Assistant 
Secretary, however. Stalwart, sturdy Vic suggested that Wyatt should contact TUC 
General Council members individually, but even they shrank away with excuses. 
One possible reason for this, something which Wyatt, Cannon and Chappie could, 
apparently not contemplate, was summed up by Feather himself in a note to 
Woodcock in November 1958. Having studied Wyatts figures. Feather wrote, I have 
gone through all this, and I do not think there is anything here at all. 
In the light of Feathers comment and the claims of Wyatt, one aspect of 
Justice Winns judgement about the period before the 1959 General Secretary 
election, is significant. Addressing himself to matters...which are earlier in point of 
time than the December 1959 election, Winn declared, in general my considered 
judgement on all these topics is that, when fully examined...they do not amount to or 
establish any fraudulent practice by any of the Defendants.The implications of this 
statement for Wyatt, Cannon, Chappie and much of the British press during the 1950s 
are interesting. Although the Plaintiffs limited their action to the Byrne versus Haxell 
election of 1959, the attacks which sustained the anti-Communists up until 1959 
referred to alleged improprieties going back to 1948 and of which, according to Winn, 
the Communists were innocent. The judge did go on to say, however, that some at 
least of the matters are...discreditable and...should not have occurred in a properly 
conducted Union; indeed some of them imply misconduct. ^
The TUC attempted to persuade the ETU to take legal action against press 
allegations. The unions refusal to do this caused the TUC to draw the conclusion that 
it must, therefore, be guilty or have something to hide. The TUCs Finance and 
General Purposes Committee (F and GPC) discussed the possibility of legal action in 
December 1958, saying some allegations against the ETU of malpractices seem 
actionable on grounds of libel or defamation.  The TUC wrote to the union two days 
later, agreeing that the allegations were inspired by a desire to discredit trade 
unionism.The letter emphasised the possible effect...on the prestige and public
 Ibid
 Feather succeeded George Woodcock as General Secretary in 1969 and retired in 1973. 
 Wyatt, Confessions of an Optimist. 254.
V. Feather to G. Woodcock (12 November 1958), MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
Winn, 'Judgement', 27.
Ibid.
F and GPC, The Electrical Trades Union (15 December 1958), 3, MRC, MSS 292/91/91. 
TUC to ETU (17 December 1958) 262, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
reputation of the Trade Union Movement/ Haxell replied, avoiding the question of 
legal action but pointing out that in the last ten years my organisation has grown from 
156,000 to 240,000, accounting for over 15 per cent of the total increase in affiliated 
[TUC] membership.  The TUC made explicit reference to litigation in February 1959, 
when it asked if your Executive Council or the officers concerned have given 
consideration to the possibility of instituting legal proceedings.^  The letter suggested 
that the ETU should institute an investigation of the issues raised by the charges 
publicly made by members of your Union.  Haxell replied, saying that we have given 
serious consideration to instituting legal proceedings...and have come to the 
conclusion that such a course is not in the interest of the Trade Union Movement.  In 
support, Haxell quoted a letter by Walter Citrine to The Times in which he observed 
that the trade union movement had little faith either in the competence or the 
impartiality of the courts in matters affecting organised labour. Haxell also referred to 
the cost of such action.
By December, the TUC had located several precedents for unions taking 
individuals or publications to court, either for defamation or libel. In its correspondence 
with the ETU, it continued to stress that such action would be in the best interests of 
the Trade Union Movement. Tewson and the TUC General Council were clearly 
under pressure at this stage, both from the press and from people like Wyatt and 
Walter Padley, to intervene on the side of the anti-Communists. Vic Feathers role 
summed up the General Councils vacillation over the ETU. Feather drifted from the 
Stalwart, sturdy Vic, of Wyatts memory to the man who did not think there is 
anything here at all and back again to being anonymously, a good friend of the 
reformers, according to John Lloyd.  The General Council were keen that something 
should be seen to be done, however, and requested the ETU to ensure that the 
allegations were thoroughly investigated. Haxell, in a further letter, agreed, saying 
that the Executive Council had decided to request the members referred to provide
Ibid.
 ETU to TUC (23 January 1959), 264, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
TUC to the ETU (25 February 1959), 265, MRC, MSS 292/91/91. 
 Ibid.
ETU to TUC (20 March 1959), 266, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
 Ibid.
 TUC to ETU (26 March 1959), 267, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
 Lloyd, Light and Liberty. 422.
them with evidence in support of the allegations and charges made in order that the 
matter can be investigated.
The ETU Committee of Inquiry
The Executive Council appointed its Committee of Inquiry on 29 April 1959 and 
it reported on 9 June. It was composed of two Executive Councillors, Harry West 
(Manchester and Lancashire) and Thomas Vincent (Wales) with National Officer, 
George Scott in the chair. All three were Labour Party members who regularly voted 
with the Communists. The non-Communist composition of the committee was 
deliberate, taking account of the political character of some of the accusations.' 
Scott, who had twice stood as a Labour candidate in General Elections and had been 
a Fife County Councillor, was accused at the trial, of being a Communist Party plant 
within the Labour Party so that he could go to Labour Party Conferences as ETU 
representative. He had written an article for the Dailv Worker on 14 December 1957, 
claiming that the number of branches disqualified following the Cannon-Frazer election 
of that year, would not have affected the result. This was later found to be untrue but, 
after careful consideration, the judge exonerated him of conspiracy.   Despite John 
Lloyds typically jaundiced remark that Justice Winn had been excessively generous in 
letting George Scott off, however, Winn himself observed that Scott was plainly 
horrified when his error was demonstrated to him in the witness box...I unhesitatingly 
infer that Mr Haxell gave him only partial facts and misled him.
Gerald Gardiner described Harry West as one of several stooges within the 
leadership of the ETU. Gardiner continued one doesnt want to be offensive, but your 
Lordship may have wondered whether Mr West could really be as stupid as he 
seemed to be. West, who had also been cited as a defendant, was also exonerated. 
Tom Vincent was not among the defendants but Cannon suggested that he had used 
Communist Party influence in order to get himself elected as a delegate to TUC
 ETU to TUC (16 April 1959), 268, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
 Electrical Trades Unions Committee of Inquiry Report (Bridlington, 9 June 1959), MRC, 
MSS 292/91/91.
 Rolph, All Those in Favour?. 174.
 G. Scott, The Press and the ETU -  What are the Facts?, Dailv Worker (14 December 
1957).
 Rolph, All Those in Favour?. 239.
 Lloyd, Light and Libertv. 468. Justice Winn, Judgement, 29.
 Ibid., 217.
Congress. Gardiner cited an example from 1955 when Vincents vote for TUC 
delegate shot up from 5,000 to 18,000 votes, though no evidence was offered to 
support the suggestion that this was because of his support for the Communists.
Mark Youngs account of how Scott and West gained their respective posts in 
the ETU gives some insight into how the CPGB operated within the trade unions. 
Young cited a London ETU Advisory Committee meeting at which a report from the 
Scottish Communist Party was discussed which spoke in glowing terms of brother 
Scotts cooperation with Communist Party councillors. The advisory committee 
decided to support Scott and so, according to Young, he moved from being an also- 
ran to being elected on the first ballot over several other candidates. 
The case of Harry West was more interesting. Manchester ETU Communists 
had agreed to support a comrade, brother Turner, for the post of Executive Councillor 
in 1958. Following the Soviet invasion of Hungary, the National Advisory Committee 
decided to support West, a Labour party member who supported the executive. 
According to Young, Haxell, Frazer and Hendy accompanied by Mr Peter Kerrigan... 
journeyed to Manchester on two occasions  This second visit, maintained Young, was 
on the direct instigation of the political sub-committee of the Communist Party, who 
had endorsed the view that Brother West should be the candidate. Following this 
second visit, the Manchester Communists agreed to adopt West.
On 4 April 1959, the Executive Council had censured Les Cannon and Mark 
Young for making revelations and allegations in the press about the ETU. As far as 
Cannon was concerned these related to statements he had made following the 
withdrawal of his credentials at the 1958 TUC Congress. Cannon said, I have made 
no allegations against the Union as such. All my allegations have been made against 
communist party members inside the union, individually and as members of the 
advisory committees. It is not possible to equate these allegations with criticisms of the 
union. Mark Youngs infraction concerned his letters to New Statesman. Cannon and 
Young were summoned before the Committee on 11 and 12 May and again on 26 and 
27 May. Their first objection was that the committee was not chaired by Frank
 Ibid., 130-1.
 M. Young to V. Tewson (5 September 1959), MRC, MSS 137/39. 
 Cited in Lloyd, Light and Libertv. 425.
 Ibid.
 L. Cannon to F. Haxell (May 1959), MRC, MSS 137/22.
Foulkes. This was strange, given that the Executive had explicitly not included 
Communists because of the political implications involved. Cannon and Young 
insisted, however, that it was unconstitutional for Brother Scott, National Officer, to be 
a member of the Committee. John Lloyd claimed that, although the officials on the 
committee were not Communists the secretarial staff servicing the committee were. 
A circular argument developed between the committee and Cannon and Young who 
refused to supply evidence until they were satisfied that the committee was genuinely 
objective and that no legal action was contemplated against them by the Executive 
Council. George Gardiner raised the issue of this inquiry at the trial whilst 
questioning Tom Vincent. Gardiner quoted Cannon as saying at one point: If Im 
making an allegation against you. Brother Vincent, somebody else should decide 
whether it is true or not; not you? Although Cannon and Young stood accused of 
bringing the union into disrepute in breach of rule 10 clause 4, both refused to supply 
evidence to the inquiry to support their allegations about ballot rigging.
The Committee of Inquiry reported to the ETU Conference at Bridlington in 
June 1959 saying we do not feel...it is necessary for us to make specific 
recommendations but admonished the Executive Council for having been excessively 
lenient in connection with the continued activities of these members who...have 
abused their democratic rights.  The Report was given to the F and GPC, who wrote 
to the ETU on 29 October 1959, inviting the Executive Council to meet with them on 
24 November.    Five days before this meeting was due to take place, Haxell replied 
saying, effectively, that the Executive Council was too busy and, according to the TUC, 
questioned the competence of the General Council. T h e  TUC announced in a 
circular to affiliated unions that it had decided to bring to an end a phase in the 
proceedings made completely abortive by the attitude of the union and concluded that 
this attitude suggested that there is so much substance in these charges that they are
 ETU Committee of Inquiry, 1, MRC, MSS 292/91/91.
 Ibid.
 Lloyd, Light and Libertv. 424.
 ETU Committee of Inquiry, 2.
 Rolph, All Those in Favour?. 130. 
io . g y u  Committee of Inquiry, 5.
 TUC to Secretaries of all affiliated organisations (30 November 1959), MRC, MSS 
292/91/91.
 Ibid.
unwilling to have them thoroughly investigated and unable specifically and 
unequivocally to deny them 
Further bureaucratic iniquities
At the ETU Conference in June 1959, meanwhile, only seven delegates out of 
380 voted in favour of a resolution criticising the Executive. There was criticism of at 
least one specific Communist policy, when, at the 1958 Labour Party Conference, the 
ETU had voted against British membership of NATO.^  The most crucial and damning 
series of accusations at the Bridlington Conference, however, were levelled by Dick 
Reno. Despite their political differences, Reno had worked alongside Cannon 
throughout the preceding year on the question of ETU finances. He and Cannon 
discovered in the accounts several excessive claims, either by individuals or by the 
Executive Council collectively. Among these were 535 13s 5d for catering at the 
Grand Hotel in Folkstone, two weeks later 259 3s 6d at the Waldorf Hotel in London 
for Executive Council members and fraternal delegates and 104 Os Od for catering 
at the Cliff Hotel in Blackpool during the 1957 TUC Congress. Reno also claimed 
that the union had lent 1,147 to Communist Colin Whittone and that Haxell had 
received expenses of 1,800 in excess of his salary of 1,158.  Cannon had also 
discovered that Head Office manager. Communist Jim Humphrey, and Communist 
John Frazer had claimed, respectively, 7 13s Od to visit the Isle of Thanet Branch and 
7 15s Od to visit Southampton Branch.According to Cannon, the allowance for 
such travelling expenses was normally 7s 6d.  The worst example of impropriety, 
however, was the use by Haxell of employees from the unions estates department for 
his own house improvements. According to Reno, these improvements allowed Haxell 
to sell his property at a profit of 3,000.  At the conference, Haxell denied this, but at 
a hearing in the High Court in 1964 through which Reno attempted to overturn a ten 
year ban on his holding office, Haxell declared it necessary to correct his previous 
assertion and admitted that funds and labour of the union had been involved in a
Ibid.
Lloyd, Light and Libertv. 427.
L. Cannon to Bill [?Blairford] (29 March 1959), MRC, MSS 137/38. 
Lloyd, Light and Libertv. 428.
Cannon to Bill (29 March 1959).
Ibid.
Lloyd, Light and Libertv. 428.
substantial extent in the repair and improvement of No. 57 Clarence Road, 
Bromley.
The fraud with which the ETU Communists were charged in 1961 was 
composed of several elements. All of these, as far as the judge was concerned, had, 
on the balance of probability, taken place, though to what extent and with whose 
knowledge, was unclear. These various elements have been detailed both in Lloyds 
Light and Libertv and in Rolphs account of the trial. These works, it should be 
stressed, manifested journalistic partiality and were explicitly unsympathetic to the 
ETU Communists.
The first part of the plaintiffs accusation was that James Humphrey, a 
Communist since 1950 and ETU Head Office manager, had ordered and despatched 
inflated numbers of ballot-papers and that Haxell and his supporters had used them to 
record extra votes. The Express Printing Company which printed the papers, was 
supposed to print just enough to correspond with current ETU membership in order to 
minimise the possibility of fraud. In the past, however, membership figures had often 
arrived at Head Office too close to elections and, because of increased recruitment, 
there were often less ballot papers than members. Humphrey came to an arrangement 
with Norman Swift of the printing company in order to solve this problem. This involved 
Humphrey estimating the number of papers required. As Union membership during 
this period was consistently on the increase, these estimates would, of necessity, be 
higher than the last recorded membership figures.^Papers were sent directly to 
Branch Secretaries from the printer. Excess papers, however, were held at St Paneras 
Railway Station because Humphrey felt it more discreet...I did not want more people 
than necessary to know they were at Head Off ice .Outs ide  of the context of a 
conspiracy charge, this might appear reasonable. Justice Winn, however, interpreted 
Humphreys interest in security wholly within the context of the allegations, saying in 
my judgement this secrecy is a badge of f r a u d . I n  all, 25,000 extra papers were 
printed. Humphrey brought these from St Paneras and locked them in a room at Head 
Office where they were left, either to be despatched to branches as required, or to be
Cited in ibid., 429. Also see Reno (aka Odiin) vs. ETU, MRC MSS. 387/6/4/12, 16, 2/1, 2, 
7-10.
Membership figures were 230, 136 in 1958; 233, 597 in 1959 and increased to 242, 900 in 
1960. Lloyd, Light and Liberty. 675.
J. Humphrey cited in Winn, Judgement, 48.
Ibid.
destroyed. Papers were distributed to members, then returned to the Branch Secretary 
under sealed envelope, either by post or at a branch meeting. The plaintiffs alleged 
that papers had been sent from this surplus store at Head Office to various 
sympathisers, who then used them to record extra votes for Maxell.
Several Branch Secretaries gave evidence at the trial that excessive numbers 
of ballot papers had been returned. Edgar Dew of Mythe Branch, claimed to have 
received six papers before he had even despatched them to his membership. I t  was 
unclear, however, how many votes had been forged in this way or what difference it 
made to the outcome. Two branches for which Winn gave figures, Woolston and 
Mythe, contained, respectively, four and six extra votes for Maxell, obtained in this 
way. ^ The judgement on this particular charge was one example where the judges 
interpretation of the balance of probability owed more to the overall context of the 
charge of conspiracy than it did to a requirement of proof. Humphrey, for no other 
reason than that he could not provide a satisfactory calculation as to how he had 
arrived at the totals for ballot papers, was considered by the judge to have been 
fraudulent. Because Maxell had not previously denied knowledge of the ballot papers 
ending up at Mead Office, Winn concluded that, I am wholly convinced that Mr Maxell 
not only knew that extra ballot papers had been brought to Mead Office but caused 
them to be there intending that fraudulent use be made of them.''' Later, Winn 
admitted that such evidence...would plainly not be admitted, ordinarily at least, in a 
criminal t r i a l . E x t r a  ballot papers also facilitated the individual rigging, done by 
Communist branch officials, which, as Jim Layzell claimed, certainly took place. John 
Lloyd said of this practice, that it is a matter of informed suspicion, rather than obvious 
proof.
The other allegations concerned frauds which took place after the voting had 
finished. One of these was first identified by Woodrow Wyatt in his 1958 article in 
New Statesman. W y a t t  had speculated in this article that it is simple to convert the 
63 into 363 before posting the return, whilst producing little beyond circumstantial 
evidence to reinforce this.^^ One such allegation in the 1959 General Secretary
Rolph, All Those in Favour?. 88.
Winn, Judgement, 58-59.
Ibid., 48.
Ibid., 49.
Lloyd, Light and Liberty. 438.
W  Wyatt, The Case Against the ETU Leaders, New Statesman (18 January 1958) 61-63 
Ibid., 62.
election, concerned Francis Fraser, Communist Branch Secretary of Preston branch of 
the ETU. An allegation was made by Branch Committee member and Cannon 
supporter, Tom Breakell, that the voting figures had changed from the branch meeting 
on 30 December 1959, when Francis Clarkson acting as Branch Chairman, 
announced that the result was 101 to 52 in favour of Maxell. Six months later, the 
Executive Council published the figures as 191 to 52 in favour of M axe l l .A t  the trial, 
Clarkson admitted that he had not seen the figure before reading them out, nor when 
he signed the minutes afterwards.Following Breakells intervention at the branch 
meeting, Fraser said that members decided that no action be taken and a vote of 
confidence was placed on myself as not being responsible for any alterations.^  
Fraser, nevertheless, said he would inform ETU Mead Office and would forward the 
Branch Minute Book for inspection. Whether this book was actually sent and received 
remains unclear. Fraser swore that he had sent the book but had never sought a 
receipt, either from Mead Office or the Post Office. George Gardiner insisted that 
Fraser had never sent the book but, in response to questions from the judge, Fraser 
offered to supply proof that he had enquired at Preston Post Office. Mis offer was 
never was never taken up which left the incident unresolved. An interesting item in a 
letter from Les Cannon to Breakell, however, indicated that Fraser was lying. Cannon 
wrote in 1961, I have been having a further word with the solicitor. Me would be 
happier if it was not indicated that you had been informed in any way that Fraser has 
not yet sent in minute book'. '* John Lloyd said of this incident that the branch books 
were sent for by the head office, only to completely disappear', implying involvement of 
the Communist leadership.^^ Cannons letter to Breakell, however, shows that the 
plaintiffs were aware that Mead Office had not received the minute book and that, 
therefore, it was Fraser at local level and not the Communist leadership who, in this 
case, were responsible for fraud. Breakell was Cannons favoured candidate for the 
Executive Committee in North Lancashire and Merseyside. In 1962 he became 
personal assistant to Frank Chappie. Me took over the role of National Officer,
Rolph, All Those in Favour?. 90.
Ibid.
F. Fraser, cited in ibid., 162.
Cannon to Tom Breakell (18 March 1961), MRC, MSS 137/75. 
Lloyd, Light and Liberty. 439.
although no nominations have been requested for this vacancy along with an area 
officials salary and Union car. 
Another element in the alleged fraud concerned, as in 1957, the disqualification 
of certain branches for the late posting of returns. In 1959, most of the disqualified 
branches had majorities for Byrne, and most swore that they had posted their returns 
well within the time when they should have reached Head Office before the deadline. 
The situation was complicated by the fact that Christmas intervened between the 
posting dates and the deadline. The plaintiffs alleged that the Executive Council had, 
in fact, received returns reflecting a Byrne majority. At the end of December, they had 
stuffed these returns into new envelopes, got into cars, driven to the appropriate 
districts and re-posted them so that they arrived after the deadline. Of the elements 
which constituted the alleged fraud, this was the most convincingly substantiated. 
According to John Lloyd, supporters of the Maxell regime had since told him that the 
plan was conceived on Christmas Eve, after it became obvious that Maxell was going 
to lose. The judge found that of 40 branches alleged to have been disqualified in this 
way, 27 could be said to have done so with any degree of certainty. The defendants 
case was not helped by evidence that John Frazer had drawn sufficient petrol for 400 
miles worth of travel between Christmas and the New Year and could not satisfactorily 
account for it.
The reaction
The trial, as Wolf Wayne suggested, damaged the Partys leadership strategy. 
Within the ETU, in an unprecedented move. Justice Winn pronounced John Byrne 
General Secretary. Byrne took up the post on 4 July 1961, although the defendants 
had announced their intention to appeal. Bob McLennan remained in post as Assistant 
General Secretary because the case had only concerned the Byrne-Maxell election. 
The former Executive Council with its Communist majority, was also in post at this 
stage. Byrne immediately created Cannon and Chappie special assistants, despite 
Cannon still being banned from holding office, a ban he had unsuccessfully challenged 
in the courts in late 1960.^^   Me also suspended James Humphrey, the Office 
Manager. Once the anti-Communist corner had been fought by media and judiciary, a
Industrial Department, CPGB, Jobs for the Right" Boys, Manchester, CP/Cent/Math/04/12. 
See Cannon vs ETU, MRC MSS. 387/6/1/1/1-387/6/1/3/15
Reform Group within the union, finally felt confident enough to reveal and declare 
itself the anti-Communist opposition.
This Reform Group convened meetings at the 1961 ETU Conference at 
Portsmouth in July with Mark Young as secretary. At this conference about half the 
delegates were Communists or fellow travellers. It was Socialist Labour League 
Trotskyist, Alan Courtenay of Camden Town, however, who most coherently attacked 
the reformists', analysing their political position as one in which whether they are 
conscious of it or not...[they]...are, in fact, representatives of the employing class.^ 
Following the Conference, which expressed confidence in the Communist Executive 
Council by a majority of 216 to 145, George Woodcock, now TUC General Secretary, 
called a meeting of the unions Executive Council with the F and G PC at Congress 
House. As with the reformists, following the anti-Communist victory, the TUC found 
the courage to get tough. Despite the Executive Council obtaining a mandate from its 
National Conference, Woodcock nevertheless insisted on changes. The Executive 
Council refused, on the grounds that it constituted wholly unacceptable and 
unwarranted interference and the ETU was expelled from the TUC in September 
1961. ^ For no apparent reason, John Lloyd praised Jock Byrnes typical courage as 
he took the rostrum at this congress.
Unsurprisingly, following the public interest in the trial and the propaganda it 
generated, the Communists were defeated in the Executive Council elections, whose 
results were announced on 12 November 1961. Out of 11 seats on the Executive, the 
Communists lost six. In 1962, Maxell, McLennan, Frazer and Humphrey were expelled 
from the union. Both Sam Goldberg and John Hendy were banned from holding office 
for seven years. Guilt or otherwise by the court, however, was not the determining 
factor in the cleansing process which followed. Harry West, who had been exonerated 
by Winn, was nevertheless made to answer for his part in the ETU Committee of 
Inquiry. Despite the fact that this inquiry had been demanded by the TUC, the new 
Executive Council, nevertheless, severely reprimanded West for his role. National 
Officer, George Scott, who had chaired the inquiry, fared even worse. Although, like 
West, Scott was judged not guilty by the court, the Executive Council banned him from
A. Courtenay Speech to 1961 ETU Conference, cited in Lloyd Light and Liberty. 462.128
Lloyd, Light and Liberty. 463 
Ibid.. 464.
holding office indefinitely. Frank Foulkes, having refused the offer of early retirement, 
was expelled.
The political landscape upon which the union had operated was effectively 
ploughed up by the reformers', so that affiliation to CND, the Haldane Society and the 
Labour Research Department, was e n d e d .T h e  attitude towards strike action took 
on an entirely new complexion. As the leadership felt it imperative to demonstrate a 
new moderate image, it was now decreed that, for the EC to support strike action, the 
cause must be just.
Protestations against Communist Advisory Committees notwithstanding, at the 
1963 conference of the ETU, the reformers spent a whole night discussing who should 
run for General President. In the event. Les Cannon, though not unanimously 
approved by his fellow reformers, won with 63 per cent of the vote. In September 
1964, Cannon won his final victory over his old comrades when Communists were 
banned from holding any office in the union. The 1963 Conference was the first to be 
held biennially rather than annually. They were now advisory rather than binding upon 
the Executive Council. Union contributions were increased and the Executive Council 
was turned into a full-time body to be elected every five years by secret ballot. The 
1965 Conference on the Isle of Man, at which most of these policies were enacted, 
also abolished Area Committees. These were considered a Communist bastion by the 
reformers, but were, nevertheless, a crucial part of the unions democratic structure. 
The ETU reached the end of this trajectory in 1988. As EETPU, it was again expelled 
from the TUC following a decision by, and on behalf of, electricians in the newspaper 
industry, not to support fellow trade unionists in the print unions, who were on strike 
against Rupert Murdochs News International Corporation.
Jim Layzell said if you really analyse the whole thing, the depth of 
understanding of the Communists who were in the leadership of the ETU wasnt very 
great...if [it] had been, they would never have got involved in it in the first place. 
Layzell continued, talking of people like Cannon and Chappie, so it was very easy to 
go from being a Communist to an anti-Communist...they didnt have to tear their 
consciences to bits because they didnt have one in the first place.^"* Morris Schaer 
felt that Cannon and Chappie were regarded as renegades who had sold out their
Ibid., 477.
Ibid.
Jim Layzell interview with Louise Brodie. 
Ibid.
comrades in the Party and the ETU, not just by Communists, but by many rank and 
file trade unionists.Cannon and Chappies efforts were later recognised in different 
ways. Cannon obtained a posthumous knighthood following his death in 1971 and 
Chappie was given a job on The Daily Mail, where he lent his trade union credibility to 
an erroneously entitled column; Frankly Speaking. John Byrne received an QBE, 
Mark Young, having accused the Communist Party of patronage was allocated an 
office at union headquarters complete with staff to prepare documents and briefs for 
the...rules revision conference in October 1962. ^
Political leadership and bureaucratic power
Summarising the stated aims of the CPGB with regard to the working class, the 
Political Committee said that it needed to give the Labour movement a Socialist 
consciousness, a scientific Socialist theory, a perspective of advance to Socialism. 
Perhaps the most serious charge against the Communists in the ETU was not whether 
or not they utilised underhand tactics to gain and retain power, but that they rarely 
appeared to consider either the political possibilities or, more crucially, the political 
limitations of such power. The bureaucratic manoeuvring of the ETU leadership may 
not have been qualitatively different from what had always gone on within such 
organisations, but it was damaging for socialists as it reinforced an unsavoury aura of 
Stalinist practice which the Party was never able to shrug off.
CPGB literature continued to outline its task as leading workers struggle from 
the immediate struggles under capitalism right up to the struggles for political power 
and the building of Socialism."' The Communists in the ETU had enjoyed more 
bureaucratic success than any of their comrades had previously managed. The fact 
that the most successful example of the Partys leadership strategy was the one which 
came under the judicial spotlight can be interpreted in two ways. Firstly, it could be 
said that it was this very success which made the ETU a target for anti-Communism in 
the first place. Secondly, it could be argued that the ballot rigging and bureaucratic 
manoeuvring which brought success for the ETU Communists but which brought the 
weight of the judiciary down upon them was a direct result of attempting to operate
' Morris Schaer, Interview, 26 March 2000.
Jobs for the Right Boys (1962), Manchester, CP/lnd/Math/04/12.136 .
'Political Resolution to 25th Congress CPGB (April 1957), 71, Manchester,
CP/Cent/Cong/10/05.
' Ibid.
such a strategy with no real political base. The ETU debacle was the result of a 
strategy which was followed routinely without regard for its negative or positive political 
implications.
Under the political conditions which existed during the 1950s, a party whose 
total membership equated to only 0.29 per cent of the organised workforce would 
inevitably find it difficult to build support for such positions on the basis of political 
opposition to the prevailing corporate consensus. By retreating from such political 
opposition and by utilising the apparatus of their own organisation, the Communists 
managed to gain and retain power in the ETU. Whilst the CPGB retained a strong rank 
and file presence within the trade union movement until the late 1970s, it continued to 
stress the importance of its trade union leaders. The Partys leadership strategy was 
the industrial equivalent of its parliamentary strategy and sprang from the same flawed 
analysis which viewed office-holding as synonymous with socialist leadership. It is 
tempting, of course, to draw a direct parallel between this strategy and Stalins 
utilisation of the Bolshevik secretariat. Electoralism and the Partys leadership strategy 
had begun in the belief that such forums could be utilised as platforms from which to 
engage with the working class; 'action as means of revolutionary propaganda and 
agitation. O v e r  time, this transformed into a belief that such institutions could be 
converted into vehicles for bringing about socialism. In the case of Parliament, the 
Partys continuing poor performance made such a possibility increasingly remote. 
Under the particular conditions of British trade unionism, the Communist Party 
machine combined with the credibility of its rank and file trade unionists to make 
election to high office a continuing possibility. The bureaucratic imperatives involved in 
holding onto power, however, made political leadership impossible.
Communist Unity Convention Official Report. (July 31 and Aug 1 1920), 59, MML.
Conclusion
In 1938, two years before his death, Trotsky attempted to build an organisation 
of revolutionary artists from his home in Mexico. These included people such as Diego 
Rivera, Frida Kahio and French modernist poet, Andr Breton.^ It was a conscious 
attempt to counterbalance the "cultural activities of the Stalinists to allow, in the 
words of the resulting manifesto, mankind to raise itself to those heights which only 
geniuses have achieved in the past.  In contrast, in 1953, Polish writer Czeslaw 
Milosz wrote of artists who worked in accordance with socialist realism [that] they 
are automatically and inescapably enrolled among the followers of Stalin.  Milosz 
recalled a conversation with a Polish poet who admitted to me My own stream of 
thought has so many tributaries...I get halfway through a phrase and already I submit 
it to Marxist criticism. I imagine what X or Y will say about it, and I change the 
ending".
The attitude to culture implied within these examples reflects a conservatism 
within Stalinist Communism which meant that it was ill-equipped to respond to the shift 
in cultural gear of the 1960s. Michael Rosen characterised a party failing to come to 
terms with what appeared to be profound cultural changes, as he described one of his 
parents friends who led a constant battle with her kids and people in the Woodcraft 
Folk against rock music, dope, sex, drugs and rock and roll;...she regarded this with 
an absolute puritan fervour -  all this was a betrayal of the working class. As the Party 
moved into the 1960s, it was forced to confront, not only these shifting cultural 
patterns, but also new and avowedly revolutionary political formations. Daniel and 
Gabriel Cohn-Bendit described Communisms response to 1968 France, saying, try as 
they might, the Communist students were unable to isolate the Leftists and, as a 
result, they themselves became completely isolated in the universities. This summed 
up the degree to which the Communist Party's traditional sectarianism and illusions 
about its left wing hegemony had caused it to lose touch at this crucial stage. As Ralph 
Russell said of student activity in Britain at the time, the attitude of the Communists
  D. King, J. Ryan, T. Deutscher, Trotskv (Oxford, 1986), 280.
 Cited in ibid.
 0 . Milosz, The Captive Mind (London, 1953), xii.
 ibid., 14-15.
 M. Rosen, interview with Cohen, Children of the Revolution. 62.
 D. and G. Cohn-Bendit, Obsolete Communism the Left-Wing Alternative (London, 1969), 150.
was, you buggers arent under our leadership, therefore it's not a revolutionary 
movement.^
The events of 1968 demonstrated to what extent the CPGB had drifted from its 
revolutionary traditions. Formally, the schism within the Party at the end of the 1960s 
was over the invasion of Czechoslovakia. There is no doubt, however, that it was also 
symptomatic of the fact that a new generation were involved culturally in a world that 
wasnt anything to do with the CP or the Soviet Union but to do with the other events of 
May 1968. Jude Bloomfield detected a three-way split within Communism at this time 
between tankies, who supported the Soviet Union, Euro-Communists, who self-styled 
themselves as modernisers and a more explicitly trade union oriented faction 'who I 
called economistic rather than Stalinist. The Euro-Communist leadership, she 
continued, remained incapable of giving up power and following through the 
implications of dmocratisation in their own organisation. 
The failure of the Communist Party to adapt to the emerging culture and 
revolutionary politics of the 1960s reflected conservatism within the Party. This had 
been expressed in a number of ways during the 1950s. Anne Palmer, for example, 
writing in 1953, dismissed as the very height of absurdity...the various new, 
progressive methods for the teaching of reading.Communist teachers at this time, 
also ran a campaign against childrens comics, expressing great concern at the 
decline in moral values associated with the spread of childrens reading matter...we 
ask all public bodies to stigmatise such publications.^  Such conservatism sprang both 
from an association with Stalinism and from an attitude which idealised as superior, 
even some of the most non-progressive ideas of workers.^
This thesis has been postulated upon the premise that by 1929, revolutionary 
Bolshevism had been superseded by a different political form called Stalinism. In 
common with other western Communist Parties, the CPGB did not recognise that the 
Soviet Union, by the end of the 1920s, was ruled by a regime which, whilst 
revolutionary in its drive for industrialisation, dispensed with all aspects of socialism in 
order to achieve it. A form of industrialisation based upon such intense exploitation of
  Ralph Russell, interview, 26 May 1998.
 Jude Bloomfield, interview with Cohen, Children of the Revolution. 74.
 Ibid., 73.
Ibid.
A. Palmer, Learning to Read, Educational Bulletin (September 1953), 9.
Teachers for Peace, Educational Bulletin. (January to February 1953), 3.
T. Jackson, Speech to 25'  Congress (21 April 1957), Manchester, CP/Cent/Cong/10/06..
labour power could never indulge its workers in the freedoms to which a revolution in 
the social, political and cultural superstructure aspired. The very intensity of Stalinist 
exploitation of labour power demanded a profoundly conservative society. A society 
which demanded obedience rather than dissent, and conformity rather than difference. 
The Communist Parties of the West, if not explicitly, implicitly accepted that the 
inconvenient social, political and democratic aspects of socialism had to be jettisoned 
in favour of this project and, despite the self-evident negation of socialism, the Soviet 
Unions industrial advance was nevertheless perceived as being synonymous with it.
At the beginning of the Cold War, Andrei Zhdanov had offered a view of the 
world separated into the socialist and the capitalist. A s  preposterous as the first of 
these labels appears in retrospect, at the time, most socialists and non-socialists 
accepted such a characterisation and chose sides. The CPGB accepted the socialist 
characterisation, partly because it reflected universal received wisdom, partly because 
the British Party habitually accepted such pronouncements uncritically but also, 
crucially, because most Communists believed it to be true. Zhdanov's formula 
reinforced the Partys traditional uncritical support for the USSR. The Party did not just 
uncritically support the Soviet Union, however, it also colluded in that states utilisation 
of an ideological tradition which was in direct opposition to the sort of intense 
exploitation and political oppression with which it was associated. The very principles 
which had motivated Marx to write, the revolutionary Bolsheviks to act and British 
socialists to join a party, were the principles which Stalinism referred to again and 
again as the regime, bludgeoned its way to modernity. Many members questioned 
uncritical support for the practices of the Stalinist regime. Those, like Eric Hobsbawm 
and John Hostettler, who, following 1956, remained in the Party in the hope of 
reforming it, did not, at the time, appear to appreciate the depth of the problem. The 
British Party was not only Stalinist because it supported the Soviet Union in opposition 
to western capitalism, it was Stalinist because it had accepted the idea that the 
principles embodied within the philosophy of Marxism somehow equated to what the 
Soviet Union had become under Stalin.
The Party accepted a Stalinist programme which looked to construct a socialist 
state in Britain along the lines of the Eastern European Peoples Democracies. It was 
never clear whether or not the Party saw itself, realistically, as leading and eventually
A. Zhdanov, Report on the International Situation to the Com inform, 125.
dominating a parliamentary coalition, or whether it continued with such a strategy, 
despairing of any alternative. What is clear, however, is that whilst British socialists 
looked to the CPGB as the hegemonic socialist organisation, they quickly had to come 
to terms with the realities of electoral practice and of defending the Soviet Union. The 
unquantifiable question was asked at the beginning of this thesis; did the British Party 
help to advance the cause of socialism within Britain during the 1950s or, like Stalin 
himself, did it turn the movement backwards? The question can, perhaps, best be 
answered, both in terms of the conservative aspects of Communism referred to above, 
and in terms of the Partys role in co-opting British revolutionary aspirations for support 
for an oppressive regime on the one hand and electoral practice on the other. Whilst 
1956 brought home to many, the realities of defending the indefensible for so many 
years, almost none made the connection between the Partys association with, and 
justification of, Stalinism and its primary focus on elections. Although many repudiated 
Soviet and Eastern European Stalinism for its use of force and terror, few referred to 
the fact that the British programme was based upon that of the Eastern European 
Stalinist parties.
It would be convenient to attempt to break down the British Party into separate 
perspectives and to judge each of these on their merits, in order to answer the 
question posed by this thesis. Much Communist Party history has stressed the 
socialist credentials of the Partys membership and has focussed, in Doris Lessings 
words, on these peoples powerful sense of service. S u c h  service within 
communities is undeniable. Similarly, the assiduity of Communists within trade unions 
described by Justice Winn is a section of Communist activity which meant that many 
honest Labour men...respect individual Communists even whilst they continued to 
mistrust the CP as an organisation.  The intellectual contribution of people like E.P. 
Thompson, Eric Hobsbawm or A.L. Morton, for example, was also a significant factor 
within British life. Breaking down and judging the actions of these various groups or 
individual members, however, has obscured more about the political impact of the 
CPGB than it has revealed. There is no doubt that the work of many such individuals 
and groups represented a significant contribution to what might broadly be termed 
progressive life within Britain. By themselves, however, such contributions could only
Lessing, The Golden Notebook. 148.
Winn, Judgement, 5. J. Beeching, Unity is not a Tactic, World News. 3:44 (3 November 
1956), 702.
be said to have advanced the cause of socialism in Britain in a piecemeal way. In 
order to for them to have had a significant impact in this regard, such activities needed 
to be coordinated into a political whole, within an organisation which provided those 
moved or inspired by such contributions with a vision and a strategy for a new kind of 
society. It was here that the Partys limitations rendered it a negative, rather than a 
positive force for change. The Party, in other words, constituted a great deal less than 
the sum of its parts.
Trade unionists, inspired to change society through collective activity, once in 
the Party, discovered that their main task was a combination of trade union activity 
over wages and conditions or working towards the election of Communist leaders. 
Alison Macleod recalled how her initial association with the Party was with a branch 
bedevilled by elections, her main job to speak at street corners, with nobody 
listening.E.P. Thompson focussed upon the Party leadership as being the problem, 
and in typically colourful terms, described them as a superior priesthood who can 
suppress facts or distort them so long as they think it is in the interests of the Party. 
Thompson answered the problem by leaving the Party and attempting to build an 
alternative. Doris Lessing was even more blunt, saying 'the leadership of the British 
CP consists of men and women totally corrupted by years of work in the Stalinist 
atmosphere...they suppress resolutions, rig ballots, pack meetings, lie and twist, there 
is no way of getting them out of office by democratic means.  Whether this leadership 
can be blamed; whether it was they who constituted the Stalinism in the Party making, 
as Thompson and Lessing implied, the membership victims of British Stalinism, is 
impossible to say with any certainty. What seems to be the case, however, is that 
these leaders were, in fact, rarely challenged by members on anything other than 
minor points of strategy. When they were, they were able to muster considerable 
forces to their side who were prepared to reiterate the Party line in the interests of 
Party unity. Even during 1956, a majority of Communists continued to support their 
Stalinist leadership. Again, it was the appeal to Party loyalty unity which ensured such 
support. The continued support that British socialists gave both to Soviet and British 
Stalinism can now be seen to have been a surrender of their own revolutionary ideals 
and aspirations. The ability of the leadership to sustain the illusion that there was no
Macleod, The Death of Uncle Joe. 13-14.
E.P. Thompson to Bert [Ramelson] (28 May 1956), Manchester, CP/Cent/Org/18/04. 
Lessing, The Golden Notebook. 383.
alternative to the barbarity of Soviet Stalinism and that there was no alternative 
despairing politics of British Stalinism, successfully disabled a whole generation of 
socialists from meaningful political organisation. There is no counterfactual method 
through which to calculate how this might have been different had the CPGB either not 
existed or had not been Stalinist. What is clear, however, is that the illusion that 
Stalinism represented the best of all possible worlds, in opposition to international 
capitalism, has made a significant contribution to the successful and continued 
marginalising of socialism as a political ideology.
Bibliography
1. Oral History interviews
1a. interviewed by Author
Patrick Goldring, (former Daily Worker journalist), interviewed, 14 May 1998
John Hostettler, (former Chair of Youth Affairs Committee, CPGB; former member of 
Social Services Committee, CPGB; former member of Lawyers 
Group, CPGB; former member of Appeals Committee, CPGB), 
interviewed, 25 June 1997
Alison Macleod, (former Daily Worker journalist, author of The Death of Uncle Joe 
(Suffolk, Merlin, 1997)), interviewed, 15 October 1997
Helen Mason, (former CPGB member; former NUT member), interviewed, 9 July 1997
Max Morris, (former member of Executive Committee, CPGB; former member of 
Executive Council, NUT), interviewed, 16 March 1998)
Dennis Ogden, (former Daily Worker journalist; former worker at the International
Publishing House in Moscow; former Moscow correspondent for the 
Daily Worker), interviewed, 3 December 1997
Brian Pearce, (former member of Historians Group, CPGB; author of several works, 
including, A History of Communism in Britain (London, Bookmarks, 
1995)), interviewed, 1 February 1999
Morris Schaer, (former CPGB member; former ETU shop steward), interviewed, 9 
July 1997 and 5 April 2000
Roger Simon, (former member of Lawyers Group, CPGB), interviewed, 10 December 
Stan Turner, (former CPGB member), interviewed, 9 July 1997
Wolf Wayne, (former CPGB Hendon Borough Secretary; former Branch Chair of AEU; 
former member of North London District Committee of AEU), 
interviewed, 10 February 1999
1b. Written Communications to Author
Ruth Fisher, (former Daily Worker journalist and telephonist), 30 November 1997
Bob Leeson, (former journalist on World Youth, former employee on Morning Star). 5 
November 1997
Morris Schaer, 20 March 2000
1c. Other Interviews
Bernie Holland, (former member of St Paneras North Labour Party) interviewed by 
Roy Gore and Louise Brodie, November 1997, British Library 
National Sound Archive Labour History Project, 0609/85/01-04. 
F6013-6
John Horner, (former General Secretary, Fire Brigades Union; former member
CPGB), interviewed by Louise Brodie, 16 August 1994, British Library 
National Sound Archive Labour History Project", 0609/13/03, F4101
Jim Layzell, (former OPGB member; former ETU Branch Secretary), interviewed by 
Louise Brodie, 5 September 1995, British Library National Sound 
Archive Labour History Project", 0739/01-05 01 F4901-5
2. Archival Sources
2a. Communist Party of Great Britain Archive. Museum of Labour and Working 
Class History, Manchester
OPGB Congress. Papers and Minutes. OP/OENT/Oong
Executive Committee. Papers and Minutes. OP/OENT/EO
Political Committee, Papers and Minutes. OP/OENT/PO
Industrial Department. Papers and Minutes. OP/OENT/IND
Organisation Department. Papers and Minutes. OP/OENT/Org
Papers of the Executive Committee of the Communist International. Doc. K/132 (held 
on microfiche)
Personal Papers
Kay Beauchamp, CP/Ind/Kay B 
Benjamin Bradley, CP/Ind/Brad 
Rajani Palme Dutt, CP/lnd/Dutt 
Hymie Fagan, CP/Ind/Fag 
Willie Gallacher, CP/I nd/Gall 
John Gollan, CP/lnd/Goll 
Wal Hannington, CP/lnd/Hal 
Allen Hutt, CP/lnd/Hutt 
Margot Kettle, CP/lnd/Kett 
James Klugmann, CP/lnd/Klug 
George Matthews, CP/Ind/Math 
Ivor Montague, CP/Ind/Mont 
Harry Pollitt, CP/lnd/Poll 
Dona Torr, CP/lnd/Torr 
William Wainwright, CP/Ind/Wain.
Unpublished Histories and Biographies held at Manchester
Ben Bradley, Diary of Visit to China, 1956. CP/lnd/Brad/7/6
Nina Fishman, The British Road is Resurfaced for New Times. CP/Hist/1/7
Wal Hannington, Biography, 1960s. CP/lnd/Hann/09/04
Hudson, Parsons and Johnstone Our History The Communist Party and 1956 (1993)
Margot Kettle, Biography of John Gollan, ?1960s, CP/lnd/Kett/05/09 to
CP/lnd/Kett/06/04
Joseph Redman, The Communist Party and the Labour Left 1925-1929 [introduction 
by John Seville] (undated)
Transcript of Daily Worker and Morning Star, BBC Arena Documentary (undated). 
CP/Hist/2/1.
2b. Modern Record Centre, University of Warwick Library
Executive Council, Electrical Trades Union (ETU). 1954 to 1992, MSS. 387/1 
Executive Council, ETU, verbatim minutes, 1959 to 1961, MSS. 387/1/1 
Executive Council, ETU, printed minutes, 1954 to 1992, MSS. 387/1/2 
Sub-Executive Council, ETU, minutes, 1954 and 1960, MSS. 387/1/3 
Court cases involving the ETU, 1954 to 1968, MSS. 387/6/1 t o l l  
The Papers of Sir Leslie Cannon, MSS. 137 
Les Cannon Deposit (deposited by John Lloyd), MSS. 387/6/12 
The ETU and the TUC, 1924 to 1961, MSS. 292/91/90 to 93
2c. Communist Party Archive at the Marx Memorial Library, London.
Communist Unity Convention Official Report. (July 31 and Aug 1 1920)
Nottingham Marxist Group, Why We Left The Communist Party (Nottingham, 71957)
3. Journals and Newspapers of the CPGB.
Challenge 
The Communist 
Communist Review
The Educational Bulletin (March/April 1949 to September/ October 1953)
Education Today (November/December 1953 to January/February 1955)
The Jewish Clarion
Labour Monthly
The Marxist Quarterly
Marxism Today
The Modern Quarterly
Morning Star 
Plebs
The Reasoner A Journal of Discussion. 1 (July, September, November 1956)
World News and Views 
World News 
The Daily Worker 
World Youth 
Workers Weekly
uiifin wnrr i A rt i Hc Within rO CR  In,,male
Editorial articles
After the 20*'  Congress in Jewish Clarion. New Series, 9 (August 1956)
Our Anguish and Our Solace [reprinted from Folkstymel. in Jewish Clarion. New 
Series, 8 (June 1956)
The Debt Jews Owe to Joseph Stalin in Jewish Clarion. 74 (May 1953)
The Hungarian Socialist Workers Party in World News. 3:51 (22 December 1956)
The Rothstein Case in Educational Bulletin. 6:2 (November -  December 1953)
The White Terror in. Hungary [reprinted from lHumanit] in World News. 3:47 (24 
November 1956)
Executive Committee of the CPGB
Decisions [statement on letters to non-Party press] in World News. 4:1 (5 January 
1957)
Lessons of the Twentieth Congress of the CPSU [resolution, 13 May 1956] in The 
Marxist Quarterly. 3:3 (July 1956). Also in World News. 3:20 (19 May 1956)
Statement on Hungary in World News. 3:51 (22 December 1956)
Statement on The Reasoner in World News. 3:46 (17 November)
Authored Articles
Alexander K., Democratic Centralism in The Reasoner. 1 (July 1956)
Alexander W., Campbell J R., Hackett I., Law J., Levy H., Moore W., Morton A.L., 
Warman W., British Communists in the Soviet Union: 1, The Soviet Union After the 
Twentieth Congress [part 2], Jews in the Soviet Union in World News. 4:1 (5 January 
1957) and 4:2 (12 January 1957)
Anderson N.G., Hungary -  Disastrous Policy in World News. 3:47 (24 November 
1956)
Aprahamian P., Why We are Angry and Impatient in Educational Bulletin. 5:3 
(January-February 1953)
Bernal J.D., Stalin as Scientist in The Modern Quarterly. 8:3 (Summer 1953)
Broadbridge S R., Safeguards for Democracy in The Marxist Quarterly. 4:1 (January 
1957)
Browning R., The Moral Basis of Political Judgements in The Marxist Quarterly. 4:1 
(January 1957)
Burns E., Is the Theory of Crisis Out of Date? in Marxism Today 1:1 (October 1957)
Cannon L., The Productivity Drive in The Marxist Quarterly. 2:2 (April 1955)
Copper D., Grammar School Teacher Offers a Draft Professional Scale in Education 
Today. 8:1 (September 1955)
Cornforth M., Science in History in The Marxist Quarterly. 2:1 (January 1955)
Cox I., New Factors in the Struggle Against Imperialism in Marxism Today. 2:1 
(January 1958)
Creighton H.C., Britain Need Soviet Friendship in Jewish Clarion. 49 (July 1950)
Davies B., The New Stage in Soviet Democracy in The Marxist Quarterly 3:3 (July 
1956)
Dobb M., Discussion, Democracy and All That in World News. 3:15 (15 December 
1956)
Marxism and the Social Sciences in The Modern Quarterly. 3:1 (Winter 
1947-8)
The Sixth Five Year Plan in The Marxist Quarterly. 3:3 (July 1956)
War Hysteria and Second Thoughts in Labour Monthly. 38:9 (September
1956)
Dutt R.P., The Communist Party and the Advance on the Mass Movement in The 
Marxist Quarteriv. 1:2 (April 1954)
The Great Debate" in Labour Monthlv. 38: 5 (May 1956)
Leadership and Policy in Britain in Labour Monthlv. 38:2 (February 1956)
Questions Before the Party Congress in Communist Review (January, 
1989)
The Role of Stalin in World News. 3:22 (2 June 1956)
The Vision Splendid in Labour Monthlv. 38:4 (April 1956)
Dutt R.P., Pollitt H., 'Ourselves and the Labour Party: Alternative Proposals to the 
Thesis of the Central Committee in The Communist (1928)
Fagan H., Strong Communist Party for Peace in Jewish Clarion. 30 (May 1948)
Anti-Soviet Slander and the Press in Jewish Clarion. 70 (January 1953)
Falber R., Warmongers and anti-Semitism in Jewish Clarion. 61 (February 1962)
Feldmar J., Hungary -  A Correct Assessment in World News. 3:47 (24 November)
Gallacher W., There was no Anti-Semitism in the Soviet Union in Jewish Clarion.
New Series, 12 (March 1957)
Gaster J., The Prague Trial in Jewish Clarion. 70 (January 1953)
Giles G.C.T., The Humanity of Joseph Stalin in Educational Bulletin. 5:3 (January- 
February 1953)
Gollan J., Communism and Mankind in The Marxist Quarteriv 1:1 (January 1954)
Gomulka W., On Dogmatism and Revisionism in Marxism Todav. 1:3 (December
1957)
Henderson F., British Labour and the Soviet Union in Labour Monthlv, 38:4 (April
1956)
Hobsbawm E.J., 1956 [interview with G. Stedman Jones] in Marxism Todav 
(November 1986)
Where are British Historians Going? in The Marxist Quarteriv. 2:1 
(January 1955)
Hutt A., Fundamental Questions for Our Party in The Communist Review (September
1930)
The Hours of Labour in The Marxist Quarteriv. 2:1 (January 1955)
The Revolutionary Role of the Theoretical Struggle in The Communist 
Review (February 1932)
Kerrigan P., Crisis in Motors in Labour Monthlv. 38:8 (August 1956)
Kettle A., Rebels and Causes in Marxism Todav. 2:3 (March 1958)
Klugmann J., Communists and Socialists in The Marxist Quarteriv. 3:3 (July 1956)
Notes on the State and Constitution of the New Yugoslavia in The 
Modern Quarteriv. 3:1 (Winter 1947-8)
Stalins Work Lives On Forever in Jewish Clarion. 73 (April 1953)
Lewis J., Marxism and Ethics in The Modern Quarteriv. 5:3 (Summer 1950)
Matthews G., Hydrogen Bomb War Plans in The Marxist Quarteriv. 2:2 (April 1955)
The Nightmare Strategy of Limited War in Marxism Todav. 1:3 
(December 1957)
A Caricature of Our Party in World News. 3:26 (30 June 1956)
Meek R.L., Houston G., Some Aspects of Stalins Economic Problems in The
Modern Quarteriv. 8:3 (Summer 1953)
Meredith C., The Mantle of McCarthy in Labour Monthlv. 38:2 (February 1956)
Montague I., Atlantic Broadside [review of M. Djilas The New Class. An Analvsis of 
the Communist System in Marxism Todav. 2:1 (January 1958)
The Slanders and the Facts in Jewish Clarion. 42 (December 1949)
Morris M., Intelligence Testing and the Class System of Education in The Modern 
Quarterly. 6:2 (Spring 1951)
A Policy For All Teachers in Educational Bulletin. 5:4 (March-April 1953)
Where Culture Belongs to the People in World News and Views. 32:40 (11 
October 1952)
Page Arnot R., Crisis and Contrast in Labour Monthlv. 38:3 (March 1956)
Palmer A., Learning to Read in Educational Bulletin. 5:6 (September 1953)
Piratin P., Lies that can lead to Genocide in Jewish Clarion. 42 (December 1949)
Pollitt H., The October Revolution and the British Labour Movement in Marxism 
Todav. 1:1 (October 1957)
The Twentieth Congress of the CPSU and the Role of Stalin in World 
News. 3:16 (21 April 1956) and 3:18 (5 May 1956)
The Politbureau of the CPGB, The Theoretician of the Left . Sectarianism and
Spontaneity in The Communist Review (January
1931)
The Political Committee of the CPGB, Khruschevs Report in World News. 3:26 (30
June 1956)
Rothstein A., Heinemann M., Man and Plan in Soviet Economy in The Modern
Quarteriv. 4:4 (Autumn 1949)
Russell S., The Czechoslovak Trial in World News and Views. 49:40 (13 December 
1952)
Seville J., Thompson E.P., Taking Stock in The Reasoner. 1 (July 1956)
Why We Are Publishing in The Reasoner. 1 (July 1956)
Thompson E.P., Winter Wheat in Omsk in World News. 3:26 (30 June 1956)
Thompson G., Gramsci, the First Italian Marxist in Marxism Todav 1:2 (November
1957)
Utley P., Economism Today -  The Iskra Period and Ourselves in The Communist 
Review (May 1930)
Wesker S. [interview], In the Soviet Union they are Proud to Say Ich bin a Yid in
Jewish Clarion. 10 (September 1946)
4. Pamphlets and Circulars of the CPGB
4a. Authored Pamphlets
Certain keynote speeches were released as circulars or pamphlets. These are 
included in the Manchester archive under Congress.
Abbott S., 15% Wages Increase for Engineering Workers
Ahern T., Right Awav for Railwav Wages (London. 1953)
Bennet A.J. [David Aleksandrovich Petrovsky], The General Council and the General
Strike (London, 1926)
Bolsover P., Kenya: What are the Facts? (London. 1953)
Campbell J R., Automation -  Friend or Foe (London. 1956)
40 Fighting Years: The Communist Party Record (London. 1960)
Is Labour Lost? The New Labour Partys Programme Examined 
(London, 1928)
Red Politics in the Trade Union (London, 1928)
Socialism for Trade Unionists (London. 1953)
What is the Use of Parliament? The Limitations of Parliamentary 
Democracy as Disclosed in the General Election (London. 1925)
Cannon L, Productivity for Whom? (London. 1955)
Dutt R.P., The Road to Labour Unity (London, undated, 71943)
Why This War? (London. 19391
Ellis, L., The Future for Miners (London. 1955)
Falber R., Beware Sharks: Tory Rent and Housing Policy Exposed (London. 19601
Gallacher W., US Soies in Socialist Countries (London. 19531
Gollan J., Britain's Future (London, 1963)
End the Bans (London. 1956)
Peoples Democracy for Britain (London. 1952)
The Case for Socialism in the Sixties (London, 1966)
30 Years of Struggle: The Record of the British Communist Party 
(London, 1950)
What Next? (London. 1959)
Which Way for Socialists? (London, 1958)
Hart F., More Wages More Jobs For Shipyard Workers (London, 1953)
Jackson T A , Socialism: What. Why. How? (London. 1945)
Jeffrey N., Bring Down Food Prices (London. 19531
Kartun D., America Go Home (London. 1951)
Keehan J., Why I am a Communist (London, undated)
Kerrigan P., The Future of Trade Unionism (London, 1963)
Mahon J., The Party of Socialism (London. 1955)
Matthews B., Changing Britain the need for the Communist Party (London, 1965)
Matthews G., All for the Cause: The Communist Party. 1920 to 1980 (London. I960)
Moffat A., Wages Increase for Miners (London. 19531
Morris M., Put the Children First (London. 1953)
Pollitt H., A Policy for Labour (London. 1952^
Britain Arise (London. 1952)
The Challenge to Labour (London. 1954)
The Communist Party and the Labour Party (London. 1955)
How to Win the Peace (London, 1944)
In Memory of Joseph Stalin and Klement Gottwald (London. 1953) 
The People on the March (London. 1954)
Trade Unionists -  What Next? (London. 1948)
What do Miners Need? (London. 1953)
Pollitt, Gollan, Matthews, The People will Decide (London. 1956)
Ramelson B., Consensus or Socialism? (London, 1986)
Productivity Agreements (London, 1970)
Winnington A., Hints on Public Speaking (London. 1942)
4b. Pamphlets and circulars with no cited author
Executive Committee statements are included in the Manchester archive under 
Executive Committee.
Britains Plan for Prosperity (London. 1947)
The British Road to Socialism (London, 1951)
The British Road to Socialism (London. 1958)
The British Road to Socialism (London. 1968)
The British Road to Socialism (London, 1978)
Class Against Class: The General Election Programme of the CPGB (London. 1929)
The Communist Party and the Local Councils (London. 1956)
Crisis in Britain and the British Empire: Marxist Study Themes (London, 1953)
The Development of Higher Education in Britain [Evidence to the Robbins Committee 
by the Communist Party] (London, 1961)
Five Women Tell Their Story (London. 1953)
For Peace For Socialism Statements of the Worlds Communist Parties 
(London,1957)
For Soviet Britain (Preface by R. Page Arnot) Resolution to 13th Congress 
(London, 1935)
Forging the weapon Handbook for members of the Communist Party (London, 1962).
40^ Anniversary (London, 1960)
The Great All-Britain March Souvenir Pictorial' (London, 1958)
Higher Education in the Nuclear Age. A Communist Plan (London. 1959)
Inner Party Democracy (London. 1975)
The International Communist Movement [EC statement] (London, 1965)
New Britain Peoples Britain: Communist Party General Election Manifesto 
(London, 1966).
Not a Penny on the Rent (London. 1953)
A Policy for Britain. General Election Programme of the Communist Party 
(London, 1955)
On Peoples Democracy in Eastern Europe and China (London. 1951)
Our Aim is Socialism: The CP, an Introductory Course (London, 1955)
Our Aim is Socialism: Communist Party syllabus for new members (London, 1962)
Questions of Ideology and Culture (London, 1967)
The Role of the Communist Party: Marxist Study Themes (London, 1955)
The Role of the Communist Party: Marxist Study Themes (London, 1957)
7,000 Miles through the Soviet Union [Report of Delegation of British-Soviet Society] 
(London, 1946)
Socialism and the British Labour Movement: Marxist Study Themes (London, 1954) 
Socialism The Future for Youth (London, undated)
5. History, Theory and Biographical Works of the CPGB.
Includes authors writing as CPGB members.
Aaronovitch S., A Study of British Monopoly Capitalism (London, Lawrence and 
Wishart, 1955)
Adi H., West Africans in Britain. 1900-1960: Nationalism. Pan-Africanism and 
Communism (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1995)
Adi H., Sherwood M., The Manchester Pan-African Congress Revisited (London,
Lawrence and Wishart, 1995)
Andrews G., Fishman N., Morgan K. [eds.]. Opening the Books: Essays on the Social
and Cultural History of British Communism 
(London, Pluto, 1995)
Beckett P., Enemy Within: The Rise and Fall of the British Communist Party (London, 
John Murray, 1995)
Bell T., The British Communist Party: A Short History (London, Lawrence and 
Wishart, 1937)
John Maclean, a Fighter for Freedom (Glasgow, CP Scottish Comm., 1944) 
Pioneering Days (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1941)
Branson N., History of the Communist Party of Great Britain 1927-1941 (London. 
Lawrence and Wishart, 1985)
History of the Communist Party of Great Britain 1941-1951 (London, 
Lawrence and Wishart, 1997)
Callaghan J., Raiani Palme Putt: A Study in British Stalinism (London, Lawrence and 
Wishart, 1993)
Campbell W., Villi the Clown (London, Faber and Faber, 1981)
Cohen P., Children of the Reyolution. Communist Childhood in Cold War Britain 
(London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1997)
Cornforth M., In Defence of Philosophy, against Positiyism and Pragmatism (London, 
Lawrence and Wishart, 1950)
Cornforth M. [ed.], Rebels and Their Causes: Essays in Honour of A.L. Morton 
(London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1978)
Darke C H., The Communist Technigue in Britain (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1952)
Dewar H., Communist Politics in Britain: The CPGB from its origins to the Second 
World War (London. Pluto, 1976)
Dutt R.P., Fascism and Social Revolution (London, Martin Lawrence, 1935)
India Today (London, Victor Gollancz, 1940)
Lenin (London, Hamish Hamilton, 1933)
World Politics 1918-1936 (London, Victor Gollancz, 1936)
Fishman N., The British Communist Party and the Trade Unions: 1933 -1945 
(Aldershot, Scolar, 1995)
Fox R., The Class Struggle in Britain in the Epoch of Imperialism. Part I: 1880-1914 
(London, Martin Lawrence, 1933)
The Class Struggle in the Epoch of Imperialism. Part Two: 1914-1923 
(London, Martin Lawrence, 1933)
Fryer P., Hungarian Tragedy (London, Index, 1997)
GallacherW., The Case for Communism (Harmondsworth. Penguin, 1949)
Rise Like Lions (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1951)
The Rolling of the Thunder (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1948)
HuttA., British Trade Unionism (London. Camelot, 1975)
Johnson H. [Dean of Canterbury], The Socialist Sixth of the World (London, Victor
Gollancz, 1944)
King F., Matthews G. [eds.]. About Turn (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1990)
Klugmann J., History of the Communist Party of Great Britain [2 vols.]; Formation and 
Early Years 1919-1924 (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1968)
The General Strike 1925-1927 (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1969)
From Trotsky to Tito (London. 1951)
Laybourn K., Murphy D., Under the Red Flag: A History of Communism in Britain
(Trowbridge, Sutton, 1999).
Lessing D., The Golden Notebook (London. Flamingo, 1993)
MacEwen M., The Greening of a Red (London, 1991)
MacFarlane L.J., The British Communist Party: Its Origin and Development until 1929 
(London, MacGibbon and Kee, 1966)
Macleod A., The Death of Uncle Joe (Suffolk. Merlin, 1997)
Mahon J., Harry Pollitt, A Biography (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1976)
Middleton Murray J., The Necessity of Communism (London, Jonathan Cape, 1933)
Morgan K., Against Fascism and War: Ruptures and Continuities in British Communist 
Politics 1935-1941 (Manchester University, 1989)
Harry Pollitt (Manchester University, 1993)
Morgan M., Part of the Main (London, Peoples Publications, 1990)
Morton A.L., Tate G., The British Labour Movement. 1770-1920 (London, Lawrence
and Wishart, 1979)
Newton K., The Sociology of British Communism (London, Allen Lane, 1969)
Pearce B., Woodhouse M., A History of Communism in Britain (London, Bookmarks,
1995)
Polling H., The Communist Party, a Historical Profile (London, A. and C. Black, 1975) 
Piratin P., Our Flag Stays Red (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1978)
Pollitt H., Looking Ahead (London, CPGB, 1947)
Selected Articles and Speeches. 1919-1936 (London, Lawrence and 
Wishart, 1953)
Selected Articles and Speeches. 1936-1939 (London, Lawrence and 
Wishart, 1954)
Serving Mv Time: An Apprenticeship to Politics (London, Lawrence and 
Wishart, 1940)
Reeves V. A., Showan V., Dan Billany: Hulls Lost Hero (Hull, Kingston, 1999)
Rothstein A., Peaceful Coexistence (Harmondsworth. Penguin, 1955)
The Soviet Union and Socialism (London, London CP, 1957)
Rust W., The Story of the Daily Worker (London. Illustrated Periodicals, 1949)
Sloane P., Soviet Democracy (London, Victor Gollancz, 1937)
Squires M., Saklatvala: A Political Biography (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1990)
Thompson W., The Good Old Cause: British Communism. 1920-1991 (London, Pluto,
1992)
Wood N., Communism and the British Intellectuals (Victor Gollancz, London, 1959)
6. Non-CPGB Journals and Newspapers (1953 to 1961 unless otherwise 
specified).
American Historical Review (1993)
Bulletin of the Marx Memorial Library (131, Spring 2000; 132, Autumn 2000)
The Economist
Daily Express (1955 to 1961)
Daily Herald (1957 to 1961)
Electron (1957 to 1961)
Forward (1957)
Historical Materialism (1998-2001)
International Socialism (1985 to 1997)
The Listener (1953 to 1961, January 1971)
London Review of Books (1998 -2000)
Manchester Guardian (1953 and 1955 to 1961)
New Left Review (1959 to 2001)
New Reasoner (1957 to 1959)
News Chronicle (1957)
Newsweek (1957)
New Statesman and Nation 
Socialist History Journal (2000)
Socialist Outlook
The Socialist Register (1965-1994)
The Spectator (1957-1959)
The Daily Telegraph 
The Times 
Tribune
Universities and Left Review (1957 to 1959) 
World Marxist Review (July 1989)
5a. Articles in Non-CPGB Journals.
(Not including Newspapers)
Abramsky 0., Hobsbawm E.J., Levy H., Browning R., Hogarth P., Lindsay J., Collins 
H., Houston G., McDiarmid H., Hill 0., Kiernan V.G., Meek R.L., Hilton R.H., Lessing 
D., Thompson E.A., Hungarian Revolution [letter] in New Statesman (1 December 
1956)
Anderson P., The Figures of Descent in New Left Review. 161 (January to February 
1987)
The Left in the Fifties in New Left Review. 29 (January to February 
1965)
The Myths of Edward Thompson in New Left Review. 35 (January to 
February 1966)
The Origins of the Present Crisis in New Left Review. 23 (January to 
February 1964)
Ashman S., Gramscis Political Thought Revisited in International Socialism. 53 
(Winter 1991)
Bambery C., The Decline of the Western Communist Parties in International 
Socialism. 49 (Winter 1990)
Barman T., Birse A., The death of Mr Stalin in The Listener (12 March 1953)
Beer S.H., The Comparative Method and The Study of British Politics in Comparative 
Politics. 1:1 (1968)
Bess M.D., E.P. Thompson: The Historian as Activist in American Historical Review. 
98:1 (1993)
Birchall I., Left Alive or Left for Dead? The Terminal Crisis in the British Communist 
Party in International Socialism. 2:30 (Autumn 1985)
Bloomfield J., Marxism Today -  A Reply to Alex Callinicos in International Socialism. 
2:30 (Autumn 1985)
Boyle P.G., The Cold War Revisited in Journal of Contemporarv British History. 35:3 
(2000)
Brodie I., Talk Broadcast in the BBCs European Service [transcript] in The Listener 
(22 January 1953)
Budd A., A New Life for Lenin [review of P. Le Blanc, Lenin and the Revolutionary 
Party] in International Socialism. 70 (Spring 1996)
Callow J., Lenin in Islington in Bulletin of the Marx Memorial Library. 132 (Autumn 
2000)
Callinicos A., Rhetoric which Cannot Conceal a Bankrupt Theory: A Reply to Ernest 
Mander in International Socialism. 57 (Winter 1992)
Clarke S., Was Lenin a Marxist?: The Populist Roots of Marxism-Leninism in 
Historical Materialism, 3 (Winter 1998)
Clegg S., The Remains of Louis Althusser in International Socialism. 53 (Winter 
1991)
Coates K., 'How Not to Reappraise the New Left [review of D. Widgery, The Left in 
Britain. 1956-19681 in The Socialist Register (1976)
Cox J., A Light in the Darkness [review of M. Phillips Price, Dispatches from the 
Revolution] in International Socialism. 76 (Autumn 1997)
Deutscher I., The Doctrine of a Hundred Flowers in New Statesman (29 June 1957)
Driberg T., Woodrow Wyatt and the AEU in New Statesman (26 May 1956)
The Economist: Leader articles (unsigned)
Even the Doctors Are At It (6 April 1957)
Facts About Real Earnings (13 February 1954) 
Lessons from the Railways (29 January 1955) 
Mr Butskells Dilemma (13 February 1954) 
Newspapers Return (23 April 1955)
Strikers Who Wont Lie Down (18 June 1955) 
Strikes and the Stricken (14 May 1955)
Strikes Suspended (6 April 1957)
Two Days Strike? (12 January 1957)
What Price the Bonus Shift? (11 May 1957)
Ehrenberg A., Problems of Leninism in Historical Materialism. 3 (Winter 1998)
Fernbach D., Rosa Luxemburgs Political Heir and Appreciation of Paul Levi in New 
Left review. 238 (November to December 1999)
Fitzpatrick S., Stalin and the Making of a New Elite, 1928-1939 in Slavic Review. 38 
(1979)
Fryer P., Hungary in Retrospect in New Reasoner. 1:1 (Summer 1957)
Lenin as Philosopher in Labour Review (September to October 1957)
The Murder of Imre Nagy in Labour Review. 3:3 (May-June-July 1958)
Gallacher W., Communism Will Prevail [interview with V. Parkhitko, reprinted from 
Sovetskvava Russia (17 November 1964)] in Bulletin of the Marx 
Memorial Library. 131 (Spring 2000)
Gardner L., A Comrades Point of Departure in New Statesman (29 October 1976)
Getty J.A., Palaces on Monday [review of S. Fitzpatrick, Everyday Stalinism.
Ordinary Life in Extraordinary Times: Soviet Russia in the 1930sl in 
London Review of Books. 22:5 (2 March 2000)
Getty J.A., Chase W., The Moscow party elite of 1917 in the Great Purges in
Russian History. 5:1 (1978)
Geras N., Althussers Marxism: An Account and Assessment in New Left Review. 71 
(January to February 1972)
G latter P., Victor Serge: writing for the future in International Socialism. 76 (Autumn
1997)
Greeman R., The Return of Comrade Tulayev: Victor Serge and the Tragic Vision of 
Stalinism in International Socialism. 58 (Spring 1993)
Hanson H., An Open Letter [reply to E.P. Thompson, Socialist Humanism] in New 
Reasoner. 1:2 (Autumn 1957)
Hanson A.H., Jones M., How Wild is my Wilderness? in New Reasoner. 1:9
(Summer 1959)
Harman C., Criticism Which Does Not Stand the Test of Logic in International 
Socialism. 49 (Winter 1990)
Harman C., Zebrowski A., Glasnost - Before the Storm in International Socialism. 39
(Summer 1988)
Haslam J., Political Opposition to Stalin and the Origins of the Terror in Russia, 1932- 
1936 in The Historical Journal. 29:2 (1986)
Haynes M., Understanding the Soviet Crisis in International Socialism. 2:34 (Winter 
1987)
Was there a Parliamentary Alternative in Russia in 1917? in 
International Socialism. 76 (Autumn 1997)
Heinemann M., 1956 and the Communist Party in The Socialist Register (1976)
Howl D., The Law of Value and the USSR in International Socialism. 49 (Winter 
1990)
The Legacy of Hal Draper in International Socialism. 52 (Autumn 1991)
Humber L., Rees J., The Good Old Cause -  and Interview with Christopher Hill in 
International Socialism. 56 (Autumn 1992)
Kolakowski L., Althussers Marx in The Socialist Register (1971)
Krasso N., Trotskys Marxism in New Left Review. 44 (July to August 1967)
Johnson A., Beyond the Smallness of Self: Oral History and British Trotskyism in 
Oral History Journal. 24:1 (1996)
Johnstone M., Trotsky and the Debate on Socialism in One Country in New Left 
Review. 50 (July to August 1968)
Jones M., Days of Tragedy and Farce in The Socialist Register (1976)
Leffler M.P., The United States and the Strategic Developments of the Marshall Plan 
in Diplomatic History. 12:3 (1988)
Lessing D., The Day that Stalin Died in New Reasoner. 1:2 (Autumn 1957)
Levy H., A Marxist Party? in New Statesman (27 April 1957)
Lindsay J., Socialism and Humanism in New Reasoner. 1:3 (Winter 1957-8)
Molyneux J., How Not to Write about Lenin in Historical Materialism. 3 (Winter 1998)
MacEwen M., The Day the Party had to Stop in The Socialist Register (1976)
MacIntyre A., From the Moral Wilderness in New Reasoner. 1:7 (Winter 1958-59) 
From the Moral Wilderness M in New Reasoner. 1:8 (Spring 1959)
Mandel E., A Theory Which has not Withstood the Test of Facts in International 
Socialism. 49 (Winter 1990)
Manning B., God, Hill and Marx [review of C. Hill, The English Bible and the
Seventeenth Century Revolution (London, Allen Lane, 1993)] in 
International Socialism. 59 (Summer 1993)
McKibbin R., Why was there no Marxism in Britain? in English Historical Review.
99:2 (1984)
Meek J., Chemical Soup [review of I. Zbarsky and S. Hutchinson, Lenins Embalmers 
(Harvill, 1998)] in London Review of Books 21:6 (18 March 2000)
Meray T., Imre Nagy, Communist in New Reasoner. 1:9 (Summer 1959)
Milward A S., Was the Marshall Plan Necessary? in Diplomatic History. 13:2 (Spring
1989),
Miliband R., Moving On in The Socialist Register (1976)
Nairn T., The Anatomy of the Labour Party [2 parts] in New Left Review. 27 and 28 
(September to October 1964 and November to December 1964)
The British Political Elite in New Left Review. 23 (January to February
1964)
The English Working Class in New Left Review. 24 (March to April 1964)
New Statesman: Leader articles (unsigned)
As You Were Comrades (28 July 1956) 
Bringing Mr Foulkes to Book (19 March 1960) 
Democracy in the ETU (9 August 1958) 
Demolitions in King Street (27 April 1957)
Noirot P., The Khruschev Speech, the PCG and the PCI [interviews with J. Pronteau, 
M. Kriegel-Valrimont, R. Rossanda, reprinted from Politigue Hebdo (Spring
1976)] in The Socialist Register (1976)
Parsons S., 1956: What Happened to the CPGB? in Our History. 88 (February 1993)
Pearce B., [letter: as Marxist], ' Lenins Testament in New Statesman (28 July 1956)
[letter: as Communard], Lenins Testament in New Statesman (4 August 
1956)
Pelikan J., The Struggle for Socialism in Czechoslovakia [interview with R. Blackburn 
and Q. Hoare] in New Left Review. 71 (January to February 1972)
Pickard A., Democracy and Trade Unions in New Reasoner. 1:4 (Spring 1958)
Pitt B., Red Flag Over St. Paneras in Bulletin of the Marx Memorial Library. 132 
(Autumn 2000)
Ready O., Secret Lives [review of L. Sieglebaum and A. Sokolov, Stalinism as a Wav 
of Life in New Statesman (22 January 2001)
Rosefielde S., Excess Mortality in the Soviet Union: a reconsideration of the
demographic consequences of forced industrialisation, 1929-1949 in 
Soviet Studies. 35:3 (1983)
Rothstein A. [letter], Lenins Testament in New Statesman (21 July 1956)
Rees J., In Defence of October in International Socialism. 52 (Autumn 1991)
Trotsky and the Dialectic of History in International Socialism. 47 (Summer 
1990)
Renton B., The Hungarian Revolution in New Statesman (17 November 1956)
Reynolds D., The Big Three  and the Division of Europe, 1945-1948: an overview in 
Diplomacv and Statecraft. 1:2 (July 1990)
St. John J., Response to Harry Hanson in New Reasoner. 1:3 (Winter 1957-58)
Samuel R., Perils of the Transcript in Oral History Journal. 1:3 (1972) .
The Waning of Collectivity: The Lost World of British Communism, Part 
One in New Left Review. 154 (November to December 1985)
Staying Power: The Lost World of British Communism, Part Two' in New 
Left Review. 156 (March to April 1986)
Class Politics: The Lost World of British Communism, Part Three in New 
Left Review. 165 (January to February 1986)
Saville J., British Communist History in New Reasoner. 1:8 (Spring 1959)
The Communist Experience: A Personal Appraisal in The Socialist 
Register (1991)
Edward Thompson, the Communist Party and 1956 in The Socialist 
Register (1994)
The XXth Congress and the British Communist Party in The Socialist 
Register (1976)
Scarlett D., A Bureau in Hungary' in New Reasoner. 1:7 (Winter 1958-59)
Schelsinger R., Stalin and Marxism in New Statesman (21 March 1953)
Stedman Jones G., Engels and the End of Classical German Philosophy in New Left 
Review. 79 (May to June 1973)
Stanley J., Including the Feelings: Personal Political Testimony and Self-disclosure' in 
Oral History Journal. 24:1 (1996)
Strachey J., Marxism Revisited in New Statesman:
i) The Great Diagram (2 May1953)
ii) The Symbol of the Aircraft (9 May 1953)
iii) Can They Hold Her Up? (16 May 1953)
Taylor 0., Marxism and Humanism in New Reasoner. 1:2 (Autumn 1957)
Thompson E.P., Agency and Choice-1  in New Reasoner. 1:5 (Summer 1958)
The New Left in New Reasoner 1:9 (Summer 1959)
Open Letter to Leszec Kolakowski in The Socialist Register (1973) 
The Long Revolution 11 in New Left Review. 10 (July to August 1961) 
The Peculiarities of the English in The Socialist Register (1965) 
Socialist Humanism in New Reasoner. 1:1 (Summer 1957)
Thompson W., Hobbs S., British Communists on the War, 1939-4T in Oral Historv
Journal. 16:2 (1988)
Trudell M., Prelude to Revolution: Class Consciousness and the First World War in 
International Socialism. 76 (Autumn 1997)
Waterson J., The Party at its Peak [review of N. Fishman, The British Communist 
Party and the Trade Unions. 1933-19451 in International Socialism. 69 
(Winter 1995)
Werth A., Jews in Russia in New Statesman (24 January 1953)
Khruschevs Secret Speech in New Statesman (14 April 1956)
The Malenkov Amnesty in New Statesman (11 April 1953)
The Stalin Cult in New Statesman (28 January 1956)
Writers at the Party Congress in New Statesman (17 March 1956)
Wheatcroft S.G., A Note on Steven Rosefieldes calculations of excess mortality in 
the USSR, 1929-1949 in Soviet Studies. 36:2 (April 1984)
Woolley N., The Road from Wigan Pier -  Les Cannon talks, just before his death, to 
Nicholas Woolley [interview] in The Listener (28 January 1971)
Worley M., Left Turn: a reassessment of the Communist Party of Great Britain in the 
third period: 1928-33 in Twentieth Century British Historv. 11:4 (2000)
Wright S.,  Hal Drapers Marxism in International Socialism. 47 (Summer 1990)
Wyatt W., The Case Against the ETU Leaders in New Statesman (18 January 1958)
Zizek S., When the Party Commits Suicide [review of J.A. Getty and O.V. Naumov, 
The Road to Terror in New Left Review. 238 (November to December 1999)
7. Non-CPGB Pamphlets.
Ginsborg P., The Politics of Lenin (London, 1974)
Hall G., Czechoslovakia at the Crossroads (New York, 1968)
Khruschev N., The Crimes of the Stalin Era [Special Report to the 20th Congress of 
the Communist Party of the Soviet Union] Anatole Shub, ed. (New 
York, 1956).
Plekhanov G.V., The Role of the Individual in Historv (Moscow, 1946)
Labour in Local Affairs: How and Whv Labour Councils are Better [Labour Research] 
(London, 1945)
Williams D., Revolutionary Communist Partv of Britain (Marxist-Leninist): Report to 
First Congress (London. 1983)
8. Books on Sovietology, Soviet History and Marxist Theory.
Althusser L., Essays on Ideology (London, Verso, 1984)
Essays in Self Criticism (London. NLB, 1976)
For Marx (London, Allen Lane, 1969)
Arendt H., On Revolution (Harmondsworth. Penguin, 1963)
Ball S.J., The Cold War: An International Historv. 1947-1991 (New York, Arnold, 
1998)
Binns P., Cliff T., Harman C., Russia: From Workers State to State Capitalism
(London, Bookmarks, 1987)
Birchall I., Bailing Out the System: Reformist Socialism in Western Europe. 1944 -  
1985 (London, Bookmarks, 1986)
Workers Against the Monolith: The Communist Parties since 1943 
(London, Pluto, 1974)
Blackburn R. [ed.]. Revolution and Class Struggle: A Reader in Marxist Politics 
(Glasgow, Fontana, 1977)
Bottomore T.B., Rubel M. [eds ], Karl Marx: Selected Writings in Sociology and Social
Philosophy (London, Watts and Co., 1956)
Borkenau F., World Communism (University of Michigan. 1962)
Bullock A., Hitler and Stalin: Parallel Lives (London. Fontana, 1993)
Carr E.H., Bukharin and Preobrazhensky: The ABC of Communism [ed.] 
(Harmondsworth, Pelican, 1970)
The Bolshevik Revolution 1917 -1923 [3 vols ] (Harmondsworth, Pelican, 
1966, 1971,1977)
Socialism in One Country [3 vols.l (Harmondsworth, Pelican, 1970)
Foundations of a Planned Economy. 1926-1929. Volume 2 
(Harmondsworth, Pelican, 1976)
Carr E.H., Davies R.W., Foundations of a Planned Economy. 1926-1929. Volume 1
(Harmondsworth, Penguin)
Chamberlain, W.H., The Russian Revolution [2 vols.] (New York, Grosset and Dunlop,
1965)
Cliff T., Lenin [3 vols.] Building the Partv 1893-1914 (London, Bookmarks, 1986)
All Power to the Soviets 1914-1917 (London, Bookmarks, 
1985)
Revolution Besieged (London. Pluto, 1978)
Rosa Luxemburg (London. Bookmarks, 1983)
Russia. A Marxist Analysis (London, Socialist Review, undated 71957)
Cohen S.F., Bukharin and the Bolshevik Revolution: A Political Biography 
(New York, 1980)
Failed Crusade: America and the Tragedy of Post-Communist Russia 
(London, Norton, 2000)
Rethinking the Soviet Experience: Politics and Historv Since 1917 
(Oxford University, 1986)
Cohen S.F., Vanden Heuvel K., Voices of Glasnost: Interviews with Gorbachevs
Reformers (New York, Norton, 1989)
Cohen S.F., Rabinowitch A., Sherolt R., The Soviet Union Since Stalin (Indiana,
Bloomington, 1980)
Cooper J., Perrie M. [eds.], Soviet Historv. 1917-53 (Basingstoke. Macmillan, 1995)
Conquest R., The Great Terror (Harmondsworth, Pelican, 1971)
The Harvest of Sorrow: Soviet Collectivisation and the Terror-Famine 
(London, Hutchinson, 1986)
Dallin D.J., Nicolaevsky B.l. Forced Labour in Soviet Russia (London, 1948)
Danilov V.P., Rural Russia Under the New Regime (London. Unwin Hyman, 1988)
Dawisha K., The Kremlin and the Prague Soring (Berkeley. UOC, 1984)
Deutscher I., The Age of Permanent Revolution: A Trotsky Anthology (New York, Dell,
1970)
The Prophet Armed: Trotsky. 1879 -  1921 (Oxford University, 1968)
The Prophet Unarmed (Oxford University, 1970)
The Prophet Outcast (Oxford University, 1970)
Stalin: A Political Biography (Harmondsworth. Penguin, 1990)
The Unfinished Revolution: Russia. 1917 -  1967. The George Trevelyan 
Lectures Delivered in the University of Cambridge. January to March 
1967 (Oxford University, 1969)
Djilas M., Conversations With Stalin (London, Hart-Davies, 1962)
The New Class (New York, Praeger, 1957)
Dunham V., In Stalins Time: Middle Class Values in Soviet Fiction (Cambridge 
University, 1976)
Elleinstein J. The Stalin Phenomenon (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1976)
Etzhold T.H., Gaddis J.L., Containment: Documents on American Policy and Strategy.
1945 -  1950 (New York, Columbia University, 1978)
Fainsod M., How Russia is Ruled (Cambridge, MA, 1970)
Filtzer D., Soviet Workers and Stalinist Industrialisation (London, Pluto, 1986)
Ferro M., October 1917 (London, Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1980)
The Russian revolution of February 1917 (London, Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, 1972)
Figes O., A Peoples Tragedy: The Russian Revolution 1891 -1924 (London,
Jonathan Cape, 1996)
Fitzpatrick S., Cultural Revolution in Russia. 1928-1931 (Indiana University, 1978)
Everyday Stalinism: Ordinary Life in Extraordinary Times: Soviet Russia 
in the 1930s (New York, Oxford University Press, 1999)
The Russian Revolution (Oxford University, 1982)
Stalinism. New Directions [ed.] (London, Routledge, 2000)
Fitzpatrick S., Rabinovitch A, Stites R. [eds.], Russia in the Era of the NEP:
Explorations in Soviet Society and 
Culture (Indiana University, 
Bloomington, 1991)
Forgacs D. [d.], The Antonio Gramsci Reader: Selected Writings 1916-1935 
(London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1998)
Fowkes B., The Rise and Fall of Communism in Eastern Europe (Basingstoke, 
MacMillan, 1995)
Frolich P., Rosa Luxemburg (London. Pluto, 1983)
Gati C., The Bloc That Failed: Soviet East European Relations in Transition [part 1] 
(Bloomington, Indiana University, 1990)
The Bloc That Failed: Soviet East European Relations in Transition [part 2] 
(Bloomington, Indiana University, 1992)
Getty J.A., Origins of the Great Purges: the Soviet Communist Partv Reconsidered. 
1933-1938 (Cambridge University, 1985)
Getty J.A., Naumov O.V. [eds ]. The Road to Terror: Stalin and the Self-Destruction of
the Bolsheviks (New Haven, Yale University, 1999)
Gori F., Pons S. [eds ], The Soviet Union and Europe in the Cold War. 1943-53
(London, 1996)
Gramsci A., Selections from Political Writings [Q. Hoare, ed.] (London, Lawrence and 
Wishart. 1978)
Habermas J., Legitimation Crisis (London. Heinemann 1976)
Hallas D., The Comintern (London, Bookmarks, 1985)
Trotskys Marxism (London. Bookmarks, 1984)
Harman C., Bureaucracy and Revolution in Eastern Europe (London, Pluto, 1983) 
Class Struggles in Eastern Europe (London, Bookmarks, 1988)
Hastie R.M. The Life and Times of Nikita Khruschev (London, Panther, 1959)
Havel V., Open Letters. Selected Prose 1965-1990 (London. 1991)
Held D., Introduction to Critical Theory: Horkheimer to Habermas (Cambridge, Polity,
1995)
Hosking G., A Historv of the Soviet Union (London, Fontana, 1985)
Hough J., Fainsod M., How the Soviet Union is Governed (Harvard University, 1979)
James C.L.R., World Revolution 1917-1936: The Rise and Fall of the Communist 
International (New Jersey, Humanities Press International,1994)
Kennedy-Pipe C., Stalins Cold War: Soviet Strategies in Europe. 1943 to 1956 (New 
York, Manchester, 1995)
King D., Ryan J., Deutscher T. [eds], Trotksv (Oxford, Basil Blackwell, 1987)
Kolakowski L, Main Currents of Marxism [3 vols ]
The Founders (Oxford. Clarendon, 1978) 
The Golden Ace (Oxford. Clarendon, 1978) 
The Breakdown (Oxford. Clarendon, 1978)
Kravchenko V., I Chose Freedom (Hale. 1947)
Krupskaya N., Memories of Lenin (London, Panther, 1970)
Kusin V., Political Groupings in the Czech Reform Movement (London, Macmillan,
1972)
Le Blanc P., Lenin and the Revolutionarv Partv (New Jersey, 1993)
Leffler M. P., Painter D.S. [eds.]. Origins of the Cold War: An International Historv
(London, Routledge, 1994)
Lenin V.I., A Great Beginning How to Organise Competition? (Moscow. Progress,
1971)
The April Theses (Moscow. Progress, 1985)
A Caricature of Marxism and Imperialist Economism (Moscow, Progress, 
1980)
Collected Works. [45 vols ] (Moscow, Progress, 1960)
Critical Remarks on the National Question (Moscow, Progress, 1985) 
Imperialism, the Highest Stage of Capitalism (Peking. 1975)
Karl Marx (Peking, 1976)
Left-Wing Communism An Infantile Disorder (Moscow, Co-operative 
Publishing Society, 1935)
Lenin on Britain (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1941)
Lenin on Trade Unions (Moscow. Progress, 1970)
The State and Revolution (Moscow. Progress, 1981)
What is to be Done? (New York. International, 1991)
Lenin V I., Trotsky L., Kronstadt [ed. Pierre Frank] (New York, Pathfinder, 1986)
Lewin M., The Making of the Soviet Svstem (London, Methuen, 1985)
Lissagaray, Historv of the Paris Commune of 1871 (London. New Park, 1976)
Luxemburg R., Selected Speeches and Writings (Berlin. 1955),
McCauley M. [d.], Communist Power in Europe 1944-9 
(Basingstoke, Macmillan, 1977)
McNeal R.H., Stalin: Man and Ruler (Basingstoke. Macmillan, 1988)
Maier C.S., The Cold War in Europe. Era of a Divided Continent. (Princeton, Markus 
Wiener, 1996)
[ed.]. The Cold War in Europe (New York, Markus Wiener, 1991)
Marx K., Capital: A Critique of Political Economy [3 vols.] (London, Lawrence and 
Wishart, 1974)
The Civil War in France (Peking. 1977)
A Contribution to the Critique of Political Economv (Moscow. Progress, 1971)
The Economic and Philosophic Manuscripts of 1844 (Moscow, Progress,
1977)
The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte (Moscow. Progress, 1977)
The Povertv of Philosophv (Pekino. 1978)
Marx K., Engels F., The German Ideoloov (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1982)
The Holv Familv (Moscow, Progress, 1980)
Manifesto of the Communist Partv (London, Lawrence and 
Wishart, 1983)
Selected Works [2 vols.] (Moscow, Foreign Languages Publishing 
House, 1958)
Medvedev R.A., Let Historv Judge -The Origins and Consequences of Stalinism (New 
York, Alfred H. Knopf, 1971)
Molyneux J., Marxism and the Partv (London, Pluto, 1978)
What is the Real Marxist Tradition? (London. Bookmarks, 1985)
Milosz C., The Captive Mind (London, Seeker and Warburg, 1953)
Nove A., An Economic Historv of the USSR (Harmondsworth, Pelican, 1980)
Proracci G. [ed.]. The Cominform: Minutes of the Three Conferences (Milan. 1994)
Raskolnikov F.F., Kronstadt and Petroqrad in 1917 (London, New Park, 1982)
Reed J., Ten Days That Shook the World (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1986)
Rees J., Service R., Farber S., Blackburn R., In Defence of October: a debate on the
Russian Revolution (London, 
Bookmarks, 1997)
Rothstein A., A Historv of the USSR (Harmondsworth, Pelican, 1950)
Rush M., [ed.], The International Situation and Soviet Foreign Policy: Key Reports 
from Soviet Leaders from the Revolution to the Present (Columbus, 
Ohio, Charles E. Merrill, 1970)
Salisbury H E., An American in Russia. (New York, Harper and Bros., 1955) 
Anatomy of the Soviet Union [ed.] (London, Nelson, 1967)
Children of Russia (London, Oak Tree, undated)
Schapiro L., The Communist Partv of the Soviet Union (Methuen University 
Paperbacks)
Serge V., Russia Twenty Years After (New York, Pioneer, 1937)
Memoirs of a Revolutionarv (London, Oxford University, 1963)
Sieglebaum L.S., Sokolov A. [eds.], Stalinism as a Wav of Life: A Narrative in
Documents (New Haven, CT, 2000)
Service R., A Historv of Twentieth Century Russia (London, Allen Lane, 1997)
The Russian Revolution 1900-1927 (Basingstoke, MacMillan, 1991)
Shub D., Lenin (Harmondsworth, Pelican, 1977)
Sobolev A.I., Outline Historv of the Communist International 
(Moscow, Progress, 1971)
Skilling H.G., Czecholsovakias Interrupted Revolution (New Jersey, Princeton 
University, 1976)
Stalin J.V., The Foundations of Leninism. On the Problems of Leninism 
(Moscow, Foreign Languages Publishing House, 1950)
Collected Works [13 vols], (Moscow, Progress, 1953)
Swain G The Origins of the Russian Civil War (New York, Longman, 1996)
Swain G., Swain N., Eastern Europe Since 1945 (Basingstoke, Macmillan, 1993)
Talbots, [ed.], Khruschev Remembers (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1977)
Trotsky L., The First Five Years of the Communist International (volume 1) 
(London, New Park, 1973)
Leon Trotsky on Britain (New York, Monad, 1973)
1905 (Harmondsworth, Pelican, 1973)
The Platform of the Joint Opposition. 1927 (London, New Park, 1973)
The Revolution Betrayed (New York, Pathfinder, 1983)
Tucker R.C., Stalin as Revolutionary (New York, Norton, 1973)
Stalinism: Essays in Historical Interpretation [ed.] (New Brunswick, 
Transaction, 1999)
Stalinism [ed.] (New York, Norton, 1977)
Ulam A.B., Stalin: the Man and His Era (London, Allen Lane, 1974)
Williams K., The Prague Spring and its Aftermath: Czechoslovak Politics. 1968-1970 
(Cambridge University, 1997)
Wood A., Stalin and Stalinism (London. Routledge, 1990)
The Origins of the Russian Revolution 1861-1917 (London, Routledge,
1993)
9. Books on Post-war British History, Trade Unionism, The New Left
Abrams M., Rose R., Must Labour Lose? (Harmondsworth, London, 1960)
Ali T., Street Fighting Years: An Autobiooraphv of Sixties (London, Collins, 1988)
Allen A.J., The English Voter (London, English Universities, 1964)
Anderson P., English Questions (London, Verso, 1992)
Ball S., The Conservative Partv Since 1945 (Manchester University, 1998)
Barbalet J.M., Citizenship. (Milton Keynes, Open University, 1988)
Barnett C., The Collapse of British Power (Gloucester, Alan Sutton, 1984)
Beer S.H., Modern British Politics (London, Faber and Faber, 1982)
Benn T., Arguments for Democracv (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1992)
Bogdanor V., Skidelsky R. [eds.]. The Age of Affluence 1951-1964 (Basingstoke,
Macmillan, 1970)
Brittan S., The Treasurv Under the Tories. 1951-1964 (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 
1964)
Brooke S., Reform and Reconstruction: Britain after the War. 1945-51 (Manchester 
University, 1995)
Burgess T., Calvocoressi P., Grieve Smith J., Upton M., Rex J., Seers D., White J., 
Matters of Principle. Labours Last Chance (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1968)
Bunyan T., The Historv and Practice of the Political Police in Britain (London, Quartet,
1978)
Cannon O., Anderson J.R.L., The Road From Wigan Pier (London, Victor Gollancz,
1973)
Callaghan J., The Far Left in British Politics (London, Basil Blackwell, 1987)
Chuter Ede J. [diary, ed., K. Jeffries], Labour and the Wartime Coalition (London,
Historians Press, 1987)
Coates D., The Labour Partv and the Struggle for Socialism (Cambridge University,
1977)
Coopey R., Fielding S., Tiratsoo N., The Wilson Governments. 1964-1970 (London,
Pinter, 1993)
Conekin B., Mort P., Waters C., Moments of Modernity: Reconstructing Britain 1945 -
64 (London, Rivers Oram, 1999)
Crosland C A R., The Future of Socialism. (London, Jonathan Cape, 1956)
Cross C., The Fall of the British Empire. 1918-1968 (London, Paladin, 1970)
Drucker H.M., Doctrine and Ethos in the Labour Partv (London, Allen and Unwin,
1979)
Drucker H.M., Dunleavy P., Gamble A., Peele G., Developments in British Politics
(Basingstoke, Macmillan, 1984)
Duff P., Left Left Left: A Personal Account of Six Protest Campaigns 1945-65 
(London, Alison and Busby, 1971)
Ellison N, Egalitarian Thought and Labour Politics: Retreating Visions. (London, 
Routledge, 1994)
Fielding S., The Labour Partv: Socialism and society since 1951 (Manchester 
University, 1997)
Fielding S., Davies A., [eds.] Workers Worlds: Cultures and Communities in
Manchester and Salford (Manchester University, 1992)
Fyrth J. [ed.]. Labours High Noon: The Government and The Economv. 1945-1951 
(London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1993)
Gyford J., The Politics of Local Socialism (London, Allen and Unwin, 1985)
Hall J.E.D., Labours First Year (Harmondsworth. Penguin, 1947)
HaselerS., The Gaitskellites (London. Macmillan, 1969)
Hogenkamp B., Film. Television and the Left in Britain (London, Lawrence and 
Wishart, 2000)
Hogg Q., The Case For Conservatism (London, Penguin, 1947)
Jefferys K., The Labour Partv Since 1945. (London, Macmillan, 1993)
Jenkins M., Bevanism: Labours High Tide: The Cold War and the Democratic Mass 
Movement. (Nottingham, Spokesman, 1979)
Jenkins R., The Labour Case (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1959)
The Labour Party, Report of the Fifty-Sixth Annual Conference of the Labour Partv. 
Brighton. 1957 (Transport House, 1957)
Leonard D., Crosland and New Labour (Basingstoke. Macmillan, 1999)
Madgwick P.J., Introduction to British Politics (London, Hutchinson, 1970)
Marquand D., Seldon A., The Ideas That Shaped Post-War Britain (London, Fontana,
1996)
Marsh D., Buller J., Hay 0., Johnston J., Kerr P., McAnulla S., Watson M., Postwar 
British Politics in Perspective (Cambridge, Polity, 1999)
Marshall T.H., Citizen and Social Class. (Connecticut, Greenwood, 1950)
Social Policy in the Twentieth Century. (London, Hutchinson, 1975)
Marwick A., British Society Since 1945 (Harmondsworth. Pelican, 1982)
McKibbin R., The Evolution of the Labour Partv. 1910-1924 (Oxford. Clarendon, 1974)
Middlemas K., Power Corruption and the State. [2 vols.], vol.1, Britain in Search of 
Balance 1940-61 (Basingstoke. Macmillan, 1986)
Miliband R., Capitalist Democracv in Britain (Oxford University, 1988)
Parliamentary Socialism (London, Allen and Unwin, 1961)
Milward A.S., The Economic Effects of the World Wars on Britain (London. Macmillan. 
1970)
Moodie G.C., The Government of Great Britain (London, Methuen, 1971)
Morgan K.O., Labour in Power. 1945-1951 (Oxford University, 1985)
Morton A.L., A People's Historv of England (London, Victor Gollancz, 1938)
Noble T., Structure and Change in Modern Britain (London. Batsford, 1981)
Parker J., Social Policy and Citizenship. (London, Macmillan, 1975)
Polling H., A Short Historv of the Labour Party (Basingstoke, Macmillan, 1986)
Powell D., British Politics and the Labour Partv (Harmondsworth. Penguin, 1963)
Punnett, R.M., British Government and Politics (London, Heinemann, 1978)
Renton D., This Rough Game: Fascism and Anti Fascism (Sutton, Stroud, 2001).
Sked A., Cook 0., Post-War Britain: A Political Historv (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 
1990)
Tabori P. [ed.]. Twenty Tremendous Years (London, Oldbourne, 1961)
Tiratsoo N., The Attlee Years (London, Pinter, 1991)
[ed.]. From Blitz to Blair: A New History of Britain since 1939 (London, 
Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1997)
Reconstruction. Affluence and Labour Politics: Coventry 1945-60 (New 
York, Routledge, 1990)
Tiratsoo N., Tomlinson J., Industrial Efficiency and State Intervention: Labour 1939-51
(London, Routledge, 1993)
Twitchell N.H., The Tribune Group: Factional Conflict in the Labour Party 1964-1970 
(London, Rabbit, 1998)
Weiler P., British Labour and the Cold War (California, Stanford University, 1988)
Widgery D., The Left in Britain 1956-1968 (Harmondsworth, Peregrine, 1976)
Wiener M.J., English Culture and the Decline of the Industrial Spirit 1850-1980 
(Cambridge University, 1981)
Wilson H., The Governance of Britain (London, Sphere, 1977)
The Labour Government 1964-70 (Harmondsworth, Pelican, 1974)
Wright P., Greengrass P., Spycatcher (Richmond Victoria, Heinemann, 1987)
Young K., Rao N., Local Government Since 1945 (Oxford, Blackwell, 1997)
9b. Political Biography and Autobiography
Allen V., Trade Union Leadership: Based on a Study of Arthur Deakin. (London, 
Longmans, Green and Co, 1957)
Benn T., Office Without Power: Diaries 1968-72. (London, Arrow, 1988)
Out of the Wilderness: Diaries 1963-67. (London, Arrow, 1994)
Years of Hope: Diaries 1940-1962. (London, Arrow, 1994)
Brivati B., Hugh Gaitskell. (London, Richard Cohen Books, 1997)
Brown G., In Mv Wav: The Political Memoirs of Lord George-Brown. (London, Victor 
Gollancz Ltd, 1971)
Bullock A., The Life and Times of Ernest Bevin: Trade Union Leader 1881-1940. 
(London, Heinemann, 1960)
Campbell J., Nye Bevan: A Biography. (London, Richard Cohen Books, 1997)
Churchill R., The Rise and Fall of Sir Anthony Eden. (London, Macgibbon and Kee, 
1959)
Crosland S., Tony Crosland. (London, Coronet, 1983)
Dalyell T., Dick Crossman: A Portrait. (London Weidenfeld and Nicolson, 1989)
Foot M., Aneurin Beyan: A Biography: Volume 1: 1897-1945. (London, Four Square,
1966)
Hollis P., Jennie Lee: A Life. (Oxford, Oxford Uniyersity Press, 1997)
Howard A. [ed.]. The Crossman Diaries: Selections from the Diaries of a Cabinet 
Minister 1964-1970. (London, Mandarin, 1991)
Jenkins R., A Life at the Centre, (London, Macmillan, 1991)
Macmillan H., Tides of Fortune: 1945-55. (London, Macmillan, 1969)
Major J., John Maior: The Autobiography. (London, Harper Collins, 1999)
Major-Ball T., Maior Maior: Memories of an Older Brother. (London, Gerald Duckworth 
and Co., 1994)
Morgan J. (Ed), The Backbench Diaries of Richard Crossman. (London, Hamish 
Hamilton and Jonathan Cape, 1981)
Thatcher M., The Downing Street Years. (London, Harper Collins, 1993)
Wyatt W., Confessions of an Optimist. (London, Collins, 1985)
9c. Trade Unionism
Allen V.L, The Militancy of British Miners (Shipley, Moor, 1981)
Power in the Trade Unions: A Study of their Organisation in Great Britain 
(London, Longmans Green, 1954)
Trade Unions and the Government (London. Longmans Green, 1954)
Barnes D., Governments and Trade Unions: The British Experience. 1964-1979 
(London, Heinemann, 1980)
Birch L. [ed.], The Historv of the TUG. 1868-1968 (London, TUC, 1968)
Blackburn R., Cockburn A. [eds]. The Incompatibles: Trade Union Militancv and the
Consensus. (Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1967)
Callinicos A., Simons M., The Great Strike: The Miners' Strike of 1984-5 and its
Lessons (London, Socialist Worker, 1985)
Campbell A., N. Fishman, J. Mcllroy, British Trade Unions and Industrial Politics: The
Post-War Compromise. 1945-64 (Aldershot. 1999)
Cannell M., Citrine N. [eds ]. Citrines ABC of Chairmanship (London, NCLC, 1982)
Clarkson L A. [ed ], British Trade Union and Labour Historv: A Compendium 
(Basingstoke, Macmillan, 1990)
Coates K., Topham T., The New Unionism: The Case For Workers Control
(Harmondsworth, Pelican, 1974)
Coates K., Topham T., Barrett Brown M., Trade Union Register (London, Merlin,
1969)
Cole G.D.H., Short Historv of the British Working Class Movement. 1789-1947. 
(London, Allen and Unwin, 1948)
Davies M., Comrade or Brother? (London. Pluto, 1993)
Dorfman G., British Trade Unionism Against the Trades Union Congress (London, 
Macmillan, 1983)
Wage Politics in Britain. 1945-1947: Government versus the TUC (Iowa 
State University, 1973)
Durcan, J.W., McCarthy W.E.J., Redman G.P., Strikes in Post-War Britain -  A study
of stoppages of work due to industrial 
disputes. 1946-73 (London, Allen and 
Unwin, 1983)
Electrical Trades Union, [anonymous: Foreword, Stevens, W.], The Story of the ETU:
The Official Historv of the Electrical Trades Union (Bromley, 
ETU, 1952)
Hannington W., Mr Chairman A Short guide to the Conduct and Procedure of 
Meetings (London, Lawrence and Wishart, 1966)
Harrison M., Trade Unions and the Labour Partv since 1945 (London, Allen and 
Unwin, 1960)
Hinton J., Labour and Socialism: A historv of the British Labour Movement, 1867-1974 
(London, Wheatsheaf, 1983)
Hyman R., Strikes (London, Fontana, 1984)
Jackson M., Industrial Relations: A Textbook (London, Groom Helm, 1977)
Strikes: Industrial Conflict in Britain. USA and Australia (Brighton, 
Wheatsheaf, 1987)
Trade Unions (London, Longman, 1988)
Kelly J., Heery E., Working for the Union: British Trade Union Officers (Cambridge 
University, 1994)
Lloyd J., Light and Liberty The Historv of the EETPU (London, Weidenfeld and 
Nicolson, 1990)
Martin R., Communism and the British Trade Unions (Oxford. Clarendon, 1969)
Panitch L., Social Democracv and Industrial Militancv: The Labour Partv. the Trade 
Unions and Incomes Policv. 1945-1974 (Cambridge University, 1976)
Working Class Politics in Crisis: Essavs on Labour and the State (London, 
Verso, 1986)
Paynter W., British Trade Unions and the Problem of Change (London, Allen and 
Unwin, 1970)
Pelling H., A Historv of British Trade Unionism (Harmondsworth. Pelican, 1963)
Pimlott B., Cook C. [eds.]. Trade Unions in British Politics: The First 250 Years
(Harlow, Longman, 1991)
Robertson R., Sams K.I., British Trade Unionism: Selected Documents (Oxford,
Blackwell, 1972)
Rolph C H., All Those in Favour?: The ETU Trial (London, Andre Deutsch, 1962) 
Richter I., Political Purpose in Trade Unions (London, Allen and Unwin, 1973)
P. Weiller, British Labour and the Cold War (Stanford University, California, 1988) 
Wrigley C. [ed.], British Trade Unions 1945-1995 (Manchester University, 1997)
9d. The New Left
Anderson P., Arguments Within English Marxism (London, Verso, 1980)
Archer R., Bubeck D., Clock H., Jacobs L., Morgan S., Steinhouse A., Weinstock D., 
[eds.] Out of Apathy: Voices of the New Left Thirty Years On [papers based on 
conference organised by the Oxford University Socialist Discussion Group] (London, 
Verso, 1989)
Dworkin D.L., Cultural Marxism in Postwar Britain: History, the New Left and the 
Origins of Cultural Studies (Durham NC, Duke University, 1997)
Dworkin D.L., Roman L.G. [eds.], Views Beyond the Border Country: Raymond
Williams and Cultural Politics (New York, 
Routledge, 1993)
Kaye H.J., McClelland K. [eds], E.P. Thompson: Critical Perspectives (Oxford, Polity,
1990)
Kenny M., The First New Left: Britains Organic Intellectuals? (London, Lawrence and 
Wishart, 1995)
Palmer B.D., E.P. Thompson: Obiections and Oppositions (London. Verso. 1994)
McCann G., Theory and History: The Political Thought of E.P. Thompson (Aldershot. 
Ashgate, 1997)
Thompson E.P., The Heavy Dancers (London, Merlin, 1985)
The Poverty of Theory and Other Essays (London. Merlin, 1978) 
Writing By Candlelight (London, Merlin, 1980)
Thompson E.P., Davies M., Williams R., Bahro R., Magri L., Balibar E., Medvedev R 
and Z, Cox J., Kugai S., Raskin M., Chomsky N., Wolfe A., Kaldor M., Halliday F., 
Exterminism and Cold War (London, Verso, 1982)
Thompson E.P., Smith D. [eds.], Protest and Survive (Harmondsworth, Penguin,
1980)
Webster D., The Labour Party and the New Left (London, Fabian Society, 1981)
Williams R., Culture (London. Fontana, 1981)
The Long Revolution (Harmondsworth, Pelican, 1980)
Marxism and Literature (Oxford University, 1977)
Orwell (London. Fontana, 1991)
Young N., An Infantile Disorder?: The Crisis and Decline of the New Left (London, 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1977)
10. Books on European History
Bethel N., Gomulka: His Poland and His Communism (Harmodsworth. Penguin, 1972)
Cohn-Bendit D. and C., Obsolete Communism The Left Wing Alternative
(Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1969)
Duggan C., Wag staff C. [eds], Italy in the Cold War: Politics. Culture and Society.
1948-1958 (Oxford. Berg, 1995)
Fulbrook M. [ed ], Europe Since 1945 (Oxford Uniyersity, 2001)
Ginsborg P., A History of Contemporary Italy. Society and Politics. 1943-1988 
Harmondsworth, Penguin, 1990)
Hobsbawm E., Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century. 1914-1991 (London, 
Michael Joseph, 1994)
MazowerM., Dark Continent: Europes Twentieth Century (Harmondsworth. Penguin,
1998)
Reader K., Wadia K., The May 1968 Eyents in France. Reproductions and
Interpretations (New York, St. Martins, 1993)
11. Unpublished Works.
Bryant B.A.D., The New Left in Britain; The Dialectic of Rationality and Participation, 
PhD. Thesis, LSE, 1981
Dayis M.J., New Left Reyiews Analysis of Britain, 1964 to 1990, PhD. Thesis, 
Uniyersity of London, 1998
N. Ellison, Concepts of Equality in the British Labour Party 1931-64, Ph.D. Thesis 
(Econ), 1988, LSE
Getty J. A., The Great Purges Reconsidered: The Soyiet Communist Party, 1933- 
1939, PhD Thesis, Boston College, 1979
Hudson K., The Double Blow; 1956 and the Communist Party of Great Britain, PhD.
Thesis, Uniyersity of London (1992), 5, Institute of Historical Research.
Koenker D., Moscow Workers in 1917, PhD Thesis, Uniyersity of Michigan, 1976
Russell R., Unpublished Autobiography.
