Title
DEMENTIA AT THE THRESHOLD:  
A QUALITATIVE INVESTIGATION OF 
NEGOTIATING THRESHOLD SPACES 
WITH DEMENTIA 
Catherine Pemble 
Faculty of Social Sciences 
University of Stirling 
This dissertation is submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
June 2019
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to thank my supervisors, Dr Richard Ward, Prof Kirstein Rummery, and Dr 
Maureen Michael for their advice, patience, and guidance, without which this thesis would 
remain little more than a tangled mass of fuzzy ideas and 50-word sentences. 
Thanks, too, to Dr Kainde Manji for her tireless support, her empathy, her mentorship and 
her wisdom, to Dr Grant Gibson for his sympathetic ear, to Dr Alison Dawson for her 
patience, insight, and compassion, and to Dr Louise McCabe for her support throughout 
this process. Without you all I would have abandoned academia for a hermitage in the 
remotest highlands long ago.  
Thank you to my friends and colleagues; my coffee wanderers, ranting companions, and cake 
enablers. This process would have been a far greyer and lonelier one without you. Thanks to 
Beth Cairns and Jessica Cleary, without whom I would be a crumpled, overwhelmed and 
hopeless mess.   Thank you to Drs Rosie Ashworth, Ashley Rogers, and Katrina Roszynski 
for showing that there is life beyond the PhD, and for somehow finding the time and the 
energy to reach back to help those climbing behind you. Words cannot adequately express 
how thankful I am to each and every one of you for your help and support, especially in 
these final months.  
Thanks are also owed to my friends; to Hannah Rae for her constant support; to Nicole 
Smith for her friendship, her acceptance, and her most excellent baby; and to Elizabeth 
Heaney for her critical eye, her comfy sofa, and her seemingly endless supply of weekend 
work snacks.   
And finally, thank you to my family; to my parents for their unwavering support, and my 
Nana and Grandad for their unshakable belief in my ability to see this thing through to the 
very end. Thanks, in fact, are due to everyone but Lance, who insisted on supporting me 
through this chaotic journey, my Alasdair, who is obsessed with being the most supportive 
and understanding sibling anyone could ask for, and Tiernan, without whom I would never 
have made it to the end. Yall are the absolute worst, and I love you endlessly.  
For Nana 
I need you to know what I know: to be rendered powerless does not destroy your humanity. Your 
resilience is your humanity. 
The only people who lose their humanity are those who believe they have the right to render another 
human being powerless. They are the weak. 
To yield and not break, that is incredible strength. 
(Gadsby, Olb and Parry, 2018) 
ABSTRACT  
This thesis argues for a profound shift in the way in which we understand dementia, 
advocating from a move away from the rhetoric of loss and decay, and towards an 
acknowledgement of people with dementia as whole and undiminished by the progress of 
their disease. It highlights the role of the narratives of decay in oppressing and disabling 
people with dementia, and contends that it the meaning attributed to dementia, rather than 
the dementia itself, which limits both what people with dementia can do and who they can 
This research uses an ethnographic approach to explores key areas where the physical, social 
and temporal spaces controlled by people with dementia meet those controlled by others, 
and elucidates the complex relationality of these threshold spaces. Through drawing on 78 
hours of audio interviews with 11 people living with dementia in Scotland, this research 
highlights key physical, social, and temporal thresholds that participants encountered as part 
of their day-to-day lives. 
This thesis highlights the weaknesses in approaches that construct people with dementia as 
passive victims of biological tragedy. It offers instead a theoretical perspective that is rooted, 
in the understanding that a person cannot be unmade by cognitive impairment. This 
perspective is grounded in Heideggerian philosophy, and allows for a deeper exploration of 
how people with dementia experience the physical, social, and temporal world as 
undiminished Dasein living with cognitive impairment. These experiences are contextualised 
through the lens provided by Thomas social relational approach to disability, which 
emphasises the role of society in disabling and oppressing people with dementia. These 
findings emphasise the need for a profound shift in both how dementia is represented as a 
reductive and tragic process and the ways in which barriers to social inclusion are constructed 
as the result of medical rather than social processes. 
CONTENTS 
3 : A SELF BEYOND PERSONHOOD: DASEIN, DWELLING, AND BEING-WITH-
5: MANAGING THRESHOLDS IN PHYSICAL SPACE: THE ART OF DWELLING 
7: I HOPE IM IN THE CROWD THAT DOESNT GET ON THE SILLY SIDE: 
How does investigating thresholds facilitate greater insight and support better outcomes for people 
What is the benefit of exploring the experiences of people with dementia as disabled people? . 252 
LIST OF FIGURES 
PICTURE 18: NIGEL SHOWS OFF HIS ELEPHANTS GRAVEYARD MEMENTO MORI
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378034
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378035
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378036
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378037
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378038
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378039
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378040
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378041
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378042
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378043
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378044
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378045
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378046
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378047
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378048
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378049
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378050
file:///C:/Users/cp36/Desktop/Master%20Vers%20Full%20Thesis%202019b.docx%23_Toc26378050
1: INTRODUCTION 
Someone ought to do something 
(Pratchett, 1996, p111). 
Overview 
The way we talk about dementia has changed. Whether it is within academia, where the 
discourse casts an increasingly critical eye over the ways in which people with dementia are 
diagnosed, informed and treated (Millby, Murphy and Windthrop, 2017 and Bonner et al., 
2015 respectively), or in a wider societal context, where there are growing tensions between 
how people without dementia represent people with dementia (Peel, 2014) and how people 
with dementia themselves wish to be represented (DEEP, 2015). Where these conversations 
mirror one another, however, is in the scale of the problem, with both academic and public 
sources presenting dementia as the greatest global challenge for health and social care in the 
21st century (Kivimaki and Singh-Manoux, 2018, p1574).  
It is this growing awareness of dementia as a societal rather than individual problem that has 
prompted increased efforts to identify risk factors, with an aim of reducing dementia 
prevalence by up to 35% (Livingston et al., 2017), alongside greater calls for early 
identification and diagnosis (see Donegan et al., 2017 for a review). What such efforts fail to 
provide, however, is substantive benefits for people who are already living with a dementia 
diagnosis. Having moved beyond the stages of prevention or diagnosis, the focus of policy 
and research increasingly becomes one of mitigation, enabling people to age in place 
(Milligan, 2009; Wiles, Leibing, Guberman, Reeve and Allen, 2011) by creating dementia 
friendly spaces. This is further emphasised by policy, with the Department of Health (2015) 
aiming to adapt existing communities such over 50% of the 850,000 people who live with 
dementia in the UK (Alzheimer Society, 2017) live within one by 2020. Despite this increase 
in research activity, several key questions remain: what does it mean to be dementia friendly? 
How, and by whom, should dementia friendliness be assessed, and upon what scale? How 
large is ones community? Indeed, what constitutes community for a person with dementia? 
Is it sufficient to attend only to the processes of aging in place (and thus geography) or must 
there also be consideration of an individuals social and emotional place in aging as argued by 
Wang, (2019)? In the current socio-political climate, these questions become more than 
flights of intellectual fancy: they are fundamental to ensuring progress, and they demand 
answers.  
The following doctoral thesis addresses these questions by introducing the concept of 
thresholds as a theoretical lens through which questions of physical and experiential 
accessibility, space, place, and temporality can be interrogated. By broadening the definition 
of the threshold beyond a set of architectural features, this research departs from the work 
of scholars who view thresholds both physically anchored and socially salient, to ask: how 
do we know what, and where, thresholds are?  
Throughout this text, I shall present an understanding of thresholds as omnipresent. We 
meet them often, for they stand between where we are and where we wish to go. They mark 
the point where we meet others in a social relationship in the present moment, even as they 
separate who we were once from who we are, and who we might become. Despite this, there 
are few works that sufficiently recognise the importance of threshold spaces to those who 
might wish to enter, or engage with, dementia friendly initiatives, spaces, and services. Such 
a gap in the literature challenges the viability of a dementia friendly space that fails to attend 
to its thresholds, and as a result restricts or excludes people with dementia from the very 
space designed to enable them?  
I present this thesis as the product of four years of intensive research activity, and the 
culmination of a process that began in my three years as an autism support worker following 
my undergraduate degree. That this role focused on facilitation, enablement, and person 
centred practice continues to have a profound impact on both my personal perspective and 
my research. The concept of physical thresholds as they are presented in this thesis was 
certainly seeded during these years, where transitional spaces often became the focus when 
service users experienced difficulty moving between spaces or activities. The concept was 
further developed during my conversations with people living with dementia at conferences 
and academic events, some of whom reported feeling at home among the autistic community 
where challenges related to executive dysfunction and impaired short term memory are 
common (see Ozonoff, South & Provencal, 2007). The process of working alongside and 
building relationships with adults with different ways of Being and relating to and within the 
world made clear to me that any attempt to link cognitive capacity to selfhood are flawed at 
best at malignant (Kitwood, 1997) at worst.  As such, my experiences can be seen throughout 
this research; in my choice of philosophical grounding, the pivot towards disability studies, 
and ultimately in my dedication to treating people living with dementia as experts and 
curators of their own experience.  
The work of this thesis is to attend to this gap in the literature. It does so by drawing upon 
insights from accomplished scholars in a variety of disciplines, including those who align 
themselves with philosophy, sociology, anthropology, disability studies and dementia studies. 
It draws great strength from its association with its parent project, the Our Places, Our 
People research project and situates itself within the broader scope of the Neighbourhoods 
programme by examining in detail those physical, social, and temporal thresholds which are 
present but ill elucidated elsewhere in the research package. As such, the results of this thesis 
serve to deepen the consideration of physical thresholds within the Our Places, Our People 
project while also forging new avenues into for the consideration of what physical, social, 
and temporal thresholds might be important for people living with dementia. This doctoral 
research further adds to the parent project through its incorporation of the social relational 
model of disability, and the explicit consideration of people living with dementia as targets 
of civilized oppression. These insights are further contextualized by reading the research in 
the context of the other seven working groups within the ESRC, NIHR funded 
Neighbourhoods and Dementia research programme (Neighbourhoods and Dementia, 
2012).  
This research is further privileged by the involvement of Alzheimer Scotland, who not only 
part funded the project, but who acted as key gatekeepers and facilitators throughout. It is 
through these partnerships that this research has been able to situate itself in a broader 
context, and glean insights into family life, service use, and the importance of neighbourhood 
and community spaces to people with dementia (see Ward, Clark and Hargreaves, 2012 and 
Ward et al., 2017 for a review). It is through attending to the following four research 
questions that this thesis contributes to this growing literature, and contributes both to the 
parent project and to the wider body of knowledge: 
What thresholds do people with dementia encounter in the course of their everyday 
lives? 
How do people with dementia manage threshold spaces? 
How does investigating threshold spaces facilitate greater insight and support better 
outcomes for people living with dementia? 
What is the benefit of exploring the experiences of people with dementia as disabled 
people? 
Key Concepts 
Dementia, Disability, and Civilised Oppression 
It is necessary, therefore, to provide a brief insight into the key terms and concepts upon 
which this work is based. The following section is therefore, supplemented by the more in 
depth discussions of each concept that occur in Chapters Two and Three and are further 
developed throughout the thesis. As a basis for this process, it is important to note from the 
outset the meanings that this research ascribes to the word dementia, and what it does not. 
First, this thesis defines dementia in the following way; as a collection of degenerative 
neurological diseases that are sufficiently alike in symptomology to be brought together 
under a single overarching term. While there is an argument for differentiating between 
participants based on their specific diagnosis, and thus dividing the participants into those 
diagnosed with Alzheimers Disease, Dementia with Lewy Bodies, Frontotemporal 
Dementia or Mixed Dementias and so on, such an approach would not reflect the lived 
reality of participants. Investigating the experiences of people with dementia, allows for an 
exploration of the participants experiences in the context of their engagement with a range 
of social structures and networks for whom dementia is more salient than posterior cortical 
atrophy or even mixed dementias. That these people are marginalised based on the 
common construction of them as people with (a) dementia ensures that such an approach is 
both valid and salient. This work thus joins the growing body of literature that seeks to 
elucidate the relationship between the person with dementia and the society within which 
they live through by highlighting the distinction between a person with dementia 
encountering challenges due to their progressive cognitive impairment, and the person being 
disabled by an ablest and stigmatizing society (Dorenlot, 2005). To this end, this thesis adopts 
Carol Thomas social-relational approach to disability (1999; 2004; 2012) which positions 
disability as a status imposed upon a person with impairments by the organisation of space, 
place, and society, and impairment, as it is understood as a biological, pre-social aspect of 
ones body (Thomas, 2007). As such, this work is able to acknowledge the biological effects 
of dementia disease as impairments and their impact upon the embodied experience of the 
person with dementia as impairment effects, which exist pre-socially and which no amount 
of social justice can eliminate. It is the societal imposition of disability upon the person with 
dementia as a disabled person with an impairment that this work views through the lens of 
Harveys (1999; 2015) concept of civilised oppression, thus highlighting the subtle and 
pervasive ways in which the organisation of society, and the interactions between individuals 
who are not oppressed and those who are, enforce and recreate oppression at an 
interpersonal level.  
The Narratives of Decay 
The narratives of decay are those that dehumanise, devalue and demean people with 
dementia based on their impairment. These narratives present dementia as a phantom, and 
a force to be resisted at all cost. They construct the person with dementia as unknowing and 
unknowable, a vegetable, (Albinsson & Strang, 2003 p.229) who has been unravelled 
(Fortana and Smith, 1989) by the disease. Indeed, the power of these constructions is such 
that it can lead to an understanding of the person with dementia as a shell (Radden and 
Fordyce, 2006), leading kin to proclaim that Mom no longer exists even though shes still 
there (Albinsson & Strang, 2003 p.230). People with dementia are as such constructed as 
effectively dead (Luntly, 2005), releasing society of its obligations towards them as they 
become a human non-person (Singer, 2011). These narratives are reductionist, and persist 
even where person centred care exists, for arguing that a person with dementia must be 
treated as a person in deference to their history (Kitwood, 1997) does not necessitate that 
the person believe in their continued person-ness. These are the narratives of decay, and 
many of the decisions that have shaped this thesis have been made explicitly with the goal of 
deposing them in mind. 
Heideggers Work: Dasein and Dwelling 
This thesis draws extensively from both Heideggerian philosophical constructs and 
hermeneutic approaches to analysis and interpretation. As such, it is necessary to outline 
briefly two theoretical constructions here. The first of these is Dasein. Dasein (or Da-Sein, 
there-being in German) is at its most foundational level, Heideggers conceptualization of 
the self, the I, or the person. The contribution of Dasein to this thesis is as simple as its 
trappings are complicated: Dasein is not reliant upon cognition. The implications of this are 
far reaching, for a self that is not reliant upon cognition (as it is in Cartesian models where 
thought precedes being, I think therefore I am) cannot be eroded by cognitive impairment or 
decline. As a result, this work is able to not only discount any suggestion that people with 
dementia are necessarily lesser than those without, and that, resultantly those with more 
significant impairments are human nonpersons (Singer, 2011; Hofmann, 2017) and shells 
(Herskovits, 1995), but to undercut these sentiments altogether. The second Heideggerian 
concept that places a major role in this work is that of dwelling, which is at its core how 
Dasein is in the world. Dasein is a dweller, and dwells through creating things (both physical, 
as in buildings, and nonphysical, as in societal systems, norms, mythos and so on) and 
protecting, preserving, and cherishing those things. It is this concept that provides the 
contextual lens for many activities at the threshold, as Chapters Five, Six and Seven explore 
the ways in which the practices of dwelling influence the organisation of threshold spaces.  
Thresholds 
This thesis uses the terms thresholds and threshold spaces to highlight a complex 
phenomenon which is both central to this work, and key to the lives of people with dementia. 
In their most familiar form, these thresholds might be aligned with designated spaces which 
separate one area from another, as they are at doorways in Latimer (2018) and Buch (2015) 
and become the focus along fences in Agamben (2005), these works rarely acknowledge the 
rich complexity of the threshold space. Thresholds are discrete spaces, in that they are 
distinct from the phenomena that lies at either side, yet because their thresholdness results 
from their ability to draw together these phenomena, they are both beholden to them and 
shaped by them. Heidegger presents this notion in the following way: 
The threshold [] bears the doorway as a whole. It sustains the middle in which the two, the 
outside and the inside, penetrate each other. The threshold bears the inbetween. What goes out 
and goes in, in the inbetween, is joined in the betweens dependability. The dependability of the 
middle must never yield either way  
(Heidegger, 1971, p.201).  
This extract gives a clear example as to how thresholds manifest in physical space, as at once 
beholden to and shaped by the spaces on either side while still being distinct phenomena 
themselves. This thesis, therefore, treats thresholds in a similar way: as significant and 
distinct, yet beholden. As stable and dependable, yet responsive to changes on either side. 
As such, the term threshold space is used to capture not only the threshold itself, but those 
efforts and phenomena that are proximal to it, and from which it most directly draws its 
character.  
The majority of this thesis is, therefore, an exploration of the experiences of people with 
dementia as they approach, and manage, these relational meeting spaces. Where these 
thresholds occur in physical space, I find my approach aligned with that of Latimer (2018) 
and Buch (2015) and their understanding of threshold spaces as tied to physical architecture, 
particularly at doorways, and staircases. Where the consideration moves to social thresholds, 
however, the analysis requires a step towards abstraction, while still aligning itself with the 
way relationships are often communicated in informal speech- that is, spatially, where an 
individual can both go too far and meet someone halfway. That thresholds can represent 
intangible spaces where two social forces are drawn together, therefore, is easily understood. 
The thesis also turns its focus towards the consideration of temporal thresholds, which once 
again draws upon the tendency to discuss temporalities as related to spatial arrangements: 
The past is a foreign country, after all (Lowenthal, 1985). The past can feel, and be felt on a 
profound and emotional level, as distant, and left behind, while the future is coming 
towards(see Rogers, 2017 for a discussion). Thus, much as physical thresholds can draw 
together two physical spaces, and social thresholds are situated between people, temporal 
thresholds are those nonphysical spaces where past and present are drawn together, for 
example, where a past time is made present through remembrance, or the future is drawn 
towards the present through expectation, anticipation or planning. What this means for 
people with dementia, in the context of being people with impairments who are marginalized 
and disabled by societal structures, is teased out throughout the body of this thesis, and is at 
the heart of the first research question; what thresholds do people with dementia encounter 
in the course of their everyday lives?  
Thesis Structure. 
This thesis is organised into nine parts, of which this introductory chapter is the first.  
Chapter Two begins by exploring the concept of civilised oppression as Harvey (2015) 
presents it. This leads into the consideration of people with dementia as oppressed by society 
on the basis of their diagnosis. The chapter then considers the ways in which dementia 
studies would benefit from drawing from the well-established and politically powerful 
discipline of disability studies, and particularly the implications of the Social Model of 
Disability. This is followed by a discussion of the challenges associated with applying the 
Social Model to dementia and concludes by arguing that Carol Thomas (1999; 2003; 2006) 
Social Relational Approach presents an opportunity to navigate the weaknesses inherent in 
the social model while still drawing on its strength. 
Chapter Three opens with a consideration of Kitwoods work on personhood, and focuses 
particularly on its grounding in philosophical thinking. The chapter goes on to argue that it 
is the positioning of personhood as a status, rather than a property that is inherent within 
the self, that has encouraged debates to continue as to whether people with dementia are 
whole selves by the end of their lives. The tendency to discuss dementia as a reductive force, 
which results in a hollowing out or zombification (Kessler, 2007) is parsed together as the 
narratives of decay. These narratives, the chapter argues, are examples of societal aggression 
towards a marginalised and vulnerable group, and have profound impacts both upon what 
people with dementia can do, and what they can be. The Chapter then moves to introduce 
Dasein as an alternative to the cognition-focused models of selfhood. The rest of the chapter 
is spent discussing Heideggers philosophical construction of Dasein, and its nature in 
relation to being-in-the-world, dwelling and being-with-others.  
Chapter Four draws together the theoretical considerations of chapters Two and Three into 
a single theoretical framework, and discusses the methodology of the study. This begins with 
a discussion of ethnographic approaches as a way of exploring the experiences of others in-
the-world, and the use of observation, interview, digital photography and field notes as 
methods of data capture. Having outlined the structure of the project, the chapter then 
discusses participant recruitment and issues of consent, entering the field, and ethical 
challenges. The final sections of the chapter provide an explicit discussion of the process of 
data analysis as it was undertaken using Hermeneutic phenomenology, and the process of 
writing an ethnography. 
Chapter Five stands as the first findings chapter, and as such focuses on how participants 
encountered and experienced physical thresholds during the course of their everyday lives. 
Stepping off from the familiar concept of thresholds as spatially bound to architectural 
features, particularly doorways, windows and stairs, this chapter demonstrates the power of 
the person with dementia as manager of thresholds and a dweller within their home space. 
The chapter places a particular emphasis on the ways in which participants could influence 
threshold spaces to facilitate access for those who were welcome, or restrict or deny access 
to those who were unwelcome.  
Chapter Six introduces the idea of social thresholds. This chapter begins by exploring the 
significant impact of social thresholds on physical spaces, and highlights the potential for 
objects around physical thresholds to represent both a means of managing physical 
thresholds and an ongoing relationship with someone who is not present in the moment of 
crossing. This discussion extends into a consideration of the role of trusted others and key 
individuals in the lives of people with dementia, and highlights the social threshold that 
differentiates between those who are held in confidence as part of the inner circle and those 
who are not. The complexity of the social threshold as it relates both to interpersonal 
relationships and ongoing rights and citizenship is then explored in relation to driving and 
maintaining the status associated with being a driver.  
Chapter Seven is the final findings chapter of the thesis and describes the experiences of 
participants with dementia as they approach and manage their passage over temporal 
thresholds. This chapter strongly repudiates the narratives of decay, and strongly advocates 
for an understanding of people with dementia as whole and undiminished Dasein. The 
chapter begins by highlighting the ways in which participants were able to draw together the 
past and present through reminiscence and storytelling in order to convey key information 
about themselves. The focus then shifts towards a consideration of the present as a time 
which is both subject to contestation where the participants rhythms of life and living differ 
from the speed and temporality of the outer world, and as the period within which 
participants must manage changes in impairment. Finally the chapter considers the role of 
participants as managers of temporal thresholds between the present and the future. This 
discussion highlights the tensions inherent within the narratives of decay, and contests that 
participants remained forward-facing, active agents throughout their lives, regardless of their 
dementia diagnosis. 
Chapter Eight draws the findings of Chapters Five, Six, and Seven, together with the 
existing literature to demonstrate the impact of adopting a Dasein perspective for dementia 
and the value of thresholds as an analytical framework. Chapter Eight thus uses the findings 
of this research to present a sharp critique of the narratives of decay, highlighting the power 
of the person with dementia at physical, social, and temporal thresholds as a demonstration 
of their ongoing orientation towards and experience of the world. The chapter goes further, 
demonstrating both the damaging and ablest assumptions upon which the narratives of decay 
are based and the value of Thomas social relational approach to disability as a lens through 
which participants experiences should be understood as the experiences of disabled people 
living with cognitive impairment. The chapter closes by emphasising the value of the 
thresholds as a novel framework that highlights both the power of the person with dementia 
and the complex relationalities of civilised oppression and structural disablism. 
Chapter Nine concludes the thesis by drawing focus back to the research questions. After 
considering each of these questions in turn and providing a brief insight into the key findings 
as they relate to the concerns raised, the chapter then details the main contributions to 
knowledge that are made by this thesis, namely the development of the thresholds 
framework, the application of the Dasein perspective to dementia, and the use of dwelling 
as a dualistic concept that provides a nuanced insight into the ways in which people with 
dementia organise and mange their physical, social, and temporal thresholds as undiminished 
dwellers.  
2 : DEMENTIA, DISABLEMENT, & 
DISABILITY 
Introduction 
One of the major contributions of this doctoral thesis is its argument that people living with 
dementia should be considered as disabled people. While there is a growing tendency for 
dementia literature more widely to acknowledge either people with dementia as disabled, or 
dementia as a disability, a systematic adoption of a disability approach is rare. In this chapter 
I argue that the reticence to align dementia studies with disability theory is predominantly 
due to the radical linguistic and conceptual shifts involved in such a change. Viewed through 
the lens of disablement people with dementia are not incidentally marginalised within society; 
their exclusion from public space is not due to the lack of special provision. Instead people 
with dementia are targets of societal oppression that is enacted through the relationships that 
they have with other people, organisations, and the state. Throughout this chapter I argue 
that only by engaging with people with dementia as both individuals with a degenerative 
brain disease and as targets of oppression that dementia research might meet its 
emancipatory goals.  
This chapter opens by exploring the concept of civilised oppression as it is presented by 
Harvey (2015). This construction provides an avenue for analysis that recognises 
marginalised people are oppressed while simultaneously attending to perspectives that 
consider oppression is both quintessentially violent and knowingly perpetuated. This 
argument in turn leads into the consideration of people with dementia as an oppressed 
population and concludes that, while ageist constructions contribute to the stigmatisation of 
older people, people with dementia are doubly vulnerable due to their position at the 
intersection of age and disability. From this point the chapter considers the ways in which 
sociological investigations of dementia might draw from the well-established and politically 
powerful discipline of disability studies. Particular attention is paid to the ways in which 
disability studies has rejected medicalised approaches to disability and advocated for 
approaches rooted in the Social Model of Disability. This is followed by a discussion of the 
challenges associated with applying the Social Model to disability and concludes by arguing 
that Carol Thomas (1999; 2006) Social Relational Approach presents an opportunity to 
navigate the weaknesses inherent in the social model while still drawing on its strength.  
Civilised Oppression 
When we think of oppression, we think of police abducting people in the middle of the night, 
people being tortured, lynched, or arbitrarily imprisoned, []We think of systematic brutality, 
terror, and evil on a scale that shocks. [] the kind of evil that should be recognisable as evil.  
(Harvey, 1999, p1). 
One of the primary challenges associated oppression as it occurs in the everyday context, 
and particularly with citing specific populations as targets of oppression, is the presumption 
that oppression must be easily identifiable to be present. From such a perspective, the 
argument that marginalised people in society are oppressed becomes more divisive. Is a 
forced admission to a care home (Dwyer, 2010) tantamount to abduction? Are care practices 
that strip people of their dignity and actively humiliate them implements of torture (Barclay, 
2016)? Does failing to address suffering perpetuate pain and create torture without a 
torturer (Marino & Marino, 2014, p54)? Such arguments are unlikely to facilitate 
communication between those constructed as targets of such oppressive measures (or, 
perhaps, those who construct them as such) and the professionals who are instrumental in 
these processes and act in line with their best intentions and practices (see Hertog, The, 
Miesen & Eefsting 2004 for an example of this). It is important to ask too whether 
oppression must always act along these recognisable contentious pathways. Must each act of 
oppression be one of atrocity (Card, 2002)and critically must oppression be enacted 
interpersonally by evil-doers?  
The focus of this research is not however whether people with dementia can be victims of 
violent oppression. As such, while this work acknowledges that people with dementia can be 
targets of violent abuse and subject to repressive legal precedent (see Behuniak, 2010 for a 
review), its focus turns instead towards what Harvey (1999; 2015) terms civilised 
oppression. Civilised oppression is primarily differentiated from the traditional oppressions 
described above by its nonviolent nature, the seeming triviality of the oppressive practices, 
and the central role of distorted relationships in enabling and perpetuating the oppression. 
Importantly: 
There are, by definition, no blatantly violent actions to see, nothing to arouse any deep moral 
concern in observers. Even the agents of the oppression typically do not strike us as immoral, 
let alone evil. In some cases they are even transparently well intentioned toward the victims they 
oppress. We can learn about this form of oppression only from the victims themselves. 
(Harvey, 2015 p4) 
Using such a framework has a number of advantages, many of them resulting from the critical 
insight that is provided by considering civilised oppression as a primarily relational, rather 
than physical, experience. It is therefore possible to consider a range of marginalised 
identities as potential targets of civilised oppression including those who are overweight, 
Muslim, living with chronic pain, or ex-prisoners (Holland, Blood, Thomas, Karunaratne, & 
Lewis, 2010; Ahmed, 2018; Parsons, Dolan & Stuart, 2016; Jarldorn, 2016, respectively). 
Indeed, by separating traditional (violent) acts of oppression from civilised oppression, it 
remains possible to unilaterally condemn acts of violent oppression as morally corrupt and 
unconscionable without necessitating the vilification of those individuals who contribute to 
civilised oppression. This is particularly important given that Harvey (2015) notes throughout 
her text that the mechanisms of civilised oppression are so subtle that not only those who 
are oppressed might find it difficult to identify individual instances of oppression but those 
who enact oppressive practices may not recognise their behaviour as such.  
It is because acts of civilised oppression are enacted routinely, thoughtlessly, and with an air 
of triviality they are able to pass under the social radar (ibid, p82). As such it becomes 
necessary not only to identify those behaviours that contribute to oppression but to convince 
those who are not oppressed of the significance and impact of those actions and their role 
in perpetuating them. Fully recognising oppression, Harvey argues, can only be achieved by 
inverting the oppressive power structure so that, rather than presuming the primacy of their 
own knowledge, the non-oppressed person accepts the oppressed person as the authority on 
being oppressed. Such genuine engagement with those who are targets of oppression is vital 
as a privileged person can be thoughtful, well intentioned, and warm-hearted and yet know 
nothing about what it is like to live a life of [] exclusion (ibid p44). This highlights a key 
difference between knowledge and understanding in Harveys text. It is possible to gain 
knowledge of oppression without engaging with the oppressed. Understanding, by contrast, 
can only be gained by engaging empathetically with the victims of oppression and accepting 
their place as experts in that experience. Thomas (2006) takes this further arguing that such 
engagement goes beyond what might elsewhere be called best practice and represents a moral 
imperative. Indeed to seek understanding in this way is to enter into: 
a mode of learning which those who have been oppressed are owed in the name 
of eliminating the very state of their oppression. In the absence of such learning, oppression 
cannot but continue to be part of the fabric of the moral life. Indeed, the absence of such learning, 
the studied refusal to engage in such learning, is one of the very ways in which oppression 
manifest itself. Worse, such studied refusal adds insult to injury.  
(Thomas, 2006 p82, emphasis mine.) 
While this arguably provides a strong argument for qualitative research, participatory 
methods, and user-led activism, it is important to note that merely collecting accounts of 
oppression is not sufficient. Rather such approaches risk becoming an exercise in generating 
knowledge without understanding. This is of particular importance because victims of 
civilised oppression will by definition:  
suffer as a consequence of often unconscious assumptions and reactions of well-meaning people 
in ordinary interactions, media and cultural stereotypes, and structural features of bureaucratic 
hierarchies and market mechanisms- in short, the normal processes of everyday life. We cannot 
eliminate this structural oppression by getting rid of the rulers or making some new laws because 
oppressions are systematically reproduced in major economic, political, and cultural 
institutions. 
(Young, 1990, p41) 
From this position, not only is there a moral imperative for those who are not oppressed to 
listen to those who are and to engage with them as experts in their lived experience, but for 
them to use their new understanding to reassess their own behaviour such that they can 
contribute to a change in societal norm.  
People with Dementia as Targets of Civilised Oppression 
It is a relatively noncontroversial insight that people with dementia become the focus of 
oppressive social regimes. What is interesting to note however is that while there are well 
documented concerns around the encroachment of technologies intended to both surveil 
and regulate people with dementia (for example, White & Montgomery, 2014; Fehling & 
Dassen, 2017) efforts to develop newer more effective versions of these technologies 
continue unabated. In light of this, it is possible to suggest that the resistance in 
acknowledging people with dementia as targets of civilised oppression may not be a result of 
a lack of evidence or the presence of overwhelming evidence to the contrary. Instead this 
reluctance may be rooted in the realisation that for people with dementia to be oppressed 
there must be an oppressor. This shift in conceptualisation leads to disquieting conversations 
as to the occurrence and nature of abuse, particularly as it occurs in long standing 
relationships (spousal, domestic or otherwise) where one party develops dementia (see 
Thomas & Milligan, 2017). It is critical to note therefore, that this thesis argues that one can 
act in good faith to respond to the needs of people with dementia with a positive desire to 
assist and ease anxiety (ibid p126) while still perpetuating disabling and ablest narratives and 
engaging it civilised oppression. Such a conceptualisation is likely to meet with resistance as 
non-oppressed persons, Harvey notes, are often shocked to hear themselves described as 
oppressors, and yet they are. (2015 p56). Furthermore, in the case of civilised oppression, 
those who enact oppression are unaware that they do so. Harvey argues that it is this benign 
ignorance that characterises most non-oppressed people and that the complexity of human 
relationships and interactions makes it difficult, if not impossible, to perceive the level of 
ones privilege and the effects of ones behaviour all of the time, in every situation. There is, 
I would argue, little to be gained by seeking to portray people with dementia as surrounded 
on each side by malicious oppression, enacted deliberately and consciously by spouse and 
diagnostician alike. Instead it is worth noting that: 
None of us is fully and permanently alert to our own behavior, although we can become more 
self-aware with effort and over time. Empathetic understanding is, I suggest, appropriate in 
some cases involving agents who contribute, all unknown to themselves, to civilized oppression, 
especially where those involved are trying to become more self-aware. [] We are in solidarity 
with them against their oppression. This does not mean against their oppressors. 
(Harvey, 2015 p57-58) 
There are a number of benefits to considering people with dementia as an oppressed group. 
In the first instance, positioning the use of systematic or relational power to restrict people 
with dementia as a moral wrong both demands focus and prompts a critical review of 
potentially oppressive practices. Secondly, it highlights the role of knowledge as both a 
precursor to and distinct from understanding the character of civilised oppression and its 
effects. Thirdly, because knowledge of the oppression is not guaranteed (a privileged person 
can be thoughtful, well intentioned, and warm-hearted and yet know nothing about what it 
is like to live a life of [] exclusion ibid p44), nor does its presence automatically result in 
understanding, it is necessary for those who would stand in solidarity with the oppressed to 
do so by learning from them. This is arguably a challenge for Kitwoods (1997) discussion of 
moral solidarity as recognition of human unity; a concept he considered central to 
personhood (ibid, p100). For Kitwood, to act in the spirit of moral solidarity necessitates only 
that one recognise that we are all [] in the same boat; and there can be no empirically 
determined point at which it is justifiable to throw some people into the sea (1997 p10). 
Such a metaphor hinges on the understanding of humanity as already united in one boat 
where the choice is between allowing their continued passage and forcibly throwing them 
into the sea in an act of violent oppression. Civilised oppression, by contrast, may permit 
people with dementia to be passengers on the same boat but does so in such a manner that 
makes the upper decks impassable, except during specified hours wherein special 
arrangements are made.  
To push this analogy to its limit; civilised oppression is what allows Rose to pride herself on 
travelling on a vessel that carries the rich and poor to New York without ever realising that 
she and Jack may have a fundamentally different experience of the voyage. Indeed, booking 
passage on the Titanic may allow Rose to pride herself on her open-mindedness; she is after 
all choosing to frequent a space that is lower class friendly. There is no necessity to question 
why such a journey might ever not be accessible to lower class people particularly as based 
on her experience leads her to believe that such spaces are accessible by default. Yet being 
permitted passage on the same ship (or boat, per Kitwood, 1997) does not necessitate an 
equality of experience or that the same value be placed on all passengers. Plot mechanics 
notwithstanding, Rose may never have known of the restrictions placed upon lower class 
characters, or of the barriers that resulted in their lack of access to life boats. She comes to 
understand these experiences only through engaging with Jack, a process which ultimately 
highlights not only the flawed premise that lower class passengers are in some manner 
inferior people, but the structural mechanisms employed to keep them locked below deck, 
and it is ultimately her privilege that allows her to speak (albeit ineffectively) against them.  
To be truly person centred is to move beyond abstaining from acts of violent oppression 
(pushing a fellow human into the sea) and engage proactively in challenging the systematic 
and systemic mechanisms of civilised oppression where they occur (segregation, for example, 
or locking passangers below decks as in Cameron, 1997), under the guidance and with 
deference to the experiences of people living with dementia. By viewing people with 
dementia as both individuals with a degenerative disease and as targets of civilised oppression 
it is possible to challenge a range of oppressive factors that extend beyond Kitwoods (1997) 
malignant psychology to consider social, physical and relational structures. This lends itself 
to the fourth point. It is only through engaging people with dementia as simultaneously a) 
people with a degenerative illness, b) experts in their own experience, and c) targets of 
oppression that it is possible to stand in solidarity with them as an oppressed group. I would 
argue that, while contemporary dementia literature engages frequently with points a and b, it 
is the engagement with people with dementia as oppressed that is less commonplace. It is 
this final factor, therefore, that I explore through disability theory. 
The Medical Model as a Mechanism of Oppression 
It is important to acknowledge, particularly at this point in the thesis, the progress that has 
been made by dementia research over the last twenty years. It is only through understanding 
history that a resurgence of old patterns of belief might be avoided in the future. For this 
reason it is necessary to begin this section, not with Kitwoods (1997) impactful text Dementia 
Reconsidered and the profound changes brought about by the move towards a person-centred 
ethos of care, but with an acknowledgement of the biomedical perspectives to which 
Kitwoods work was reacting. Behuniak (2010) provides a particularly clear insight here: 
Within this [the biomedical] model, AD [Alzheimers disease] is a neurological disease, its 
symptoms have biological roots, and the individual who falls victim to it is not an individual 
with AD but an individual redefined as an AD patient. Given this medical construction, the 
appropriate response to this neurological assault were medical interventions that attempted to 
control this out-of-control disease by controlling the body of the patientin essence meeting force 
with force. 
(p.232-233) 
There are several aspects of this quote that are worth noting: firstly, the positioning of 
dementia as a solely medical concern with biological roots situates both the problems 
associated with dementia and any potential solutions within the medical sphere. As a result, 
literatures approaching dementia from a medical perspective seek to fix the defective body 
without consideration for the social, economic and spatial structures that disable them 
(McRuer, 2006). This is the perspective that leads to the forceful approach where the battle 
is primarily between the physician, armed with the (predominantly pharmaceutical) tools of 
their trade and the disease (Behuniak 2010). The person with dementia is merely the field 
upon which doctor and disease meet in battle. Arguably, this is a predictable outcome of a 
biomedical perspective where the body is like a machine and can be repaired when it breaks 
down [] there is a technological solution for everything (Bond & Corner, 2001 p98). As 
such, from a biomedical perspective, dementia is best understood through its symptoms 
which include but are not limited to; slowed cognition, memory loss, delusions, behavioural 
changes, mental illnesses such as anxiety and depression, and mental decline (Hugo & 
Ganguli, 2014; Luntly, 2006; Fauth & Gibbons, 2014; Doctor, Iqbal & Naguib, 2014; Mintzer 
et al., 2000; Thyrian et al., 2016; and Godfrey et al., 2005 respectively).  
When viewed from a medical perspective, within which both dementia itself and the 
challenges that are associated with living with the disease are tied to physiological changes at 
the individual level, it is possible to argue that social approaches have little to offer (Lyman, 
1989). Dementia patients, therefore, are victims to a disease that unravels them 
progressively over time (Fortana & Smith, 1989; Beard, Knauss & Moyer, 2009). This 
unravelling inevitably results in a loss of self, leaving effectively dead shells or zombies 
behind (Milne & Peet, 2008, Luntly, 2005; Radden & Fordyce, 2006; Herskovits, 1995; & 
Kessler, 2007 respectively). That such a construction provides an opportunity for oppressive 
practices is clear as they work together to position the person with dementia as a human 
nonperson towards whom we have few obligations (Singer, 2011; Hofmann, 2017). While 
the majority of Chapter Three is dedicated to exploring ways in which these claims of 
degeneration and loss of self might be rejected outright it is necessary to acknowledge such 
constructions as a continuation of a biomedical understanding of dementia that relegates 
people with dementia to the role of patient with a terminal degenerative illness.  
It is this biomedical narrative that Kitwood (1997) sought to address by defining personhood 
as a status that is bestowed upon one human being, by others, in the context of relationship 
and social being [implying] recognition, respect and trust (Kitwood, 1997, p.8). This 
distinction allows personhood to remain intact throughout the dementia journey, as the 
process is grounded in the relationship that is maintained by others rather than by the 
individuals cognitive capacity. While the philosophical underpinnings of Personhood are 
discussed in more detail in Chapter Three, it is nevertheless important to note here the ways 
in which Personhood and the resultant move towards person centred care fundamentally 
altered the ways in which dementia was discussed, conceptualised, and communicated both 
within the UK and internationally. Critically, in presenting Personhood, and advocating for 
person-centred care, Kitwood provided an opportunity for professionals to adapt their 
practice without denouncing the core of the biomedical model with which they were aligned. 
Critically, in personhood, Kitwood (1997) acknowledged that dementia was at its core a 
biological process, while drawing attention towards the psychosocial implications of living 
with the disease. To adopt a person centred approach, therefore, was to move away from 
the strictly biomedical model and its exclusive focus upon symptom management (Kitwood, 
1988) and begin to reflect on how professionals were communicating with, building 
relationships with, and respecting the relationships of people living with dementia (Kitwood, 
1997).  
It is important to note that while Kitwood (1997) is particularly influential he was not a lone 
visionary, but the figurehead for a movement that had been growing for some time which 
advocated for placing the person with dementia at the centre of their own care (i.e. Rader, 
1995; Thomas, 1996, Sabat and Harr, 1992). Indeed this wider movement enjoyed 
significant success with person centred care entering the National Service Framework in 2001 
(Dept of Health for England and Wales, 2001), in part due to its conceptual simplicity. 
Person centred care can be encapsulated by V+I+P+S where:  
1) Valuing people with dementia and those who care for them (V) 
2) Treating people as individuals (I) 
3) Looking at the world from the perspective of the person with dementia (P) 
4) A positive social environment in which the person living with dementia can experience relative 
wellbeing (S) 
(Brooker, 2004 p216).  
This model tempers the biomedical approach by acknowledging the impact of social 
processes and stigmatisation. Person centred care demands that people with dementia should 
be treated as individuals rather than hosts to a disease or a field of battle between medical 
professionals and a degenerative illness. Furthermore, positioning healthcare professionals 
as part of a system of care allowed the person centred framework to challenge practices that 
perpetuated patterns of infantalisation, intimidation, stigmatisation and invalidation 
(Kitwood, 1993) as results of a malignant social psychology without passing moral judgement 
upon the actor themselves. This is arguably compatible with Harveys (1999; 2015) notion of 
civilised oppression, where individual actors might perpetuate systems of oppression without 
realising that they are doing so or even being aware that such mechanisms are in place. What 
personhood does not do however is provide a suitably robust framework for challenging the 
beliefs which underpin such systems on a systematic level.  
Opposing the Medical Model: Learning from Disability Studies. 
If Kitwoods person-centred approach does not succeed in challenging the structural 
processes that contribute to the oppression of people with dementia and their 
marginalisation within society then it is necessary to look elsewhere. Given that people with 
dementia become targets of oppression on the basis of their dementia, and more specifically 
on the basis of their existence as embodied carriers of a degenerative health condition linked 
with both older age and progressive cognitive impairment, it is most appropriate to turn 
towards the disability literatures in search of an answer. At its core the British strand of 
disability theory contends that disability is a socially constructed, societally enforced, and 
fundamentally oppressive status that is imposed upon people with impairments by the 
organisation and construction of the social world (Oliver, 1996). Grounded in the Union of 
the Physically Impaired Against Segregations (UPIAS) Fundamental Principles of Disability 
(1976) the history and development of disability theory is both complex and culturally 
sensitive. The following section provides only a limited insight into several influential debates 
within disability theory and does so exclusively in the context of British disability literature. 
Deeper explorations are to be found in the writings of the dedicated scholars upon whose 
work this section is substantially based: Carol Thomas, Tom Shakespeare, Vic Finkelstein, 
Mike Oliver, and Jenny Morris.  
Although the history of UK disability theory and particularly the progress made around and 
towards a social model is complex, this thesis need only focus on Fundamental Principles of 
Disability as the impetus for, and the core of, the Social Model of Disability (SMD). Resulting 
from the activism of disabled people, and the labour of predominantly disabled scholars, the 
SMD stands in direct opposition to medicalised perspectives on disability. It was created as 
a replacement for the dominant medical model, arguing that people are disabled not by their 
impairment, but by social structures which restrict and disable them. Where the medical 
model placed undue emphasis on clinical diagnosis creating a partial and inhibiting view 
of the individual (Brisenden, 1986 p.173), the SMD argues that disability is a social 
construction that penalises (Tregaskis, 2002, p 457) people with impairments when they 
deviate from societal norms (Oliver 1990; Thomas, 1999). Where the medical model 
constructed people with impairments as deviant problem people (Briesenden, 1986 p.175) 
for whom the ultimate goal should be cure and rehabilitation at any cost (Shakespeare & 
Watson, 2002), the SMD argues that the fault, an thus the responsibility to adapt, lies with 
society rather than with the individual (e.g. Finkelstein, 1980; Oliver, 1990; Thomas, 1999). 
Indeed the SMD goes further and argues that not only is disability not resident within a 
person as the medical model suggests, but that it is an unnecessary, additional system of 
oppressed inflicted upon disabled people by the nondisabled. Specifically: 
It is society which disables physically impaired people. Disability is something imposed on top 
of our impairments by the way we are unnecessarily isolated and excluded from full participation 
in society. Disabled people are therefore an oppressed group in society. [] We define 
impairment as lacking all or part of a limb, or having a defective limb, organism or mechanism 
of the body and disability as the disadvantage or restriction of activity caused my contemporary 
social organisation  
(Oliver, 1996, p.22) 
There are several points to note here. Firstly, the positioning of disabled people as targets of 
oppression, the mechanisms of which include exclusion and isolation and result in 
disadvantage and restriction. As such it would be entirely appropriate to consider disabled 
people in the United Kingdom to be targets of (predominantly) civilised oppression, in line 
with Harvey (2015). The second is the scope of the concept of impairment or a defective 
mechanism of the body. This allows dementia to be framed as an impairment without 
significant controversy. Indeed, Thomas and Milligan (2015) highlight a myriad of ways in 
which people with dementia experience similar oppressive barriers including being 
misunderstood, systematically devalued by society, denied opportunities to express or pursue 
their needs and desires, and forced to endure the use of chemical restraint via sedation. 
Nevertheless they note that the collaboration between dementia and disability studies has 
been forged only incrementally (Thomas & Milligan, 2018, p116). This observation speaks 
more to several core tensions underlying disability theory in the UK than it does the 
applicability of the disability perspective to the experiences of people with dementia.  
Disability and the Lived Experience of Impairment 
One of the most influential divides within disability studies centres around the body and its 
relationship to disability. It is not surprising that the SMD, as a direct reaction to the 
biomedical model and its exclusive focus upon bodily impairment, did not account for nor 
make space for a discussion of the embodied experiences of those living with impairment 
(Oliver, 2013). Attempts to explore these lived realities, where challenges were not merely 
present in the outer world, but in the aches and pains and urinary tract infections (Watson 
& Shakespeare, 2001, p.12) of disabled people, were actively criticised as perpetuating the 
same oppressive biomedical perspectives that the SMD had sought to eradicate. The erasure 
of the body from disability discourse was widely criticised (see Crow, 1996; Thomas 1999), 
in part because it created an emancipatory model which could attend only to the concerns of 
the healthy disabled and permanently and predictably impaired (Wendell, 2001, p21). Such 
a construction, therefore, could not be applied to the lives of those whose impairments were 
invisible, mental, chronic, unpredictable or painful (see Crow, 1996) who experience[d] 
physical or psychological burdens that no amount of social justice [could] eliminate 
(Wendell, 2001, p18).  
The erasure of the body in the social model introduces two principle challenges for the study 
of dementia. Firstly, dementia is by its nature both unpredictable and degenerative. This, 
ultimately, problematizes any attempt to align the experiences of people with dementia with 
the paradigmatic construct of the disabled person as someone who needs only societal and 
environmental adaptation to live without disability (ibid), as the effectiveness of adaptations 
will change over time. As such, dementia diagnosis not only challenges the inclusion of 
people with dementia into the disability literatures but marginalises them within the field of 
gerontology. At the moment of diagnosis they become incapable of aging well or 
successfully or healthily (Angus & Reeve, 2006, Minkler & Fadem, 2002 and Koen & 
Yonelinas, 2014 respectively). They must, at best, aim to live well with dementia (Martyr, 
Nelis, Quinn & Wu, 2018). This drive towards living well with dementia, (which I would argue 
would be more accurately parsed as living well despite dementia given its focus on maintaining 
a previous lifestyle rather than adapting to a new embodied experience) follows a similar path 
to the SMD. It erases any experiences of difficulty, frustration, pain or suffering associated 
with the experiences of living with dementia lest it reinforce the narrative of people with 
dementia as suffering (see Bartlett, Windemuth-Wolfson, Oliver and Denning, 2017) rather 
than targets of civilised oppression. As a result it is necessary to consider the pitfalls of a 
disembodied SMD as it applies to dementia, and to identify a contemporary approach which 
incorporates the valuable theoretical, political and social aspects of the SMD while attending 
to its weaknesses. 
The exact placement of the body within disability theory may remain a matter of heated 
debate within the literature. There is at least some consensus however on the idea that even 
if the body itself is irrelevant the body as it exists in situ is relevant to disability theory (Freund, 
2001) and to an extent in the dementia literatures as the aging body in space becomes the 
focus of architectural design (Buse, Nettleton, Martin & Twigg, 2017). Were this thesis 
strictly limited to a consideration of dementia and spatiality this would be sufficient, however 
such restriction would be wholly inappropriate in the context of the complex web of 
interactions that are made manifest at physical, social, and temporal thresholds. As such this 
research follows the path laid by phenomenologists, critical realists, and materialists 
(Goodley, 2012; Watson, 2012 & Thomas, 1999 respectively) among others in considering 
the body as not only a relevant object, but a vehicle for the embodied experience of space 
(Buse et al., 2017), relationships (Buse & Twigg, 2014) and time (Twigg, 2008). It is critical 
to acknowledge at this juncture that considering impairment and disability as separate-but-
interrelated makes it necessary to separate this research from the post-structuralist 
approaches advocated by Shakespeare (e.g. 1996; 2004) and his colleagues. These approaches 
do not allow for a body that is real or pre-social. Such essentialist approaches are often 
met with resistance when communicated to those working from within a discipline associated 
with the biological, medical, or natural sciences where the body is the primary subject of 
study (see Williams, 1999). Given that this research was conceptualised not only as an 
academic endeavour but a potential vehicle for change and improvement and that managing 
dementia care requires a holistic approach drawing on a myriad of disciplines and 
perspectives, adopting such a position would be counterproductive. Instead this research 
follows both theoretically and ideologically from Thomas (1999; 2006; 2009) and uses her 
social-relational approach. As a result, this thesis uses terminology in the following way: 
disability/disablism: the social imposition of avoidable restrictions on the life activities, 
aspirations and psycho-emotional well-being of people characterised as impaired by those deemed 
normal. Disablism is social-relational in character and constitutes a form of social oppression. [] 
As well as enacted in person-to-person interactions, disablism may manifest itself in institutionalised 
and other socio-structural forms 
(Thomas, 2012 p.211) 
impairment: A characteristic, feature or attribute within an individual which is long 
term and may, or may not, be the result of disease, genetics or injury and may:  
1: Affect that individuals appearance in a way which is not acceptable to society,  
   And / or  
2:Affect the function of that individuals mind or body, either because of or regardless of society,  
And / or  
3. Cause pain, fatigue, affect communication and reduce consciousness 
 (Thomas, Gradwell & Markham, 1997) 
impairment effect: The direct and unavoidable impacts that impairments (physical, sensory, 
intellectual, emotional) have on individuals embodied functioning in the social world. 
Impairments and impairment effects are always bio-social and culturally constructed in 
character, and may occur at any stage in the life course  
(Thomas, 2012 p.211) 
While these three concepts encompass the majority of Thomas work as it applies to this 
thesis, it is also necessary to acknowledge the contribution and value of what she calls 
psychoemotional disablism particularly in the context of living with dementia. 
Psychoemotional disablism, which acts at the individual level to limit not just what disabled 
people can do (as structural disablism does) but who they can be (Thomas, 2007). In these 
cases, internalising disabling narratives and beliefs has a profound negative effect on an 
individuals self esteem, their confidence, and their ontological security (ibid, p.72). Such 
disablism can be explored in the context of both direct relationships (e.g. between the 
disabled person and others, or between the disabled person and themselves) and indirect 
interactions (e.g. between the individual and an ableist society) (Reeve, 2008; 2014). Such 
insights further emphasise not only the value of viewing people with dementia as disabled, 
and as such as targets of civilised oppression who are vulnerable to psychoemotional 
disablism, but of exploring their experiences at the threshold spaces where the individual 
meets another, where public and private meet.  
The Importance of Threshold Spaces 
The previous discussion has considered at length the value of considering people with 
dementia firstly as targets of civilised oppression and, secondly, as people who are disabled 
by society on the basis of their embodied impairments. There is also a need to more explicitly 
discuss the value of exploring how these processes are encountered by people with dementia 
at physical, social, and temporal threshold spaces. This argument is most clearly made in 
relation to physical thresholds, as both the SMD and the wider Neighbourhoods project are 
deeply concerned with the organisation of physical space are it impacts the lives of disabled 
people and, thus, people living with dementia. Indeed, there have been a number of articles 
published with the intention of highlighting the ease with which physical thresholds can be 
rendered impassable for people with dementia by, for example, disguising threshold spaces 
and doorways as other objects (i.e. Kincaid & Peacock, 2003; Vanderhorst & Koenig, 2015). 
There is also a well established literature that explores various methods of facilitating physical 
thresholds by, for example, clearly labelling cupboards and drawers (Chard, Liu, & 
Mulholland, 2009) and using photographs and meaningful objects to help residents in 
nursing homes differentiate between their rooms and those of others (Gross et al., 2004). 
Thresholds are paradoxically central to, and absent from, the considerations of these works, 
despite their focus on spaces where one physical space meets another. Given the presence 
of such literatures, it is possible to see how physical thresholds might become sites of civilised 
oppression and disablement (i.e. by blocking passage as per Vanderhorst & Koenig, 2015) or 
facilitation and enablement (was with labelling in Chard et al., 2009, or increasing visual 
access in Namazi & Johnson, 1991). Exploring how people with dementia experience and 
navigate these thresholds, therefore, provides an opportunity to better understand the 
experience of disablement and oppression as it occurs on a day-to-day basis.  
Living with dementia is an intrinsically spatial experience where people are disabled in and 
by space and experience their impairments in the context of their environment. Patterson 
and Hughes (1999) explore this experience in the context of dys-appearance: 
 The disablist and disabling sociospatial environment produces a vivid, but unwanted, 
consciousness of ones impaired body. Here the body undergoes a mode of dysappearance which 
is not biological, but social. For example, in the context of the ubiquitous disabling barriers of 
the spatial environment, ones impaired body dysappears- is made present as a thematic focus 
of attention. When one is confronted by social and physical inaccessibility one is simultaneously 
confronted by oneself.  
(Patterson & Hughes, 1999, p.603) 
In such cases encounters with impassable barriers or threshold spaces not only influence 
how an individual interacts with the space itself but how they feel both about themselves and 
about the space (Davidson & Milligan, 2004). This interrelation allows spaces to be, 
simultaneously, physically accessible and mentally or emotionally oppressive (Freund, 2001). 
Indeed, such complexities ensure that simply being able to physically access a space does not 
necessitate an equality of experience or even successful access in a holistic sense. It is 
possible, therefore, for a space to be physically and architecturally accessible, but experienced 
as inaccessible due to less-visible factors such as the expectation of speed and the intrinsic 
timing of the space (c.f. Hoxie & Rubenstein, 1994; Allen, 2004). It is this complexity that 
necessitates an investigation of nonphysical social and temporal thresholds alongside a 
consideration of physical threshold spaces. Such an investigation may, for example, highlight 
where a shared space like a supermarket is considered to be accessible because it has 
designated hours or check-out lanes that are designed to compensate for some of the 
disabling aspects of that space (i.e. Brorsson, Ohman, Lundberg, Cutchin & Nygard 2018). 
It is important to note, however, that while such interventions may make the physical space 
accessible under certain circumstances, it fails to address the social or temporal aspects of 
the space more generally, forcing people with dementia to inhabit different spheres even 
when using the same facility (Imrie, 2000). That these efforts are often parsed as additions 
to public space rather than intrinsic requirements for public space given the rights of disabled 
people (Equalities Act, 2010) is indicative of the very civilised oppression Harvey (2015) 
describes. Focusing on these threshold spaces, therefore, allows for an exploration of the 
tensions that are made manifest when a person with impairments as a result of their dementia 
meets, negotiates with, and manages thresholds in a predominantly ableist society (Goodley, 
2014).  
Summary 
This chapter has made a number of important contributions to the thesis in terms of defining 
its theoretical foundations. First, it introduced the concept of civilised oppression and the 
value in considering people with dementia as targets of that oppression. It goes on to draw 
from the discipline of disability studies to highlight how considering people with dementia 
both disabled and oppressed by society. Positioning the thesis in this way allows not only for 
an investigation into the lived experiences of people with dementia, but a multi-layered 
analysis that is capable of capturing the impact of disablism as an extrinsic and intrinsic force 
that restricts both what people with dementia can do, and who they can be (Thomas, 2007). 
Finally, the chapter highlights key points where existing literatures in dementia research touch 
upon, but never fully acknowledge, the importance of threshold spaces in enabling or 
disabling people with dementia.  
3 : A SELF BEYOND PERSONHOOD: 
DASEIN, DWELLING, AND BEING-WITH-
OTHERS.  
Introduction 
Where the task of Chapter Two was to elucidate the ways in which positioning people with 
dementia as disabled people and targets of civilised oppression provides an opportunity to 
challenge ablest and dehumanising narratives, it is the work of this chapter to attend to the 
philosophical constructs that underpin this research. I argue that an uncritical acceptance of 
Cartesian mind-body dualism, with its construction of the self as both shaped by and reliant 
upon cognition, is complicit in the construction of the narratives of decay. Indeed, by 
challenging the notion that thought is the preeminent component in selfhood (as Descartes 
does in I think, therefore I am), it is possible to unilaterally dismiss any constructions of the 
person with dementia as one who is hollowed out or reduced (Luntly, 2005; Radden & 
Fordyce, 2006; Kessler, 2007) by the effects of their disease.  
The chapter opens by acknowledging the impact of Kitwoods (1997) work on Personhood 
before shifting focus to consider its philosophical underpinnings. I then contend that 
Kitwoods construction of Personhood as a status bestowed by others fails to sufficiently 
disrupt the narratives of decay, as it demands only that people with dementia be treated as 
individuals with a lived history, rather than engaged with as whole and undiminished 
individuals navigating the world with progressive cognitive impairment. The body of the 
chapter builds from this point, as I present Heideggerian philosophy, and specifically the 
concepts of Dasein, Dwelling, and Being-with-Others as key concepts which at once 
facilitate exploration of the threshold and preclude any intrusion by the narratives of decay. 
From this perspective, I argue, it is possible to approach dementia studies and people ith 
dementia in a way that is sensitive to their experiences and challenges, critical of their 
oppression, and respectful of their undiminished value. 
Considering Personhood 
It is impossible to engage with dementia studies as a discipline, or dementia research in a UK 
context, without acknowledging the impact of Kitwoods seminal text, Dementia Reconsidered 
(1997). The implications of this text are profound, and its reach extends beyond the academic 
sphere, where it provides a foundation for the contemporary activism surrounding human 
rights and citizenship for people with dementia (Mansell & Beadle-Brown, 2006; Bailey, 
Ridley & Greenhill, 2010; Turner, 2001, respectively). Dementia Reconsidered is also 
profoundly important for this work, as it was Kitwoods (1997) reconstruction of dementia 
that helped lay the groundwork that makes it possible to adopt disability approach for people 
with dementia. Critically, Kitwood argues that dementia is more than a diagnosis, or the 
presence of disease, but:  
Neurological Impairment + Personality + Biography (Life History) + Physical Health + 
Malignant Social Psychology 
(Kitwood, 1997 p.83) 
While proposing such a model does not afford Kitwood the status of disability theorist, it 
certainly aligns dementia studies with the disability literatures discussed in Chapter Two. 
Indeed, Kitwoods (1997) notion of Personhood draws strength from preexisting work 
within disability studies, which also presented Personhood as a cultural status. Luborsky 
(1994), for example, argues:  
Personhood is bestowed by society, and is earned by achieving and maintaining expected social 
roles and ideals. It is not an intrinsic property of the individual nor can it be seized merely by 
individual fiat (Fortes 1987; Schiebe 1984). By person I refer to the cultural category of full 
adulthood or full Personhood. The term individual is used to refer to the concrete biological 
organism. Personhood is not an automatic or intrinsic property of the individual nor can it be 
gained by personal claimit must be socially legitimated. 
(p.240) 
While Luborskys (1994) concern is primarily with the extent to which people with physical 
impairments were not afforded full Personhood status, that Kitwoods Personhood draws 
from this work, gains acclaim and is ultimately reabsorbed into the disability literatures (i.e. 
in Blain-Moraes et al., 2013) demonstrates the extent to which the core concepts of 
Personhood are shared between disciplines. Where these concepts differ, however, is in the 
explicit acknowledgement of the disabled person or person with dementia as oppressed. It 
is important to note, therefore, that while Kitwood (1997) highlights the important of social 
relationships through discussing malignant social psychology, he does not extend his analysis 
to the systematic cultural and societal aspects of this oppression. For the purposes of this 
research, such insight is provided by the lens of Thomas (1999; 2007) social relational 
approach to disability, and Harveys (1999; 2015) conceptualisation of civilised oppression.  
The Limitations of  Dementia Reconsidered 
As impactful as Kitwoods 1997 text is, it is vital to consider not only the fruit it bore in 
terms of institutional and cultural change (Manthorpe and Samsi, 2016), but the roots of 
Kitwoods theorising. It is important to note, for example, that while Dementia Reconsidered 
(1997) applied the principles of Personhood to dementia care, there is evidence to suggest 
that Kitwoods interest was not dementia per se, but in how dementia could be used as a case 
study to uncover underlying philosophical principles. As Dewing (2006) notes:  
[Kitwoods] ultimate project, ontological in nature, is centered on having a moral concern for 
others to enable forms of moral praxis or empowerment [] Indeed, Moral Concern for 
Others is the title of his seminal work, yet rarely referred to within contemporary dementia 
literature 
(p.8) 
Taken in this context, the rationale behind Kitwoods focus upon Personhood as a status 
bestowed by individuals upon one another becomes clear. From this perspective, his 
argument that there can be no empirically determined point at which it is justifiable to throw 
some people into the sea (1997 p10) can be applied not only to dementia, but to human 
relationships more broadly, as a reflection of our moral duty to one another. As a result, 
malignant psychology becomes more of a reflection upon the negative patterns of thought 
that allow one to consider throwing someone out in the first place. This distinction is not 
without import. Indeed, I contend that it is this subtle change in direction results in a model 
of Personhood that requires only that people with dementia be treated in a way that honours 
the person that they were. Such a construct therefore only dictates that people with dementia 
be treated as if they were people: it does not demand that they be recognised as whole and 
undiminished individuals in the now. It is this caveat that, in turn, makes Personhood an ill 
wrought tool for the fight against the narratives of decay, wherein the person is ultimately 
reduced and rendered lesser by their disease (Radden and Fordyce, 2006). 
There are, arguably, two means by which such an oversight might be remedied: by 
disregarding Kitwoods work wholesale, much as Shakespeare and Watson (2002) would do 
with the social model, or by addressing the weaknesses in its foundation. Given the positive 
impact of Kitwoods (1997) model of Personhood, and the tendency for contemporary 
caring to be carried out in line with the principles of Personhood, the former option must 
be rejected out of hand. This, then, requires an examination of the roots of Personhood as 
presented by Kitwood, particularly in the context of Dementia Reconsidered (1997). While it 
would certainly be possible to delve into extended philosophical discourse here, such analysis 
would only serve to distract from the broader work of this thesis. As such, I turn to a critical 
review offered of Dementia Reconsidered at the time of its publication, which pinpoints 
what I consider to be the primary weakness of the work. 
While proposing an alternative theory, [Dementia Reconsidered] is actually premised on an 
I-It construction, on precisely that which it criticizes in the traditional care culture. The following 
statement illustrates this: Some glimpses of the way in which the experience of dementia may 
differ from one person to another can be gained from studies of personality (p. 71). Examining 
personality studies to obtain insights into a subjects experience is incongruous with I-thou 
relations. [] The approach outlined by Kitwood is more about knowing the other in the 
relation, and not about confronting the other in their otherness. 
(Greenwood, 1998 p155-156) 
The distinction between relationships formed in the manner of I-It and those that are 
conducted as I-Thou draws from Martin Bubers (1923/2004) text Ich und Du  translated as 
I and You. In his work, Buber argues that it is possible for people to relate to one another in 
two ways as objects (I-It) and as other people (I-Thou). According to Greenwoods (1998) 
reading, therefore, Dementia Reconsidered fails to avoid positioning people with dementia 
as objects of consideration, and thus fails to demand that those without dementia engage 
with them as other complex beings with needs and desires that extend beyond the interaction 
of the person without dementia (in this case, the I). It is by leaving open this potential for 
people with dementia to be approached either as objects (I-It) or complex individuals (I-
Thou) that Kitwoods work allows the narratives of decay to continue. Those works which 
build upon Kitwood (1997) thus risk inheriting the weakness, or face engaging with such 
narratives as potentially valid interpretations.  
The Danger in Dualism 
When considering philosophical approaches that might serve to undermine and ultimately 
silence the narratives of decay, it is important to recognise the ways in which such efforts 
have already been appropriated to reinforce rather than challenge the construction of 
dementia as a disease that ultimately erodes the self. Radden and Fordyce (2006) provide an 
apt example here:  
As the disease progresses, almost all hint of the person we knew will likely be eclipsed, leaving 
only the bodymaybe itself barely recognizableto taunt us with its empty endurance. But 
breaking from Lockean concepts and instead acknowledging the self as another in Ricoeurs 
words, has revealed ways to salvage for a little longer a little more, not only of the sameness of 
the dementia sufferer but also, perhaps, aspects of their ipseity or selfhood 
(p. 85) 
Read uncritically, the above abstract might seem to advocate for a move away from Lockes 
idea of the self that is tightly bound with cognition as a conscious thinking thing, [ that 
is] concerned for itself, as far as that consciousness extends (Locke, 1690/1836 p230) it 
does so only as a method of stalling the ultimate decay of the self with dementia: for a little 
longer (Radden and Fordyce, 2006, p.85). Importantly, however, the passage acknowledges, 
as the narratives of decay do, the on-going existence a living body. The problem, therefore, 
lies in adopting a dualistic construction of the self wherein mind and body can be ultimately 
separated. Such separation introduces the potential for erasure, as the presence of a self 
becomes ultimately reliant upon the ability to convey ones selfhood in a way that is 
understood and perceived as valid by others. Such occurrences are discussed at some length 
by Boyle (2014) who notes that people with dementia are often denied the opportunity to 
demonstrate their capacity for agency by those who link cognitive, and particularly discursive, 
capacity with continued agency. As such, people with dementia who attempt to retain and 
utilise power in situations and relationships through being (ibid, p1140) rather than doing or 
saying may be wrongly presumed to lack agency, and ultimately, selfhood. 
It is worth noting, too, that the more contemporary shifts towards rights or citizenship based 
approaches rarely directly address these underlying assumptions. Bartlett (2014a; 2014b), for 
example explores the lived experiences of people with dementia who directly and routinely 
engage in social activism. Yet these people with dementia are constructed as powerful agents 
precisely because they can perform the role of social activist in spite of their dementia (with 
some reporting negative consequences precisely because they were able to meet these 
expectations) (2014a).  Such works are immensely valuable for capturing the experiences of 
people with dementia as they encounter civilised oppression and stigmatisation, but they do 
not inherently challenge the presumption that selfhood is reliant upon cognition. Instead, 
they demonstrate that not all  dementia related cognitive impairment endangers selfhood, as 
those people with dementia who can no longer leverage power through neurotypical 
channels and societally validated ways remain unrepresented.  
 What is required, therefore, is a philosophical framework that does not rely on cognition, 
and thus is not beholden to the ability of others to intuit and recognise the presence of valid 
thought. This, I argue, can be achieved by shifting away from the dualism of philosophers 
like Descartes and Locke, and adopting a Heideggerian perspective.  
Heideggers Dasein 
In constructing cognition as the preeminent component of the self, upon which being 
depends, Descartes allows for the deconstruction of the self with dementia. Thus, if we 
adhere to the concept that the presence of thought indicates being, as in I think, therefore 
I am then a decline in cognitive function threatens the reverse I think not, therefore I am 
not. Heideggers philosophy offers an alternative interpretation, captured neatly in the word 
he uses to refer (broadly speaking) to the self: Dasein, which when examined in its 
component parts constructs the self as there (Da) being (Sein). Dasein, therefore, is a Being 
which is perpetually engaged in the activity being (sein) there (da), where there is the world. 
As a result, Daseins Being is dependent not on thought, but on being in the world- on 
experience. As Heidegger notes: 
Being-in is not a property which Dasein sometimes has and sometimes does not have, and 
without which it could just be just as well as it could be with it. It is not the case that man is 
and then has, by way of an extra, a relationship-of-Being towards the world- a world with 
which he provides himself occasionally. 
(1954/1993 p84) 
Being-in-the-world is both the character of Daseins experience (Riya, 2006), and how Dasein 
comes to understand itself proximally and for the most part in terms of its world 
(Heidegger, 1954/1993 p120). Dasein is inseparable from the world, and comes to know 
itself through its experiences therein. As a result, Dasein is rendered immune to the threat of 
dissolution or decay based on cognitive decline, setting it apart from concepts borne of 
Cartesian mind-body dualism (Radden & Fordyce, 2006). People with dementia continue to 
experience their surroundings throughout their life course, though these views may be rarely 
captured and recorded in academic research (See Godwin & Waters, 2009 for an exception). 
As a result, people with dementia, as Dasein with dementia, cannot ever be diminished by 
any aspect of their impairment for so long as they experience being-in-the-world, which they 
do until the end of their life (see Bourbonnais & Durcharmes 2010 for an example of this). 
It is in death, and only in death, that Dasein can be extinguished (Heidegger, 1954/1993). 
Until that moment, the person with dementia as Dasein with dementia, remains whole, and 
forward facing with an ability-to-be (ibid. p434) and a future that is coming towards which 
is of equal value to its past. This perspective even remains if one dismisses the concept of a 
self as a metaphysical fancy:  
Even if one rejects the soul substance and the Thinghood of consciousness, or denies that a 
person is an object, one is still positing something whose Being retains the meaning of present-
at-hand, whether it does explicitly or not. 
(Heidegger, 1954/1993, p114). 
Dasein is, as a result, not beholden upon the recognition of its existence by another. It is 
whole because it is in-the-world, separate from the ability or willingness of others to 
recognise and respect that being, a position entirely in step with Boyles (2014) observation 
of agency in adults with advanced dementia.  
Being-in-the-World  
Given the extent to which Dasein is always in-the-world, it is important to clarify what it 
means to be in-the-world, at least as it relates to the work of this thesis. Firstly, it is important 
to recognise the impact of Daseins experience of being-in-the-world, as the way in which 
Dasein comes to know itself as a Being-in-the-world. The second and third aspects of being-
in-the-world that are particularly influential on this work are those which form the heart of 
Division I and Division II of Heideggers Being and Time (1927/1962): how Dasein interacts 
with things which are not itself, and how it organizes itself in relation to its finite existence 
respectively. Importantly, like Buber (1923/1970), upon whose work which Kitwood (1997) 
built Personhood, Heidegger acknowledges the primary distinction between the way in which 
people (as Dasein) engage with objects, and the way in which they engage with people as 
other Dasein. Critically, Dasein engages with objects for-the-sake-of accomplishing a task 
whereas Dasein exists itself in-order-to (1927/1962 p.86). Dasein is the haver of desire, and 
the creator of goals for which all objects can be engaged with in the manner of for-the-sake-
of. The exact pattern of relations that occur between Dasein, other Dasein, and objects in-
the-world is the subject of most of Heideggers works. It only necessary to note here, 
however, that Dasein as always in the world is always and inextricably positioned as in 
relation to both objects, and other Dasein. That it is possible for Dasein to engage with 
others in a way that is for-the-sake-of achieving an objective does impact upon the 
substance of either being, but represents a deficient way of being-with one another. As 
Heidegger (1927/1962) notes: 
passing one another by, not mattering to one another  these are the possible ways of 
solicitude. And it is precisely these last-named deficient and Indifferent modes that characterize 
everyday, average Being-with-one-another. 
(p158) 
While the phrasing is complex, the implication of such a construction is simple: there is no 
way that Dasein can be-in-the-world as a Being in receipt of experience, that is not valid. 
There is no cognitive impairment, no deficit in communication, memory, or mood that can 
rend apart that which Dasein is. Instead, Dasein remains undiminished, (though, arguably, 
in receipt of different experiences of being-in-the-world), a Being which gathers together 
memories of the past (Heidegger, 1971), experiences the present, and looks ahead to a future 
which is silenced only in death, and never by impairment.  
Dwelling 
Given that this thesis proceeds from the acceptance of people with dementia as Dasein who 
are always in the world, and explores thresholds as they are experienced by people with 
dementia as they navigate their daily lives as embodied Beings, it is necessary to highlight the 
spatial aspect of that existence. In Heideggers later work (1971) this is explored as in the 
concept of dwelling. In his piece, Being, Dwelling, Thinking (1971) Heidegger argues that 
the act of dwelling is not interchangeable with the act of residing, because it is possible to 
reside in a place without dwelling there. Dwelling, Heidegger contends, is instead a 
fundamental thing that Dasein does, because it is Dasein. He notes:  
 We do not dwell because we have built, but we build and have built because we dwell, that 
is, because we are dwellers.  
(1971, p.148) 
With this in mind, the exploration of how Dasein with dementia experience and manage 
threshold spaces might be usefully explored wherever the dwelling space meets a space 
where that Dasein does not dwell. Such an understanding of dwelling is particularly apt for 
this study given the ongoing trends towards enabling people with dementia to live at home 
for longer and the emphasis on building dementia friendly communities and neighborhoods 
(i.e. Department of Health, 2015). To draw on Heideggers conceptualization of dwelling not 
just as existing in a space, but as being emotionally bound to it and to the community 
associated with it, therefore allows for a more nuanced view of what it means to dwell, 
which in turn, allows for a consideration of what it means to dwell within or as part of a 
community.  
There are three main aspects of dwelling that are particularly pertinent to this research. The 
first is the understanding of dwelling as an ongoing and flexible process that occurs through 
the medium of time; as such people must continually learn to dwell (Heidegger, 1954/ 
1993 p363). This element of temporality is key to understanding not only daily experiences, 
but experiences of dwelling over time, as one becomes at-home or no-longer-at-home in the 
context of progressive illnesses and impairments (Ohlen, Ekman, Zingmark, Bolmsjo & 
Benzein, 2014), the introduction of telecare (Lopez & Sanchez-Criado, 2009), the entry of 
care into the home space (Andersen, 2008) and the move into residential living (Zingmark, 
Norbberg & Sandman, 1993) are all of potential concern for people living with dementia. As 
such, it becomes necessary not only to consider dwelling as a fundamental way in which 
Dasein is in-the-world, but as something that can be disrupted with profound negative 
effects. Diprose (2011), for example, uses dwelling in this way to examine the difficulties 
people experienced in feeling at home in the aftermath of disaster. She notes that the 
buildings (as shelters) are simultaneously a product of dwelling-as-building, and facilitative 
of dwelling more broadly.  
[A dwelling] provides an anchor for the building of, first, the inhabitants desires, aspirations, 
perceptions, and memories at a pre-reflective level, and, when the building recedes through 
habituation, it provides the ground for the emergence of more abstract capacities of measuring, 
valuing, and thinking. This is why loss of a building and things that have participated in the 
building of ones dwelling can strike at the core of ones being 
(ibid p.62) 
Read in this way, a dwelling, in the Heideggerian sense, encompasses more than spatial 
physicality, and highlights the intricate relationships that occur between people, their homes, 
and the objects that they keep within their home. A challenge to dwelling, therefore, creates 
a challenge to abstract processes such as thinking and valuing, much as has been discussed 
in the literature regarding the increasing presence of care and caring within the dwelling space 
(i.e. Surr, 2006; Kontos and Martin, 2013). 
This consideration of spatial aspects of dwelling necessitates an acknowledgement of how 
Dasein dwells as an activity. There are two primary ways in which Dasein dwells that are 
relevant to this research, namely dwelling-as-building (bauen) and dwelling-as-maintaining 
(wohnen). In Being, Dwelling, Thinking (1971) Heidegger argued that the tendency to 
construct dwelling as interchangeable with building (as a noun) led to an impoverished idea 
of what it is to build. Patra (2006) explains his complaint thus: 
The Old English and High German word for building, bauen, means to dwell. This 
signifies: to remain, to stay in a place. The real meaning of the verb bauen, namely, to dwell, 
has been lost to us.  
(Patra, 2006 p.210).  
If we follow Heideggers thought- that building is dwelling, that dwelling is how Dasein is 
in-the-world, and that being-in-the-world is both part of Dasein and how Dasein comes to 
know itself, then the reason behind his concern at losing the real meaning of building-as-
dwelling becomes clear. If we do not know the manner of our dwelling and how we dwell, 
we cannot know ourselves as Dasein. To recover this, Heidegger proposes two active 
components to dwelling: building (bauen) and protecting and maintaining (wohnen). For the 
sake of clarity, however, rather than referring to the concepts themselves in their original 
German, or the recursive building-as-building and building-as-dwelling (where dwelling is 
itself to build) the thesis shall use the terms in the following way: 
 Those aspects of building-as-dwelling that are tied up in the construction, creation, 
or building of something, which Heidegger calls bauen are henceforth referred to as 
dwelling-as-building (bauen).  
Those aspects of building-as-dwelling that are concerned with maintaining, 
protecting and cherishing that which has already been been built, which Heidegger 
calls wohnen, is from here out referred to either as dwelling-as-maintaining 
(wohnen) or dwelling-as-protecting (wohnen) as is most appropriate in context.  
While defining the bauen and wohen in this way limits the extent to which the entirety of 
Heideggers thought on dwelling can be used within the thesis, it is necessary to consider 
dwelling in some manner that might be applied during analysis if it is to provide insight. To 
assign bauen to creation and wohnen to preservation does so, while still allowing for the English 
word dwelling to represent the two aspects intertwined. It is also necessary to note that 
while considering dwellings (as spaces within which Dasein dwells) rather than houses, 
flats or bungalows as discrete units, would circumvent the need for an a priori assumption 
about the limits of the home space, it introduces unnecessary levels of confusion when used 
as such. For example, to use the word dwelling in all of its meanings (including the 
Heideggerian) would allow for a discussion of how people dwell (as their way of being-in-
the-world) through their practices of dwelling (as specific acts of bauen and wohnen) within 
their dwelling (the place-in-which-they-dwell). In an attempt to accommodate the 
complexities that are facilitated by a dwelling-as-a-place-where-Dasein-does-dwelling this 
research will refer to the place-in-which-Dasein-dwells as home where it is best 
characterized as inside the primary building in which they dwell, and as the home-space 
where dwelling proceeds beyond these architectural boundaries, for instance into the garden 
or beyond. Those places where Dasein does not dwell (but may nevertheless access, such as 
the dwellings of others, meaningful spaces, doctors offices and so on) are referred to simply 
as Elsewhere.  
Being-with-Others, Near-Dwellers and Neighbours 
As noted in the previous section, the fundamental experience of being-in-the-world ensures 
that Dasein is always surrounded by both objects and other Dasein. This understanding is 
critical, for the world is a with-world that one that I share with Others (1954/ 1993 
p.155) Such a construction is vital for understanding Dasein as it not only constructs the 
world as a space which exists beyond individual Dasein, but acknowledges at once the 
inextricable relationality of being in the world with other Dasein alongside Daseins 
temporality. Dasein exist together in one world, but only for a finite period of time. Dasin is 
always with others in the with-world, and because it cannot be separated from the world by 
anything other than death, the question can no longer be how do I relate to this shell that 
was once by loved one? (as in Radden and Fordye, 2006) but how can I, as a person without 
dementia, continue to communicate with my loved one with dementia, whose experience of 
being in the world has been transformed by the dementia disease? That this positioning 
acknowledges the work already undertaken to support carers and family members to learn 
to listen in a way that facilitates new methods of communication (as in Lovett, 1996; Basting 
2009, Banner 2014) demonstrates the potential for such a perspective to find resonance 
within the existing body of dementia literature. 
From this perspective, and having explored the ways in which Dasein is always in-the-world, 
knows itself through its experiences of being in-the-world as a dweller, and is constantly 
surrounded by and in relationship with both objects and other Dasein, it is necessary now to 
examine one space in which all of these concepts might be applied- at the threshold. It is the 
spatial orientation of each of the concepts listed above that make such an example possible; 
Dasein exists in space, alongside objects and other Dasein; Dasein dwells through building 
physical and nonphysical things which are themselves spatially situated either through being 
constructed physically (as buildings) or socially (as social structures with other embodied 
Dasein). As a result, the home space as a dwelling within which Dasein enacts their practices 
of building (bauen) and maintenance (wohnen) represents a space that is necessarily surrounded 
by thresholds. Where these thresholds occur remains open, as dwelling can extend beyond 
the traditional boundaries of the house and into spaces that might otherwise be understood 
as communal or free of ownership and thus of dwelling. Yet these are the areas where Dasein 
may dwell together, or where each might dwell but separately alongside one another. Shared, 
communal spaces such as the gardens associated with a block of flats are examples of this: 
as each is a space in which the dwelling of multiple Dasein might overlap in harmonious or 
conflicting ways as each seeks to build (as in bauen) and preserve (as in wohnen) according to 
their habits. These Dasein, then, are not just others in the sense that they inhabit a shared 
with-world, but Dwellers who dwell alongside- they are the Nachgebauer, the near-dweller 
(Heidegger, 1971 p.349): the neighbour. How people with dementia manage and navigate the 
thresholds that separate them from their neighbour, and their dwelling space from that of 
their neighbour, calls upon each of Heideggers constructions. That both the person with 
dementia and the neighbour are necessarily Dasein who are in-the-world as dwellers, that 
they are each surrounded by other Dasein and objects, and that they comport themselves in 
a way that reflects their past experience, their lived present, and their oncoming future 
highlights the complexities that are brought into threshold spaces as it draws together both 
neighbours as Dasein, and neighbours as Near Dwellers. Such complexity is glimpsed in 
existing research, as people with dementia reflect upon their experience of community (e.g. 
McMillan & Chavis, 1986; Davis, 2003; Doyle, de Medeiros & Saunders, 2011), and their 
engagement with neighbourhood spaces (Keady et al., 2012). This thesis draws from 
Heideggerian thought to provide novel insight into the ways in which people with dementia 
continue to dwell in the context of their impairment.  
Summary 
This chapter provided a brief insight into the some of the philosophical perspectives that 
implicitly or explicitly inform key works in dementia research. It argued that the narratives 
of decay, wherein people with dementia are constructed as being progressively reduced to 
hollowed, empty versions of themselves by their disease (as in Radden and Fordye, 2006), 
continue due to a continued implicit adherence to Cartesian mind-body dualism.  
It began with a consideration of the philosophical limitations that undermine Kitwoods 
(1997) work, arguing that a Dasein perspective supports rather than undermines the 
conceptualisation of Personhood by attending to its weaknesses without challenging its 
strengths. From this point, the focus of the chapter focused on providing an insight into 
Heideggers philosophy as it applies to this research. The result is a theoretical framework 
that constructs the person with dementia as Dasein with Dementia, and thus inextricable 
from their experiences of being-in-the-world, being-with-others and being-towards objects. 
It argues for an understanding of Dasein as a holistic entity which cannot be separated into 
distinct components, and thus is not at risk of decay based on impairment. Finally, the 
chapter draws together these aspects at a potential threshold, highlighting the complexities 
of dwelling with dementia in the context of a shared spatial world, in which the threshold 
draws upon not only the expectations and experiences of the Dasein with dementia, but 
those near-dwellers who dwell proximately and whose practices of dwelling may overlap, 
harmonise or conflict with those of the person with dementia. It is here, at the point where 
the literature highlights an increasingly complex web of interconnections between the person 
with dementia, their environment, other Dasein, and society that I turn to the most pertinent 
question: how might such relational complexities be captured, analysed, and understood? 
This is the work of Chapter Four.  
4: METHODOLOGY, METHODS AND 
ANALYSIS. 
Introduction 
Where the work of Chapters One, Two and Three has been to introduce this doctoral 
research, it is necessary in this chapter to move away from the broadly theoretical concerns 
discussed thus far and focus instead upon practical concerns of undertaking research and 
analysis. The following chapter describes in detail the methodological approach, data 
collection methods, and analytic techniques in turn, highlighting the ways in which they are 
at once grounded in the literature and theoretical considerations discussed in previous 
chapters, and formative for the findings and analysis presented in Chapters Five, Six and 
Seven.  
The chapter begins by presenting the ethnographic approach taken by this research, 
highlighting the ethnographic principles which make the methodology particularly well suited 
to research involving people with dementia. The chapter then describes the processes of 
recruiting participants and obtaining consent. This is followed by engagement with the 
research design, taking each method used in turn to elaborate on the process of research 
itself. Following this, the ethical and logistical challenges that resulted from working directly 
with people with dementia are highlighted by the use of a vignette that draws together my 
experiences of being in and out of the field to provide an insight into a typical visit with a 
participant with dementia. Having provided an example of how the data collection methods 
were used in the field, the chapter then discusses each in turn, beginning with a description 
of participant observation and ending with a reflection on the use of field notes as an 
influential tool for both fieldwork and analysis. Finally, the chapter describes its analytic 
processes, highlighting the value of using hermeneutic phenomenology as a vehicle for 
analysis, detailing the different stages of analysis, and reflecting on the process of writing a 
vital component in the creation of an ethnography, in preparation for the presentation of 
findings that occurs in Chapter Five, Six and Seven.  
Research Questions 
Given the literatures presented in Chapters Two and Three, and the commitment of this 
research to investigate how people with dementia experience and navigate threshold spaces 
without pre-emptively specifying where such a space might occur, the following research 
questions were developed to provide direction, shape, and clarity to the data collection and 
analysis:  
i. What thresholds do people with dementia encounter in the course of their everyday lives? 
ii. How do people with dementia manage threshold spaces? 
iii. How does investigating threshold spaces facilitate greater insight and support better 
outcomes for people living with dementia? 
iv. What is the benefit of exploring the experiences of people with dementia as disabled people? 
Taking an Ethnographic Approach 
As this research considers people with dementia as disabled people and targets of civilised 
oppression, it was vital to adopt a methodological approach that could at once be facilitative 
of participants and sufficiently robust that its findings could be communicated in a way that 
might inspire and demand change in a range of academic and practice based contexts. While 
there are a number of methodologies which might accomplish such a task, there were few 
that would do so in a way that: a) fore-fronted the participants experience, b) provided 
sufficient flexibility to facilitate a range of participants and their needs, c) did not require 
significant labour on the part of participants, and, d) did not pre-emptively limit the scope 
of the investigation to those thresholds that I, as a researcher without dementia, might intuit 
as significant. Introducing such principles resulted in a move away from participatory action 
methodologies, where the positive aspects of fore-fronting the experiences of people with 
dementia must be balanced against the extra labour required of participants in order for them 
to be fully involved (Natasi et al., 2000) and the ethical concerns associated with the need 
to protect members of a vulnerable community (Morgan, Cuskelly, & Moni, 2014) whose 
experiences might be shaped by, and expressed through, unwelcome truths (Kemmis, 2009 
p.463). Adopting an ethnographic approach, by contrast, addressed many of these concerns.  
Building upon the traditional, immersive ethnographic method first used broadly within 
anthropology (Van Maanen, 1988), contemporary variations, or ethnographic approaches, 
have a number of key strengths that are particularly pertinent to this research. Firstly, 
ethnographic work positions the participant as the expert in their own experience, and in 
doing so explicitly seek to address the power imbalances between researcher and participant 
(Shakespeare, 1996; Berger & Lorenz, 2015). Such measures are vital given my presence in 
the field as both the architect of the project and as a non-disabled researcher who does not 
live with dementia (Shakespeare, 1996; Richardson, 2000; Wilkinson, 2002). Indeed, it is only 
through entering the field as a daft laddie, or a novice who seeks to learn from participants 
rather than study them (Berger, Feucht & Flad, 2014) that it is possible to gain a meaningful 
insight into how people with dementia experience and manage threshold spaces. This allows 
participants to be conceptualised as experts and truth-tellers of their own experience in that 
moment at the physical, social, or temporal threshold without requiring their experiences to 
be positioned as reflective of an empirical truth (Hammersley, 2017). Adopting an 
ethnographic approach to interviewing also allows for participants to visit and revisit key 
events or narratives during the interview, a practice that was particularly facilitative for these 
participants who were able to clarify and embellish on previous tellings as their memory 
provided further detail.  
Secondly, by adopting a methodology which is broadly nondirective, in a way that encourages 
participants to control not only the timing, duration, and setting of the research visit but the 
content of our discussions, an ethnographic approach allows participants with dementia to 
choose which information they share, and how they share it (Baumbusch, 2011; Petersen, 
2011; Berger et al., 2014). This allows not only for a growth of rapport over time, but for the 
fluctuating impairment effects associated with dementia, and allows the participant to share 
their experiences at a time when they feel physically and emotionally able to do so.  
Thirdly, adopting an ethnographic approach acknowledges the importance of engaging with 
participants in naturally occurring (Breweer, 2000, p.10) environments. Critically, 
ethnographic methods allows for people with dementia to be asked about their practices of 
dwelling in the place in which they dwell; allowing the environment itself to become a 
facilitative factor, a practice which has a long history in dementia research (Namazi, Rosner 
and Rechlin, 1991). Indeed, the ability to engage with participants in situ allows for greater 
insight into how people with dementia dwell within a space (as in Hockeys 1990 study of 
nursing homes as transitional spaces) as well as into how being within those environments 
shapes the way in which people with dementia communicate (Bourbonnais and Ducharme, 
2010). As a result, participant observation forms a key component of this thesis 
ethnographic approach as it not only allows the voices and experiences of people with 
dementia to be captured with a sensitivity to the physical, social, and temporal contexts in 
which they are shared, but removes the overt and potentially disabling reliance on vocal 
expression that might disable participants if interviews were used in isolation. This was a key 
component for engaging with participants like Stan, who often found it difficult to articulate 
his thoughts clearly, and preferred to provide tours around key locations, including his 
home, his neighbourhood, and his local church. Such an approach was also useful in 
contextualizing discussions with other participants, like Bob and Hazel, who both discussed 
particular aspects of being in space while demonstrating their use of the spaces (or objects) 
in question. In such instances, any attempt to understand and explore the experiences of 
people with dementia at the threshold without the opportunity to engage with and observe 
the participant in in situ would have lead to, at best, an impoverished understanding of their 
experience as the practices of dwelling and management were enacted routinely, and often 
demonstrated specifically for the researcher within the dwelling space. Finally, ethnographic 
approaches require the researcher to engage extensively with the principles of reflexivity 
throughout the research process, from project conception to analysis and dissemination 
(Malinowski, 1922; Hammersley & Atkinson, 1983; Draper, 2000; Holloway & Biley, 2011). 
It is only through engaging with reflexivity as a recursive practice that it is possible to mitigate 
the risks of producing research which might perpetuate, rather than challenge, the systems 
of civilised oppression that marginalise and disenfranchise people with dementia (Harvey, 
1999; 2015).  
For all its strengths, however, adopting an ethnographic approach does open this work to 
criticism. The most obvious of these is well-documented claim that for research to be 
considered an ethnography, the researcher must leave their customary environment and 
immerse themselves in the lives of participants for approximately a year (Pink & Morgan, 
2013). Such prolonged contact is thought to provide unique insights into how participants 
engage with the everyday activities of life (de Laine, 1997; Tedlock, 2000). That this research 
is described as taking an ethnographic approach rather than as an ethnography is intended 
to show deference to the on-going discourse around what does and does not constitute an 
ethnography proper without becoming entrenched in it. As such, this research aligns itself 
with what might be considered to be works taking an ethnographic approach, which 
demonstrate that studies of a shorter duration should not be dismissed as quick and dirty 
versions of a true or traditional ethnography (Hughes et al., 1996 p61). Instead rapid (Millen, 
2000), focused (Knoblauch 2005; Stephens, Cheston & Gleeson, 2012), and short term (Pink 
& Morgan, 2013) ethnographic approaches account for a shorter period of fieldwork in a 
number of ways, including by using digital technologies to capture of a large amount of data 
over a shorter period of time. Bourbonnais & Durcharmes (2010) investigation into the ways 
in which people with advanced dementia used screaming as a communication method is a 
clear example of this. 
It is worth noting, too, that ethnographies which are shorter in duration permit a more 
intense engagement with the field than might otherwise be possible. As Pink and Morgan 
(2013) argue: 
It is useful [] to create short term research engagements that benefit from the production of forms of 
intensity, empathy and an ongoing ethnographic-analytical- theoretical dialogue. Indeed to achieve this 
we often need to intervene in peoples lives in new ways, that are intensive, potentially intrusive and 
involve asking what they might think are irrelevant questions. None of which is sustainable over long 
periods of time. 
(p 3-4) 
This ability to enter the field and ask seemingly irrelevant questions is particularly facilitative 
of research into the threshold, which itself may be considered an irrelevance given its status 
as an often-travelled, ever-managed space. Most importantly, however, this form of 
ethnographic approach incorporates flexibility, allowing participants to cancel, shorten, or 
extend the duration of the research visit depending on their embodied experience as a person 
with dementia who lives with impairment, and maintains a life and commitments beyond the 
boundaries of this research. This approach resulted in visits to participants that ranged 
between twenty minutes and four hours in length, where I could visit their home up to six 
times over the course of seven months in line with their preferences and in deference to their 
health and other commitments. By building in flexibility at the outset, it was possible to 
acknowledge a participants levels of tiredness, agitation and exhaustion and adjust in future 
visits without framing it as a failure to participate.  
Recruiting Participants with Dementia 
Much of the success I experienced in recruiting participants to this research can be linked to 
the involvement of Alzheimer Scotland as a stakeholder and funding body. Through 
leveraging this pre-existing connection, I was able to draw upon knowledge and identify 
avenues of recruitment that might otherwise have remained inaccessible. The benefits of this 
were particularly evident when navigating the numerous gatekeepers that existed between 
myself as a researcher, and participants with dementia, a process that is often troublesome 
without built in stakeholder involvement (Hellstrom et al, 2007). My invitation to speak with 
the Scottish Dementia Working Group demonstrates the value of such pre-existing 
connections, as does my ability to contact professionals employed by Alzheimer Scotland 
who facilitated dementia cafes so that my arrival had been advertised to attendees ahead of 
time. Undertaking recruitment in these pre-existing contexts allowed me to engage with both 
people with dementia and gatekeepers in a way that was honest and open. As a result, I was 
able to explain both the aims of the research and reassure all involved that the research 
represented a negligible level of risk to the participants, that it would be neither invasive nor 
restrictive, and that their privacy and anonymity would be assured throughout the process 
(Mental Capacity Act, 2005). This engagement ensured that both participants and those who 
supported them understood that as a non-clinical, non-therapeutic research project, there 
would be no reward for participating beyond the experience of having participated (Clarke 
& Keady, 2002) and aiding in the furtherance of dementia research (McKillop, 2002). Table 
1, below, provides a brief insight into each participant including their approximate age at the 
first visit, the number of times they were visited, their living situation, and their engagement 
with walking interviews, while the participant profile section which follows provides a brief 
description of each. 
Psydonym Gender 
Approx 
# Times 
Visited 
First 
Visited 
Visited 
Audio 
Hours 
Recorded 
Area Type 
Living 
Situation 
Received 
Care? 
Sensory/Mobility 
Aids? 
Took Part  in 
Walking 
Interview? 
Flash Male 90s 3 March April 6:18 Urban Sheltered  Yes Hearing No 
George Male 70s 4 April August 
10:48 
Suburban Home No 
Hearing, Vision, 
Mobility 
Hazel Female 60s 4 April July 7:46 Suburban Home No None Yes 
Isobel Female 70s 5 February June 
Urban Home Yes Mobility Yes 
Janet Female 60s 2 April April 2:35 Suburban Home No None No 
Margaret Female 80s 2 February March 
Urban Sheltered  No None No 
Mark Male 80s 5 April July 14:56 Urban Home Yes Mobility, Vision Yes 
Nigel Male 50s 6 July July 10:30 Suburban Home No None Yes 
Stan Male 70s 4 February May 
Suburban Home No None Yes 
Sybil Female 80s 2 April May 
Suburban Home Yes 
Hearing, Vision, 
Mobility 
Bob Male 70s 1 March March 3:25 Urban Sheltered  Yes None Yes 
It is important to clarify at this juncture that while approximately half of the participants were 
recruited through groups associated with Alzheimer Scotland, others were recruited through 
other organisations that explicitly focused on supporting people with dementia or otherwise 
advertised their activities as dementia friendly. While this strategy was effective in facilitating 
recruitment, it should be noted that by targeting groups that advertised their connection to 
dementia there is a potential loss of other voices. Milligan (2000; Milligan & Morbey, 2013) 
notes that gender and class are often ingrained in traditional support spaces in such a way 
that certain groups, may find them emotionally or mentally inaccessible. This is particularly 
true of men, who often feel out of place in dementia cafes and similar conversational spaces 
(ibid). Similarly, a strategy that focuses on groups which announce their dementia connection 
will by extension miss those who do not wish to disclose their diagnosis through attending, 
or who do not see those spaces as representative of their experience. While I made attempts 
to challenge the issues of the former by reaching out to groups focused on physical activities 
or sports reminiscence groups where the membership was exclusively male, the latter remains 
a limitation of this research which should be tended to in future research. Although some 
ethical considerations have been highlighted here, these are presented in greater detail after 
discussion of the research design itself.  
Research Design and Methods 
Interviews 
Interviews often form one core element of the ethnographic research design. This research 
included two interview styles: unstructured, informal interviews within the house and walking 
interviews (see Clark & Emmel, 2010; Ward & Campbell, 2013).  As this research explicitly 
positions participants as disabled people and targets of civilised oppression, it was, and is, 
important to acknowledge and seek to mitigate the extent to which participants might be 
disempowered by the research methods themselves. It was through cultivating and 
maintaining this awareness that I was able to consciously relinquish as much power as 
possible. Unstructured interviews allowed for greater space for participants to control the 
direction of our discussions. While unstructured interviews are less pressured,  participants 
were also encouraged to choose whether they would prefer a smaller number of longer visits, 
or a greater number of visits that were shorter in duration (Pratt, 2002), and they were 
encouraged to take breaks within that time where needed (Nygard, 2006). I also made a 
concentrated effort to engage with participants in a manner that was familiar, guided by 
Weinbergs (1996) observation that the was a fundamental difference between talking with 
someone, where each member of the conversation is an equal participant, than there were 
associated with interviewing someone, where the researcher retains a position of authority. 
This was reinforced by moving away from structured or semi-structured interviewing 
techniques, and embracing the flexibility offered by unstructured interviews, where there 
were no pre-determined questions, and thus no correct or incorrect answers (Leech, 2002; 
Hellstrom, Nolan, Nordenfelt & Lundh, 2007). This was particularly influential for my 
participants, many of whom went on to recount feeling significant anxiety when faced with 
structured measures, which they often associated with embarrassment, failure, and the 
emotional process of their diagnostic journey.  
It quickly became clear that informality, rather than the formality associated with the 
researchers mantle was facilitative of my participants in an interview setting (see 
Hammersley and Atkinson, 1983). For example, in my first interviews with Margaret and 
Isobel (who were among my first participants), I arranged myself with a notepad at my side, 
intending to make quick notes to remind myself of any particular topics or phrases that I 
wanted to return to as they occurred in conversation. It was only after Margaret took me 
around her flat that I realised she spoke more freely when the notepad, itself a material 
reminder of our roles as researcher and participant, was not present. This impression was 
confirmed when I reclaimed the notepad briefly, noticed a change in her demeanour, and 
returned it to my bag. This pattern was repeated twice more with two different participants 
before I abandoned the notebook entirely, preferring to take field notes in the car directly 
following an interview, and to remain present in conversation with only the Dictaphone 
accompanying me into the interview space as a physical prop. The results of this decision 
were twofold. Firstly, my participants became easier in my presence and spent less time 
apologising for not providing good information. Secondly, I found that being stripped of 
the material objects of research facilitated my own research practice. Left with only the 
Dictaphone as a physical symbol of my researcher role, I found myself better able to engage 
with participants. Freed from the task of taking notes, I became a more egalitarian 
conversational partner (Oakley, 1981). Secure in the knowledge that the Dictaphone would 
capture our conversation, I could focus instead on engaging with participants in a way that 
was genuine, nondirective (Leech, 2002) and open (Selltiz 1959). Ultimately, this openness 
facilitated rapport building, and allowed me to engage with participants in a way that was 
enabling, thus helping to ensure that it was the participants experience and voice at the heart 
of this work, rather than my own pre-formed assumptions, a process that was crucial to 
accomplishing the goals of this work (Barton, 1993).  
Walking Interviews 
Alongside interviewing participants within their homes, the research also made use of 
walking interviews as an additional avenue of data collection. In this, this research aligned 
itself with the methods of its parent project, the Our Places Our People study, which uses 
walking interviews as a method of exploring the ways in which people with dementia 
experience and engage with their neighbourhood. The rationale behind the adoption of 
walking interviews as a data collection method is mirrored in both projects, as walking within 
the neighbourhood while discussing the neighbourhood, and crossing thresholds while 
discussing thresholds both facilitate recall for people with dementia by discussing 
phenomena in context, rather than separate from it (Clark and Emmel, 2008; Ward and 
Campbell, 2013).  
Using walking interviews encouraged participants to become curators of our time together, 
as they chose if, when, and where we would walk together. It is important to note, however, 
that providing this freedom resulted in 5 participants (Flash, George, Janet, Margaret and 
Sybil) choosing not to walk outside during our time together. When queried on why they 
chose not to walk, these participants offered a myriad of explanations including preferring 
not to walk outside, finding the outdoor environment difficult to navigate due to mobility 
impairments, fearing a fall, feeling tired, and distrusting the weather. Each of these reasons 
were respected as valid and represented of their habits of dwelling, with potential limitation 
in data collection being addressed by undertaking walking tours of their home space. 
Whether inside or out of doors, these walks both changed the dynamics of the interviews 
themselves, but provided ample opportunities to observe how the person with dementia 
navigated the physical and social spaces of their neighbourhoods. This facilitated a more 
nuanced insight into the complex relationships that existed between the person with 
dementia and the spaces they routinely accessed, as well as how they navigated those public 
spaces in the context of potential social encounters with others. Insights into these physical 
threshold crossings and the spatial arrangements that informed them are discussed at length 
in Chapter Five. Similar methods have also been used to explore the potential impact of 
context and the environment on healthy behaviours (Garcia et al., 2012), wellbeing 
(Carpiano, 2008), and continue to become more prevalent within qualitative research as 
advances in digital technologies make walking or go along interviews a viable method of 
prompting novel insight without sacrificing audio quality and data capture. 
Photographs and Objects 
Although it was not my intention to create a visual ethnography, I nevertheless wanted to 
make visible to the reader the phenomena I encountered in the field (Harper, 2012). In this, 
my thinking was aligned with scholars like Pink (2009; 2012) and Mason and Davis (2009) 
who argue that the sensory world represents a fundamental aspect of the experience of being-
in-the-world, and as such support the use of multiple data collection methods to capture it. 
As such, while my field-notes often reflect on my own embodied sensory experiences of 
being in a place, I use digital photographs both to highlight areas and objects that appeared 
to become significant during interviews and to exemplify the topic at hand. I do not consider 
the digital images I captured to have an inherent meaning, but use them to explain, exemplify 
and communicate meaning uncovered using other methods. The images thus serve a twofold 
purpose, first in facilitating the process of analysis by providing a visual reference for audio 
and transcribed data, and second in providing contextual or demonstrative visual information 
for the reader where they are included in the thesis. As such images, as I use them in the 
thesis, are intended to enhance rather than replace description by capturing the materiality 
of often immaterial threshold spaces. It was an unexpected development to have participants 
supplement this aspect of the data capture themselves through the gifting of objects and 
tokens. While much has been written elsewhere on the import of mundane objects (for 
example; Hurdley, 2013) and the practices of hosting, which themselves involve materialities 
of foods and containers (van den Hoonarrd, 2005) I was surprised at the extent to which I 
often left participants houses with token objects despite explicitly resisting attempts to do 
so. This was particularly notable with Bob- who refused all of my attempts to leave the 
residence without a chamois cloth after I admitted I did not own one nor know of their 
particular use for glass; Flash, who escorted me to the main road that separated his residence 
from my car and agreed (at my request) to remain on that side, only to cross moments later 
with a pink flower he had picked from the bush behind him while he waited to wave me off; 
and Mark who made extra copies of the poetry he took to his local club and kept them in an 
envelope until my next visit. These tendencies towards physical tokens was reversed with 
female participants, who often baked, purchased or otherwise set aside food for us to share, 
with Isobel going so far as to suggest I should remain for dinner so as to avoid rush hour 
traffic. While few of these objects find themselves represented in the thesis, they nevertheless 
reflect a material relationality of this work that informed data collection and analysis.  
Participant Observation 
Observation is one of the most powerful tools available to an ethnographer (Van Mannen, 
1988; Fetterman, 1998), but it takes on greater significance for this study because participants, 
people with dementia and thus people living with impairment, may experience difficulties in 
communicating the wealth of their experiences using only spoken language. Indeed, 
observation is often used within dementia studies for precisely this reason (e.g. Chao, Chen, 
Liu & Clark, 2008; Nygard, 2009; Dugmore, Orrell & Spector, 2015; Buse and Twigg, 2016). 
Observation allows the researcher to capture not only what people say they do, but what 
they do and how they do it in the context of their day to day lives. This insight, paired with 
the researchers ability, as a novice in an unexplored space, to notice and question aspects of 
these experiences that have become habitualised and taken for granted by participants who 
routinely navigate the space and enact their practices for dwelling there (Storti 2001). In this 
way, my position as an ethnographic observer within an unfamiliar space was often one 
which placed me somewhere between a participant and a nonparticipant, as I was increasingly 
drawn into relational activities such as taking my turn in making tea, while seeking to observe 
the way in which participants managed threshold spaces without myself participating. That 
including me in the tea making routine arguably represents a process wherein I became a 
participant at a social threshold, however, problematizes this, and it is a critical to note that, 
as an individual within the dwelling, I could never wholly engage as a non-participant, for I 
was always engaged with my participants in some way at a social threshold.  
Field Notes 
Field notes represent one of the pillars of ethnographic work, with Geertz going so far as to 
argue that between the creation of field-notes and the written ethnography, an ethnographer 
must also consider scribe to be a facet of their researcher identity (Geertz, 1973). While the 
way in which field-notes are used vary between researchers and over time (see Van Maanen, 
1988) the process of writing in an unpolished way in context is a fundamental aspect of then 
writing polished ethnography (Richardson, 1990). My decision not to take notes during my 
conversations with participants, as noted above, is not contrary to this tradition (Emerson, 
Frez & Shaw, 1995), as writing field-notes as a reflective practice following a period in the 
field has equal validity (Jackson, 1990). As such my relationship to field-notes is one of 
participating-to-write, or where I dictated rather than wrote field-notes, participating-to-
speak. As Emerson, Fretz & Shaw observe: 
For the most part, these impressions remain headnotes until the researcher sits down at some later 
point to write full field-notes about these scenes and events. [] ethnographers should take note of their 
initial impressions. These impressions may include those things available to the sensesthe tastes, 
smells, and sounds of the physical environment, and the look and feel of the locale and the people in it. 
Such impressions may include details about the physical setting, including size, space, noise, colors, 
equipment, and movement, or about people in the setting, such as their number, gender, race, appearance, 
dress, movement, comportment, and feeling tone. []the ethnographer can begin to assimilate strange 
sights and sounds by attending to and then writing about them. 
(2011, n.p) 
From this perspective, my field notes were used as a method to capture not only what I was 
aware of in the field, but of my own thoughts, feelings and emotions on encountering the 
field. This writing informed my future visits with participants, as made a note of particulars 
that required a follow up, as well as forming the first stage in the process of textual 
production and reproduction (Atkinson, 1992 p5). It is important to acknowledge at this 
point that field-notes are not a complete nor accurate representation of events as they 
happened, they are descriptive in nature and selective in focus (ibid, 17). In undertaking my 
research, my notes were transformed from mental notes (Lofland & Lofland,1995) to full 
field-notes by the process of turning away from the field toward the worlds of research and 
writing (Emerson, Fretz & Shaw, 2001 p358). These field-notes were then, in turn, used to 
provide depth and context to the transcripts of interviews, and the review of visual images 
(Van Maanen, 1988).  
Ethical Considerations 
Given the positioning of people with dementia as both vulnerable (Mental Capacity Act, 
2005) and at risk (Cooney, Howard, and Lawlor, 2006) the decision to engage directly with 
participants with dementia introduced a number of additional ethical considerations to the 
study, particularly in regards to establishing capacity, gaining and maintaining consent, and 
managing participant stress and distress. While these factors are discussed to some extent 
throughout the body of this chapter and beyond, the following section will briefly detail the 
steps taken to account meet the ethical responsibilities of the research. Each of the steps 
below were detailed in full in my application to the University of Stirlings General University 
Ethics Panel, and were approved under reference GUEP20 on the 19th December 2016. 
Establishing Capacity 
As this research is substantively informed by the field of disability studies, it was vital that 
each potential participant was approached in a way that presumed capacity, rather than 
incapacity (Dewing, 2002). Such an explicit approach was vital, for presuming that a diagnosis 
of dementia is mutually exclusive with the capacity to provide informed consent is not only 
inaccurate but risks perpetuating the vey mechanisms of oppression this work seeks to 
disrupt (Adults with Incapacity Act, 2000; Mental Capacity Act, 2005; Dewing, 2007; Scottish 
Government, 2008; Nuffield Council on Bioethics 2009). As a result, this research adopted 
the Mental Capacity Protocol designed and developed by the Our People, Our Places study, 
which had been previously approved by ethics committees at both the University of Stirling 
and the Social Care REC. Presented in Appendix A, this protocol allowed for information 
to be shared in a conversational manner, and aimed to be facilitative of the different ways in 
which potential participants could communicate understanding, consent, and assent 
throughout the consent process Karlawish, Casarett & James, 2002) . This was accomplished 
by first establishing the persons orientation in time, place, and person, before discussing the 
details of the research, and their involvement and establishing their comprehension through 
asking questions about the information they had been provided. The protocol provides an 
explicit framework for establishing capacity to consent, while still providing an option to 
leave and return to undertake the process again at a future time if the potential participant is 
unable to demonstrate capacity where their ability is suspected to have been undermined by 
illness or other factors. Where participants could not sufficiently evidence capacity to 
consent, their engagement with the research ended, while those who sufficiently met the 
criteria proceeded to the consent stage.  
Obtaining and Maintaining Consent 
As discussed in Chapter Two, people with dementia may experience and manifest 
vulnerability both as a result of their impairments and as a result of systematic disablement. 
As such the process of negotiating consent, particularly informed consent, with people with 
dementia requires a number of decisions to be made at the outset. First and foremost, among 
these is how consent is understood as a concept, and how the securing of consent is 
undertaken as a process. It is vital to acknowledge, therefore, that the manner in which 
informed consent is differentiated from uninformed consent within a research context is 
inherently problematic (Wilkinson, 2002). Ultimately, the process of establishing informed 
consent requires not only that the participant demonstrate the capacity to consent, as 
described above, but that they are able to convey their ability to be informed participants. 
This introduces two key issues; the power of the researcher as the shaper and communicator 
of information and an on-going challenge to what it means to be informed.  
My efforts in mitigating the power imbalance introduced in and perpetuated through the 
consent process were significantly shaped both by my engagement with the disability 
literatures, and by my experiences of providing support to adults with cognitive impairment. 
The result was an effort to shift much of the onus involved in demonstrating informed 
consent from potential participant to myself, embracing the idea that a failure to provide 
informed consent may just as accurately reflect inaccessible materials and procedures as lack 
of capacity. This approach closely aligns with those of Brady, Fredrick and Williams (2012), 
who sought to adapt research materials to be accessible for participants with aphasia- a 
condition which, like dementia (e.g. Bourbonnais and Ducharme, 2010), can affect speech, 
language comprehension and writing. They argue:  
Standard approaches to ensuring informed consent are poorly matched to many patients 
information needs [] Development of accessible documentation may also improve all 
potential participants access to the research process [] Thus, for clinical, legal, and ethical 
reasons, we should be facilitating the accessibility of information provision and consent processes 
[however]enabling people[]extends beyond the development of accessible written 
materials to support their spoken communication needs.  
(Brady, Fredrick & Williams 2012, p.194) 
In the context of this research, the call for a facilitative ethical process was met in two primary 
ways. Firstly, through the design of a Mental Capacity Protocol (Appendix A, discussed 
above, and secondly through attending to the design of the study materials. To this end, the 
information sheet and consent form were written in clear, accessible English, and 
supplemented with visual images reinforcing the key message in each section (Appendices B 
& C). This process of creating accessible materials and approaching the consent process in 
the spirit of facilitation (Nuffield Council on Bioethics, 2009) created a formal space within 
which participants were encouraged to seek more information (Clarke & Keady, 1996) and 
make informed choices (Karlawish, Casarett & James, 2002).  
It is this notion of informed choices and informed consent that introduces an additional layer 
of complexity to the ethical grounding of this work. It is vital to note, for example, that even 
where participants are capable of providing informed consent at the outset of the study, the 
degenerative nature of dementia problematizes the assumption that capacity once 
demonstrated, and consent once given, could be relatively assured throughout the research 
process (e.g. Wilkinson, 2002). However, because informed consent stands as a bedrock of 
academic research (see Miller and Boulton, 2007) and because obtaining informed consent 
means providing adequate information (Alldred and Gilles, 2012 p.150) and presuming 
that the potential participant takes this information on board in a way that is congruent with 
the researchers intentions, despite being shared by their expectations of research generally, 
and social research specifically, as well as their personal interests and intensions (Edward and 
Alldred, 1999). The extent to which participants can be informed is therefore problematic, 
especially where the information given encompasses the potential outcomes of the research 
and its impact, something the researcher themselves cannot foresee at the point of fieldwork 
(Miller and Bell, 2012; John 2014).  
With this tension in mind, therefore, this research engaged in a process of initial and on-
going consent, where participants who demonstrated capacity at the point of recruitment 
were frequently presented with opportunities to reinforce or withdraw their consent 
(Dewing, 2007). Critically, through this subtle repetition of the process of establishing 
capacity and consent I was able to detect where a participants informed consent began to 
become more aligned with uninformed consent (Wilkinson, 2002), which ultimately resulted 
in one participant (Stan) ending his participation as neither his capacity nor his informed 
consent could be established after my fourth visit.  
Managing Stress and Distress 
Although undertaking interviews with participants is generally constructed as unproblematic, 
there are several points that require explicit consideration, particularly when engaging with 
individuals who are potentially isolated (Cotrell & Schulz, 1993; Holmn, Ericsson & 
Winblad, 2000) and who live with a cognitive impairment. As such, there were two key 
aspects of the research encounter that introduced the potential for participants to experience 
stress or distress: the encounter itself, and their reminiscence upon the encounter. It is 
important to note that an attempt to censor or avoid topics that might cause unease for 
participants, while conceptually simple, is not only complicated in practice but undermines 
the emancipatory and inclusive principles of this work (Dewing, 2002). Indeed, the 
assumption that there exists a clear distinction between potentially distressing topics, the 
discussion of previous distress, and the experience of distress in the moment is itself worthy 
of contestation (Denzin, 2003). My approach in the field was, therefore, to approach each 
encounter with an awareness of the relationship that existed between myself and the 
participant (Ellis, 2007; 2016). This position allowed me to respect the participants decision 
to share their memories of living through times of great distress (such as with Isobels 
reflection on the death of her children, Janets increasing struggle with aggression, and Flashs 
reflection upon his time in the army) while still reaffirming throughout that they were free to 
stop at any time, to change the subject, or to take a break if they wished. Acknowledging my 
place within the research relationship and the conversational dynamic was vital, for these 
memories were shared between people (Slatterly, and Rapp, 2003) in a way that was shaped 
and influenced by a wide reaching web of interconnectivities that spanned beyond the direct 
relationship between he participant and I in the room (Brooks, 2006). To this end I was often 
comforted by Franks (2004) assertion that a researcher couldnt: 
Act on principles that hold for all times. We act as best we can at a particular time, guided 
by certain stories that speak to that time and other peoples dialogical affirmation that we have 
chosen the right stories. [] By remaining open to other peoples responses [] we engaged in 
the unfinalized dialogue of seeking the good.  
(p.191  192) 
As such, the discussion of distressing topics was something that we navigated relationally, 
together. While I always made a point of reminding participants that they need not speak on 
any matter they did not wish to, I was guided by their mood (Field, 2006) as to when and 
how often such reminders were appropriate. Reassured that participants did wish to share 
their thoughts, emotions and experiences, I engaged by listening deeply to the stories that 
participants wished to share (Ellis and Patti 2014), and sought to create a space in which they 
could feel heard by actively recognising, relating and reacting to their narratives (Way & 
Tracy, 2012). 
In spite of these attempts, however, there was evidence of a participant experiencing distress 
and regret over her engagement in the research after the fact (Jones (1998; Clarke, 2006). 
This became evident after I received a phonecall from one of Margarets family members 
several days after a visit to inform me that I was no longer welcome, and that she believed 
our conversation had made [Margaret]s dementia worse (CP Field notes) as she had been 
distressed the following evening and for several days after. This event proved to be 
particularly challenging for me as an early career researcher who was seeking the good 
(Frank, 2004, p.192), and resulted in a significant period of reflection wherein I questioned 
not only my comportment in the field, but the wisdom of allowing participants to set the 
time and duration of my visits. This period was, ultimately, cut short by other engagements 
with participants, who made short work of any potential safeguards. This was particularly 
true of Hazel, who dismissed my concern about staying beyond 12pm and encroaching upon 
her lunch, by informing me that she didnt like to eat during the day a practice which was 
confirmed, and mirrored by her husband who reinforced my welcome. The final result was, 
perhaps, an acutely targeted awareness of signs of fatigue in participants, but my dedication 
to engaging with participants as knowledgeable, powerful, and competent individuals who 
were capable of directing both the conversation during field work and the shape of the 
encounter (i.e. Corbin and Morse 2003, Nunkoosing 2005) remained. Indeed, Margarets data 
remains within the thesis as a result of her decision to have our time together remain as part 
of the study rather than removing it entirely following her withdrawl, an instruction I received 
during that final conversation. 
Passages in to and out of  the Field 
The following vignette has been compiled from the reflections captured both in my field 
notes, and as part of the transcribed interviews with participants. As such, it represents an 
amalgam of many passages into and out of the field, and provides an example of the ways in 
which the studys methodology, methods, and practices where intrinsically linked with one 
another, and enacted through the research relationship. 
April 31st 2017. 
Met with Sue Donym today at her home in Afar. I called ahead before leaving the office and 
spoke with her husband (Alyas) who confirmed they were both at home and happy for me 
to visit. The drive was easy, but ended up parked around the corner again- Sue insists I should 
park on her drive in future. I arrived at 2pm, and Sue waved through the window for me to 
let myself in and met me at the door. Sue and I sat in the livingroom, Alyas entered briefly 
with tea for us, but took his upstairs to let us chat. I put the Dictaphone on her chair arm 
to keep it out of the way of the mug and biscuits. Checked Sue was still happy to chat, and 
reminded her that she could kick me out whenever. 
I asked Sue about their holiday, and she spoke animatedly about the cottage and the nearby 
farm animals. She was less clear about specific events, but returned to them later in the visit 
(museum, dinner out, etc). I asked Sue if she wanted to walk today- she agreed, but only to 
a short walk as she expected it to rain. She went upstairs briefly to tell Alyas, and came down 
with her coat- this one had a larger lapel, and was easier to clip the walking microphone to, 
and had an inside pocket to keep the Dictaphone in (no more hands getting tangled in wires). 
We walked a loop around the housing estate n.b. theres an interesting discussion of 
relationships between generations about halfway through the walk. Sue noted that she didnt 
know the names of most of her neighbours, but knew them to wave to, and could describe 
their cars/whether they had children who played outside etc. Sue spoke about the games her 
son (deceased) used to play as a child- seemed sad but not distressed (reminded her after she 
didnt need to tell me things she didnt want to. Sue said she wouldnt- I left it at that). Took 
a brief stop on the way back as Sue struggled with the incline- Sue very resistant to resting, 
but I wasnt comfortable continuing until she had her breath. 
Returned to the house, my turn to make tea. Returned to the living room to Sue examining 
the side of her shoe- n.b interesting discussion here about her concerns about falling and her 
need for good grippy shoes that are still easy to take on and off. Spoke for another hour or 
so, before setting up next meeting and heading off before the rush hour. Sue says I should 
bring my husband over for dinner as theres always plenty as she still struggles to work out 
how to cook for two not more. Old patterns die hard (temporal threshold?). Drove off ASAP 
after getting in the car- Sue waiting at window as expected as I went past. Parked two streets 
down to take notes, emailed confirmation of exiting field to supervisors and headed home.  
The vignette above combines a number of fieldwork experiences and practices, several of 
which are particularly important. Firstly, my tendency to call ahead and confirm on the day 
that the visit was still convenient to participants, Sues greeting, and my efforts throughout 
to remind Sue that she could both end the visit and redirect the conversation at any time are 
examples of engaging with consent as an on-going process. The move from a home based 
interview, to a walking interview, and back, along with the changes in focus and dynamic 
which accompanied these movements is broadly representative of my experiences in the 
field. With the exception of Nigel and Stan, few participants wished to start the visit with a 
walk, and as such the pattern of sit-walk-sit was more representative of the dataset. It should 
be noted, however, that some participants never engaged with walking interviews either due 
to difficulties accessing their outdoor space (George, Sybil) or declining to do so (Flash). The 
section above also captures the practice of setting the date for future visits before leaving the 
home, and the presence of another key individual within the home (in this case, Alyas, Sues 
husband). 
Analysis 
Data Management 
Fieldwork was conducted between February and August 2017, and resulted in 34 interviews 
and over 78 hours of audio interview content. These files were initially collected on an 
Olympus WS-853 Dictaphone, using either the inbuilt or clip-on microphone before being 
transferred onto a password locked computer at the University of Stirling and removed from 
the device. The audio files were sent for verbatim transcription and received between 
September 2017 and June 2018, with commonly used names (those of participants and 
spouses) replaced with pseudonyms in the resulting text file prior to the first round of 
analysis. Photographs were initially arranged by participant pseudonym and anonymised 
through digital blurring (where details like faces, names or house numbers were shown) 
before being saved alongside the transcripts for that participant. Original audio files, along 
with non-anonymised transcripts and photographs were saved in a separate folder to allow 
for reference throughout the analysis process while limiting the chance for them to be 
accessed or seen by unauthorised parties. Digital media was stored on the University of 
Stirling mainframe, with paper copies of consent forms and other materials being stored in 
a locked cabinet. Field-notes were reviewed as part of process of preparing to engage with 
analysis, with notes taken of potentially useful insights, and key sections 
Using Hermeneutic Phenomenology  
Although hermeneutic phenomenology used rarely within dementia studies, it has a long 
history both as a basis for other phenomenological approaches (particularly Interpretative 
Phenomenological Analysis, see Smith, Flowers and Larkin, 2009) and is used regularly in 
the contexts of nursing and allied health research (i.e. Annells, 1996; Van der Zalm and 
Bergum, 2000; Laverty, 2003; Ajjawi & Higgs, 2007; Taylor, 2017). It is important to 
acknowledge that while there are a number of philosophical distinctions between the 
phenomenological approaches rooted in Hursserls transcendental philosophical approach 
and Heideggers hermeneutic phenomenology there are three key features that are of direct 
relevance to this research. Firstly, hermeneutics understands engagement with the world to 
be characterised first by experience, then by contemplation (Bennett, 2013) and as a result 
removes any grounds for challenging the data, or the experience of participants, on the basis 
of their cognitive impairment. Secondly, the goal of hermeneutic phenomenology is to 
facilitate an understanding of what an experience is like, rather than simply provide a 
description of it (Draucker, 1999). Such understanding is necessary and owed to people with 
dementia by people without dementia, in line with their status as targets of civilised 
oppression (Thomas, 2006; Harvey, 2015). Finally, hermeneutic analysis is characterised by 
its use of the hermeneutic circle, wherein analysis is understood to be an iterative process 
that evolves through engaging with the data, thinking about the data, writing the data, 
returning to the data repeatedly over time. The result of such a conceptualisation is the 
recognition that analysis, and understanding, is a dynamic process that evolves over time 
(Smythe et al., 2007). Critically, like Van Manen (1990), advocates of hermeneutic 
phenomenology recognise the importance of writing in the process of analysis, rejecting the 
construction of artificial borders between a stage in which only analysis is undertaken, and a 
stage where the results of analysis are faithfully transformed into written prose without 
further engagement (Spence, 2017). As such, themes become indicative of what a researcher 
sees or hears in the data (Smythe et al., 2007, p.1392) rather than authoritative, exhaustive, 
and preclusive statements of fact. Instead, the data, in conversation with the researcher, 
the wider context, and its own composite parts, simultaneously raises and answers its own 
questions (Bontekoe, 1996).  
Stages of Analysis 
Given the extent to which hermeneutic analysis differs from other forms of 
phenomenological analysis primarily in the attitude of the researcher, in that they must seek 
to analyse and synthesise the data in a way facilitates the emergence of meaning (Crowther, 
Smythe and Spence, 2014; 2015) and results in a written ethnography that is representative 
of both the wider body of data collected and the researchers experience in the field.  For the 
purposes of clarity, therefore, I have followed the example laid out by Titchen (1993) and 
colleagues (Edward & Titchen, 2003) in an attempt to outline my analytic process. The first 
stage of analysis was characterised by immersion, wherein I was mentally and physically 
surrounded by physical copies of the interview transcripts, coded directly on paper and 
created physical notes of the emerging nodes. In this stage, my aims were to both become 
acquainted with my data in the printed rather than spoken or experiential format, and to 
outline call first order constructs (Schutz, 1970). It was not until step two that these 
primarily descriptive constructs became the foundation for my own analysis. This strategy of 
noting the presence of first order constructs in step one and my interpretations as second 
order constructs in step two while working on the same physical print-out facilitated my 
movement within the hermeneutic circle as I was able to more clearly track the links between 
participants own statements and my own interpretations. Step three involved spreading 
related post-it notes out in such a way that they could all be viewed simultaneously, before 
arranging them into sub-themes and themes- the result of which can be observed in Picture 
1: Themes and Sub Themes Emerging in Stage Three. 
Picture 1: Themes and Sub Themes Emerging in Stage Three 
Finally, stage four involved moving the analysis from paper into NVivo 11, a process that 
not only encouraged critical reflection on the analysis as a whole, but further engagement 
with the hermeneutic circle as I reviewed the framing, naming, and position of each theme 
in relation to one another as I (re)constructed the data in NVivo. Once all transcripts and 
coding was transferred to Nvivo, the software was used to explore and visualise the data, 
confirming the validity and salience of the nodes within the dataset and facilitating constant 
comparison (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) to ensure that the codes were used consistently 
throughout.  
Writing an Ethnography 
Van Manen (1990) argues that a good phenomenological work is not just one that describes 
a phenomena, but one which presents it in such a way that: 
the essence of something is construed so that the structure of a lived experience is revealed to us 
in such a fashion that we are now able to grasp the nature and significance of this experience 
in a hitherto unseen way.  
(p. 39) 
This quest to capture the significance of an experience while honouring its complexity 
demands that researchers remain Janus-faced (Stanley, 1990 p623) looking at once towards 
the field and their participants, and yet towards the academe. In this context, the act of 
writing becomes itself relational, placing the thesis at the threshold as it draws together the 
academy and the field, and the experiences and voices of participants with dementia. The 
aim of ethnographic writing is, therefore, to relate not only the words of participants, but in 
the construction of the written piece to convey the sense of having been there (Geertz, 
1988). The result should be evocative in addition to being factual and truthful (Van 
Maanen, 1988, p34), a document that keeps one face towards my participants and my 
experiences in the field, and the other towards the academy, the research communities, and 
the developing discipline of dementia studies. 
Summary 
While seeking to explore the experiences of people with dementia at the threshold resents a 
number of logistical, methodological and ethical challenges, each of these provided a unique 
opportunity to further refine this research and reflect upon the process as a researcher. This 
chapter began by presenting a case for adopting an ethnographic approach as an avenue for 
at once eliciting valuable insight from participants with dementia, while providing sufficient 
flexibility in method and practice that research encounters could be shaped reflexively to 
meet the needs and desires of participants over time. This was supplemented by a discussion 
of the methods of data collection used with participants, principally, interviews, walking 
interviews, photography, observation and researcher field notes. The closing sections of the 
chapter then seek to capture the complex and iterative processes of analysis and writing. It 
has been this process of talking, reading, writing, re-reading, and re-writing that has shaped 
the three findings chapters to come. The following three chapters each present an insight 
into how people with dementia navigate particular thresholds, with Chapter Five focusing 
on physical thresholds, Chapter Six on social thresholds, and Chapter Seven completing the 
findings section of this thesis with its exploration of participants experiences at temporal 
thresholds.  
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
5: MANAGING THRESHOLDS IN PHYSICAL 
SPACE: THE ART OF DWELLING WITH 
DEMENTIA. 
Introduction 
As the first chapter in which I present the findings, it is appropriate to consider those aspects 
of thresholds which are most aligned with how the concept is predominantly encounterd in 
everyday life; their manifestation in physical space. The following discussion draws on the 
concept of Dasein as both perpetually in-the-world, and continually engaged in activities of 
dwelling-as-building (bauen) and dwelling-as-preserving (wohnen). Thomas (1999; 2007) 
social-relational approach is used to provide key insights into the relational aspects of 
disability as it manifests in physical and material practices which can enable and/or disable 
at different times, in different contexts, and in different relationships. This perspective is key 
to unpacking the complexities that occur at physical thresholds where the place in which a 
person with dementia dwells meets the shared spaces of Elsewhere.  
The chapter begins by discussing those points where the home-place met Elsewhere, 
focusing particularly on the importance of doors, doorways and window areas as thresholds 
that draw together home and Elsewhere. This allows an investigation into how these 
thresholds could made manifest as places that simultaneously facilitated passage for the 
welcome visitor while acting as bulwarks against the unwanted intruder, with particular 
emphasis how this relates to dwelling and the use of objects as methods of threshold 
management. Having considered how thresholds draw together home and Elsewhere, the 
chapter then turns to focus on troublesome thresholds within the home, drawing out the 
difficulties associated with both vertical up/down thresholds and those that appear 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
horizontally as in/out spaces. The fundamental concept of the participants physical, social 
and relational experiences as inextricable from one another is introduced in this chapter, and 
recurs in those that follow as the focus shifts from the physical to the social (Chapter Six), 
before discussing temporal thresholds in Chapter Seven. 
Separating the dwelling from Elsewhere 
In the methodology chapter I discussed the importance of explicitly acknowledging and 
consciously looking beyond preconceived ideas or fore-structures as part of hermeneutic 
looking and analysis. As such I note here that I entered into the field with a simplistic notion 
of where thresholds might be, but with little expectation around what they were or how they 
were managed in the everyday. As such the first sections of this chapter are dedicated to 
those first notions which most clearly align with the language I used throughout my ethics 
applications and participant recruitment where the ideas of doors and windows as threshold 
spaces made accessible an otherwise abstracted and at the time unformed concept (as per 
Weinberg 20006). As a result, many of the discussions which explicitly focused on doorways 
and windows formed the basis of my early visits with participants, a touch stone which itself 
facilitated my passage into the field and over the physical and social thresholds managed by 
my participants.  
Material Objects and Threshold Guardians  
Doors & Doorways 
For participants, the front door provided a forcible bulwalk between their dwelling and 
Elsewhere; between themselves as older people and unknown others in the world. It was the 
front door that, once secured, could (for the most part) be trusted to fulfil its purpose and 
be ignored, while also representing (most commonly) the primary mode of physical passage 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
between the dwelling and elsewhere. That there is a necessity for the parentheses in the 
previous sentence is key: as relational spaces, thresholds were drawn, redrawn, and 
encountered both by the participants themselves and by those who dwelled Elsewhere. As 
such physical thresholds were imbued with activity and tension as an aspect of their being. 
Nowhere was this as prevalent as at the front door, which was the only threshold space to 
host objects directly focused towards those who 
were unwelcome. Picture 2 and Picture 3 show 
two stickers in two different residences, the first 
declaring the presence of a neighbourhood watch 
initiative, and the second deterring cold callers 
and doorstep salesmen. Both stickers are 
themselves placed on the patterned glass that was 
itself an architectural feature intended to dissuade 
unwelcome visitors from peering inside the door 
in a forcible demarcation between public and 
private spaces (c.f. Kaup, 2011) while still 
providing sufficient light to enter the home.  
As a space which drew together the Elsewhere and 
the home the front door became a space that was 
at once its own, and beholden to those spaces on 
either side of it. Importantly, while pictures Picture 
3 and Picture 2 were taken from within the 
participants home, I first viewed them from the outside, in the same manner as their intended 
audience and any person approaching the home. In my first crossings into the field, and into 
these particular homes, I was consciously aware of the stickers, and their counterparts that I 
Picture 2 : Anti Cold Calling Sticker 
Picture 3 : Neighbourhood Watch 
Sticker 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
observed in numerous other houses. As a researcher, they served as a reminder of the 
privilege of being allowed inside, subsequently fading from my awareness as my research 
progressed and I visited each house repeatedly.  
This is, arguably, a reflection of their purpose and message, they are not for people who are 
known, expected or welcome, but the unknown, the uninvited, and the unwanted. So strong 
was this targeting that on one occasion Nigel commented that he no longer noticed the 
sticker at all, that it had been installed by the previous owners of the house and simply never 
been removed. It was something he had intended to do, as the sticker was not the kind of 
thing he and his wife would have installed themselves, but it had faded from their awareness 
in the course of everyday, and thus it remained, a guardian of the threshold that required no 
maintenance to fulfil its purpose. 
It is worth noting that the majority of my first visits were marked by an encounter with some 
form of guardian at the doorway threshold. While in some cases these objects were passive, 
in others objects became foregrounded in my awareness as they were actively used- first by 
myself as someone seeking entry, and then by my participants as a method of response. This 
was particularly notable when visiting Margaret and Mark, who each lived alone and 
employed an intercom system as a technological mediator between themselves and potential 
visitors. Others accomplished a similar feat by using social resources to influence the 
threshold (McKnight, 1987; Warneken, Grafrenhain & Tomasello, 2011) - that is, by 
delegating the task of answering the door to a trusted person, often a family member or 
spouse (as with Isobel, George and Stan) or through requesting that I be accompanied by a 
trusted individual on my first visit to Flash and Sybil). This method of using others as a 
means of managing threshold spaces is explored in depth in the next chapter (Chapter Six). 
It is meaningful to note that while my experiences of crossing an unfamiliar physical 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
threshold and entering a participants home for the first time were often similar, the way in 
which participants organised their threshold spaces were deeply personal and tightly bound 
with their practices dwelling-as-building (bauen) and dwelling-as-maintaining (wohnen). 
Critically, while the act of crossing often appeared smooth from my perspective as a visitor 
it was not always so, as the thresholds themselves proved flexible and dynamic, and were 
reorganised at need in line with the participants wishes and lived experience. 
The Role of  Knowledge and Being a Known Visitor 
One example of the flexibility and the underlying relationality of threshold spaces themselves 
came through my visits with Isobel. Isobel was an older woman who lived in a one-floor 
adapted bungalow which she shared with her adult son, who had sustained a traumatic brain 
injury in adulthood and now required substantive care. Isobel had a large family network of 
children and grandchildren who visited regularly, alongside the comings and goings of the 
care staff who supported her son. On my first visit to her home, I parked in the communal 
parking bay across the road and spent a moment ensuring I had everything I needed before 
exiting the car. I knocked at the door, and was greeted by one of Isobels daughters, who had 
watched my approach across the street and down the drive through the living room window. 
I was led through the short hallway into the living room, where Isobel waited along with her 
second adult daughter, her granddaughter and her infant great-granddaughter. While 
fieldnotes from this initial visit reflect that the experience was akin to being at once a source 
of entertainment, and in the middle of a practical exam (CP Fieldnotes), I was instructed 
on how to navigate the doorway-threshold in the future in such a way that I bypassed these 
measures on a subsequent visit: 
I knocked on Isobels door and was told to let myself in. Opening the door I found it wasnt Isobel 
or her daughters who had called, but [Isobels Sons] support worker who was escorting him to the 
bathroom. She nodded towards the living room where Isobel sat bundled up on her chair in her pyjamas 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
and dressing gown. It turns out she had a chest infection, but wouldnt consider the idea of me coming 
back another day. NB: Isobel says knock and enter in future so she doesnt need to get out of her chair.  
(CP Fieldnotes, underlining in the original) 
In Isobels case my first crossing had been influenced both by Isobels experience as an 
individual with limited mobility and by her familys wish to limit her vulnerability. It is notable 
therefore that she gave directions on how I was to enter her home on future visits once my 
identity and intentions had been verified. It was through Isobels decision to share this 
information that it became clear that while I would certainly pass over physical thresholds in 
the course of my leaving and arriving on subsequent visits, I had also crossed an unseen 
social threshold during the course of our early conversation. It is this social passing that 
transformed the way in which I was to approach the physical threshold of the doorway in 
later visits. What this research understands as a social threshold is explored in more detail in 
Chapter Six. 
It was possible to see a similar pattern of influence between social and physical thresholds in 
my encounters with Mark. Much as with Isobel, my first entry to Marks home was mediated 
by a threshold guardian. This time, however, this presence at the threshold was material and 
digital, rather than human: an intercom system which limited access to the building, 
subsequently reinforced by the closed door to his flat. Over subsequent visits, I was 
instructed on how to bypass these elements, first by being told to let myself in at the flat 
door after using the intercom, and latterly how to bypass the intercom all together. As with 
Isobel, these practices of dwelling-as-protection and guardianship (wohnen) adapted to with 
our growing rapport and Marks physical impairments which often made responding to the 
buzzer effortful. It is interesting to note at this point that throughout fieldwork it was only 
Isobel and Mark who asked that I follow a knock and enter protocol and that both managed 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
the movement of care professionals crossing into and out of their home numerous times a 
day. In the following quote, Mark reflects on the importance of knowledge in navigating the 
doorway threshold (in indicating the button to push), the impact of temporality (in deciding 
when the service button would or would not work) and his own process of managing the 
access of carers:  
Mark:  When I knew you were there. I shouted come in  
I:   Yes, you did, yes.  
Mark:  Yeah. [] but all the carers walk in. [] in to me. But I have to let them in at nights. 
[] But during the day it's open till 2 o'clock. [] So you can use that other [button], 
till 2 o'clock. And so everybody knows, everybody in the block knows that. So they can tell 
who they want to use that. All my girls know because they know other blocks [] So they 
get to know me they can er... at 9 o'clock they come in the morning. [] And they just 
walk in. 
I:   So do you... do you keep your flat door locked, overnight and whatever, then open it...  
Mark:  [speaking at the same time] Oh yes  
I:    in the morning?  
Mark:  As the girl goes out at night I lock the door. 
(Mark, Interview Transcript) 
Interestingly, Sybil, who was also visited by care workers throughout the day, actively resisted 
any attempts to open her threshold in this way. Rather than leave the door unlocked, or 
dispensing privileged knowledge, Sybil managed her threshold directly. This was facilitated 
both by having a Yale-lock system that would allow her to put the door on the latch when 
she heard taxi drivers arrive; and by having her living room arranged such that her preferred 
seat faced the small side window that looked out onto the driveway, rather than the main 
window which faced the front of the house and the road. Even here, however, some level of 
concession was necessary, as care workers needed a way to access her home in the event that 
Sybil could not open it for them, even though in general Sybil preferred to manage her 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
threshold herself. The solution (which needed to satisfy Sybil, her family, and the company 
providing her care) was to install a combination outdoor key safe by her front door. Sybil 
explained that this meant that in order for carers to access her home without her involvement 
they would need to call their head office to ask for the combination code, then walk from 
the back door (through which they routinely entered due to the proximity to her drive) to 
the front door and access the safe. Notable here is the introduction of not just an object as 
a mechanism for securing the threshold, but the inclusion of a tertiary human element who 
must themselves be contacted by phone in order to pass on the knowledge necessary to enter 
the key safe and thus the home uninvited. 
Key to these accounts are the practices of dwelling as both aspects of building (bauen), and 
protection (wohnen). That the thresholds to Isobel and Marks homes became passable 
thresholds during my fieldwork did not detract from their initial status as guarded or 
troublesome. While neither kept their door habitually locked, as Stan and George did, initial 
passage required explicit consent sought through either human or digital means through 
passing family members or ringing the intercom. It was only with gifted knowledge and thus 
explicit permission that these methods of protection could be effectively bypassed. To enter 
either residence was to know (the appropriate button, that the door was unlocked and so on) 
and/or to be known. Uninvited or unexpected persons at either residence who lacked this 
knowledge would find the threshold difficult if not impossible to pass- a factor upon which 
Sybil based her own threshold management. For these participants, securing the threshold 
and protecting their home place was only possible through the integration of objects and 
strategies was a fundamental part of how they negotiated those aspects of dwelling-as-
protection (wohnen). The integration of new tools or techniques was often in response to 
some perceived shift in their ability to protect their dwelling, such as through physical 
impairment or the introduction of carework to the home-space. Critically, while the above 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
examples have discussed the giving of privileged knowledge as a method to allow known 
persons to avoid being impacted by threshold tools and objects, the use of knowledge at a 
strategy could also inform which threshold was approached in the first place.  
While the previous section focused on how objects could be used to influence who entered 
the home space and when it is necessary to note the secondary level of privileged information 
which informed the habits of myself, Sybils family and care workers. Specifically, welcome 
persons approached the back door, while the unknown and unknowing approached the front 
door. While in isolation this practice might seem to be a function of the houses orientation 
in relation to its driveway and the road, Bob and Hazel both employed a similar means of 
separating the welcome from the unknown or unwelcome visitor. This method of managing 
the thresholds between the home-place and Elsewhere were so clandestine as to become 
almost invisible in their simplicity. In my first visits with Bob and Hazel, for example, I drew 
upon the presence of familiar markers (such as the house number, the garden layout, or the 
homes orientation in relation to the nearby road) to identify the appropriate door to knock 
on to announce my arrival, with my participant unlocking the door to allow me to enter. It 
was only once I was within, once I had become known, that I was instructed to knock at the 
back door in future- a knowledge I gained directly from Bob, and vicariously through 
following the trusted person into Sybils home. In these cases how open a threshold was 
could be managed not only through adapting the practices of dwelling, but by redefining the 
meaning of the threshold space itself: in this case, by considering the front door an area 
where unknown persons arrive, and the rear door as a place for those who are known. 
George also discussed this, explaining that while he would not generally open his front door, 
he knew that a knock at his back door meant announced the arrival of his next-door 
neighbour, whereas everybody else comes to the front. By introducing this separation 
between known and unknown, welcome and unwelcome at the moment of announcement, 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
George, Sybil, Hazel, and Bob were all able to differentiate between visitors who might be 
safe, and those who may represent a risk before deciding whether they should answer the 
door. This management strategy worked even when they could not remember whether 
someone was due to call. A lesser version of this practice also occurred with Isobel, for while 
the majority of foot traffic came through the front door, those care workers who supported 
her son and needed a place to park would occasionally enter through the garden gate and 
rear door. In each case, an invitation to approach through the rear door was given only to 
those who could be trusted in some manner, with George, Sybil, Hazel and Bob all 
maintaining the practice of keeping the front door locked as default.  
Managing Risk and the Potential for Unwanted Passing 
While the discussion to this point has focused on the way in which the threshold at the door 
way could be made traversable to those who were welcome, it is equally important to discuss 
how a threshold might be secured when approached by the unwelcome. As active spaces, 
thresholds became sites of dwelling both as building (bauen) and preserving (wohnen). As might 
be expected of an area that draws two phenomena together, however, these processes were 
not without their tensions. For example, over the course of my conversations with Mark it 
became clear that his customary arrangement of having his house keys on the small desk in 
his hallway with his notebook had been introduced relatively recently. When asked about it, 
Mark explained that hed changed his habits to appease the concerns of his close friend and 
neighbour, who felt that his tendency to leave them hanging in the lock, or on a hook just 
inside the doorway, represented a safety risk. This tension between Marks perception of the 
communal hallway as a safe space, and his neighbours concerns about intrusion into the 
hallway leading to intrusion into his flat, are made clear in the following section: 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Mark:  I used to leave the keys in the door, and the door open you see, because she comes in and 
[neighbour] across there, she comes in as well. And the lady next door they bring me a 
paper every day. [] 
I:   That's grand, that. So do you not leave the keys in the door now?  
Mark:  No. No. Jane [my neighbour]  Jane said.. [] Well they're on the desk. [] Jane said 
that, you know, I left them in the door, and that was dangerous.  
I:   Oh right enough cos if they needed to get in?  
Mark:  Cos people could open the door [] and get them.  
(Mark, Interview Transcript) 
In this section, the discussion about where the keys are kept is informed by several 
relationalities. In the first instance, Mark sees no problem with leaving his door unlocked 
and the keys in the lock, secure in his relationships between Jane and his other neighbour 
who regularly accessed his home. The second point of note is the relationship between Jane 
and Mark- that Mark would wish to facilitate her access, that she cares about his safety, and 
that he cares about her opinion. The final significant factor is that of those unwelcome people 
who could open the door and get them. The threat in this instance isnt immediate, but 
protracted: whoever took Marks keys might not use them immediately, or themselves, but 
through the loss of those keys the doorway would become ultimately insecure. It is the 
interaction of those three factors together that prompted Mark to change his habit and stop 
keeping his keys in the door. This rearrangement, however, had itself caused problems as the 
keys were no longer where Mark usually kept them, leaving him to rely on his impaired 
memory to successfully locate his keys in order to leave his home. This, then, necessitated a 
further step, where the keys were placed between other important objects that connected 
him to Elsewhere: specifically, his printer and laptop (which he used to copy poetry for his 
group), and beneath the intercom which announced the arrival of potential visitors.  
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
This shift in where the keys were kept also separated Mark from others, like Stan, George 
and Isobel all of whom continued to keep their keys near the door. Interestingly, however, a 
similar concern had indeed been discussed with Isobel, who like Mark maintained a 
predominantly open threshold with care staff entering and leaving relatively uninhibited. 
Rather than remove the keys from the door, however, Isobel opted to disguise their location 
using a small wall mounted clock, the front panel of which opened outwards to reveal a key 
box. As we discussed the key box, Isobel brought my attention to the small push-button 
alarm that she could press to summon the police if she felt threatened by someone at her 
door. Picture 4 shows Isobel demonstrating how she could stand in the doorway, barring 
entry, while simultaneously using the button to summon aid without it being obvious to a 
potential intruder. Here we see again the interaction between the methods of threshold 
management (in this case, blocking the door and the 
presence and use of the alarm) alongside the 
importance of curating threshold knowledge (part of 
Isobels confidence was based in knowing she could 
summon help discretely). Critically, both Isobel and 
Mark engaged with these methods of dwelling 
through creating a threshold place that could protect 
their home place, alongside habits of dwelling that 
became integrated part of their routine- limiting the 
extent to which memory impairment could impact 
their ability to dwell.  
The discussion of doorway thresholds as sites of deliberate action and management does not 
however, imply that all objects and security measures were deliberate acts of dwelling-as-
building (bauen), that they were welcome, or that they were successful. Nigels ambivalence 
Picture 4: Isabel demonstrating her door 
alarm. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
towards the neighbourhood watch sticker on his window (Picture 3) is an example of this. 
Here the sticker became invisible, eclipsed by the everydayness of dwelling, but may have 
continued to impact those approaching the house who were unaware of Nigels disinterest. 
For George and Anne, however, the difficulties engaging with threshold objects came not 
from disinterest but through progressive physical impairment. During one conversation 
Anne noted that the small raised foam dots she had placed on particular buttons of the 
telephone and television remote to reduce the need for George to attempt to navigate the 
objects with his macular degeneration had once been applied to the burglar alarm. 
 George: The only thing is the alarm, I don't 
Anne:  Oh, [] That is a problem that we can't solve. We've got a house alarm and George can't 
see the numbers now. I did put these dots on it so he could feel where to start and he knew 
where to go after that, but then that's given a clue to any intruder. [] Of the numbers. 
So I can't have the sticky dots on them because the insurance doesn't like that, because it 
would tell an intruder [] at least one or four of the numbers. I had it on all four to start 
off with. So that's a problem. 
I:  Did you realise that was an issue or did they say to you, you can't have that 
Anne: I realised it was an issue myself because I thought I can't give any indication of what our 
code is really. Because that limits thewhen it's all the nine numbers there's a million 
choices. But if I've only got four numbers [] they could try all the different combinations 
with the alarm, so I don't suppose that's very legal to do that. 
 George: I don't know, I don't think so. [] 
Anne:  Also his problem is remembering the code. So it's not just not seeing it. 
(George and Anne, Interview Transcript) 
This highlights the importance of acknowledging dwelling, as both protection (wohnen) and 
building (bauen), and threshold spaces as eminently changeable. In the first instance, Annes 
introduction of a new item to the burglar alarm is indicative of creating a space (bauen). That 
this practice of creation was then the subject of concern, raising the potential for the area to 
become insecure, demonstrates the potential for conflict between bauen and wohnen (as 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
preserving and protecting), with both practices harmonising in the removal of the dots 
creating a clear keypad. As the conversation progressed, George further discussed his 
unease in relation to using the burglar alarm, as it required not only clear eyesight, but quick 
access to his memory and swift movement to enter the code in good time while under 
pressure and listening to the beep that warned of intrusion. As such, the alarm system was 
rendered ineffective as a method of protection any time George and Anne left the home 
separately, and was as a result only used when they went out together. This particular 
interaction highlights the potential difficulties of navigating threshold spaces with an 
impaired memory: if knowledge and knowing facilitates access to the welcome and restricts 
the unwelcome, what happens in the event of forgetfulness? It is this potential, for George 
to be marked out as an intruder in his own home, which made him fearful at the thought of 
using the burglar alarm. That this in turn made it increasingly difficult for him to remember 
the code, or to manage the gaps in his visual field in such a way as he could enter it, served 
to compound the problem to the point at which the object initially tasked with protection 
became itself an impediment to dwelling-within.  
While Georges ultimate rejection of an object that had initially served to protect his home 
highlights one troublesome aspect of dwelling with dementia, it is important to note the 
multifaceted nature of doors and doorways where they are considered primarily in the 
context of the threshold they guarded rather than as objects themselves. To this point, the 
discussion has focused primarily on the manner in which thresholds might be made passable 
for those who are welcome, and prevent access by those who are not. The following quote 
from Margaret highlights the potential dangers in confining ideas about what thresholds 
might be, and how they might be crossed, based on their spatiality and general use. The 
following conversation resulted from my asking Margaret about a square keyring she had 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
looped over the handle of her front door, a decision which was tightly bound to her 
experiences of friendship and cohabitation within her supported accommodation:  
Margaret:  And then he started, and I was, [explaining] I don't like the bananas when they get 
speckled. [] And I used to keep them for him. And next thing, he was at the door. And 
one of the days, he asked me to come in, and I went, no, don't bother, he was banging 
against it with his wheelchair. I said, no, it's alright, just stay where you are. Here, this 
night, I'm sitting, and I went, my keyhole, I went, uh-oh.  
I:  Never [] Was he looking through it? 
Margaret: Aye. I nearly died. I went into the toilet for something, and you know how you never, I 
never go in without doing the hand basin, and the pan, and that. And I just happened to 
look round, and I said, that looks like somebody. So whenever, I waited, and then I went 
and started at the back of the door, and he went, are you there, Margaret? I said, uh-
huh, I'm here. [] and I went, right, what can I do for you. No, I just wondered how 
you were. [] So I thought, right... 
I:   I'd be better if you weren't peeping in my keyhole. 
Margaret: Exactly. Well I couldn't prove it, but I says, no. So then, I got the key-rings, and I stuck 
them up against the door. I can't remember, somebody came in later on and went, what's 
all that behind the door?, I said, I've got my reasons for that, but I said, just leave them 
there. 
(Margaret, Interview Transcript) 
In contrast to other discussions that occurred around doorways and the management of 
those threshold spaces, this extract introduces the concept of a threshold that is not 
troublesome, but entirely unwanted. In this case it was not the door or doorway which 
represents the danger of physical invasion, but the keyhole alone which introduces the 
potential for visual access to an otherwise private space. This is particularly pertinent as the 
keyhole in question did not allow for a view into any space other than the bathroom, an area 
that Margaret had at that point successfully maintained as entirely private. Impactful, too, is 
the gendered aspect of this incident; that Margaret was viewed in an unwanted way by a 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
younger male, who attempted to gain access to her home through physical means (by running 
into the door with his wheelchair).  
There are two aspects of Margarets reaction to this incident that are particularly interesting 
when considering threshold spaces. The first is in the negotiation between understanding the 
keyhole as a method of protection, and thus both a product and facilitator of building (bauen) 
and dwelling (wohnen) and the need to render it impassable. Here, the door itself continued 
to act as the impenetrable boundary that she desired- with only the keyhole introducing the 
potential for visual ingress. By hanging a keyring over the open space Margaret successfully 
re-secured her doorway, as the actions necessary to push aside the keychain would necessarily 
fill the keyhole itself. The method in which she did so is also usefully viewed both as an 
exercise in dwelling-as-protecting, and in demonstrating the importance of understanding 
Dasein as in-the-world and orientated primarily through action rather than theoretical 
consideration. The second point of note is Margarets conscious decision not to disclose the 
event despite stating elsewhere in the conversation that the man involved was known to staff. 
Rather than a lack of opportunity, therefore, the decision not to call upon social connections 
and other people to secure this boundary is worth reviewing. Principally, Margaret cites not 
being able to prove the incident, but throughout the quote above and the wider 
conversation it became clear that she was particularly worried both about being embarrassed 
(which she avoids in the quote above by deflecting Ive got my reasons) and about being 
identified as an easy mark to take advantage of. This latter tension, around actively 
maintaining and managing thresholds and relationships as an older person who is known by 
others to have dementia, is discussed in more depth in Chapter Six.  
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Windows and Window Ledges  
While only Margaret identified her doorway as an area that allowed visual access into or out 
of her home, the importance of window areas was evident throughout fieldwork. Contrasted 
with doors and doorways, windows introduce a number of distinct features which were of 
particular value to participants- of these the ability to allow visual passage between inner and 
outer spaces was perhaps the most obvious. Windows provided participants with an 
opportunity to assess the weather, allowing them to consider what attire would be 
appropriate in their own time, as well as allowing visual access to other people, animals and 
spaces without either party physically crossing a threshold. It is important to acknowledge, 
however, that neither windows nor the spaces that surrounded them existed as a mere void 
through which the Elsewhere beyond the home space could be accessed visually. Instead, 
the properties of the glass, the angle of the window, its ability to open or close, and the 
practice of guarding the threshold against visual intrusion through the use of coverings were 
all significant. This section focuses on three particular facets of the window space; first, as 
visual thresholds that draw together the home and Elsewhere, then as a threshold that is 
visible to the self and others before finally discussing the importance of windows as things 
of significance in their own right and the practices which surround them 
Windows as Visual Thresholds 
While ability to see through and maintain the windows as things emerged as important to 
participants through both observation and discussion. Margaret, for example, had arranged 
her living room such that she could sit in her armchair facing the television, while seeing out 
onto the street one floor below. From this vantage point Margaret was able to watch the 
children across the road play and grow, watch friends leave their homes and return, as well 
as observe known strangers and unknown people moving up and down the street, while also 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
watching the program on television and knitting. For Margaret, the organisation of her home 
space provided a further feeling of safety by assuring her anonymity. Specifically, it was her 
arrangement of her space in relation to her window that allowed her to view activity on the 
street below, while ensuring that it was difficult to see into her flat or discern if she was 
present while approaching either on foot or by car. When she moved to the window to wave 
me off, however, it became clear that by moving directly to the window she could choose to 
see, and be seen in return. This allowed Margaret to engage with a silent form of being-with, 
one which did not require her to engage in conversation (which she sometimes found 
difficult), but nevertheless built up a sense of relationship between herself and those she 
observed. She spoke in some depth about the children who lived across the road and their 
changing play patterns as they aged, as well as which one of them took the dog for a walk, 
showing a concern for their welfare formed through her experience of being-with them as a 
near-dweller.  
Hazel also engaged with windows as a means of observation, with one notable difference.  
Hazel:  And the wee birds on the roof over there, I can see them in the cabinet window. [] I must 
be sad, I sometimes sit here and count how many birds there are there. Then get up and 
look out the window to see that I counted the right amount. I thought to myself youre mad. 
I:   It makes you happy though. I dont see why not. 
Hazel:  Oh, it keeps me going anyway. 
I:  Aye. 
Hazel:  Theres two I can see just now anyway but I cant see through the way, the middle bit of the 
window. Aye, so its good fun. 
 (Hazel, Interview Transcript) 
Hazel:  The people in that house there [] at the corner, yeah, that blind is never open. And I 
just sit and I look there and I can see the traffic all going past. 
I:   Oh aye, its a reflection. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Hazel:  Yeah. And I keep thinking to myself, God if they were standing behind that blind theyll 
be thinking Im watching them all the time. But Im just watching all the traffic all the 
time. []You know, so I quite enjoy that. Im weird. [] I dont look at the traffic 
at the front. I look at it in somebody elses window.    
(Hazel, Interview Transcript)  
In these extracts, Hazel explains that she enjoys using windows and glass surfaces to watch 
the reflections of things rather than the things themselves. Critically, this manner of watching 
introduces an element of challenge or skill- most notable in the first extract where she uses 
the reflection to count magpies before moving to the window to count them directly. This 
simple introduction of a notion of challenge and ability shifts what might otherwise be cast 
as purposeless (Roach and Drummond, 2014), as a genuinely meaningful activity. The 
tension between what is perceived by others as purposeful, and what is enjoyed by the 
individual is acknowledged by Hazel herself when she jokingly posits the idea that shes mad 
for using windows in this way.  
Indeed, Hazels engagement with windows as things with a purpose other than being for-
the-sake-of looking through, or for-the-sake-of keeping weather out and so on, arguably 
impacted the ways in which she sought to manage her relationships with near-dwellers by 
actively managing her window spaces. In the following quotes, for example, windows play 
an important role in how Hazel experiences the effects of her memory impairment, and how 
she manages that experience.  
Hazel:  In fact, there was a day...it was just a couple of days ago and [my husband] was out and 
I knew there was something I had to do in the house. I looked in the calendar. I looked on 
my phone and I thought what the heck am I meant to do? Well, I stood over there and I 
let out a scream and I thought oh my god what have I done here but the back door was 
shut luckily and all the windows were shut and him next door hes away for a couple of 
days... 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
I:  Aye, so thats perfect, hell...nobody will know. 
Hazel: Well, I wouldnt have wanted him to come in anyway even if I had of screamed. [] Well, 
screamed loud because, I mean, he would have come straight in... [] 
(Hazel, Interview Transcript) 
I:   What do you do when you feel like screaming if you cant just shut everything down and 
have a wee scream to yourself? 
Hazel: I did one day actually. I shut all the windows and I shut the door and I had a scream but 
it wasnt really much of a scream but I did, sort of, let it out. [] A, sort of, growl more 
than a scream and it did help a bit but I thought to myself dont be so blinking stupid. 
Well, I swore at myself actually which is very unusual and then its not been so bad since. 
(Hazel, Interview Transcript) 
These quotes demonstrate a distinct difference in the way that Hazel relates to indirect 
reflections in windows, and windows themselves. In the earlier quotes, viewing the world 
through a reflection allowed for a sense of distance and safety. By being separated from the 
objects of her interest, Hazel expressed a sense of contentment (thats good fun, I quite 
enjoy that). By contrast, her own windows, as discussed in the two quotes above, represent 
potentially unsecured thresholds, in this case allowing her sounds of frustration to escape 
and reach the next-door neighbour. In the first quote this is expressed as fear (Oh my god, 
what have I done?) while in the second she takes deliberate action to secure these thresholds 
against the outside world, creating boundaries that she considers impermeable to sound. 
Through placing barriers and filters between herself and others, she was able to manage the 
impressions she made and maintain an air of someone who didnt yet have it bad. For 
Hazel, exposure was often related to the experience of vulnerability. She feared screaming 
both in that it would summon her neighbour, triggering an unwanted intrusion into her 
home, and in that it might indicate she might have crossed some unseen threshold, and have 
what she called the bad dementia. That the tensions around how participants managed 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
their dementia in relation to others forms the core of Chapter Six, while the idea of the bad 
dementia how it effects the way Dasein relates to itself is considered in Chapter Seven.  
Windows as Physical Barriers 
While the discussion to this point has focused predominantly on the potential for people 
with dementia to use the threshold spaces provided by windows as things that, it is vital to 
note that much as with doorways, these thresholds allow movement in both directions, as 
Flash shows in the following extract: 
Flash:  I wasnt long in here and I opened the window and I threw bread out to the birds. The 
next thing they was a chap on the window, youve not to throw bed out to the birds. I said, 
its just to give them something. No, no, she says, it encourages the rats and mice. I says, 
the birds have got it in before they 
I:  Aye, right enough.  
Flash: So I went outI'm going stand behind the curtain, open the window and throw it out.  
I:  Just sneaky, like.  
Flash: Yes. So its not me. [] It must be somebodywhoever lives up the stair. The lady that 
lives up the stair.  
(Flash, Interview Transcript) 
 To an extent this movement can be seen in the quote above, where a staff member enters 
visually and audibly by knocking on the window to address Flashs feeding of the birds. This 
use of a window as an entry contrasts well against Hazels concerns around the window as a 
potentially unsecured exit, which would allow others to hear her scream of frustration, 
permitting her distress to cross the threshold between her home, and Elsewhere. The way in 
which Hazel and Flash managed these events were appreciably different, in part due to 
whether the potential challenge to the threshold was in something from Elsewhere entering 
the home, or something from within the home escaping.  
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
As with doorways, however, it is important to acknowledge that instances where a 
participants control of the threshold is challenged are not always so neatly navigated. 
George, who lives with significant visual and physical impairments, managed the 
complications arising from the interaction between his dementia and his physicality by 
leaving the task of opening the front door to his wife. On the single instance where I was 
met by at the door by George, he discussed the confluence of factors that meant he felt able 
to do so: 
 George:  I dont answer the door anyway. I knew you were coming, thats why, because Anne left the 
keys in the door. I knew she was up the stair, and it was about time, I think, you were due 
anyway, but normally I dont answer the door anyway 
(George, Interview Transcript) 
While this quote arguably demonstrates both the mobilising of social resources to secure a 
physical threshold and the impact of calling ahead as a facilitative technique, its role here is 
primarily contextual. It is important to recognise not only that George doesnt answer the 
door, but that his decision to do so is sufficiently conscious that it required a specific 
combination of factors in order to facilitate him breaking that rule. The keys being left in 
the door, by pre-arrival phone call, his wifes proximity and his awareness of the time that 
allowed me to be expected, which themselves relate to physical, social and temporal aspects 
respectively, led George to undertake a different course of action because he felt both safe 
and enabled. At another point in the conversation, George discussed his experience of not 
answering the door on other occasions where the living room window (itself proximal to the 
front door) allowed unwelcome visual access while still maintaining a physical boundary. 
George: Weve hadis it a Jehovahs Witness or something? I didnt answer, they stood in front of the 
window and looked in before they went away, aye, so I just looked back. They were stood 
out there. Oh aye, weve had that, but normally theyre not bad 
(George, Interview Transcript) 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
In this case, while those attempting to gain access could see inside, and made eye contact 
with George himself, the physical impassability of the window itself allowed George to feel 
secure in his habits of dwelling- that is, refusing to answer the front door. However, this was 
not always the case. In the following section George and Anne were discussing the difficulties 
he experienced in accessing the major city nearby, where the speed of traffic, number of 
people passing by and noise made George feel drunk, disorientated and upset. While these 
experiences are discussed in relation to the embodied experience of Being-in-the-World with 
Dementia in Chapter Eight, it is the role of the window-threshold that is particularly 
impactful here. 
Anne: The other time [you felt frightened] was in a restaurant with my sister. 
 George: I was just going to say that because I was facing headlights through the window []and the 
headlights were coming straight towards me because was it the street was going up, [] I 
mean, if they were going to the side maybe but they were directly coming at me. 
I:  So it felt like they were coming towards you more. 
 George: Yes. 
Anne: He feels all that assault. Its like an assault on his senses. When the rest of us just shut 
that out George cant seem to shut that out anymore. 
(George and Anne, Interview Transcript) 
In stark contrast to the confidence he expressed in the earlier quotation, where an entity 
outside the window could be relied upon to stay there, this example demonstrates the ways 
in which thresholds which are themselves familiar (in this case, windows) can become 
troublesome when in a different setting. While earlier George felt secure in his home-place, 
and in the physicality of his dwelling (in its built aspects), the combination of his sight loss, 
his dementia, the unfamiliar setting and the increased threat of a car in comparison with a 
person combined to make the experience distressing. It is interesting to note that the option 
to shut out the cars, or the feeling of being under threat was not available in this instance 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
despite the window still acting as a barrier to other senses, separating George from the sound, 
smell and feel of the street outside. Nevertheless, through becoming experienced as 
unmanageable and insecure the window threshold drew the perceived danger of the road and 
the oncoming cars into the safety of the restaurant, resulting in significant distress. 
Importantly, this experience of danger was particular to George- with neither his wife nor 
his sister in-law perceiving the window in this way. This provides an apt example of a 
moment where a participants impairment resulted in an impairment effect, but did not 
become disabling. Critically, while Anne and Georges established patterns of 
communication allowed them to reflect on this experience during the interview, would have 
been easy to mistake Georges reaction as irrational in the moment it occurred; as there was 
little danger of the cars crashing into the restaurant. This demonstrates the need for those 
supporting people with dementia to be both empathetic in the moment, and open to 
considering the individuals experiences as valid to them. To view such episodes from a 
threshold perspective facilitates this, without necessitating confrontation about whether cars 
are really going to crash into the window, instead facilitating discussions about how these 
threshold spaces might be experienced as secure, or at least, as a non-threat.  
Physical Thresholds as Sites of Resistance.  
The potential to be at once a permeable threshold (to sight, sound and smell) while still 
representing a physical barrier that prevented others physically entering the home was 
fundamental to the character of window thresholds. That, with the exception of Georges 
restaurant experience, windows were not understood as points of entry in the same manner 
that doors were. It is worth noting, however, that despite generally trusting in the physical 
security offered by the window, participants were often keenly aware of windows as active 
spaces that required attention and management. In the following section Flash discusses why 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
his living room window has become a site of tension between himself and the support staff 
at his assisted living facility.  
Flash:  I wasnt long in here and I opened the window and I threw bread out to the birds. The 
next thing they was a chap on the window youve not to throw bread out to the birds. I 
said, its just to give them something. No, no, she says, it encourages the rats and mice. 
I says, the birds have got it in before they[] I'm going to stand behind the curtain, 
open the window and throw it out. []. So its not me. [] I said, its not me. It must 
be somebody whoever lives up the stair. The lady that lives up the stair.  
(Flash, Interview Transcript) 
The tension in the above quote is borne of the differing views of Flash and the support staff 
about appropriate behaviour in shared spaces; specifically the garden outside Flashs window 
and the wider building which would be affected by vermin. Flash, by contrast, not only 
disagrees with the complaint on the mundane level, arguing that the birds will eat the bread 
before it attracts vermin, but on a fundamental level where he has integrated the ground 
directly outside his window into his dwelling space. As such, the support workers insistence 
that he refrain from acting in a particular way is seen as restrictive of his dwelling. As a result, 
rather than curtailing the behaviour, the intervention of a staff member does little to dissuade 
Flash from throwing out bread, but rather encourages him to take steps (in this case hiding 
behind the curtain) to disguise that he is the transgressor. This is particularly pertinent in that 
Flash then disclosed that he thought the flat above was empty, making the rebellion more 
focused on staff being unable to prove he had thrown out bread, rather than them being 
unaware. That it was rebellion, rather than simply a desire to feed birds close by, became 
particularly clear when Flash pointed out the bird feeder his son had installed two feet away 
from the window in an attempt to make such actions unnecessary. In this example, therefore, 
the bread, window-latch and curtain all become tools with which Flash manages his threshold 
space- the bread bringing his desired company into view, the window latch letting him throw 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
the bread while still providing a barrier he controls between himself and care staff, and the 
curtain as a method of eluding detection. Viewed from this perspective- as a reinforcement 
of his preferred practices of dwelling and a restatement of his space, it would be possible to 
suggest that no amount of bird feeders would change his behaviour. It is, in short, not about 
the birds.  
For Bob, tensions surround his window-thresholds were less focused on the expansion of 
his dwelling into shared outdoor space, and more tightly woven with his own sense of having-
been and his desire to continue to work. It was this interplay that led Bob to leave his home 
in the morning and head to the local shopping centre every morning where he would check 
in and stay until evening- holding hours that mimicked his traditional working hours. This 
close connection to his past, and particularly his identity as a working man, also led Bob to 
have a particular appreciation for properly cleaned windows, a result of plying his trade as a 
window cleaner for many years. As a result, a significant proportion of my visit with Bob was 
spent being tutored on the appropriate method of cleaning glassware, the difference between 
a chamois and a rough cloth, and the virtues of undiluted ammonia as a cleaning substance. 
It was through this tutorage that I learnt that Bob not only found his dirt on his own windows 
annoying, but took offence to the poorly cleaned windows of his neighbours, both as an 
aesthetic affront, and a factor that reflected poorly on the community. Rather than suffer the 
sight of a job poorly done, Bob proudly related his strategies for addressing this state of 
neighbourhood disrepair: he would sneak along the street to clean windows in the dark. Bobs 
particular bugbear was not just that the windows themselves were insufficiently clean, but 
that the regular window cleaners did not properly attend to the white PVC window frames, 
causing them to yellow and become unsightly overtime. It was only as Bob was discussing 
this habit that it became clear that, like Flashs bird feeding, this was not action for the sake 
of rebellion. Instead, Bob expressed a deep connection with his neighbourhood and 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
community, expanding aspects of his dwelling out into his street- and sought to serve them 
in the same manner he had during his working life. That he had been reprimanded by staff 
for this behaviour had not diminished this need, so instead of undertaking the cleaning in 
the daylight hours, Bob now completed it after dark, thus disguising his passage over the 
contested threshold.  
This example highlights an important aspect of dwelling in both of its aspects as both the 
building and maintaining of nonphysical things as a function of dwelling. In this case, rather 
than building an object, place or societal structure, he instead constructs a place for himself 
in the social fabric of his community, as a working man with purpose and value, as a rebel, 
as a phantom window cleaner. Critically, even within our interactions this work-related 
expertise allowed Bob to assert a level of status and knowledge that could be balanced against 
my position as a researcher. This was reinforced by his insistence that I take a rough, dark 
cloth home to clean my own windows; something he could not be dissuaded from (n.b. to 
my credit I did escape without a chamois or my own decanted ammonia). Such actions take 
on particular significance when viewed through the Social-Relational Model of Disability, 
where Bobs behaviour is that of direct rebellion against a formal care system that seeks to 
limit his ability. Specifically, because Bob is an older man with dementia, he met with 
resistance in cleaning his own windows on the basis of both his age and his diagnosis, which 
was amplified when he attempted to do so for others. In such cases it is possible to argue 
that a more person-centred approach would have been to create situations where it was 
acceptable, or indeed desirable, for Bob to continue serving his community in this manner. 
The extent to which psychoemotional disablism may negatively impact on the dwelling of 
people with dementia is discussed more explicitly in Chapter Six, but it is notable in this case 
that rather than internalise the messages about what he could not do, he continued to defy 
them. It was in this case the windows themselves that both enabled this resistance and 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
problematized it both in terms of risks of physical harm should he fall, and the social risks 
associated with an uninvited man cleaning the windows of others after dark and uninvited. 
Window Ledges and their Occupants 
Considering the significance of the windowsboth as things which gather the Elsewhere 
and the home together (Heidegger, 1954/1993) and thresholds which can both admit and 
resist passageit is it important to stress the importance of the area which surrounds the 
window itself. For the most part, the objects which adorned window areas fell into two 
categories: those which acted to communicate with others who approached the threshold, 
and those which those which had meaning to the individual, and as such offered passage 
over a temporal threshold (discussed in detail in Chapter Seven). It is important to note, 
however, that while the windowsill is at once like many other horizontal surfaces within the 
home (with sideboards, coffee tables and shelves often hosting meaningful objects) they are 
unique in their placement between inside and outside, between the home-place and 
Elsewhere. Items placed on the windowsill could not only be viewed from within the home 
(as shelves and tables were), but from outside, marking the line between a space which was 
public, and one that was personalised and private, between outside and inside.  
Much as it would be a mistake to restrict the discussion of a participants engagement with 
windows as objects that are for-the-sake-of looking through, it would be an 
oversimplification to suggest that the management of window ledges as thresholds was 
characterised by a single instance of arrangement followed by passive viewing. While such 
acts of dwelling-as-building were certainly present, for many participants windowsills also 
formed the focus of dwelling-as-maintaining. Margaret, for example, lined the windowsill of 
her living room with bamboo plants in clear containers, while Hazel grew plants at her 
kitchen window both of which required different patterns of care. While the use of clear 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
water beads for hydration had removed much of the processes of nurturing from Margaret, 
Hazel by contrast had traditional pots with soil. Although this maintenance of traditional 
methods might appear ideal, the plants themselves became a source of tension between Hazel 
and her husband John, as activities surrounding their maintenance foregrounded Hazels 
memory impairment:  
Hazel: Well, the flowers are lovely, I just watered them all. 
John: Oh no, not again. 
Hazel: Yes, Ive just watered these ones on the table. 
John: You havent touched the ones in the kitchen? 
Hazel: Which ones in the kitchen? 
John: The ones you keep killing because youre feeding them too much bloody water. 
Hazel: Dont know which ones youre talking about. 
John: On the windowsill. 
I:  Im staying out of this one. 
Hazel: On the windowsill, no, theyre okay.  
John: Theyre all dying because theyre full of water. Put any more water in there and you could 
use it as a swimming pool. 
(Hazel and John, Interview Transcript) 
While it would be possible to discuss the pattern of overwatering, and the labour that 
resulted, or to focus on the tension that such incidents created, it is telling to view such 
activities as disrupted activities of dwelling. The above extract demonstrates several of the 
tensions that result from Hazels attempts to maintain her surrounding. Firstly, it is 
interesting to note framing of overwatering as a function of poor care; Hazel is cast as 
feeding them too much water rather than forgetting she has watered them. From such a 
perspective, her behaviour becomes harmful (she waters them too much) rather than being 
viewed as a mistimed act of maintenance (she waters them when she believes she has not). 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
While the example at hand is banal in its everydayness, to take a wider view would be to see 
how it is possible to cast disrupted dwelling as deficient dwelling, rather than an attempt to 
dwell in the accustomed way that is interrupted by particular impairment effects- in this case, 
Hazel forgetting that she had watered the plants in the first place. How one might respond 
to one aspect is quite different to the other, for example, disordered dwelling might become 
the target of interventions intended to stop the behaviour entirely. By contrast, viewing 
dwelling practices from a perspective that presumes legitimacy- that is, that they are aligned 
with Hazels dwelling and as such are orientated towards dwelling-as-maintenance or 
preservation  efforts can be made to account for her impaired memory. An example in this 
case might be the installation of a moisture indicator that provides guidance about when the 
plant does or does not need water in the moment, removing the requirement for Hazel to 
successfully access her memory in order to determine if she should, or should not, water the 
plant. What such efforts may not address, however, is Hazels continuing desire to dwell 
actively, by watering the plants herself at the time when she feels they require it.  
It is important not to ignore Johns ongoing facilitation of Hazels dwelling. That she is 
capable of repeatedly overwatering plants to the point of death, this is possible only through 
Johns repeated efforts to replace the dead plants with new specimens. This requirement for 
others to intervene in threshold practices is discussed more explicitly in Chapter Six, but it is 
nevertheless important to acknowledge here that Hazels dwelling- specifically her desire to 
maintain and care for plants within her home- is only possible through Johns repeated 
intervention. Similar small acts of maintenance were common throughout the fieldwork, 
emphasising the potential fragility of dwelling for people with dementia. These efforts 
ensured that the participants were not merely existing in space, but engaged actively in 
dwelling- fulfilling a role where there was an ability to create and to maintain in a meaningful 
way. Such opportunities are not without their tensions, however. To embrace a perspective 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
of maintenance activities as examples of dwelling-as-building, or dwelling-as-maintenance 
implies that they are undertaken in isolation except where remedial action becomes 
necessary. This is not always the case. The following quote is drawn from an interview with 
Mark, where he discussed a problem he was experiencing with having a cleaner come around 
once a week.  
Mark:  I have to move [the ornaments] every week when she has been, she always spreads them 
like that. And to me, that doesn't do any good at all. I just don't like them there. 
I:   Where do you like them? 
Mark:  Well, I like them there. 
I:   But together? 
Mark:  But together. [] You see them now, how they are. [] This one? These two? [] They 
are two, aren't they? 
I:   They are two. 
Mark:  But they should be acting like one. So they've got to be together.  
I:   . []. Do you have to change that every time she's been round? 
Mark:  Yeah. 
I:   Have you told her? 
Mark:  No. 
I:   [Laughs] Bless her, she comes round and she wipes and she thinks she's putting them back 
in the right place and you've got to go round after her. 
Mark:  No, she puts them back where she thinks they should go And she's wrong. [] They... 
um, my wife used to buy these things. 
(Mark, Interview Transcript) 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
This subtle conflict appears inconsequential on the surface. In Marks case the tension wasnt 
due to his practices of dwelling as maintaining and preserving, but in the building- or rather 
the building and rebuilding of the window ledge space after each visit by his cleaner. 
Critically, he casts the cleaners behaviour as an act of deliberate choice, while Marks own 
rearrangement of the ornaments on his windowsill is setting things right. Its possible to 
argue that the exact placement of objects in relation to one another on a windowsill is of 
relatively low importance when an individual is living with cataracts, poor balance and 
dementia (as Mark is), however it is clear that for Mark this is not the case. Picture 6 and 
Picture 5 show the difference in how the ornaments are placed by the cleaner as two distinct 
figures and when Mark places them together as one, respectively.  
The relationship between how objects were displayed by a window, and who had purchased 
or placed them there was important to a number of other participants. Critically, these objects 
Picture 6: Two ornaments on a windowsill 
Picture 5 : One ornament in two parts 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
drew meaning not only by (usually) being visually pleasing, but by marking the visual 
beginning of the home place. As such, where these objects were not bought explicitly by 
others they often invoked them in other ways- through housing meaningful photographs, 
acting as mementos for journeys together and so on. For these participants it became a matter 
not just of whether the windowsills were populated by objects and plants but who had done 
so, and why. A windowsill full of objects thus became a visual barrier, where the memory of 
friends and family was made concrete through their gifts which guarded the boundary of 
the window space itself.  
Thresholds in Vertical Space 
During fieldwork it became clear that while doors and windows were threshold sites that 
required active management, there was another aspect of the home space which presented 
particular challenges for the participants, specifically the organisation of high or low spaces. 
I first noticed this in my discussions with Sybil, as we were talking about which household 
chores she liked to do herself, and which carers participated in. She explained: 
Sybil: [The care workers] do the cleaning when I allow them to do it. [] Ive never asked them 
to wash the windows. So they just dont we used to have a man came round, but he 
stopped coming and I dont think theres anybody taken his place. I clean the bottom half 
of them but I wouldnt stand on the steps to [] do the top, no. [] No its not worth 
it. [] Its bad enough when I'm walking. 
(Sybil, Interview Transcript) 
Like Bob, Sybils focus in this extract is less upon the windows as they exist for-the-sake-of 
looking through, than it is on windows parts of her home that need to be maintained. As 
such, the act of cleaning the bottom portion of her windows becomes more explicitly an act 
of dwelling-as-preserving (wohnen), that is, as a practice of care and maintenance. As the quote 
demonstrates, she considers the windows as part of her cleaning routine, which she will 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
allow care workers to participate in but resists surrendering completely. The latter half of 
the quote highlights the tensions present in this action, however, as Sybil sought to balance 
her dwelling with the impairments associated with her aging body. Critically, her perception 
of cleaning the upper half of the windows as a separate and risky activity, demonstrates again 
the shifting thresholds- in this case, not just between inside and outside, but between up and 
down. For Sybil this concern was tied to her embodied experience of poor balance, and the 
pivotal role that a fall had played in triggering her journey towards diagnosis when she broke 
her ankle. In this context, the potential to fall from a height takes on even greater risk than 
the dwelling and maintaining she carried out at ground-level, and was as such regarded with 
extra caution.  
The Role of Vertical Spaces: Out of Sight, Out of Mind 
Far from being confined to window spaces, vertical thresholds occurred in the houses of 
many participants, influenced by a range of different experiences and impairments. The 
pervasiveness of this particular theme became clear on the morning that Margaret escorted 
me to her kitchen cupboards and explained that while the design was standard for her 
supported housing block, it rendered half of the contents inaccessible to her as they were far 
beyond her reach. She then walked me to her wardrobe where items she didnt use were 
often stowed above her head, and complained that the only way she could have a proper 
clear out was if she could ask her niece to lift things down for her. Similar issues emerged 
when I accompanied Mark to his local shop, as he avoided using his lower cupboards due to 
physical difficulty, something he had sought to utilise by dedicating two of his lower 
cupboards for his cleaners supplies. Having noted and discussed these experiences, I 
maintained a more active watch for them in the field going forward, leading to a realisation 
that while these vertical thresholds were more subtle than those that appeared horizontally 
between the home-space and elsewhere, they were similarly relational. Hazels husband John, 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
for example, organised her medication each week, placing the weekly pill bible on the shelf 
at her eye line while boxes for following weeks were stored higher. Having been present 
during one medication delivery, I listened to John reinforcing that the medications werent 
hers and not her problem until theyd been set up in the weekly dispenser. While this was 
a strategy that had been introduced after Hazel had mis-ordered medication on a number of 
occasions, it nevertheless capitalised on vertical thresholds to restrict the extent to access to 
potentially harmful substances in her home, while other items were kept where they could 
be easily identified and accesses. The effectiveness of such a technique was further supported 
when I watched Nigel search the kitchen for a coffee pot he had misplaced- a process that 
excluded all shelves above and below his eyeline (with the exception of the kitchen counter). 
Rather than search each shelf, Nigel searched from left to right around the kitchen, including 
in the oven (in case). This pattern was repeated again when Mark asked if our walking 
interview could incorporate his need buy some necessities for his flat. As we navigated the 
store he reflected that without help, he could only shop for items within a certain mid-range 
of the shelves, thus restricting both his engagement with that space, and how he interacted 
with his home space when he returned with items to put away. 
While it might be argued that these issues might allow for subtle management of people 
with dementia that causes less distress (something I shall specifically debate as part of the 
discussions in Chapter Nine), it should be noted that vertical thresholds did not only affect 
what participants could interact with when stood in a stable position on the floor. Both 
George and Hazel had experienced significant difficulty navigating their way up and down 
the stairs in their home and elsewhere, a process that profoundly impacted their processes 
of dwelling. For George, passage between his upstairs and downstairs rooms was facilitated 
by using a collapsible stair-lift upon which he would sit. Whether this process was considered 
risky in itself was a matter of debate however, as Anne playfully nagged him to fasten his 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
seatbelt before setting his chair in motion on several occasions during my visits. When he 
wished to access outside spaces, however, George and Anne had to employ different tactics- 
some of which they undertook themselves, some of which required inviting the state into 
their home to install hardware. The result of this dualistic approach was that George could 
secure his balance as he stepped down the step into the garden by holding onto a standardised 
white hand rail, but could only see the step below and discern the difference in depth because 
Anne had painted it red. Importantly, while they had been given support (in regards to the 
provision and installation of the rail) to allow George into and out of the house, this did not 
extend to providing support to help him climb the stairs into the higher back portion of their 
garden- which he preferred. As a result they had paid privately to have a long metal hand rail 
installed to facilitate his continued access. Anne had subsequently gone further, painting the 
bottom edge of the first grey concrete step with a strip of white paint to indicate the final 
edge between stair and flat paving below. It is interesting, and noteworthy in the context of 
the everydayness of dwelling, that it was only as Anne was showing me her efforts that she 
realised she had only painted the bottom step. It was a realisation prompted by my asking 
about why shed chosen to paint it in such a way, presuming it to be a conscious decision. 
When I returned again, the steps had all been painted and George noted that while having 
one stair painted had been good, having the entire staircase outlined was far better. It is 
clear, therefore, that as ubiquitous as the threshold might be, Heideggers notion of habit as 
a force that can distract from and cover over the detail of often-encountered experiences 
has a place here. As such, it becomes necessary to examine physical thresholds as they occur 
at one moment of time, but repeatedly and with a fresh awareness as peoples embodied 
experience and impairment effects change.  
 It is worth noting that the design of the home-spaceparticularly the presence or absence 
of troublesome vertical thresholdsnecessitates viewing these experiences through a lens 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
informed by the Social Relational Model of Disability (Thomas, 1999). Through changes in 
their embodied experience, and the shifting landscape of the participants impairments, a 
great deal of their vertical space was experienced as inaccessible. In this case, the positioning 
of objects outside the visual field, and thus facilitating forgetting, or simply placing them in 
a space that is too risky for the person with dementia to access accomplishes the same effect 
- disablement. To limit the examination of physical thresholds to invisible lines which exist 
in a space, and as such may identified through implementation of a cursory checklist would 
be a mistake. Instead, physical thresholds were made manifest as relational spaces that drew 
together the person with dementia and those around them, their dwelling spaces and 
elsewhere, and the complexities of their bodies in situ in various ways and at various times. 
These thresholds were made manifest through dwelling in its complete sense, encompassing 
not only the construction of space and the practices of maintenance, but the way in which 
the participant moved within it as they dwelled.  
Mark provided a clear insight into the tensions that can occur around threshold crossings 
when pointed out that he needed to put his shoes before undertaking a walking interview. It 
is worth noting that I, as an nondisabled person who does not often consciously reflect on 
the physical process of putting on shoes, did not register Marks announcement as unusual 
in the moment he made it, despite his mentioning in an early visit that he could no longer go 
swimming because he could not re-dress himself without support. This was nevertheless a 
difficulty Mark was keenly aware of, and he was keen to show his solution exclaiming Heres 
something for you. Asking me to follow him to his bedroom, he proceeded to retrieve a 
litter-picker and a long-handled shoehorn from their places, sit on the end of the bed, and 
demonstrate his technique for manipulating the Velcro fastenings of his shoes in such a way 
that he could change his footwear independently. Interestingly, what I had taken to be the 
items of interest (the litter picker and shoehorn) were not what Mark had wanted to 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
demonstrate. Rather, his excitement focused around a new pair of shoes that had thick, 
straight Velcro straps that he could easily manipulate, where his older pair could not be closed 
securely. For Mark, the tool that he felt most expedited his crossing of this particular vertical 
threshold- the one that separated him from his shoe fastenings- was the modified design of 
the closing flap. The litter picker and shoehorn combination, by contrast, he almost 
dismissed saying; I have been doing that for the whole time [] I have to do something 
dont I?. Picture 7 demonstrates Marks method of closing his left shoe by leaning across 
with his dominant right hand and using the angle to his advantage, while Picture 8 shows the 
modified technique for his right shoe, which requires the shoehorn to close the flap.  
This too introduces a difficulty in providing a comprehensive account of thresholds in a 
home space- that the process is relational, that it is changeable and that it is embodied all 
impact on the accessibility of different thresholds to an observer. Following the conversation, 
and Marks demonstration, I asked specifically about his older shoes and how he would 
Picture 7: Marks shoe technique, left foot. Picture 8: Marks shoe technique, right foot. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
manage before. It was only then that I learned that delays in carers arriving in the morning 
were not merely a nuisance in that they prevented him planning his day, but in that they left 
him physically restrained within his home as he could not put his shoes on without aid.  
It is vital, as such, to note that those practices that artificially impose or close thresholds for 
people living with dementia are burdened with moral undertones. Where restriction of 
activity leverages impairment effects to create barriers, there is disablement and the 
imposition of disability. In such contexts, it becomes difficult for individuals with dementia 
to control their interaction with their environment, and with their belongings. That these 
practices may echo those discussed briefly in in Chapter Two , where items and doorways 
were disguised, or false holes introduced to influence the movement of people with 
dementia (as in Kincaid & Peacock, 2003 and Vanderhorst & Koenig, 2015, for example) 
should not be overlooked. Indeed, these everyday methods of management should be subject 
to similar levels of scrutiny and trouble ethicists in much the same manner. This is not to say 
that these spaces were organised as an act of malice; keeping medication safe is a laudable 
and necessary activity, for example, but it is nevertheless a practice which should be 
acknowledged openly and considered critically rather than developed and employed without 
due consideration. 
Navigating Shared Space and the Nachgebauer 
To explore what it is to experience crossing the threshold out of their home place, it is 
necessary to clarify where it is a person goes when they are no longer at home. As discussed 
in Chapter One, this project was predicated on the idea that assuming that what one sees 
outside ones window is ones neighbourhood- or that one enters it at the front door (c.f. 
Blackman, 2006)- risks expediting the research process at the cost of deeper understanding. 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
The concept that any individual who navigates the world without dementia can reliably intuit 
where a person who lives with dementia considers the home to end and Elsewhere to begin 
was challenged in more detail in Chapters Two and Three through considering a disability 
and dwelling perspective respectively. It is important to note, however, that the idea of a neat 
division between the home place and Elsewhere has already been challenged by the 
discussion of windows as both thresholds and things in their own right earlier in this chapter. 
As things windows and doors gather together the home and the Elsewhere, bringing them 
into each others neighbourhood (Heidegger, 1954/1993, p.354). As such, the Elsewhere 
begins not as we leave the front door (Blackman, 2006 p.3), but on approaching threshold 
itself, where home and Elsewhere merge together and become one another. Where this 
crossing involves the participant staying within the home space, Georges example of 
Jehovahs witnesses looking through the window earlier in this chapter is particularly apt. 
What this section does, therefore, is turn its focus explicitly on the experiences of physically 
crossing from the home place into the Elsewhere where the practices of dwelling with 
dementia come into contact with those near-dwellers who inhabit Elsewhere.  
As discussed in Chapter Three, it is impossible to consider the practices and experience of 
dwelling as either building (bauen) or preservation (wohnen) without acknowledging the area 
in which dwelling occurs. For Heidegger (BDT) this necessarily includes thinking about, the 
Nachbar, the Nechgebur, the Nachgebauer, the near-dweller (p.349). It is therefore necessary 
to consider the neighbourhood not only as a physical space in which objects are distributed, 
but as a place inhabited by the Nachgebauer, who are themselves involved in the business of 
dwelling. Those moments in which neighbours were drawn upon as resources to facilitate 
participants in navigating troublesome thresholds are discussed in more detail in Chapter Six. 
What is considered here is the presence or absence of the near-dweller as an outside force 
which influenced the ability of participants to cross the physical threshold from home place 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
to Elsewhere. Indeed, for participants, the presence of a neighbour could either support or 
impede passage into the neighbourhood- that is, into the area of their shared dwelling. For 
example, Marks experience of moving into and out of his home place was regularly 
influenced by the presence of near-dwellers, something which became increasingly clear 
throughout the course of fieldwork. The following excerpt is taken from my first visit with 
Mark, having stepped into the communal hallway after a walk. 
Mark:  One of the problems living in a, in the block of flats, is people don't do things the way you- 
[] You see this in here. What happens is, some people like to push that [a large rubber-
bottomed mat] right up to the door and that, that- 
I:   And it gets folded up? 
Mark:  It gets folded and it spoils the, the, the thing. Could you jump off it for a second? [Pause as 
Mark moves the mat] That's how I like it. 
I:   No, that makes sense. So it doesn't curl back when the door opens. 
(Mark, Interview Transcript) 
There are two aspects of this extract that are important to note here. The first is the indication 
of the difficulty associated with negotiating with Marks processes of dwelling-as-building 
with others in a shared space that is at once home and Elsewhere. The shared doorway into 
the building is an area in which both practices of building have equal legitimacy, and yet 
indirect conflict (in this case, carried out through the movement of an object in space) occurs 
on a regular basis. The second point to consider is that this failure of near-dwellers to arrange 
the shared space as Mark would prefer actively impedes how easily Mark can navigate this 
threshold. The following description is taken from the fieldnotes of the same visit. 
Getting back into the close involved a series of actions that seemed so routine for Mark that they have 
become a dance. Keys, key hole, walking stick, stairs, handrail and doorway all come together to play 
their part: standing on the bottom step, Mark leans forward to put his key in the keyhole. As the door 
opens he shoves it (hard) with the other hand, and quickly uses the walking stick and its rubber 
stopper to stop it closing on him. He then uses the rail to mount the stairs, extracts stopper from doorway 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
and closes the door behind us. Apparently this dance is sometimes invaded by an unwelcome partner- 
the large (3ft by 5ft maybe?) doormat which will curl if put too close to the doorjamb, making pushing 
the door open more difficult 
(CP Fieldnotes) 
Clearly, as an item in isolation, the placement of the doormat might be seen as a minor long-
running disagreement between neighbours. Here, by contrast, the mat perhaps too closely 
gathers the door, impeding progress and introducing not only the potential for Mark to 
struggle to get into the hallway, but the potential for him to fall backwards down the stairs if 
the door pushes him backwards. Despite this, Mark discussed this contentious arrangement 
of the mat as simply one of the difficulties of living in a block of flats. A result of 
thoughtlessness, or at least, of not considering the reasoning behind other mat placements, 
rather than deliberate sabotage. As a man who cultivated a positive relationship with all of 
his neighbours, there was no suggestion that this shifting of the mat might be an act of 
malice- yet it nevertheless speaks to the disability and accessibility literatures. Through the 
mats placement, and the relationship between the neighbours as near-dwellers, and 
neighbours as dwellers in space, and thus builders in the sense dwelling-as-building (bauen), 
Marks physical impairment meets socially arranged space to become disability in spite of 
both the mobility aid provided by his walking stick and the handrail outside the door. Nor 
are these clashes of dwelling limited to the threshold of the doorway or the block of flats. 
After one of our walks together, Mark paused before turning into the path that led to the 
door of the building and instead explained that he wanted to move the car from its place at 
the far end of the small parking lot to the empty space at the end of the path. At first this 
appeared to be a matter of preference, but Mark explained: 
Mark:  If it's raining tomorrow and there is rain due, isn't there? 
I:   I think so, yeah. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Mark:  And if I've got to walk up there, you see, I walk very slowly. [] And I'd get soaked by 
the time I get there. 
I:   Hadn't thought about that [] I thought maybe you just liked this parking space and 
you saw it free. 
Mark:  Well, I did, I do, I do. Hes got... his car's there and her car's there. They take, they're 
taking up both of them. 
(Mark, Interview Transcript) 
This extract demonstrates once again the impact of near-dwellers both as individuals who 
arrange themselves in space in line with their own desires (Mark highlights what he sees as 
the unfairness in this, as the couple are taking up two of the three prime parking spaces 
between them) and as agents whose actions can easily complicate Marks ability to traverse 
between home and Elsewhere, disabling him. 
It is important to note that the restrictive and disabling impact of near-dwellers was not 
always an unwitting outcome of their behaviour. My discussions with Sybil, for example, 
often touched on the lengths her daughter went to, to ensure her safety and wellbeing. These 
efforts had a profound impact on Sybils dwelling as both building (bauen) and maintaining 
(wohnen) as she not only influenced where Sybil lived, but the activities she could undertake 
there. 
Sybil:  My husbandwhen he died, the house we were living in at the time, itwell I didnt 
want to move but my family said no. This house came on the market and they thought that 
was perfect because it was so near [my daughters] house which is three doors along. 
Sybil:  The only problem is I'mcause I'm walking without [my walking sticks] in the house 
and I open the door and out the door and I get halfway across theoh something missing. 
I have to go back and get them. I mightget my sticks before somebody seems me and tells 
[my daughter]. []Itsthats annoying because I like weeding and I cant get back up 
off my knees. [] But I like weeding and making it nice. But got to restrain myself. 
(Sybil, Interview Transcript) 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
While there are definite similarities in how Mark and Sybil are influenced by the presence of 
near-dwellers, and how this influences their practices of dwelling with dementia and physical 
impairment, there are profound differences between their experiences. The first point of to 
be noted is the somewhat unwelcome rearrangement of Sybils home place to better integrate 
the support she needed with her daughters dwelling. In this case, the redefinition of where 
and what home was represents a deliberate tactic in managing Sybils widowed status and 
advancing age. Following this, the complex interaction between Sybils physical impairment 
(I cant get back up off my knees) is directly related to her daughters management of her 
impairment, shown through Sybils worry about being caught walking without her sticks 
outside. This itself held extra levels of meaning, as Sybil was only diagnosed with dementia 
following being admitted to hospital with a broken ankle- an accident she blames on walking 
with her stick. Viewed in this context, the sticks became a troublesome and troubling item 
at Sybils threshold, at once allowing her to feel secure when walking on concrete, and 
introducing risk on unpaved ground; enabling her to move independently while constantly 
reminding her of the watchfulness of others.  
Throughout our conversations, Sybil often discussed her own impairments in relation to the 
restrictions placed on her by others, parsing her impairment as insignificant against the 
actions of others to manage them. Such an argument fits neatly into the paradigm of 
impairment and disablement, though it was not explained as such in the moment. There are 
questions to be asked, however, around whether appropriating the language of disability 
might provide an opportunity for people with dementia to frame their concerns, their 
irritations and experiences in a politically powerful way such that they engender action. To 
go further, drawing together the concept of dwelling as an aspect of being, how do such 
experiences of disablement impact ones ability to dwell? How can one be spared, or freed 
or be set at peace? (Heidegger, 1954/1993). Certainly, in the most straightforward use of the 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Social Relational Model of Disability, Sybils sticks should be considered freeing and 
enabling- and yet in their use, and in their mediating relationship between Sybil, her changing 
physicality, her navigation of physical space and her relationships with others, it takes on 
greater meaning. Indeed, Sybil is as such one of the clearest examples of a participant who 
must ever learn to dwell, not only through a process of adaptation to processing the world 
through her dementia, but through those arrangements which occur in response to it. What 
it is to be free, to be at peace must be constantly renegotiated as the changes introduced 
by time, aging, and relationality influence the permeability of the physical thresholds that 
interlace the spatial world. 
Conflict at the Threshold 
As with the thresholds that manifest at doorways and windows, however, it is necessary to 
examine the potential for threshold spaces to be challenged. It is also important to note that 
while Mark and Sybils neighbours influenced their movement over physical thresholds 
through spatial means (by moving the rug, or watching to ensure Sybil had her sticks), such 
events could not always be so neatly separated from the social experiences of being-with. 
This was most clearly discussed by Hazel, who had formed a particular ideal of how a good 
neighbour, or Nachgebauer (near-dweller) would behave. Through outlining the less than ideal 
traits of those who lived nearby, Hazel revealed that to be welcome they must be open to 
talking (being too quiet was a quality associated with being a funny sort), but not too keen 
to hold a long conversation. This latter behaviour was strongly associated with her next-door 
neighbour, whom she actively sought to avoid. This conflict was key in understanding 
Hazels use of her home place and her crossing into other spaces; it is this neighbour that 
she feared summoning by screaming in the earlier extract and was reassured when she 
realised he wasnt at home for her outburst. In speaking about how she managed her 
relationship with this neighbour, she reflected: 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
Hazel: As long as he doesnt bother me, Im okay. If he gets to the stage when he comes out and 
he starts talk, talk, talk, talk, talking you know hes had an awful lot and Ill say, oh 
sugar, Ill need to go in, theres the phone. Especially if John is not here, I go in as quick 
as I can. In fact most of the time if I know hes in Ill not come out when I know hes 
there himself, you know, and Johns not here. Johns never, Johns seen him a couple of times 
when hes been really bad but hes told him to, hes actually told him, will you stop it, []? 
Get in the house. And hell go in. But once we go away hes back out again. So And 
its not so good. I mean if we have a nice day well come out with our chairs and things and 
well sit in the sunshine. And its not that nice when hes sitting there boozing and talking 
away and all the rest of it"  
(Hazel, Interview Transcript) 
An important aspect of this extract is not only the concept of her neighbour as an unwelcome 
and talkative individual, who will talk to her if he sees her in her garden, but her portrayal of 
his drinking and drunkenness as a threat. Over the course of my visits with Hazel she often 
noted that while her glass bin was full of jars, his was all bottles. Descriptions of his 
character flaws were used during conversation as a way to contextualise her unease, her 
dislike, and her avoidance. Interestingly, these factors receded when she knew his wife was 
at home. On several occasions Hazel reflected that she enjoyed sitting out with his wife, 
who also had dementia but was further forward and didnt speak as much. This 
companionship, therefore, and her friends presence in the garden space mitigated the 
otherwise troublesome factor of her neighbours behaviours- both in regards to talking, and 
to drinking. Without her presence, however, Hazel was left to draw on other techniques to 
secure the thresholds between them, and found it difficult to cross into shared dwelling 
spaces particularly the back step where she liked to sit, but could be spoken to across the 
knee-high fence, when she thought he might be present (Ill not come out). Importantly, 
however, such measures were only in place if her husband wasnt home- much as with 
George, the presence of a trusted person within the home was facilitative of taking greater 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
risks at the threshold. It is this interrelation between social aspects and threshold spaces that 
forms the crux of the next chapter.  
Summary 
This chapter has explored the physical thresholds that surround people with dementia. By 
focusing on several areas as discrete from one another it was possible to consider not how 
thresholds appear in physical spaces, but to acknowledge the complexity that occurs when 
thresholds overlap in the participants lived experience. Throughout the analysis, the 
discussion of physical thresholds has centred primarily around their physicality, their 
manifestation in shared space, and the methods participants used to manage and navigate 
them, touching only briefly on their intrinsic multiplicity. Yet, rather than existing as 
objective, predetermined, or pre-social phenomena, physical thresholds were inherently 
relational, drawing together the home and Elsewhere spaces, the person and their neighbours 
as near-dwellers. They were constructed and influenced by not only the presence or absence 
of physical objects and architecture, but by the participants practices of dwelling, which could 
transform a permissive space into an impassable threshold and vice versa. This analysis 
demonstrates both the power available to people with dementia as dwellers in their own 
space, and the flexible nature of thresholds that they could be transformed not only in line 
with an individuals desire in response to their embodied experience of impairment. 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
6: RELATIONSHIPS, SOCIAL 
THRESHOLDS, AND BEING-WITH-
OTHERS  
Introduction  
Having dedicated the last chapter to considering the ways in which thresholds can be 
arranged in physical space, it is now necessary to consider the importance of nonphysical 
thresholds. The following discussion begins by considering the ways in which individuals as 
social actors can influence the extent to which a person with dementia is disabled in a given 
context. As a result, this chapter draws upon Heideggerian concepts in the same manner as 
Chapter Five, by using key concepts to highlight the complexities of experience that occur 
when one lives with a dementia diagnosis. Where Chapter Five explored the concept of 
Dwelling, however, this chapter places particular emphasis upon the concept of being-with-
others as a core aspect of Daseins experience of being in-the-world. This chapter begins, 
therefore, by exploring the ways that social relationships could influence thresholds 
indirectly, through the introduction and maintenance of enabling objects. The analysis then 
explores the social threshold between a persons inner circle, and their wider social network. 
This serves as a clear example of how a social thresholds occurred as a relational space which 
is actively managed by people with dementia and subject to both invited and uninvited 
crossings.  The chapter discusses how an individuals position in relation to this threshold 
determine whether they are allowed insight into the indignities and realities of living with 
dementia or presented with a carefully curated insight into the lives of participants. Finally, 
the focus then shifts to consider driving as a socially mediated activity, and the impact of 
engaging in constructive social activities through activism, altruism and community 
engagement.  
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
Although the concept of a social threshold lacks the tangible, observable, physical, properties 
that shaped participants physical thresholds, they were often easily identified within the data 
corpus. Indeed, participants often expressed their experiences with others through physical 
metaphors, where unwelcome social actors were depicted as crossing a line, or going too 
far- phrases that emulate the physical within the social context. As a result, it is worthwhile 
to consider social thresholds as fundamentally similar to the physical thresholds described in 
Chapter Five: as drawing together two phenomena (Dasein) to create an active (social) space 
that is distinct from, yet beholden to, the phenomena on either side. As with physical 
thresholds, social thresholds became subject to the same processes of creating (bauen) and 
protecting (wohnen) discussed in the previous chapter, but are further complicated by 
Heideggers acknowledgement that Dasein is always with-others, even when physically 
separated from them. As such, social thresholds continue to manifest even where a 
participant expels an unwelcome person from their life, or loses a loved one in death.  
Social Relationships and Physical Objects  
Given the impact of objects on the physical threshold as discussed in the last chapter, it is 
pertinent to begin this chapter by acknowledging that these objects did not enter the 
environment of the person with dementia accidentally. Indeed, it is worth noting that 
participants were often surrounded by many more potentially enabling objects than they 
engaged with, marking the recursive processes involved in identifying, implementing, 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
maintaining, adapting and finally replacing these objects as the needs of the person with 
dementia changed.  
Written Materials  
Participants were surrounded by a wealth of written notes that had been introduced by others 
in an effort to mitigate the memory effects of dementia. These notes, whether handwritten, 
printed or laminated, differed from those discussed in Chapter Five in one key aspect: their 
intended audience. Critically, while many of the signs in the previous chapter had been 
introduced by someone other than the participant, and were intended to communicate with 
potential visitors, the notes discussed here were often primarily, if not exclusively, intended 
for the participant to read. Flashs home provided several clear examples of this, for each 
door in his small bedsit flat bore a black and white laminated label positioned at eye level 
that announced what was inside. His son, 
Flash explained, had introduced these labels, 
when he first moved into the flat to help him 
easily find his way around. These had since 
been supplemented with further notes 
detailing his regularly taken medication and 
his familys contact numbers, which had been 
attached to the frame of a large family 
photograph above the telephone, and a 
simplified bus timetable attached to the 
window frame in his kitchen (Picture 9).  
Picture 9: Simplified Bus Timetable & Notepad 
with Pencil 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
These creation and placement of these notes had two primary effects; firstly, they supported 
Flashs memory, allowing him to navigate his supported accommodation independently 
without relying on his own recall. The need for this system to be maintained and adapted by 
his family over time had resulted in the introduction of further notes, written on post-it notes 
in pencil, which had been attached to the outfit he was to wear the next morning. These, 
Flashs son explained, were in response to his fathers propensity to rewear dirty clothes the 
following day if he could not readily identify the pre-assembled set that was hung on a hanger 
on his wardrobe door. This highlights not only the need for written materials to be constantly 
reassessed, but the labour involved in their production and maintenance. The process of 
creating such written directions over time and in a targeted way ensured that the notes 
themselves were at once useful physical objects in their own right and symbols of the ongoing 
relationship between Flash and his family. Such notes thereby became a physical 
representation of a social threshold that had a profound influence on Flashs day to day lived 
experience, even when the writer of the notes was not themselves present. It was this social 
threshold between Flash and his children, particularly his son, which ensured the constant 
evolution of the note system, captured clearly in the move away from the laminated labelling 
of dresser drawers that had previously aided Flash to select his own attire, and towards a 
more directive communication that better accommodated Flashs impairment. A similar 
process had prompted a shift in how the communications book was used, as it transformed 
from being primarily used to facilitate communication between family members and different 
members of care staff, to something that accomplished this while also providing Flash with 
the opportunity to review the activities of recent days, aiding his memory and his 
management of temporal thresholds, discussed further in Chapter Seven.  
It is worth acknowledging here the complex relationship that existed between social 
thresholds as nonphysical, relational spaces and the physical, material aspects of notes and 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
signage. Indeed, the ability to identify the optimal position for written materials in physical 
space, often further evidenced the presence of a social threshold that was regularly and 
successfully negotiated. An example of this is captured in Picture 9, as Flashs bus timetables 
had been carefully sized to fit in his wallet, and provided only information that was directly 
relevant to his journey, with outward and homeward journeys detailed on separate cards. As 
a result, these cards aid navigation over both physical and social thresholds in that they 
facilitate his movement to specific locations, and enable him to navigate the social thresholds 
necessary to do so, such as interacting with the bus driver and so on. Both of these passages 
are, therefore, contingent on the preliminary navigation of the social threshold between 
Flash, his children and his care staff, such that his desire to travel is respected and enabled 
without causing stress or distress for those who care for him. This facilitation allowed Flash 
to continue to construct himself as a man who was capable of managing such journeys 
unaccompanied, even though he increasingly preferred to venture out in the company of his 
family.  
 This intervention of key social contacts occurred in a range of situations, and varied in its 
manifestation for each participant. For example, while Flashs bus passes aided him in 
travelling independently if he wished, for Hazel many of the written materials were targeted 
towards enabling her to continue to attend to chores within the house, particularly those 
that influenced her ability to host others and maintain social connections. As a result, 
accompanying Hazel into the kitchen to carry tea and biscuits involved encountering a 
plethora of signs, all targeted towards her continued ability to attend to these gendered social 
expectations. The most striking example of this was Hazels food waste bin, which had 
become a key component of the tea making ritual as the local authority continued to 
encourage waste reduction and recycling. Picture 10 shows the directive sign that had been 
printed by Hazels husband, John, and attached to the top of the bin to ensure she did not 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
mistake the food-waste bin for one intended general recycling. In stark contrast to the plain 
black-on-white signage used by Flash, Hazels signs leveraged her interest in owls to draw 
her attention and prompt her compliance. While this strategy arguably created a design that 
was visually cluttered with limited contrast between image and text, it was effective in 
drawing Hazels attention, to the point where she explicitly pointed it out during one of my 
early visits while supervising my efforts 
to make tea. It was this combination of 
incorporating images that drew her 
attention, and ensuring that the bin itself 
was placed in a way that its spatiality 
indicated its role in the task of tea 
making, that John had successfully 
ensured that she could continue to 
provide herself and any guests with tea, 
thus fulfilling the role of host.  
The importance of this routine action should not be underestimated, as Hazel and I drank a 
substantial amount of tea during our visits together, a shared action that provided an 
opportunity for Hazel to not only redirect our conversations but to take the time to reflect 
upon them as either she or I passed briefly into the next room to make the tea, a process 
which was initiated by asking if the other was ready for a cup, and ended with the teabags 
being disposed of and the tea being brought through. Resultantly, the tea, and thus the food 
bin and its signage as part of the tea making process, enabled passages over a number of 
social thresholds, not least those that occurred between herself as a person with dementia 
and myself as a researcher, and herself as a host and myself as a familiar guest in her home.  
Picture 10: Hazels Personalised Food Waste Bin 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Given the striking aesthetic differences between Flashs signage (Picture 9) and Hazels 
(Picture 10), and the variation in which thresholds they were intended to facilitate, it is worth 
noting here that Hazels home also held a number of written materials that had been used 
infrequently alongside those that were used regularly, demonstrating the processes of 
innovation adaptation required of her husband as the primary source of the material. 
However, where Flashs changing signage charted an increasing difficulty in remembering to 
assemble a clean outfit from various drawers when a pre-assembled, but already-worn outfit 
was readily available, Hazels materials suggested a difficulty in remembering to use the tools 
at all. Picture 11 shows three separate calendars clustered together in Hazels kitchen; a red 
bordered weekly planner showing each day of the working week, the weekend, and tasks to 
be completed; a monthly calendar with one line dedicated to each day arranged vertically; 
and a weekly planner with each day given its own space, arranged vertically with additional 
space for writing longer notes.  
Of the three, only the centre calendar was used regularly, even though the two unused 
calendars are more in accordance with the principals of dementia design. Interestingly, just 
as Flashs bus timetables demonstrated the potential for a social relationship, and a facilitative 
social threshold, to ease passage over physical thresholds, Hazels calendars demonstrate the 
Picture 11: A Tale of Three Calendars 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
impact of social thresholds on the temporal thresholds that are the focus of Chapter Seven. 
Specifically, the maintenance of the calendar required not only identifying one that would 
draw Hazels attention and prompt her usage of it, but the introduction of further practices 
to ensure that she could successfully identify where she was in the month, despite being 
presented with each day simultaneously. This had been achieved simply by Johns 
introduction of the green pen which was used to highlight past dates and ensure Hazel could 
orientate herself in the present (the pen is visible in Picture 11, in its customary place on top 
of the control pad for the heating, which also performed a facilitator role in the process as it 
displayed both the date and time). Hazel often referred to the calendar in our conversations, 
using it as an aide memoir to prompt her recollection of what had occurred since our last 
visit, as well as a tool with which to organise our future visits together. Yet, even as the 
calendar, the product of her ability to navigate her social threshold with her husband, helped 
Hazel arrange herself and manage her temporal thresholds, it also acted as a social prompt, 
and she would often fetch it down as our meetings drew to a close to arrange my next visit, 
a process which, once complete, would prompt my withdrawal from her home space.  
It is through capturing this interaction between different types of thresholds that the concept 
demonstrates its value, as it provides additional avenues for investigation should crossings 
become troublesome, prompting an investigation of physical, social and temporal 
components rather than presuming primacy in one particular area. This inter-relation was 
further exemplified during a discussion between Hazel, John, and myself about the use and 
maintenance of her calendar. Critically, while many of the entries on the calendar were in 
Hazels handwriting as many or more were in Johns, products of a routine transfer of 
information from his paper diary to the shared wall calendar- a process that Hazel could no 
longer undertake as she rarely remembered to write in her own diary. The on-going labour 
of maintaining such resources became a source of tension during our discussion, providing 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
an insight into Hazels frustrations at her own progressive impairment as well as her reliance 
upon John as, increasingly, the keeper of the calendar. The following quote is taken from a 
point late in one visit, where Hazel, John and I were sat together in the living room, with she 
and he together on the sofa and I sat in the armchair perpendicular to them.  
Hazel:  What are you doing?  
John: Looking at my diary.  
Hazel: Oh, right. Im just asking. []  
John:  [jokingly] Well, Im a very busy man. Ive got to keep it up to date.  
I:  You know what though, I laugh. And if things arent in my diary, they dont 
happen at all.  
Hazel: Heres my diary. [Hazel lifts it from under a book beside her and opens it towards 
me] Its empty [] Im supposed to write everything in it... I keep forgetting its 
there. Dont I, John?  
John: Yes. []  
Hazel: I should have had your name down in there to say you were coming and I havent.  
I:  It was my fault because [] I arranged it with John, so  
Hazel: Well theres no point arranging anything with John, because he doesnt tell me 
nothing [] Im only joking, John, honest.  
John: Yeah, I know.  
(Hazel and John, Interview Transcript)  
Hazels reinforcement of her own failure to keep a diary, first through forgetting it was there, 
then by not having my name noted in it was tied to her wider frustrations about her 
impairments making things difficult. Yet Hazel was not alone in this. Many participants 
used some variant of note-taking in order to supplement their impaired memory, whether 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
that was by using a calendar (Hazel, Isabel, Sybil), diary (Flash, Mark), notebook (Mark) or 
iPad (Nigel) successful use often required some input from others in their life. Indeed, taken 
more broadly, most objects that served to facilitate habits of dwelling or threshold crossings 
were in some way facilitated by others, either through their introduction or through some 
form of continued maintenance. That these materials, which were themselves important in 
facilitating threshold crossings, relied upon continued successful navigation of social 
thresholds indicates not only the complex web of thresholds that surrounded participants, 
but the particular importance of navigating social thresholds as facilitative of the others 
which would follow.  
Beyond the Written Word  
One example of the on-going labour involved in maintaining facilitative resources was 
provided by George and Anne. In our conversations together, George and Anne often 
discussed their engagement with numerous agencies and charities as a strategy in an attempt 
to assemble a range of techniques that could support and enable George in the context of 
his complex impairments as they resulted from severe macular degeneration, dementia, limb 
damage, problems with balance, and a chronic lung condition. The intersecting of this 
selection of impairments introduced a particular challenge, in that many things that were 
meant to enable people with one impairment were either inappropriate or inaccessible to 
George due to another impairment effect. This resulted in, among other things; George being 
unable to drive a motorised wheelchair, but unable to self-propel, and as such requiring Anne 
or another person to push him when he journeyed Elsewhere; special corrective glasses that 
could no longer successfully circumvent his macular degeneration, but that he continued to 
try to use as he forgot the reasoning behind no longer using them; and a particularly 
unsuccessful engagement with cognitive behavioural therapy where many of the suggested 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
interventions proved inaccessible for him. As each impairment proceeded at a 
different rate they were constantly engaged in trying novel solutions to existing and newly 
occurring difficulties.  
It was in this context that I first became aware of myself not only as a researcher in the field, 
but as a resource for my participant- one which had already been drawn upon during several 
visits without it coming to my attention that this was what occurring. That this is, perhaps, 
an indication of the risk-focused orientation of the ethics process which itself tends to frame 
vulnerable people as at risk of being used rather than entering into a bidirectional 
relationship where each party gains something of value is reflected upon in the discussion in 
chapter Eight. The initial conversation occurred after Anne took me to see the visual 
medication guide she had made to enable George to take his medication independently by 
providing a visual map of which medications were to be taken when (Picture 12).  
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
As the discussion moved on, George had expressed his frustration at no longer being able 
to keep track of what day it was, or what he could expect to happen. In response, I had asked 
if they had seen the visual daily planners that were displayed in the local dementia centre, 
which they had already discussed visiting. When they expressed surprise and interest, I had 
explained both the concept and the location within the centre in case they wanted to revisit 
and look for themselves.  
The following quote captures both the result of that conversation when viewed as a strategic 
resource, and the on-going processes involved in refining the use of a tool once it has been 
introduced.  
Picture 12: Georges Visual Medication Guide 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Anne: But since youve been, weve made a little board for him.  
I:  Hows that going for you?  
 George:  Great.  
Anne: We quite like that, actually.[] I got him to choose the pictures he wanted, so that 
it wasnt kind of patronising.  
I:  Yes.  
Anne: There was a picture of one of the dentists treating somebody, but it was too busy for 
him and he preferred ... thats not like our dentist [] He picked them, you know. 
Because I thought, well, it has to be easy for him to see. I just put a text box on 
that to do the writing for us[]  
I:  I love that so much. George?  
George: What?  
I:  Ive been seeing your visuals [] This makes me giggle so much.  
George: Aye, thats a haircut.  
I:  Is this what you look like before you go in, aye?  
George: Aye, yes, just about. But this starts to stick up then.  
(George and Anne, Interview Transcript)  
In this example, Anne had actively enlisted George for his help in choosing the form and 
features of the visual daily planner. The result was a mixture of different image styles and 
shapes, from silhouette outlines to cartoons to photographs rather than a stylistically 
coherent set that included a mixture of no text, printed text, and Georges own handwriting. 
The haircut visual discussed in the extract is highlighted by the yellow square in Picture 13, 
and successfully became not only a visual guide for what George could expect in his day but 
a focus of conversation.  
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
While this was, arguably, a secondary function of the visuals rather than an intended result, 
it was not inconsistent with other participants who identified material objects as facilitative 
of Being-with-others and thus of social thresholds. That these objects were both beholden 
to and facilitative of social thresholds, while also acting in other capacities (for example, as 
memory aids) captures the complexities introduced when social relationships influence the 
identification and implementation of materials that, in turn, facilitate further crossings of 
social thresholds. This is cleanly captured in the introduction of Georges visuals. Such a 
process required first that George communicate his difficulty, then that Anne both recognise 
that difficulty and engage with it as a valid concern. Both George and Anne then accessed 
their social resources through talking to others, identified my research as something of 
interest, and to successfully leveraged our relationship in a way that resulted in an exchange 
of knowledge about the use of visuals for people with dementia. Anne then acted on this 
information in collaboration with George, (the collaborative process itself another social 
Picture 14: Georges Daily Planner Picture 13: Georges Visuals 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
threshold), and so on. Viewed in such a way, it becomes clear that the process of material 
introduction requires significant labour, which continues as the object is refined or 
impairment effects change and progress, thus making both the threshold crossing facilitated 
by the materials, and the materials themselves, reliant upon the ability to maintain an open 
social threshold between the person with dementia and their key person, in this case between 
Anne and George.  
The Role of  the Inner Circle  
While the previous sections have detailed the role of social relationships, and thus the impact 
of social thresholds, on the production and maintenance of objects it is necessary to move 
beyond the discussion of which objects were being introduced and maintained and consider 
the relationships between those who undertook these duties and the individual with 
dementia. It is therefore helpful to consider a participants social network, and an 
acknowledgement of the qualitative difference between those individuals in the participants 
life who were permitted insight into the indignities and challenges of everyday life, and those 
from whom such knowledge was withheld. There were two aspects of this inner circle that 
were particularly influential in the lives of participants; the first was the particular status 
awarded to those within the inner circle and the second involved the measures that 
participants took to guard and manage that social threshold.  
Inside the Inner Circle  
One common example of the esteem in which participants held members of their inner circle 
was demonstrated in the way that they were featured as part of the participants story of 
diagnosis. This is captured in the following extract, where Nigel reflects on the role played 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
by his adult son in highlighting his memory impairment, something both he and his wife had 
resisted acknowledging until it was unavoidably drawn to their attention.  
Nigel:  [My Son] was the one who reallyhe didnt diagnose it, but he said, I think you 
should see a doctor, cause youve asked me the same silly question three 
times. So after the family, sort of, digested this and [my wife] digested it and then 
[] [she said] I should go to see my GP. Cause thats the first stopping point. I 
mean, good GPs are very rare these days. Im lucky that Ive got two of the main 
GPs in [local] Medical Centre are both outstanding, [] And they both know me 
by first name, which is good. So I think that they then said, well youmaybe you 
should go and see what the Memory Clinic says of you.  
(Nigel, Interview Transcript)  
There are two points of particular interest here; the first is the value attributed by Nigel to 
his sons opinion, such that his concerns are not dismissed out of hand or resisted, and the 
second is the importance of social thresholds in the process of securing a diagnosis. For 
Nigel, and for a number of other participants, it was difficulty at the social threshold that first 
prompted the journey towards diagnosis, which, in turn, necessitated navigating a multitude 
of additional social thresholds, between the person with dementia and the doctor, the doctor 
as a referrer and the consultant, the consultant and the person with dementia and so on. 
Importantly, members of the inner circle often continued to be active throughout the 
diagnostic journey. This was particularly true for Janet, whose husband had attended 
appointments with her and often advocated and fought for her concerns to be taken seriously 
by professionals who had initially attributed her symptoms to stress.  
It is important to note, too, that the influence of those within the inner circle did not end 
with diagnosis, but continued forwards, transforming alongside the needs of the person with 
dementia. Indeed, it was often only the inner circle that were permitted an insight into the 
difficulties associated with an individuals impairment effects, and as such they often became 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
facilitative resources in their own right, providing emotional as well as practical support. 
Examples of this often involved comments about how the person would need to check in 
or ask a particular person for clarification about something they felt unsure about. It was 
this ability to confirm their beliefs or seek new knowledge that often helped participants 
manage the uncertainty and anxiety that occurred when they felt like they had forgotten 
something important. This reliance, however, could result in problems as the individual 
members of the inner circle continued to navigate their own lives and responsibilities. The 
potential for the individuality of someone in the inner circle to conflict with their role as a 
facilitator is captured in Hazels quote, below, where she discusses her feelings of anxiety 
that she was experiencing in that moment, knowing that neither her daughter nor her 
husband were available to provide information or reassurance.  
Hazel: I have to say hand on heart the memory is worse.  
I:  Is it worse?  
Hazel: Yes. Its definitely worse. Me talking just now like this is okay but trying to 
remember things is just hopeless. [] I mean, just there just now, I mean, Ive 
forgotten where Johns gone. [] You know, I dont know where hes gone unless 
its written in the calendar and I dont think it is written in the calendar today. 
[] So, I dont know where he is. I said to...I said to him before he went away I 
said, well, I said maybe [my daughter[Jill will come down today. He said, no, he 
said Jills not coming down. Shes away just now. And I thought... [] oops, Id 
forgotten she was away as well. Shes only away for two or three days right enough 
but...so Id forgotten about that as well so...wherever he is, hes there.  
(Hazel, Interview Transcript)  
In this section, the role of the calendar, Johns role in maintaining the calendar, and Johns 
position as an important social resource are all made evident. Hazels inability to remember 
where John has gone is then compounded when the calendar fails to provide the information 
she needs, which is framed as something John should have seen to as primary maintainer of 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
the calendar. This confusion builds then, compounded by the absence of Hazels daughter 
(Jill) who she would normally call for information and reassurance in times where John was 
not available. In their (temporary) failure, the mechanisms of Hazels systems of support are 
laid bare. In the moment that Hazel initially feels unsure about being left alone, she attempts 
to draw support over the social threshold she shares with her daughter, a process that is 
impaired by her unavailability. This experience is then exacerbated when John, who initially 
provides support, is then rendered incommunicado, a process which is further problematized 
by Johns perceived failure to update the shared calendar, leaving Hazel in a state of 
uncertainty, where she is separated from her two main sources of social support by 
impermeable physical and temporal thresholds, with (she believes) no method of knowing 
when that support will reappear. Hazel communicates her sense of resignation and 
frustration in her acknowledgement wherever he is, hes there. Unable to rely upon her 
usual mechanisms of support Hazel resigned herself to waiting either until she remembered 
where John had gone, or until he returned at an unspecified future time. John subsequently 
returned before the end of my visit, and the normal patterns of social relational support 
returned. This highlights not only the importance of the relationships and social thresholds 
between the person with dementia and those in their inner circle, but the particular strengths 
associated with a thresholds framework, as it can capture Hazels sense of loss and isolation 
while simultaneously acknowledging the experiences of John, for whom there was never a 
concern about Hazels wellbeing or his intention to return. This relationality, and particularly 
the thresholds existence as distinct from yet beholden to the phenomena on each side, allows 
for a nuanced insight into the experiences of people with dementia, allowing for an 
exploration of experience without necessarily conflicting with the realities of others.  
It is important, too, to acknowledge those within the inner circle not only as individuals with 
valued and influential insights, or as valued social connections in their own right, but as 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
facilitative of other social thresholds more broadly. In particular, those within the inner circle 
were often called upon to act as repositories of both memory and knowledge, acting as filters 
and curators of information in a variety of settings. The following quote, in which George 
and Anne discuss a recent visit to the opticians, clearly demonstrates this.  
 George: What I still find annoying is because when I went to the optician earlier on they 
wouldn't give me any glasses. And they wouldn't give me any stronger reading glasses 
which I need, at least I thought I needed. But they refused to give me because I was 
going blind or something.  
Anne: This is a problem we have a little bit too at these earlier stages, is that when Georges 
talking to professionals like opticians and doctors he seems to understand at the 
time [] But then I come home  
 George:  I forgot what she said.  
Anne:  and it's not that he's forgotten, he hasn't understood. So the optician explained to 
him quite clearly that he's lost his central vision. So there's no waythey could not 
give him any stronger glasses. [] George was saying oh yes, yes, and going along 
with all that. And she would say do you understand? And he'd say yes, yeah. 
And I thought he was understanding too. But when we came home and he said but 
why am I not gettingcan they not just give me stronger glasses? And he still can't 
understand that.  
(George and Anne, Interview Transcript)  
This is particularly telling when compared to the following quote, in which Hazel discusses 
her sisters continued efforts to influence her behaviour, a pattern that, Hazel stated, had 
become more pronounced since she had disclosed her dementia diagnosis.  
Hazel: Its hard to say what [my sister] is like. She tries to say to me I should be doing 
this or I should be doing that. I says, [sister], I says, listen to me, I says, Ive got 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
a nice house, I says, Ive got a husband. I says, and touch wood, Im not short of 
anything.  
I:  Aye.  
Hazel: I says, I dont need anything. I says, Im quite happy. She says, but you must, 
there must be something you want. I says, not really. I says, theres nothing I really 
need. Theres nothing I want. I says, Ive got John, I says, Ive got [granddaughter], 
Ive got Jill and Ive got Karen. You never see Karen. I says, but shes still there. 
[] I says, it doesnt matter whether I see her very often or not, shes still there 
and I can ask her anything and shell do it for me. [] Oh but you never talk to 
her. I says, I do talk to her. I says, maybe once a month or something like that, 
but I says, thats how Karen is.  
(Hazel, Interview Transcript)  
Contrasted with one another, the two quotes above provide a telling insight into the different 
statuses afforded to people inside and outside the inner circle. In the first, Anne is called 
upon to repeat and repackage the key information initially related by the optician in order to 
facilitate Georges understanding. Of particular note is the lack of conflict between Anne, as 
a member of the inner circle, and George, and the echoes of conflict between George and 
the optician, who was not a member of the inner circle. This is almost diametrically opposed 
to Hazels outright rejection of her sisters attempts to manage her behaviour. As someone 
outside the inner circle, Hazel responds to her sisters input by narrowing their shared 
threshold, going to significant lengths to not only demonstrate the quality of her life but the 
extent of her existing social networks. It is interesting to note, however, that Hazels rejection 
of her sisters critique is not grounded in an attempt to convey her relationship with her 
daughter Karen as one of constant communication, but in defending the makeup of their 
social relationship: she and Karen may not communicate regularly, but shes still there. 
This faith, that Hazel could rely on Karen in an emergency despite her placement outside the 
inner circle, was fundamental to the way in which Hazel experienced and explained her 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
security. By contrast, she often described her sister as an opposing force that is permitted 
only a carefully curated insight into her experience. Such practices raise profound questions 
around how individuals who are not included in a person with dementias inner circle might 
gain access, as the knowledge that is a prerequisite to entry may be disguised or withheld 
entirely by the person themselves. It is how the participant constructs themselves in different 
social situations, and how this influences the way in which they relate to others that forms 
the crux of the coming sections.  
Restricting Access to the Inner Circle  
Given the importance of the inner circle, and the benefits and responsibilities associated with 
being included within its ranks, it is perhaps unsurprising that the social threshold that 
separated members from non-members was one of the most carefully guarded social 
thresholds to emerge during fieldwork. The following quote was drawn from one of my visits 
with Hazel, and clearly demonstrates the way that people with dementia could call upon a 
range of techniques to secure their social thresholds and restrict the extent to which those 
outside the inner circle could gain clear insight into the challenging realities of navigating the 
world with dementia.  
Hazel:  Did I say about my sister saying about driving? [] Shes still at it I spoke to 
her I think it was about a week or two ago. How are you doing? I said, aye, Im 
fine. Oh right. Next thing, are you still driving? I said yes. Are you sure you 
should be? I said [sister] youve gone around that corner two or three times. I said 
the corners nearly done. [] She said well, if youre still... if youve got... what.. 
.what... and thats how she went on. She couldnt remember what to call it and Ive 
got Alzheimers and she said to me are you sure youre alright? I said, well, am 
I talking alright to you on the phone? Aye. [] I said, do I sound okay? She 
said, yes, she said but I asked you a couple of times she said and you couldnt 
remember. I said, well, Ill ask you something. So, I asked her something about 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
the family from way back. Oh, I dont know. I cant remember I said there you 
go you couldnt remember either could you? Oh, see you  
(Hazel, Interview Transcript) 
There are a number of points in the quote above that are worthy of further consideration. 
The most important of these is, arguably, the tenacity with which not only Hazel resists her 
sisters attempts to influence her behaviour (in this case, driving) but the way in which she 
manages the conversation such that even an accurate insight into the effects of her 
impairments becomes impossible. This occurs first in her rebuke about having 
gone round that corner before, indicating that the imposition of her sisters opinion had 
been reluctantly tolerated before but would not be so again. She then proceeds to shift the 
conversational context, away from her ability to drive, towards an assessment of her sisters 
ability to recall information, capitalising on her sisters limited insight into the range of 
impairments that could accompany a dementia diagnosis. Were this quote to be viewed alone, 
however, it would provide only a limited insight into the deliberate efforts taken by Hazel to 
secure her social threshold. She continued:  
Hazel:  Oh, see you.  
I:  Thats what you get.  
Hazel: Yes. I keep saying to John I said youll need to take me through and see her because 
I said shes getting really...Im beginning to worry about her. So, I said other than 
that I said Ill drive through myself. He said indeed you will not. I said, oh, not 
you as well. I said its alright when youre going to [a club] and you want picked 
up though, isnt it? Oh, thats only wee short journeys. I said I know how to get 
to [my sisters]. Its only just up the road. [] in saying that even with... once 
before I got the, sort of, dementia thing the way it is now I was driving through and 
I had the satnav on because I always do when I go to [hers] because its a roundabout 
road to get there. So, I put the satnav on and it said you have reached your 
destination and I looked roundabout me. I was out in the wilds with fields all over 
me and Im thinking [] what the hecks that satnav doing. So, I phoned [her] 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
up. I said...she says, where are you? [] I said, well, I says to be quite honest 
with you I havent got a clue. I said Im surrounded by field roundabout here and 
a couple of buildings and whatever. How did you manage that youve got the satnav 
and you know how to get here? I said, aye, I says but the satnav brought me here 
[]its a bit like me, its forgetful.  
(Hazel, Interview Transcript)  
The first point of note here is Hazels sudden shift, from flatly rejecting the suggestion that 
she should not drive, to acknowledging her need to be driven to locations that were further 
away: I keep saying to John [] youll need to take me through. John, as a member of 
Hazels inner circle, is not only provided insight into Hazels experience of memory 
impairment, but her increasing difficulty in regards to way finding. As a result, Hazel 
provides a clear example of how she responds to challenges to her behaviour from those 
outside her inner circle (that corners nearly done) versus those within it (Its alright when 
youre going to [a club] isnt it?). Only those within the inner circle are permitted to see the 
indignities of a life lived with impairment (Shakespeare and Watson, 2001), and as such it is 
often only their attempts to respond to the changing impairments associated with a 
degenerative brain disease are considered as benevolent, where others are viewed through a 
lens of oppression, and are responded to as such.  
Responding to Violations of  the Social Threshold  
While previous sections have discussed the ways in which participants may seek to actively 
permit or resist the attempts of others to cross the social threshold that separates the wider 
world from their trusted inner circle of confidantes, it is important to acknowledge that such 
relationships are not always so easily navigated. In each of the cases above, engaging with 
others in threshold spaces has predominantly required the participant to stand firm in their 
perceptions. It is in the face of people with dementia holding their ground that those in the 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
inner circle seek to identify and implement facilitative practices that allow such engagement 
to continue, and those outside that circle find themselves excluded. In my conversations with 
Mark, however, he discussed similar issues around regulating who was and was not 
considered part of his inner circle, with a key difference. For Mark, maintaining a trusted 
inner circle not only required a vigilant guard over the social threshold, but direct action to 
remove someone from a position of trust, forcibly moving them from inside the inner circle, 
to outside his confidence. The following quote is protracted, but provides necessary insight 
into both Marks engagement with the state as an older man with dementia, his management 
of his social thresholds, his maintenance of his inner circle, and his practices of dwelling-as-
protection as they manifested in redressing the situation.  
Mark:  [My daughter has lived abroad for] about 7 or 8 years. And when I got dementia, 
she decide- they decided I had to have a Power of Attorney and so she decided that 
she was going to be the Power of Attorney. So she went to my bank and did all 
that. And made herself the Power of Attorney and I didn't know much about it I 
just left it that she was going to be able and capable of looking after me. [] But 
she lives [abroad].  
I:  Yeah, how does that work?  
Mark:  Well I realised  well she is in touch with the bank only [] so she has a copy of 
my bank statement every month and, you know, would occasionally say what's that 
for? She- she's the sort my daughter, she's. she was a bully. She used to bully 
me. She used to get on my nerves sometimes when she was coming you know I'd 
think [sucks in breath] you know why come, you don't need to? [] They were 
over here before Christmas and I told her then that if she was Power of Attorney 
and she wasn't going to be there to do things for me when I wanted them... [] She 
says I'm always here for you to phone me. I said but I can't ask you on the phone 
all sorts of things. [] And her husband he knows everything, you know, and he 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
said you could send it to me  send it to me in the post and I'd read it and come 
back to you on [] any problems you have. [] You can't do things like that.  
I:   No  
Mark:  I can't live like that. []And I had spoken to a couple of people  not those two  
a couple of people that they know about being Power of Attorney and they said I 
should have two people anyway, so I could appoint another one, and that's 
it. However I decided there were a couple of people I know I could have asked to do 
it so I told my daughter I was going to scrub her and get somebody else  2 people. 
And she says No you're not. You're not going to do that. I won't sign anything for 
you. And she was quite nasty with it.  
I:   Hold you hostage, is it not?  
Mark:  Oh well she's like that you see. Don't think you're going to do that. [] That 
was the end of it for me. [] In fact I got an appointment for them this morning 
and what was it came out this morning? Oh a letter came this morning saying 
that this is from the man who stamped this Power of Attorney at [town], [] 
letter came from him saying to me that he'd written to my daughter telling her that 
she was no longer a Power of Attorney, [] She doesn't need to, she didn't need to 
sign anything anyway. And she's been now officially told by [him].  
(Mark, Interview Transcript)  
This extract is remarkable in a number of ways. In the first instance, it demonstrates the 
flexibility of the social threshold that separates the inner circle from the wider social network. 
That Marks daughter was allowed to enter into a place of confidence with little conflict based 
on her kinship, gain formal recognition of her status by gaining Power of Attorney, thus 
being formally recognised as the de facto decision maker should Mark lose capacity, and then 
have her access to the social space and its benefits revoked using the same mechanisms with 
which shed sought to secure her place demonstrates the relationality of thresholds. Rather 
than representing a fixed arrangement, Mark is able to not only redraw the social threshold 
such that his daughter is forcibly removed from his inner circle, but is able to leverage both 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
social resources (his lawyer, his neighbour, etc.) and material objects (his Power of Attorney, 
and latterly, his will) to render the threshold impassable to her subsequent attempts to regain 
entry. This, in turn, emphasises the power that people with dementia could leverage 
in threshold spaces, as they capitalised on the relational aspects of the threshold space to act, 
and react, to those who met them on the other side.  
While examples like those provided by Mark, above, provide dramatic examples of 
renegotiated social thresholds, such events were not always characterised by direct conflict. 
In the quote below, Margaret was discussing her concern at being mistaken for weak by those 
she showed kindness to within her supported living facility. After relating how washing a cup 
for a fellow resident had (she felt) lead to him peeking through her keyhole as discussed in 
Chapter 5, Margret decided to hold other residents at a distance, saying:  
Margaret: You never get anybody kind of decent in here, it's all weirdos. But that big man's 
the latest one. And the way he came right up to me the first time, and I just kind 
of froze, and I went, no, I don't like the look of you. [] And he's awful nice, 
don't get me wrong, but he's just not, I don't know, there's just something about 
him that I just don't like. I don't like people that are too friendly. [] I like, if 
he'd come up and just spoke naturally to me. Oh, he came right up, and I went, 
oh, alright. I said, enough's enough, once bitten.  
I:  Aye, twice shy, right enough.  
Margaret: Oh, I said, it's nice to be nice, and kind-hearted, but I don't like to get made a 
mug of, and that's just what happened there. [] That I was handing him, and 
I was going out and buying things, and then coming in and saying, oh that's a 
shame, maybe he could do with that. You clown, you, you know.  
(Margaret, Interview Transcript)  
Key to Margarets distrust of other resident was her own experience of navigating the world 
not only as a person with dementia, but also as an older woman living alone with dementia. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
In this case, not only does the big man meet with resistance because of her experience of 
being spied upon but also as a result of her encounters with men more generally, which had 
been predominantly unpleasant. This construction of men as potentially dangerous has a 
profound influence on how she constructs and retells the story as she casts suspicion upon 
the genuineness of the residents apparent friendliness, and fears being taken advantage of. 
This experience, particularly as an older woman in a complex that had only started housing 
men after she moved in, significantly impacted the way in which Margaret organised her 
social space, and how she perceived those who attempted to cross her social and physical 
thresholds (n.b. that the man in the above quote does both, in that he comes right up to her 
and was overly friendly). This raises questions about how those who are unknown might 
navigate their way successfully over social thresholds in their relationships with people with 
dementia- particularly where an expansive history is not known. Through the information I 
gleaned in our conversations, I was able to see Margarets distrust of men manifest 
throughout her timeline; in her relationship with her husband, with her brother, and with a 
number of men since including the one described above and the man peeking through her 
keyhole in Chapter Five. Without such insight- which I might not have been privy to in 
another role, or if I had started out with questions that were obviously directed towards such 
information- such connections would have been impossible to make. The impact of such 
lived, temporal aspects of threshold spaces is discussed more thoroughly in Chapter Seven, 
while the implications for practice are considered in the discussion in Chapter Eight.  
Driving as a Social Threshold  
Given the complexities that are inherently a part of the social threshold, as a relational space 
between two whole, nuanced Dasein, it is particularly valuable to explore the ways in which 
social thresholds can affect a range of behaviours, particularly those more readily associated 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
with physical or temporal thresholds. Driving provides just such an example. Although there 
were a number of my participants who had never obtained their driving licence (Margaret 
and Bob chief among them), driving remained a point of particular contention and focus in 
the lives of participants. More than any other activity, the ability to drive and the cessation 
of driving was discussed by participants in terms of profound biographical disruption, as they 
ceased to be drivers, and became, at best, pedestrians, but more often reliant on the 
timetables of others or the availability of taxi services. While there is a growing, valuable 
work detailing the experiences of people with dementia as they surrender their 
driving licence (including Chacko et al., 2015; McKillop, 2016 and Read, Toye and Wynaden, 
2017), I direct the readers attention not to the loss of driving as an activity, or to the resulting 
restriction at the physical threshold, but to the profoundly impactful social factors that 
influence not only how people with dementia construct and communicate themselves as 
drivers but to how they seek to maintain that status, and the ways in which they manage its 
revocation. Thomas understanding of disability as resulting from the interaction between 
impairment effects and socially constructed barriers is particularly informative in this case, 
as members of the inner circle were often considered as the ultimate guardians of the 
threshold between the participant as drivers, and as non-drivers, making the negotiation of 
that portion of their identity beholden upon their ability to navigate social thresholds 
between themselves and those within their inner circle.  
As shown in Hazels quotes in the previous section, driving was often constructed as a 
behaviour that was not only risky for the person for dementia, but as an activity that actively 
created risk for others. Taken from this perspective, Johns assertion that Hazel can drive 
him to and from his social clubs can be viewed as actively enabling her role as a driver and 
as an equal partner in their relationship, while mitigating the risks that are associated with 
driving longer distances and to less familiar locations. By contrast, her sisters questions of 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
whether she should be driving rely not only on a generalised understanding of Alzheimers 
disease, but also on the propriety of her driving, rather than her ability to do so safely. This 
is, arguably, a powerful example of psychoemotional disablism as a force which seeks to 
restrict not only what people with impairments can do, but what they can be (Thomas, 2007). 
This is particularly impactful in the wider context. Of those who were drivers prior to 
diagnosis, only Nigel, Mark, and Hazel were still driving at the time of fieldwork, while others 
relied on family members, taxis and formal services, public transportation or some 
combination of the three. The loss of the ability to drive had been a distressing process, 
particularly for Sybil, Isobel and George, and was often intrinsically connected to the 
reconstruction of their identity post-diagnosis as they attempted to navigate the social 
expectations of what people with dementia could do, and what they could be. The profound 
impact of the disabling narrative, that people with dementia cannot or should not drive post 
diagnosis, and the expectation that this restriction would be applied to anyone with a 
diagnosis, is clear in the following extract from Sybil:  
Sybil: I had my own car. I'm missing it now, but at first I didntit didnt worry me, but 
its beginning to worry me more when I think of where I want to go, you used 
justthe car, you open the door out and jump in the car and there you go. It was 
a nice little car. [] It was really a greatand I hadnt been driving very much 
because [] the traffics been building up and building up. Andwell I just 
decided [] not to drive again. When I think about it, the man that told me, he 
looked as if he was just going to say, dont drive again in your state. []  
(Sybil, Interview Transcript)  
Sybil: And at that point in time, it didnt really matter, but I wasnt able to walk very 
farmuch. But as the times going on, its beginning to niggle. I cant do as I would 
(Sybil, Interview Transcript)  
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
Analysing these quotes highlights a number of interesting and interrelated aspects which 
influenced the way in which Sybil understood her loss of driving ability. Firstly, there is the 
difficulty it introduces in relation to a physical crossing- the loss of a car means 
she cannot do as [she] would do or jump in the car and there you go. Instead, movement 
beyond her walking range that wasnt very far and was carefully regulated by her daughter 
became reliant on others- predominantly the taxi drivers arranged by her daughter. The 
second point to consider is the presence of the social other in the decision process; the 
man who needed only to look as if he would suggest that she should no longer drive with 
a diagnosis of dementia. This exemplifies the power both of the narratives of decay, the 
ableist dialogues surrounding dementia, and the stigma associated with receiving a diagnosis: 
it was never necessary for someone to request Sybil give up her driving licence, because she 
had already internalised the ablest narratives that cast her diagnosis, and her social status as 
a driver as incompatible.  
Events like those above highlight the need to explicitly acknowledge the social and relational 
constructs of disablement and enablement that surround people with dementia. In the 
following segment, Nigel reflects upon his decision to keep driving, and critically, the two 
conditions under which he would surrender his driving licence voluntarily: his 70th birthday, 
or his wifes request.  
Nigel: You do things, yes intuitively, so I drive a car intuitively. Now I have to think 
carefully much more about where Im driving and how Im driving and [my wife] 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
hates me driving now 'cause it scares her to death. But I say, dont worry it's 
alright  
I:  So is it some of the things that you were taking for granted are getting muddled or 
are getting off...  
Nigel: Yeah, I would take for granted that I would automatically know where Id left my 
car. [] So what Ive been trying to do is create landmarks and do a 
quick reconnaissance and say, these are the main points. But the trouble is I forget 
what the main points were which is a bit of a problem. Thats another thing about 
Alzheimers, you get multiple problems occurring where things just dont happen 
where they would happen previously and they can range from just finding the word 
to being able to intuitively know how to put a car in gear or whatever it happens to 
be. So Ive said to [her] I will stop driving when either two conditions, one that you 
tell me I should stop driving, because Im not able to tell myself Im driving badly, 
cause Im driving alright, there is no danger...ahhh but it scares me to death. And 
second when I turn 70. I think thats probably a good time to stop because apart 
from anything else when you turn 70 you have got to re-do your licence test.  
I:  Yeah.  
Nigel: And I would almost certainly fail. [] Because it's only another year away.  
(Nigel, Interview Transcript) 
In reflecting on the quote there are arguably several factors that interact. Key to this section, 
however, is the interaction between his wife as someone who cares and worries (it scares 
her to death), Nigel as an intuitive driver, and his wife as an ultimate authority who can 
accurately judge the safety of his driving. Such a relationship, again, highlights the influence 
of social relationships, and particularly on the ability to navigate social thresholds, as a key 
component of maintaining a drivers status. Indeed, it is worth arguing that Nigels 
assessment that he should stop driving at 70 may be more a reflection of his own internalised 
negative perceptions about what it means to age, rather than a manifestation 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
of psychoemotional disablism whereby what it means to age with dementia becomes 
incompatible with being a driver. Ultimately, however, it is Nigels wife, and her trusted 
opinion, that successfully guards the threshold between Nigel-the-driver, and Nigel-the-non-
driver at the time of fieldwork, emphasising a further importance of trusted people at the 
threshold.  
Nigel was not the only participant who found it necessary to negotiate with an outside force 
in order to maintain his identity as a driver, however. Mark, too, sought to maintain his 
licence, and as such had to navigate a test every year as part of being considered fit to drive. 
Rather than being an objective, spatially informed test, however, Marks continued driving 
was more reliant on his ability to portray himself as a careful, courteous, and safe driver in 
social conversation. In the quote below, Mark relates his experiences of this annual testing 
process in the context of a recent health-related driving restriction and his concerns about 
the future.  
Mark: I had to do a three- point turn. Which I failed. I hit the kerb. I had to do another one, 
in another place. He told me, he said you're not supposed to hit the kerb you know. 
I said Oh He said because if you hit the kerb with the tyres, the rest of the car is 
on the [] So he said that's dangerous isn't it? I said oh yes. So he 
said don't do that. [] What else? Oh, the 20 thing [sign]. I didn't know there 
were green and red lights on it, I thought there were just red lights on it [] He 
said when I got to it, there were no lights on but there were cars behind me and I 
slowed up, and I shouldn't have slowed up.  
Mark: I don't know whether I can pass it this year. [] if I lose my licence not being able 
to drive for the last couple of weeks after I had this thing [] put me in the bad 
mood [] I was terrible, really  
(Mark, Interview Transcript)  
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Most noticeable in this abstract is that while Mark was marked down for a number of 
violations during the test, he was able to mitigate these effects verbally- by agreeing that 
hitting the curb was dangerous, by acknowledging the faster speed limit and so on. It is the 
presence of these social requirements which prompted him to reflect that he might not pass 
in the future, as the DVLA was only interested in [his] dementia rather than the cataracts 
he had recently had removed. As such, he felt that the focus was placed on his cognitive 
impairments- that he could neither influence nor predict- rather than on his visual acuity for 
which there were medical procedures and a potential for improvement. This experience of 
another person presiding in judgement over a participants ability to drive was common 
across a number of both driving and non-driving participants, from Sybil and Mark as they 
are discussed here, to Isobel whose daughters explained that they were worried she would 
make an incorrect turn on the local motorway and end up hundreds of miles from home. In 
each case, however, the potential cessation of driving was tied by participants not to the 
impairment effects of their dementia, but to a social threshold, where relationships, rather 
than impairment effects, were leveraged in such a way that they often felt they had little 
choice but to surrender their licence.  
Guarding the Social Threshold: The Role of  Community 
Engagement  
Rather than drawing this chapter to a close by considering how participants actively sought 
to preserve their relationships, freedoms and social standing from the disabling and 
stigmatising aspects of dementia by managing social thresholds, it also important to consider 
the ways in which they maintained, and in some cases increased, their standing following 
their dementia diagnosis. One the most pertinent examples of this is in the participants 
decision to take part in this research in the first place, thus seeking to place themselves as 
both experts in their experience and contributing towards a wider societal good. Indeed, it is 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
only in the context of living with dementia that participants were able to surrender their time 
and undertake the emotional and psychological labour involved in taking part in a qualitative 
study. Rather than reflecting a desire to pass the time, or an expectation of reward, however, 
several participants saw participating in research as an opportunity to make a valuable 
contribution to society, which might produce real benefit for people diagnosed in the future. 
As Nigel explains:  
Nigel:  Cause you know, ityou know, I will have Alzheimers til I die. And that 
will make me die quicker. But by taking part in a clinical trial, I might help 
someone whos perhaps younger than I am now or help someone to live 
longer. Perhaps being part of that clinical trial, theres a breakthroughyou know, 
who knows. [] I think that theres no biochemistry coming through I 
suppose. Yeah, we  humans  will conquer dementia, but not yet. We will find 
out what causes dementia and how to [treat it] in exactly the same way as over the 
years we discovered what smallpox was and how to stop it. Its the same sort of 
thing. Its all about doing the science. And so if I can help in either of those 
capacities, then thats good. Gives me a sense of usefulness. But it doesnt help me 
on a day-to-day basis too much. [] Ive always been a person who gets involved 
in things and so on.  
(Nigel, Interview Transcript)  
Interestingly, this tendency to view their involvement with the research as a societal 
contribution was mainly discussed by male participants. Nigel, Bob, and Mark all regularly 
related my purpose to others in discussion, highlighting their role as experts and mine as an 
apprentice who had come to learn from them. This often led to a broader exchange of 
knowledge in a variety of areas where the participant had expertise, including the uses of 
ammonia for household cleaning, the importance of a chamois cloth, government bonds and 
church history. This advice was often tightly linked to the participants previous identities as 
working-men whose contribution was valued by a capitalistic system, and as such allowed 
participants to draw these aspects of their identities close across the temporal threshold (as 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
discussed in the next chapter) while still securing their societal place in the present moment. 
Female participants, by contrast, often discussed their participation in the context of my 
development, as an exchange between themselves as a person with dementia and myself as 
a young researcher, rather than between themselves and the wider society. From either 
perspective, however, the desire to participate, to give back, or in Nigels case, give forward 
to those who would come after him was indicative of an on-going desire not only to be 
treated as someone of worth, but to contribute in a way that they felt was meaningful and of 
value.  
Summary  
This chapter began by considering the ways in which social relationships could be leveraged 
as enabling forces for people with dementia, firstly through identifying, implementing and 
maintaining physical resources, and then through providing interpersonal support. Through 
exploring these relationships, the chapter was able to demonstrate not only the complex 
relationships that can manifest between physical and social thresholds, but the importance 
of exploring the ways in which participants organised, maintained, and protected the social 
thresholds that separated their inner circle from their wider social network. Critically, by 
adopting a thresholds perspective, it was possible to simultaneously acknowledge the 
important enabling influences of people within the participants life without repeating the 
narratives of decay that portray people with dementia as objects of diminishing power who 
are increasingly beholden to their social contacts. Indeed, the opposite was often true, as 
people with dementia actively cultivated and maintained their inner circle, guarded the 
threshold, and responded to violations of trust in a way that often transformed the way in 
which they shaped their social and physical thresholds moving forward.  
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
7: I HOPE IM IN THE CROWD THAT 
DOESNT GET ON THE SILLY SIDE: 
MANAGING TEMPORAL THRESHOLDS 
The chapter begins by discussing how people with dementia manage those temporal 
thresholds that separate their current everydayness from their past, though the use of objects, 
stories, and spoken word. This begins with an exploration of the ways in which people with 
dementia used stories and storytelling to express aspects of their character (such as resilience, 
honour, and determination) that were less visible in the context of their everyday lived 
experience as older people with dementia. The chapter then moves forward, considering how 
time is experienced in the present as both a factor that challenges access to the shared social 
world of others, and as the dimension within which changes in ability and impairment are 
charted. In the final sections of the chapter, the focus moves forwards again towards the 
future, investigating the way in which people with dementia made sense of their potentialities, 
their-being-towards-death, and being-towards-death-with-dementia. This chapter therefore 
draws strongly from Heideggers construction of Dasein as fundamentally temporal, whose 
experiences are meaningful precisely because they are finite. As the focus moves steadily 
towards the future in the latter portions of the chapter, the findings become increasingly 
relevant to the construction of dementia as decay, the profound psychoemotional disablism 
that results from these messages and the effects this has on the way in which people with 
dementia understand their experience in the context of their temporality as Dasein who has-
been, is, and is towards-death.  
With Chapter Five providing an insight into the experiences of people with dementia as they 
manage the physical thresholds that they encounter in the process of dwelling, and Chapter 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
Six focusing on the complexities that result from when Dasein is viewed as simultaneously 
in-space and with-others, it becomes the work of this chapter to explore a different manner 
of threshold. Here, the temporal threshold is explored as distinct from the everyday 
temporalities that are managed at physical and social thresholds as they appear, for example, 
in Marks management of his doorway to receive care, and the maintenance of Hazels 
calendar. As such, the following sections build upon the foundation laid in Five and Six, 
while shifting the focus away from Dasein in its everydayness, to Dasein with dementia as a 
temporal being who gathers knowledge from their past, manages their present and faces ever 
towards their future. As such, temporal thresholds are presented here as the space where the 
present (as experienced by the person with dementia in the moment) meets either the past 
through memory and reminiscence or the future through imagination and prospective 
thinking.  
Much as with the social thresholds in Chapter Six, the concept of temporal thresholds was 
determined by the way in which participants constructed and conveyed their experience in 
terms of physicality; the past was a location, understood through their having been there, 
while the future and its complexities was parsed as a foreign and unknown space. They were 
not there yet. This chapter, therefore, uses the thresholds framework to examine ways in 
which participants could draw past and future spaces such as they abutted with the present 
at the temporal threshold.  
Objects as Guardians of  the Temporal Threshold 
Given the importance of objects at both the physical thresholds described in Chapter Five, 
and the social thresholds explored in Chapter Six, it is not surprising that objects played an 
important role at the temporal threshold. While some of my participants had moved into 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
supported living accommodations (Flash, Bob, Margaret) only Flash had moved recently. As 
a result, most participants had not been forced to reduce their material possessions in some 
time, and certainly not to the extent that would have been required had they moved into 
residential care (Lovatt 2018). The focus of this chapter is, therefore, on how people with 
dementia shaped and managed their temporal thresholds through material objects and 
discursive practices. One of the clearest examples of this was in my work with Mark, who 
had been widowed for several years. Throughout our conversations, Mark would refer to his 
late wife often as the person who had bought particular objects or who had enjoyed particular 
activities. Indeed, Marks home space was shaped by his wifes previous illness, as he had 
arranged for them to be moved while she was in hospital following a severe stroke, as their 
previous home would not have been accessible for her upon discharge. As a result, many of 
the aspects of his home, and particularly his bathroom, that enabled Mark as an older man 
with impairments in the present had initially been installed as aids for his wife. Despite of 
the prevalence of his wifes influence on many aspects of his dwelling, it was not until we 
had spent several days together that Mark invited me to see those items that most strongly 
recalled his wifes presence. After proceeding into Marks bedroom, he directed me to the 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
tall wardrobe on his side of the bed, and towards a brown envelope that was laid carefully 
beneath the final bottom shelf on the carpet beneath (Picture 15).  
Mark:  I was going to show you the thing at the bottom, right at the bottom. [] That 
was her membership thing, [my wifes]. Yeah. 
I:   Right. Oh 2012 this is So was that what she wanted for her birthday was to 
give it to the charity?  
Mark:  Thats right yeah, yeah. But we had the birthday at the golf club and thats the 
dementia thing [donation cheque] you see. [] Strange that because I wasnt  
hadnt dementia then.  
I:   Yeah. Did your [wife] have dementia? [] 
Mark:  No. []Well it was coincidence. I dont know why. She didnt have dementia, in 
fact we knew nobody that had dementia. [] But she had a stroke for twenty years. 
And [] I keep that. 
I:   Why do you keep this one in particular close to [your bed]? 
Mark:  Well thats very little of what Ive got of. [my wife]. [] I dont have any clothes 
or anything like that [] but Ive got that and Ive got her thing.  
(Mark, Interview Transcript)  
Picture 15: Marks Bedside Possessions in Situ 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
At Marks direction, I emptied the contents of the envelope onto the satin-finish of the 
bedspread, and found a number of photographs, a membership card and lanyard, and a 
number of personal objects, which are the focus of the discussion in the extract above. 
Through explaining the reasoning behind keeping this small and carefully curated selection 
of objects, Mark made present not only his wife, but also her illness and their experiences 
together in the context of his ongoing experiences living with dementia. The tone and 
reverence with which Mark interacted with these objects was in stark contrast to the easy 
manner with which he discussed other ornaments his wife had purchased, their shared 
history, or the legacy of her illness as it appeared through facilitative objects. Indeed, Mark 
often made light of his status, and related not only that he always dressed in a shirt and 
sweater vest in case he met a rich widow (you never know), but in regularly instructing 
newer members of his care staff not to turn down the other side of the bed at night because 
his wife wasnt coming, again. Yet, these particular objects were approached with care as 
they connected him to the wife he had lost, to his role of having-been husband and care 
giver, and to a woman with whom he had more experience in common now - as an elder 
man with dementia, cataracts, skin cancer and difficulty balancing - than he had when she 
passed away. By keeping these objects not only separate from the rest of his belongings 
(Picture 15), but in an opaque container (in this case, a brown envelope) Mark limited the 
possibility that he might inadvertently find himself at the temporal threshold that these 
objects stand at the forefront of. Notably, this differed from the practices of others, such as 
Isobel, who was surrounded by pictures of her family, including a number arranged within 
view of her chair specifically showing her deceased children. Yet, despite these different 
approaches, the effect is arguably the same: a managed temporal threshold, for while Marks 
arrangement limited accidental crossings, having the envelope by his bedside made it easily 
accessible, and allowed him to access it easily when he chose. Isobel, by contrast, often drew 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
her deceased family members into conversation, making the threshold between the now 
without them and the then with them an oft travelled and much facilitated one.  
It is possible, however, that Marks arrangement might present a challenge in the future 
should he move into residential care environment. Would the sentimentality of these items 
be recognised, if Mark were not in a position to convey it himself? While there are clues in 
Marks spatial arrangements - the items are kept alone on the bottom of the wardrobe (Picture 
15), directly below the napkin-clasp and apron he preferred to use if he was eating food likely 
to spill, and to the right of that was the bag set aside should he need to go into hospital at 
short notice. Nevertheless, how significance is both recognised by others and communicated 
by people with dementia presents an important question that is discussed as part of the 
discussion in Chapter Eight.  
While it has thus far been the focus of the thesis to outline with sufficient clarity some of the 
thresholds that people with dementia encounter in the course of their everyday lives; it is 
worth noting specifically that what was captured during fieldwork does not and cannot 
sufficiently encapsulate all of the complexities and contradictions of any Daseins being-in-
the-world. Rather, the practices of fieldwork allowed for an uncovering of how participants, 
as Dasein-with-dementia experienced, navigated, and interpreted their engagement with the 
world. This idea of uncovering resonated particularly strongly with the ways in which 
participants used stories and discursive practices to relate aspects of their being, as having-
been being, and being-towards during the course of fieldwork. Flash provided a powerful 
example of storytelling as a method of uncovering as we discussed his history of living in 
the area, which was interrupted by his military service. Below, Flash reminisces on his period 
in the army after being drafted in 1945 and being assigned to the Argyles (an infantry unit) 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
rather than his expected assignment in the Royal Electrical and Mechanical Engineers 
(REME).  
Flash:  The Argyles was a good service. [] [I was] in Palestine, you were in looking for 
all these Jews that had come on boats and were put in a camp. And they [the 
superiors] were saying that if theyre trying to escape, shoot them. I says, theyre 
just man and wives. Kids. Aye, just shoot them. [sarcastically] Aye, thatll be 
right. They [Jews] were, sort of, coming up in theyou were all round about 
[patrolling] and [] the boy would come and say, theres a load of them behind 
that shed. Wait until you go that way so they can get I says, aye I says, 
well we see when we go that way. Will we stay and do it that way? 
I:  Aye. No one to see it.  
Flash: Out of the blue he says, aye you just shoot them. Theyre on the backkids and 
everything, you know.  
I:  God. And you at 18 
Flash: It was a silly idea, you know. A silly situation. [] And the place was full of 
prisoners of war, camps of them, you know. And they were all trying to get home to 
Germany. [] Anyways a mixed up world at that time.  
(Flash, Interview Transcript) 
At its core, Flashs tale is a simple one: he was told to shoot refugees for attempting to escape 
a controlled area but refused. In reconstructing it as a narrative for a receptive audience 
interested in his experience, however, Flash conveys a number of key points about how he 
sees himself. Reading the quote in order, the first impression of Flash is a compassionate 
one, who as a young man from a poor industrial area in Scotland looked at refugees unlike 
himself and saw them in their humanity: as families trying to get home. This quickly shifts, 
and compassion is supported by principle: rather than responding aggressively to the news 
that there are people trying to leave the refugee camp, he first attempts to avoid 
confrontation by waiting (will we stay?) and giving them time to escape, and then by refusing 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
to carry out what was being presented as the norm (just shoot them aye, thatll be right). 
Rather than castigating his peer, however, in the closing section of the quote he instead places 
the responsibility on situational factors (a mixed up world) rather than on individual 
preference. In doing so, something more subtle is communicated: an understanding of the 
complexities of life, of the effects of chaos and uncertainty on human beings. Taken as a 
whole, in this telling Flash becomes brave but humble, understating an action that might 
have caused significant issue in his own life had he in turn met resistance. Thus, by this 
process of remembering what has-been, that is gathering what endures (Heidegger, 1971), 
Flash brings his younger self and past experiences towards his present, creating and managing 
the temporal threshold between them. That there might be no cause for Flash to behave in 
a way that demonstrates bravery, or integrity, or humility on an everyday basis as an older 
man in a supported living environment does not stop them reflecting on his being, or his 
having-been. Furnished with this information, it is possible to see the same resistance to 
authoritative voices he disagrees with in his steadfast feeding of the birds outside his window. 
That he does so indirectly in the present (by hiding behind the curtain and blaming the 
resident upstairs) is as harmonious with his instinct to look the other way in his retelling of 
the past.  
As understandable as it might be to recall events that only cast us in the most favourable 
light, it is worth noting that many of my conversations with participants were permeated with 
complexities. The following quote is taken from a conversation with Margaret about her 
family, where she relayed the help and support she currently received from her niece and 
from her daughter as similar to the help she herself provided her family as a younger woman. 
The following section results from my asking if her sister, who lived in the same facility, was 
her only sibling.  
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Margaret: There's only two of us. No, we had a brother, but our brother committed suicide. 
[...] He stayed with my mother. And I used to go up and clean the house, to make 
sure everything was alright.[] And then he said to me, see when you're finished, 
just put the keys through the door. Don't ever go into my bedroom, I said, I 
wouldn't dream of going into your bedroom, because I would die of shock looking 
under that bed of yours Bottles of, not gin or rum...brandy, bottles of brandy. []. 
And then my cousin phoned []said, that was [my brother]. [He]committed 
suicide. I said, how did he do that? stabbed himself, and turned the knife in his 
stomach. [] I said, and that lassie had to go in and face that that was the 
home help, got him.  
I:   My god. 
Margaret: A rotten, dirty thing to do to any young lassie, you know. Because they're all quite 
young, they home helps, you know. []And I thought, you dirty ratbag. I said, 
should have got hold of you and threw you out the window. [] [I was talking to 
the staff and] I said, to think what you went through [cleaning the house 
afterwards], I feel sorry for you. He said, no don't do that, it's all part of what 
we've got to do. I said, oh that was terrible. [] I said, well thank god I don't 
have to have that. It was bad enough with my mammy's funeral. [My daughter] 
said, all I can remember is you greeting, I want my mammy Can you imagine 
an old woman like me greeting for my mammy? But I broke my heart, when my 
mother died. Because I was up there every day, and she wouldn't go into hospital. 
She was in a couple of days and she came back home [] I was up there every 
week, I went up, and if I couldn't clean and tidy her, and all the rest of it, oh. A 
shame. However, he'll get his day, and he did. He did the right thing. He did the 
right thing. 
(Margaret, Interview Transcript) 
In interrogating the way in which Margaret relays this period of her life it is possible to gain 
a greater insight into those aspects of her being that would otherwise remain hidden. We 
learn, for example, about her relationship with vices and those who entertain them (via the 
focus on alcohol); about how she views communal responsibility (via the criticism of her 
brothers method of suicide and how it impacted others); about the depths of her feeling (as 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
an older Glaswegian woman weeping openly for her mother); and about her faith (hell get 
his day, and he did). It is interesting to note in this case that the portrait painted by the 
narrative is less flattering than the one presented by Flash, providing insight into a moral 
stance that could more easily be challenged than refusing to shoot refugees. Nevertheless, 
through her storytelling we learn of Margarets complexities, her experiences, and- moreover 
- we learn that death is not sufficient to warrant forgiveness. Even when drawn to the 
threshold of her present, her brother is still not portrayed favourably, his actions still 
portrayed as selfish and her own role as permissive (I should have got hold of you). Thus, 
while Flashs tale brings towards the present those laudable traits of compassion and 
integrity, Margaret draws forth a turbulent experience and an image of herself as a caring 
woman of faith whose empathy is deep but not without its limits. Given the other 
experiences Margaret shared, including of people taking advantage, this story provides a 
valuable insight into not only how she chooses to see herself, but how she organises her 
social relationships and her willingness to stand by her principles. That this insight might be 
lost if her reminiscence is seen as off topic or out of place presents a problem for dementia 
practice where time may not favour seemingly tangential discussions. This tension between 
viewing stories as valid means of drawing together past and presents selves, a process which 
necessarily shapes not only the past and the present, but the temporal threshold at which 
they meet, and the practical considerations of time in a caring environment are discussed 
more broadly in Chapter Eight.  
In each example discussed above, the manner in which objects or storytelling is used 
profoundly impacts the message. The act of retelling or sharing the history of objects draws 
together temporal realities, and past and present selves, providing context for the person 
listening, and justification for the person retelling the story. These thresholds stand between 
the having-been and the present, and as such can be viewed in much the same way as physical 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
and social aspects of dwelling. Telling stories build and maintain a place for participants as 
Dasein with rich lived experience of having-been. Rather than being reduced to shells, as in 
the narratives of decay, participants continually maintain, preserve and protect their 
understanding of being-in-the-world through their activities of dwelling (in this case, 
reminiscence and storytelling) gathering what endures from the past to inform themselves 
in the present.  
Making-Present with Dementia 
While the notion of bringing the past forward to meet and inform the present is one which 
fits neatly within the threshold paradigm, it is worth noting that were analysis to cease at the 
previous section it would be incomplete. In the openings of Chapter Four I emphasised that 
thresholds are by their nature relational, in that they gather two phenomena together, as well 
as distinct, in that they are their own thing while remaining reliant on the phenomena on 
either side. It is important to return to these core aspects, especially when considering 
temporal thresholds for people with dementia, because the threshold itself is dependable, in 
that it might never yield either way (Heidegger, 1971 p201). This requires further 
exploration when applying the framework to the experiences of people for whom the ability 
to situate oneself in the present may be complicated in various ways by a variety of 
impairment effects resulting from their dementia. This becomes particularly impactful when 
the temporal organisation of everyday activities is considered as accessing physical spaces 
appropriately or inappropriately- indeed, suitable forms of dress, methods of greeting and 
other social phenomena are all contextualised through time. Wearing ones pyjamas to the 
local corner shop may (or may not) be overlooked early on a Sunday morning, but to do so 
in the middle of an afternoon on a weekday may be perceived differently, for example. 
Similarly, while calendars and pill bibles both provide prompts to aid in temporal orientation, 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
both require either some method of identifying which day is today. Hazels habit of scoring 
off the previous day on her calendar provides an example of this, as does her husband John 
needing to re-label her pill bible so that the first day in the week matched the first day in 
which she started using that strip. While orientating oneself to the date may be seen as 
important, however, it would be a mistake to assume that temporal disorientation only 
occurred during long periods of time. The following section focuses on Georges experience 
using a dementia-friendly clock in his bedroom. The clock shows the current time on a large 
display and provides textual guidance as to what day it is, and whether it is daytime or night-
time. 
 George: Because my wee clocks nice. I liked that when we first got it because I could see the 
time but  
Anne: But now youre confused. 
 George: not so much I cant see because I have to shine my torch on it because it doesnt change 
til 
Anne: Seven oclock.[] 
 George: In the morning its still Wednesday and thats what knocks me off. []I thought 
this was Thursday and its only Wednesday, right enough. [] If youre up at half 
past twelve or something to go to the toilet or something its still the day before. [] 
Then I thought, well, if the clock says its such and such a time, and then I thought, 
oh, no, it doesnt change until, when is it? Is it seven oclock in the morning? 
Anne: Seven oclock in the morning. 
I:  Oh, so youve got to keep track of not just what day it is but what day the clock 
says it is and when it 
Anne: Yes. 
 George: Aye. [] [But] My watch is very accurate because its [presses the button on his 
watch] today is Monday May 15 2017. Oh, its Monday, aye. [] Its very 
clear. 
(George and Anne, Interview Transcript) 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Georges frustrations here are a direct result of an insecure temporal threshold, and his 
inability to effectively place himself in time. While he could manage his anxiety during the 
day by using his visual planning board and his speaking watch, which he activates in the last 
part of the quote, neither of these tools provide the support George requires between 
midnight and 7am. He explains this though his example: where rising at 0:30 on Thursday 
leads the clock to read 0:30 on Wednesday due to the clocks display only showing a change 
of day at 07:00. According to the clock, therefore, Wednesday Day runs between 07:00 and 
18:59 on Wednesday, with Wednesday Night occupying the hours between 19:00 and 06:59 
on Thursday morning. During these hours the function of the clock contradicts Georges 
habitual understanding of time- specifically where night becomes morning, and where this 
early morning becomes a point at which it is reasonable to rise and begin the day, impeding 
his attempts to secure himself in time as a direct function of the same aspects intended to 
make it dementia friendly. Georges difficulty in placing himself successfully in time during 
the early morning hours resonates strongly with the expansive literature that focuses on the 
disturbed sleep patterns often exhibited by people living with dementia as the disease 
progresses, while providing a novel perspective on the phenomenon. The advantages of 
considering unsecured temporal thresholds in the context of sleeping patterns is therefore 
explored in the forthcoming discussion in Chapter Eight.  
Lived Temporalities and the Speed of  Elsewhere 
It is interesting to note that the experience of time in the present was not limited to those 
moments when participants needed to pinpoint when they were in relation to the time or 
the day. Rather, time was also experienced in an embodied way in relation to speed; their 
own, and that of others and their environment. As discussed in Chapter Four, the potential 
for people with dementia to need extra processing time during the research process was 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
factored into every stage of the research design. Despite this, and despite considering the 
disabling impact of a wider world that rewards quick movement and cognition, it is only 
through being alongside my participants that I became aware of the multitude of ways in 
which this temporal tension impacted their lived experience. The following two extracts, 
from Sybil and George respectively, highlight different aspects of their experience when 
accessing the shared social world as contrasted to their home space where they could 
complete tasks in their own time and at their own pace.  
Sybil:  Its bad enough when I'm walking, not so fast, not so fast 
(Sybil, Interview Transcript) 
 I:   Does that make it hard being out and about? 
 George: It does, very much so, yes. I cant stand the noise. It reallyI dont know if 
thatssomebody said it was part of the condition or something.[] I dont find 
the smell [bothers me] so much but I do find the colours and I do find 
Anne: Its busyness. 
 George: Aye, busyness. I cant stand a lot of people [] I just dont like busyness and people 
because 
Anne: Claustrophobia, is it? 
 George: Is it claustrophobia? No, because Im not frightened to go outside it was just 
Anne: We went into Edinburgh one evening. 
 George: Aye, that was at night. [] I couldnt see. I was tripping over the pavements. 
Anne: And it was because they had bright lights, the cars, the traffic, there was more people 
going about than during the day. We got the train in and then got a taxi up to [the 
venue]. At the top of [the train station] steps we were waiting for the taxi, there 
was such a rush of buses, cars, taxis, lights, people and there was a nearbyI think 
its an Irish bar thats on [the main street] just for the summer, they were playing 
their music so it was an assault to the senses. [] 
 George: I couldnt cope with that. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Anne: He got dizzy, physically, he physically just 
I:  Just went straight off?[] 
 George: Felt like it as well. 
Anne:  We had to sit down somewhere quiet and we have to do that a lot. 
(George and Anne, Interview Transcript) 
In the extract above, both George and Sybil reflected on their difficulty adapting to the speed 
that they felt was expected in Elsewhere spaces. For Sybil, this was predominantly something 
she felt physically as she strove to maintain her balance with her walking sticks, making the 
experience of being rushed not only irritating for her, but potentially threatening. This sense 
of threat is amplified for George, who lives with dementia, visual and hearing impairments, 
poor balance and restricted use of one arm. This interaction between impairment and 
environment results in disability, manifesting physically in restriction, and emotionally in 
distress and fear. This experience, of the unwelcoming, quick moving Elsewhere, reoccurred 
throughout the data and with most of the participants. Whether it was the need to take extra 
time to accomplish tasks like shopping, difficulty moving quickly through space, or the 
sensory overload associated with the bustle, light and noise of busy places, it was the speed 
of Elsewhere which most notably contributed to the participants disablement. In many 
cases, participants overcame this by using tools and practices; George, for example, no longer 
handled coinage but was given a number of 10 notes when leaving home so that he did not 
have to risk being slow while counting change in public. This practice was particularly 
interesting as it highlighted the potential risk associated in being rushed in financial situations, 
which is discussed further in Chapter Eight.  
Another interesting factor to note is despite increasingly common use of technological and 
digital means to streamline public spaces, most participants did not express a feeling of the 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
world speeding up, but rather of them slowing down. This tendency crept through in many 
of the discussions where the participants and I went walking, where they would often 
apologise for being slow, justifying their need through reference to their physical 
impairments rather than expecting acceptance for the speed of their movements. In fact, it 
is important to note that Stan, Mark, Hazel and Isabel all initially ignored my reassurance 
that we would walk at their preferred speed and needed to be asked multiple times if they 
wanted to slow down before admitting their need. This is most aptly viewed through 
Thomas (2007) conceptualisation of psycho-emotional disablism, where this need for extra 
time is tacitly rejected and considered lesser than the speed at which the Elsewhere 
functions - leading to participants resisting using a pace they were comfortable at until they 
felt the ill effects of mimicking the speed of Elsewhere. George, however, experienced the 
meeting of temporal paces differently:  
I:   Does you being late stress you out then? 
 George: Yes. [] I like to be ready. 
Anne: Were everywhere early but Im a bit like that too. I would rather be there half an 
hour early and sitand just sit in the car or wait or read a book just so I know 
that Im there. 
 George: Sometimes I dont understand why were going so early but Ive said that to you before. 
Anne: Youve not got much sense of a time now though, have you? 
 George: How do you mean? 
Anne: You dont seem to realise how slow you are at walking and getting somewhere. 
 George: Oh, right. 
Anne: You know, for example, our doctors surgery is just down the road. It only just takes 
five minutes but thats if you can get a parking space and leap out of the car and 
run in. [] But George takes ages to get in and out of the car and to get going 
with walking but he doesnt see that because thats normal to him. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
 George: Aye. 
I:  Right, so are you still trying to run on the oldlike the old? 
Anne: George is but I know I should make allowances for that so we leave half an hour 
early for the doctor now. It is just five minutes down the road but its surprising by 
the time you get parked, well, get him in the car, down the road and then out of the 
car and sorted and then get into the surgery that takes a good 15, 20 minutes. So 
we end up only maybe five or ten minutes early which is fine but he cant understand 
it. [] He says, its just five minutes down the road but itshe doesnt realise it 
takes him a good while to get him in the car. 
 George: The other thing that reallyjust when youre saying that if Ive got a time for the 
doctors or whatever and they dont come at that particular time because I look up, 
what time is it? That really irritates me. 
I:  God, you must spend your whole life irritated. Theyre never on time. 
Anne: He is. 
 George: Aye, I do. 
(George and Anne, Interview Transcript) 
Rather than a hyperawareness of his own slow movement, Georges difficulty adapting to 
the temporalities of Elsewhere came from a lack of recognition of his own embodied 
experience in the context of the environment. As such, George framed himself as moving at 
the same speed as he had when he was younger (thus, did not understand the need to alter 
their schedule and leave earlier), while experiencing the world as faster but more inefficient 
as he encountered delays. This tension, between Georges lived temporality, and the time 
shared by others, provides an apt example of a troublesome threshold, and the difficulties 
that could occur when thresholds were not necessarily tethered to concrete spaces. It is 
noteworthy, too, that George was not only frustrated by his attempts to navigate the 
temporalities of Elsewhere, but by the way in which the temporalities of others intersected 
his own in his home space, particularly if they were delayed or late in arriving for which he 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
had no patience at all now. Nor was this perspective representative of his overall 
orientation towards time, but his experience of movement across physical thresholds and 
through space as it occurred through time. His experience with attempting to think quickly 
or respond quickly to questions was quite different: 
Anne: You were saying you find it harder to think quickly of what to do as well. 
 George:  Oh aye, yes, aye, decisions. [] Or for you explaining sort of, you know. [] 
sometimes in the kitchen as well youll say to me, thats something or [] If 
youre trying to tell me something or explain something to me I dont understand 
what it is. [] It takes longer. [] I cant remember but there have been occasions 
where I havent a clue what youre talking about. [] Sometimes Ill say to you I 
dont understand. [] 
I:  Do you know youre not getting it? Are you aware that youve not quite got it yet 
or do you think youve got it and then its not quite? 
 George:  No, Im aware ofI dont know what that means or I dont understand why youre 
doing that certain thing or why thatI dont understand what it is or why it is or 
something like that, I think. [] I have to have everything where it is or itll get 
lost. [...] I sometimes do that or I get lost. [] I find the slightest bit of things are 
more frustrating now or irritating now. I dont think Ive ever had that before. I 
dont think so. 
Anne: Just lifes harder, isnt it? 
 George:  Aye, it is harder. 
(George and Anne, Interview Transcript) 
This highlights the difficulties associated with presuming how an individual might experience 
thresholds, temporal or otherwise. In this case, while Georges perception of his physical 
movement could be contrasted with those of others, like Sybil, there was commonality when 
the question was moved from physical movement to cognition. This complexity contributes 
to the tendency for trusted people in the inner circle to become innovators and maintainers 
of facilitative tools. as discussed in Chapter Five, and raises questions for how it might be 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
achieved in settings where time is a more restricted resource, further discussed in Chapter 
Eight, as someones impatience with others being slow or late in one situation may not 
necessarily extend a perception of themselves that acts quickly in all situations and at all 
times.  
Managing Changes and the Import of  Time 
One of the other challenges that participants often faced when navigating thresholds was the 
unpredictability of their impairment effects. As such, temporal threshold often became 
particularly visible where it intertwined with physical thresholds, for example where being 
spatially removed from the home space during an episode of confusion made it more difficult 
to return to the home space. Nigel reflected: 
Nigel: I knew [the thought] would come back, its a bitit was the thing about dogs. 
People with dogs. What can happen to people [who are afraid of] dogs is they dont 
go out because there might be a dog, oh, there might be a dog out there, its a bit 
like that, oh, I might get lost, which is a bit debilitating actually. [] but Ive 
learnt strategies around it, I mean, Im not stupid, Im still not stupid. 
Nigel: It is fairly debilitating actually, I dont know how youd deal with that. 
I:  How do you deal with it? 
Nigel: Well, I said Im not stupid, no, Im not stupid, my faculties are failing me slightly 
unfortunately, so I tend to do a fairly analytical approach and say, right, I know 
what the way points are and so on and I know if I do that, then I have to go right 
and then left, and so on, but that failed me yesterday. 
(Nigel, Interview Transcript) 
The importance of time here is clear. Firstly, Nigel charts his strategies and his abilities in 
time - shown particularly in his repetition of not being stupid. This tendency to draw on his 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
past status, and his intellectual achievements offset any suggestion that dementia might have 
in any way compromised his abilities. Secondly, the acknowledgement that becoming lost is 
a risk, being afraid of being lost, and developing strategies to avoid it are all played out in 
time as well as place. Finally, the unpredictability of his impairment resulted in his strategies 
working sometimes, but not others. As such, Nigels analytical approach had to account 
not only for those days where his impairments were more disruptive, but for the sudden 
intrusion of impairment into a day that was otherwise going well. In another conversation, 
Nigel and I discussed his experiences of wayfinding after he became disorientated on a 
familiar route.  
Nigel: I find that increasingly I wont necessarily go for the shortest route because I will 
say, no, Ill go this way because I know this way. [] Ive got to look after myself 
and thats actually quite important so as I say to [my wife], I said, I always say to 
her, youve got to look after yourself because if you dont, no other buggers going to 
look after you. [] 
I:  Is it one of the things where, you know, if you feel that todays going to be a bad 
memory day youll play it safe, kind of thing, whereas other days youll maybe try 
for a different route or? 
Nigel: But memory is not necessarily the same [] I can be disorientated but remember 
the name of something and I can remember the name of something without being 
disorientated. So its quite a complex calculus, actually. 
I:  []do you get a feeling if todays going to be like a disorientating day? 
Nigel: Yes. [] fortunately I had an extremely good memory to start with. [] Ive got 
a long list of techniques for remembering things and so on so there are lots ofI 
might want to say something and I cant remember what it is but I can remember 
what a synonym is. [] And Im very lucky, without boasting at all, I was actually 
quite bright. 
I:  What? [] You keep that light covered. 
Nigel: Yes, I know it comes as a surprise. [] But Im very lucky because Ive met so 
many people who have Alzheimers who are not bright and that must be a terrible 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
load on them because they feel thewhats the word Im looking for? [] The 
weight of it.  
(Nigel, Interview Transcript) 
There are a number of interesting aspects that present themselves in the quote above, 
particularly when taken in the context of the previous quote, the clearest of which is the 
introduction of specific rather than generalised strategies to counterbalance his impairments. 
While Nigel overtly describes one example of this in finding synonyms for words, the very 
process of strategising and managing his impairment is arguably a strategy in and of itself. By 
using the complex calculus necessary to ensure he is looking after himself, Nigel secures 
his own self concept and draws a strong boundary between himself and an unknown future 
where his impairments become more challenging. In this way Nigel is able to draw together 
the intelligence and capability he associates with his younger, pre-dementia self, with his 
present self and assert that while his diagnosis has challenged specific areas of his cognition, 
he is still clever. As a result, the experience of living with dementia no longer represents a 
threat to his innate intelligence, but 
rather relies upon it, as he navigates 
with, and around, his impairments. 
This dialogue two constrasting 
aspects of Nigels identity is captured 
visually in Picture 16, where the book 
Nigel was currently reading for 
pleasure sits alongside the published 
material for the Talking Mats 
intervention, with the charging cable for his much-used iPad plugged in at the top of the 
image.  
Picture 16: Nigels Reading Material 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
Yet, even in emphasising his ability to circumvent some of the impairment effects he 
experienced, Nigels quote provides context to Georges earlier assertion that everyday 
activities were harder than they were previously. The rejection of stupidity, therefore, 
speaks more strongly to the presence of internalised ablism and psychoemotional disablism 
than it does an incompatibility of experience. While Nigels efforts might appear to be almost 
a conscious construction of a threshold between himself as someone who is not stupid and 
who can strategize, and those who might feel a terrible weight, that was certainly not his 
intention. As discussed previously, a threshold space draws together which is on either side, 
becoming a discrete thing even as it shapes the phenomena on either side by drawing them 
together. What Nigel attempts in the quote above is the opposite: a strict deliniation between 
an experience he rejects (parsed as stupidity) and his own self-image. That his strategies were 
not always successful, however, speaks to what thresholds are, rather than what he might 
wish them to be. Put most simply, what Nigel desires is a wall - an impermiable boundary 
between his experience and that of those he wishes to set himself apart from. What he has, 
arguably, is a threshold that must be diligently guarded and patrolled lest he cross accidentally. 
The following quote from George provides some insight into what it feels like to be unable 
to secure that threshold, and to experience the shift of how one is in-the-world as demetnia 
progresses:  
 George: These things are allIm beginning to realise that these things are happening. [] 
I think I feel things are sort of escalating and I sort of feel that some things are 
coming on too fast. I ont know where Im going to end. You see some on the 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
television theyre really, really bad so I wonder how long Ive got before I get to that 
stage. 
I:  Oh, aye, yes, the television ones. 
 George: Sometimes I feel like that. I know things are happening and I know things that I do 
feel are escalating a bit but I think, I cant help it. I dont know what to do about 
Anne: We cant do anything either. 
 George: So these things become 
Anne: Remember [the dementia nurse] said to you though that [] you were looking 
at the end stage and weve not to do that, just to 
 George: Not to do that. Oh, right, I forgot that. 
Anne: move with whatever were with. [] 
 George: I know things within myself that theyre notthings have sort of taken a momentum. 
I dont think I had them years ago. 
Anne: Like what, George? 
 George: Well, getting anxious and forgetting. Well, I know I forget things anyway but if Im 
not sureI seem to be not sure about a lot of things that doesnt seem to [] I 
cant make a decision. [] I find that not easy because you ask me what I want 
for tea and I just cant make up my mind what I really want. I dont know what I 
really want. That can be a bit frustrating as well. It must be frustrating for you. 
[] Theres a lot of things Id like, like a ham and egg sandwich or something. 
[] I cant help. [] A lot of these little things I find theyre more evident. 
(George and Anne, Interview Transcript) 
The lived experience of temporality once more takes a central role in how the experience of 
impairment, and progressive impairment, is both understood by the person and retold to 
others. For George, the movement is not of himself towards the threshold, but of the 
threshold rushing towards him at an increasing pace. That his explicit consideration of the 
future is derailed, in the first instance by the dementia nurse and in the conversation itself by 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
Anne, resulting in George piecing together his understanding of what might-be from 
televised depictions of dementia raises profound questions about how, and when, the 
conversation of death as the End towards which Dasein is always orientated should be 
facilitated rather than silenced. This, arguably, is one of the most detrimental effects of 
engaging with the narratives of decay (even where such engagement is to argue against their 
language) rather than reinforcing the foundations of dementia theory such that the entire 
premise is rejected outright. It is only through permitting the ongoing consideration that one 
might, as George said elsewhere become almost like a vegetable, that it becomes a 
possibility, whereas an outright rejection of the potential for a person to be magically 
transformed into plant life would necessitate a more candid discussion of what such 
constructions mean. Such conversations, in turn, can be facilitated such that the fear and 
spectre of dementia as a self-dissolving, slow death can be addressed directly for "If we are 
to kill the demon, first we must say its name. (Pratchett, 2008). The mistake is to assume 
that the only demon worth slaying is the disease itself.  
Avoiding the Silly Side: Looking Towards the Future with 
Dementia 
Hazel: It feelsI dont really think it [dementia] feels anything, to be quite honest with 
you. Its just when I noticed I was starting to forget things, and I thought, oh my 
god, here we go, thats the sort of thing I said to myself, and youre thinking about 
it, theres nothing I can do about it. Alright, you can get some sort of medication of 
some sort, but it really doesnt work, because theres for some other people it doesnt 
work, and I think to myself, I just have to continue the way Im going, and hopefully 
stay compos mentis. Thats the biggest part about it, its the staying compos mentis 
and not starting being silly, and I dont mean silly in the way it sounds, but I know 
that an awful lot of people when they get dementia, they have that silly thing, and 
they talk silly, some people do, not everybody, and I think to myself, I hope Im in 
the crowd that doesnt get on the silly side, and I know what I mean by that, and 
I dont mean it to sound horrible to people. So Im just keeping my fingers crossed 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
at the moment and hope that John gets through it more than me, not so much for 
myself, but for him. He thinks he knows, but he hasnt got a real clue of what 
actually goes on. You could end up one night just screaming for the sake of screaming, 
no reason, no rhyme or anything, you just scream, and Ive heard it, and I thought, 
dont let me do that in front of John, because 
I:  Is that the kind of silliness that youre meaning, that kind of just doing things 
without a? 
Hazel: Without any reason, really, you get to the stage where you want to doand you 
scream, Ive seen people do that, and I keep trying to tell him that if that happens, 
please dont shout at me, theres nothing I can do. Oh aye, right aye, thats his 
answers, but I think he knows, so Im trying to tell him that if that does happen, 
please dont shout at me. 
(Hazel, Interview Transcript)  
Throughout my visits with participants, whenever the conversation turned towards a 
consideration of their future as older people with a progressive degenerative disease, there 
was an expression of fear, resistance, or discomfort. Specifically, participants highlighted 
their concerns about what the future looked like for them once their dementia had 
progressed. Such a future was, almost always, constructed as away, somewhere that had yet 
to be reached and that should be avoided for as long as possible. Most importantly, however, 
it was also usually considered as a future inhabited by an unknown and unknowable version 
of themselves. Throughout Hazels conversations with me, she often contrasted her own 
experiences of coping, of enjoying her life and managing her challenges, with the bad 
dementia. This bad dementia was characterised not by experiences she could share and 
understand through her experiences as a carer, or as a woman with dementia who attended 
dementia orientated groups, but by an innate otherness where she perceived the impairment 
effects to be so profound as to make the experience of living in such a way unfathomable. 
The bad dementia is an experience that exclusively belongs to others, known only from the 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
outside. In the extract above, Hazel explicitly considers the ways in which she avoids this: by 
continuing as she is, by ignoring urges to behave in a way that is silly, without rhyme or 
reason, while at the same time acknowledging that there is nothing [she] can do about it, 
and by seeking to explain the motivations of her unknown future self ahead of time as she 
attempts to warn her husband of her potential to scream, and relates how he would like him 
to respond.  
For George, however, the fear he felt when viewing his unknown future self across the 
temporal threshold was based not in his potential victimhood, but his potential to make a 
victim of his wife. Future-George, he worried, would not become a vegetable, or even (as 
Hazel feared) someone who screamed without reason, but an unpredictable violent force. 
 George: I have accepted it [dementia] now. I had a great fear ofyou see some people with 
dementia that, well, especially the chap next door as well, I've always had a fear of 
getting too volatile, is it? 
I:  Aye, the emotional. 
 George: Rough. Aye. Or hitting somebody 
Anne: You mean violent. 
 George: Violent, aye. But I think I've got passed that now. I don't worry about it so much. 
It's still maybe in the back of my mind but I don't dwell on it. [] 
Anne: He really was worried for a while. I had to just keep saying well, if that happens 
I'll get extra help, help from somebody. 
 George: You see people on television that their dementia is way further on than mine. We have 
a person at church, his wife is almost like a vegetable, isn't she? 
Anne: But she's had a lot of problems for a lot of years that way. 
 George: Yeah. So that sort of You look at them and think oh, are we going to come to 
that? But I'm not too bad just now, I think I've got over that. But there are things 
that I find strange. Bright sunlight. Bright lights bother me as well. I know that's 
getting away from the subject sort of thing. But memory wise, sometimes you'll say 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
oh, you've said that before. I've no recollection of anything. Or films or names or 
television, articles, they've all gone. And money wise I can'tif it's pound coins I 
can maybe count out one, two, three or whatever. But trying to count something up, 
I forget what the first number is. [] I've forgotten it. So I don't know where I 
am. [] Things like that I find hopeless now really. 
(George and Anne, Interview Transcript)  
Through Georges description of his fears, it is possible to better understand the bad 
dementia as a spectre (or, as Pratchett (2008) suggested, a demon), an entity unto itself, that 
might at once be less than human (like a vegetable), while also becoming an unknown and 
dangerous force that represented a threat to those the person with dementia holds dear. Two 
further factors are worth noting here. First, is the continuing presence of fear about the bad 
dementia despite reassurance, and second is the influential role of the media in reinforcing 
this understanding of what it means to live with dementia. In the latter half of the quote, 
George reflects on the profound and enduring ways his experience of being-in-the-world has 
transformed through his dementia diagnosis, highlighting processes that affect both the way 
he interacts with the outer world (through perceiving colours and light), and how he 
experiences his internal life (memory, numeracy and cognitive impairment). Secondly, despite 
his lived experience of his impairment and the associated impairment effects and their 
progression over time, George did not see himself as anyone other than himself: knowable 
and known despite the progression of his disease. The fact George expresses his experiences 
of loss of ability as hopeless is also key to understanding the spectre of bad dementia. It was 
not an experience that could be recovered from, even with medication (as Hazel notes 
above), or extra help (which Anne uses to reassure George of her future safety), but 
something that is deeply rooted in social and cultural contexts, manifested for George and 
Hazel in their fears of becoming either violent, or irrational respectively. As such, the bad 
dementia, the dementia that must be held at bay at all costs, arguably requires a fundamental 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
and permanent alteration of self  a transformation that necessitates the same mind-body 
duality and desecration of self that Dasein subverts. This is not to suggest that aggression, 
violence or screaming does not occur in the later stages of dementia. Instead, it is a question: 
how would these conversations, these constructions, change if the changes in behaviour were 
widely acknowledged as the result of impairment, rather than personal fault or the 
transformation of the self into a shell (and thus passive), or a zombie (and thus monstrous)? 
What insights could be gained if these actions could be viewed in the context of thresholds, 
as efforts to reinforce existing thresholds, repudiate intruders, or manage their own 
crossings? These questions are at the heart of Chapter Eight, as it explores the value of a 
threshold perspective more broadly in the context of disablement and the narratives of decay.  
For others, like Nigel, the pressing concerns were not necessarily focused on the unknown 
future self, but rather a continued maintenance of themselves in the present. In the extract 
below, he reframes his health as primarily physical in the present, with dementia representing 
a chronic but future problem. 
I:  Do you find that people underestimate you if they find out youve got dementia? 
Nigel: Ah, yes, its an interesting question, I dont know the answer to that, but I think 
thats probably because I havent really come across that to any extent, but Ill look 
out for it actually, because I think it could happen very easily. [] And thats 
because I think people dont understand dementia. They dont understand that its 
a degenerative disease and that if you say youre in your 60s and youve got dementia, 
theres still a long time for me to run before I die. [] And apart from having a 
bad leg, which is just a mechanical thing, all my metabolism is great, my teeth are 
good, my blood pressure is outstanding, I generally eat well. 
I:  Yeah, so youre given a full check of health, youve passed the MOT. 
Nigel: Yeah, oh yes, I passed the MOT and, in fact, I think [] my GP, [] I 
remember him saying at one stage, oh well, youll never get a heart attack, 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
becauseyou know blood pressures? [] Mines about 110 on 30, something 
like that. 
(Nigel, Interview Transcript) 
Through suggesting that the tendency to focus on dementia, rather than other health 
conditions that may cause serious health complications in the short term, is a mistake, Nigel 
successfully reclaims his status as a healthy man in his sixties. As such, he regularly engaged 
in groups and walked regularly and extensively both alone and with others. For Nigel, this 
intersection of physical health and invisible disability introduced a different issue, as he rarely 
saw himself being represented by the images used to promote dementia-friendly activities or 
dementia specific support. For Nigel the experience of being-alongside others with dementia, 
therefore, was often one of separation as he found himself separated by his age, his physical 
ability, and what he understood as his intellectual resilience. This actively introduced 
hindrances at the thresholds to dementia-friendly spaces, as in addition to being geared 
towards feeling the terrible weight of dementia (due to not having his intellectual capacity), 
he also saw them as populated by people decades his senior, making him feel ill at ease. This 
experience had led Nigel to seek out opportunities for activism, but simultaneously 
contributed to a narrative of himself as something set apart from others. This has profound 
implications for the provision of group support and intervention, and highlights some of the 
potential issues around the branding of dementia friendliness as it becomes associated with 
particular images and age demographics. It is also notable that Nigel himself displayed such 
internalised ableism. This intersection of how society constructs dementia, how dementia 
friendly spaces are organised and marketed and how people with dementia see themselves 
raises significant questions moving forwards. It is clear from the quotes above that Nigels 
experience of aging and his concerns about his health are different from those communicated 
by others, something that in part resulted from his early diagnosis. Any tendency to consider 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
people with dementia as a homogenised group, with a unified set of concerns or 
understandings would likely fail to account for Nigels own beliefs as a man decades younger 
than many of the other participants who attended dementia friendly groups. What this means 
for the practical provision of support, and for the creation of dementia friendly spaces in the 
wider context of earlier diagnosis while people are living longer is discussed in Chapter Eight.  
 I dont know where Im going to end 
One of the most striking themes to emerge during analysis was the ways in which participants 
discussed their feelings towards, thoughts about, and experiences of death, particularly as 
people living with dementia. It is worth noting specifically here that at no point did I 
deliberately prompt such reflections. Instead, I found that through being a person present, 
alongside who was listening in a focused way, I was often made privy to stories that ran the 
length of the life course; from the birth of children and grandchildren, to the death of parents, 
loved ones, and siblings. While each of these stories was profoundly meaningful to the 
participants, there was on occasion a thread that bound together these reflections of 
mortality, between participants and across time. In these discussions, participants were often 
alongside death as older people, but also as people living with a degenerative disease that 
profoundly affected both their experiences of the deaths of others and their expectations of 
what the remainder of their life might look like. Mark relates some of the complexities in the 
quote below: 
Mark:  I've no other family now. My brother died a couple of months ago. He was 91. 
[] I was unable to go to his funeral unfortunately. [.] I couldn't go [] it's 
too much to go there and I didn't want to go to a funeral. [] I haven't been to a 
funeral since my wife died. [] I told [him] that I won't be going to his funeral 
because I hadn't been to one and he said ah that's alright, I'll not miss you [] 
I got the minister at  in his funeral, to read that God's garden [] So he was 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
looked after very well. [] We would phone each other at least once week. [] 
just to say what have you got this week. [] He'd say 'is there owt wrong with 
'ee?' 
(Mark, Interview Transcript) 
In this extract it is possible to see how Marks 
experience of aging is intimately tied to his 
experience of others aging and dying. Importantly, 
through the death of his brother, he becomes the 
last of his generation in his family group, 
surviving both his brother and his wife. As the 
survivor, he navigates certain obligations - to 
attend the funeral, to make sure his brother is 
looked after in death, and to continue - all of 
which are complicated by his experiences of living 
with dementia and comorbid conditions as well as 
by his experiences of having-been a survivor in the 
past. Seen from this perspective, Marks reasoning 
for avoiding the funeral is twofold: the first is the 
difficulty presented by navigating the physical 
thresholds which separate him from his brother who lived hundreds ofmiles away, the 
second in his refusal to attend funerals after his wifes. Interestingly, however, he nevertheless 
negotiates ways in which he could meet these social obligations. In the first instance, despite 
not being physically present at the funeral, he found, copied, and edited the wording on the 
poem Gods Garden. (Picture 17) shows a copy of Marks edited version, with the original 
text changed to read his so as to refer specifically to his brother. The task of choosing 
readings allowed Mark to meaningfully contribute to making sure his brother was looked 
Picture 17: Marks Annotated Gods 
Garden 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
after while acknowledging his own grief in a way that was not impeded by his inability to 
attend the funeral himself. His decision not to physically attend the funeral is itself mediated 
through the way in which he relates his relationship with his brother; through both cultivating 
and maintaining a relationship where they could speak frankly about both their on-going 
experiences of aging and health ('is there owt wrong with 'ee?) and what would happen after 
his brothers death. These conversations, in turn, ensured Mark was able to secure his 
physical thresholds in the aftermath of his brothers death: he could not attend the funeral, 
but even if the necessary affordances were put in place, he would not, a choice his brother 
supports in Ill not miss you. This is in itself an enabling practice, supporting Marks choice 
while protecting him from the social repercussions of his non-attendance allowing him to 
grieve in place.  
Even where the death of someone close did not necessitate a shift in self-concept (in Marks 
case from one of a pair of siblings to a sole survivor), it was still impactful. In the following 
quote George and Anne discuss the death of a cousin who, like George, had dementia: 
 George: I know my cousin died very quickly, he had dementia, but he was a very heavy drinker 
and a smoker, and a lot of them said that that was the cause of 
Anne: They said it was that type of dementia, alcohol related. [] 
 George: But he died very suddenly, but I mean, I knew himwell, him and I were very close, 
like a father, but to see him like that was quite upsetting, to start with. [] He 
didnt know who I was orhe didnt know who his wife was, actually, didnt know 
anybody, but he really was a sad soul to see, and I think, well, I had a bit of 
dementia then, but not like that, and I know myself it is graduating to the worse 
side, its impossible to go back the way, but I dont want to go forward, butand 
I know [he] died ofthey say he died with dementia, but then explained sort of 
why hed died, because he was such a heavy smoker and drinker, that didnthe 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
was a heavy gambler, smoker [] There was a lot of sidelike he was never 
ill to that extent. 
Anne: And he still functioned at work, he had a good job. 
 George: Oh aye, he was head something in the bank. And then all of a sudden he deteriorated.  
(George and Anne, Interview Transcript) 
In reflecting on this quote, a number of factors become evident. First is Georges use of 
language to separate his dementia from that of his cousin who was a drinker, and a smoker, 
later adding gambling to the list of behaviours that are being constructive as risky and, 
importantly, unlike George himself. With this in mind, it is possible to outline part of 
Georges unease, specifically the decline he had witnessed that changed their relationship 
from one with paternal tones, to one between a sad soul and a man diagnosed with dementia 
feeling anxiety as he faces towards the oncoming future. It is vital to note the role of 
internalised ableism here, as the decline is parsed not in terms of his ability, but in what he 
was. It is this future that George expresses fear over sharing, acknowledging that while he 
cannot go back he nevertheless does not want to go forward. This reluctance is 
characteristic of the fundamental experience of being-towards-death, both as something 
inescapable and as something not to be outstripped (as discussed in Chapter Three). In this 
case, however, it is not the experience of dying that George fears specifically, but the decline 
that manifested itself in his cousins ability to recognise others. This is, arguably, the spectre 
that he had been dissuaded from discussing by the dementia worker - as related in the 
previous section- drawn into focus again, though this time through viewing the last months 
of his cousins life. By separating out his cousins negative traits, he can reinforce the same 
threshold in his own experience, accepting death as an inescapable fact, while holding back 
the idea of becoming a sad soul.  
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
Telling a Different Story 
With such examples of grim fore-tellings and expectations of the future, it would be too easy 
to in these last throes replace the narrative of decay with one of grief and fear. This would, 
however, not be wholly accurate. Throughout my fieldwork, I was blessed by the openness 
and candour with which I was met by participants. Through our conversations, I gained a 
privileged insight to over five hundred years of lived experience; with Flash being my oldest 
participant at 90 and Nigel my youngest at 69. Their histories spanned continents, while in 
the present they all made time for our visits together and shared the messiness and the 
mundanity of their experiences of being-in-the-world, each unique, yet tied together in their 
journey in-the-world-with-dementia. This chapter ends, therefore, with a glimpse into how 
participants not only expressed their own understanding of being-towards-the-end as older 
people with a degenerative illness, but how they did so with humour, irreverence, and objects 
to mark the final threshold. 
While objects marking forward-facing temporal thresholds were less commonly shared 
during fieldwork, they were present nevertheless. In many cases, these were objects of utility: 
powers of attorney, wills and testament and so on. For some participants, like Mark, it was 
an encompassing approach, where important paperwork was filed into separate, lockable 
hard plastic filing boxes to be easily found in the future. These not only aided him in 
navigating the on-going processes involved in maintaining his processes of dwelling and 
living independently, but in ensuring that his estate could be easily managed after his death. 
For other participants, however, the meaning of those objects at the future threshold 
towards-the-end were abstracted from their use. The following segment is drawn from my 
last visit with Nigel that was recorded as we made tea and coffee before sitting down in the 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
living room. Amidst discussing how it was just not done, to make tea without offering to 
do so for everyone in the house, the following exchange occurred: 
I:  Now, you have an array of cups. [Gesturing at several shelves of mugs] 
Nigel: I do. 
I:  You can either have them with saucer or without saucer. 
Nigel: Im pretty good without saucer, I would like to pretend to be sophisticated enough to 
require a saucer, but I would suggest not. [] Somewhere there should be a 
dishcloth. [] Itll be in here somewhere. [] This is indicative of me living in 
the elephants graveyard, i.e. Im going to die here, in other words Im going to go on 
living here, until I die. Even though I hope to go back [abroad], but not to live. 
[] I hope to go back [abroad], just to visit, like we did a couple of months ago.  
(Nigel, Interview Transcript) 
That the a regularly used dishcloth (tea-towel) could stand as a memento mori for the innate 
temporality of Dasein already presents a stark juxtaposition between the traditionally grim 
and morbid conversations of death and the everydayness of cleaning and drying dishes. That 
the object resided in the kitchen of a home that had had to adjust to a vision of the future 
that might be very difficult [] and so on and so on. following Nigels dementia diagnosis 
might have aligned itself with a grim mood. Instead, as I turned from the counter where I 
had just poured tea, to face Nigel who had found the dishcloth after a short search, I was 
presented with something quite different.  
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
When compared with the grey filing boxes in Marks flat, Nigels tea towel creates humour 
in its irreverence. Indeed, its nonthreatening style lends itself to its purpose. Indeed, the 
design of the object was fundamental to its role. The paperwork boxes were business-like; 
they primarily occupied a space for business; where the practical matters of either maintaining 
or closing down the estate were at hand. The tea towel, by contrast, served a different 
purpose, and stood firmly on this side of the threshold. It was a reminder not to take himself 
too seriously, and to find humour where he could. This is the nuance that many of the works 
that perpetuate the narratives of decay fail to encapsulate; a facing-forwards-with-dementia 
that is as multifaceted and difficult to categorise as life before dementia. Understanding 
people with dementia as innately future focused, despite their impairments is fundamental to 
Picture 18: Nigel Shows Off His Elephants Graveyard 
Memento Mori 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
supporting them to live well, especially given the cultural understanding of dementia as a 
disease contracted towards the end of life. Temporal thresholds by their nature have 
potential to draw together periods of great sadness with those of great joy. Similarly, for 
Isobel, this occurred often when she spoke about seeing her favourite granddaughter - and 
by extension called to mind her adult daughter who she had lost to cancer. For Mark, 
conversations about his relationships with his neighbours and friends often invited reflection 
on his relationship with his estranged daughter. Flashs recall of living in a small home as one 
of eleven children in a household of three adults, eating meals in shifts due to the size of the 
table brought into sharp relief his small bedsit where he lived alone. Yet, they were stories 
shared, freely, by those who were older, to one who was younger and eager to learn. Often, 
I learned about thresholds. Sometimes, I learned about the need to stand alongside Dasein-
with-dementia and laugh. At the close of this final findings chapter, the following quote from 
Hazel captures these layered interactions between past, present, and future; sobriety and 
irreverence:  
Hazel: [We had a] Wee Westie, but he loved it, and I keep saying to John, well get 
another [dog], he says, no, well not be getting another [dog]. Now, he was really 
distraught when she had to be put down, poor wee thing. [] He didnt think that 
I was upset. He was really upset. He didnt want to show it though. 
I:  A man thing though, eh? 
Hazel: Oh definitely, definitely. Quite funny actuallyit wasnt quite funny, it was quite 
sad watching him, Ive never seen him like that before, ever, and I havent seen him 
like that since. Its unbelievable. He never spoke. The day that she went, he never 
spoke for a couple of days, it really was bad, butand I keep saying, well get 
another dog. No, no. And I says, but you cant just go by one dog, you can have 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
another try. No, Im not going through that again. Whats he going to do when I 
I:  Hell not re-marry, apparently.  
Hazel : Oh, I dont know. [ Hazel uses her inhaler] Thats a laugh. 
Summary  
The work of this chapter has been to argue for an application of the threshold framework 
beyond the spatiality of physical thresholds and interpersonal aspects of social thresholds, 
and into the dimension of time. The chapter began by showing the ways in which participants 
used objects and stories to draw together aspects of their past with their present. Through 
viewing storytelling as more than a method of perpetuating conversation, a thresholds 
perspective allows insight into how recalling and retelling stories in certain ways can not only 
draw past events closer over a temporal threshold, but can also uncover different facets of 
their personality and experience for others. Thus, by drawing on and sharing memories of 
bravery, people with dementia can again be seen as brave - even where their current 
environment does not demand it of them. The focus then moves forward to consider the 
ways in which people with dementia managed their impairments in the present over temporal 
thresholds; where instances of disorientation or confusion could not be reliably predicted. 
The presence of tension around these influential temporal thresholds demonstrates not only 
the value of a threshold perspective, but its ability to elucidate the relationship and interaction 
between personal and societal factors. Finally, the chapter considered how participants 
situate themselves relationally with others in the context of their current lived experience, 
and with others in the future - including after their death. That participants often experienced 
challenges around temporal thresholds both, in regard to navigating them and in resisting 
their own passage into an unwanted future with the bad dementia highlights the 
contradictions and multiplicities that are part of being in the world. The experiential 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
complexity is often denied to people with dementia is seeded with tension, as dementias 
status as a life limiting, disease (and is thus inherently future focused) alongside a resistance 
to future thinking. By closing down such conversations and denying people with dementia 
the opportunity to express themselves as innately being-towards-the-future, normative 
understandings of dementia perpetuates the belief that the only future for people with 
dementia is a frightening one, lived as an unknown and unknowing person in the grips of the 
bad dementia. Such constructions demonstrate the discursive power of the narratives of 
decay, whilst additionally provide a keen insight into the harmful impact that such limited 
and ablest outlooks can have on the day-to-day lived experiences of people with dementia, 
as they influence not only how they perceive themselves in the present, but who and how 
they can hope to be in the future. 
5: Managing Thresholds in Physical Space: The Art of Dwelling with Dementia. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
8: SYNTHESIS AND DISCUSSION 
Introduction  
What is to be gained by adopting a threshold perspective? The data presented in the last three 
chapters has demonstrated that it is possible to identify, observe, and analyse activity within 
and around physical, social, and temporal thresholds. Yet, without consideration of how such 
a concept relates to the wider dementia and disability literatures, the task is not yet complete.  
The following chapter is dedicated to providing a critical overview of the themes presented 
in Chapters Five, Six, and Seven and placing these findings in the context of the wider 
literature as it relates to dementia and disability. As such, the main body of the chapter is 
made of three main sections. The first section reflects upon the themes drawn out in Chapter 
Five. It highlights the significance of physical thresholds and the power wielded by people 
with dementia as dwellers at the threshold. This is carried forward into a discussion of how 
people with dementia manage physical thresholds, how they facilitate or impede access, and 
how they engage with thresholds which are in some manner troublesome and the impact of 
such practices on care and support. The second section draws from Chapter Six and focuses 
on how a person with dementia manages their relationships in the context of being-with 
dementia and how social reactions may disable or enable them. Finally, the third section 
discusses the importance of viewing the person with dementia as undiminished Dasein, 
deeply situated in the context of their temporal experience. This section explores the concept 
of temporality as an influential factor in a persons experience of space, relationships, and 
self. As such, it challenges works which seek to present people with dementia as focused 
primarily on the past rather than their coming future and considers the implications of this 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
perspective as counter to the narratives of decay. The chapter then closes with a discussion 
of the studys limitations and potential directions of future research.  
Dwelling at the Physical Threshold 
Summary of Findings 
The concept of physical thresholds provides valuable avenues for exploring the experiences 
of people with dementia both as disabled people with a progressive disease and as dwellers 
who are constantly engaged in the processes of dwelling-as-building (bauen) and dwelling-as-
preserving (wohnen).  This section draws on the lived experience of participants to evidence 
the significance of physical thresholds in their day to day life and the value that can be drawn 
from building the threshold concept atop a foundation of Heideggerian philosophy, 
particularly the notions of Dasein and dwelling. The result is a work that positions people 
with dementia as Dasein and thus as active and enduring dwellers (Heidegger, 1971) 
irrespective of their experiences of physical or cognitive impairment. This premise forestalls 
questions of whether people with dementia dwell and facilitates instead questions of how they 
dwell.  
The Influence of Dwelling Practices on the Threshold 
Although participants varied in their socioeconomic status, living arrangements, marital 
status, age at diagnosis, age at interview, overall health, and specific dementia diagnosis, they 
were all actively and consistently involved in dwelling as an act of creation or building (bauen) 
as spaces were defined and redefined by the participants. Critically, while the threshold 
concept allows for a multiplicity of practices, it can also provide additional insight to 
common practices, such as, for example the arrangement of meaningful objects in space. To 
this end, Hazels growing flock of owl ornaments can be viewed as both in line with the 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
wider body of literature which explores the importance of meaningful objects as key 
components in feeling at home (as in Lovatt, 2018). Hazels relationship with these objects 
also aligns itself with the work of authors like Miller (2010) and Smith and Ekerdt (2011), for 
example, as she the ornaments exist predominantly as passive items within the space and are 
only used as they become the focus of Hazels attention for a time, before fading into the 
background again ad infinitum. Where a threshold perspective challenges such interpretations, 
however, is in the assumption that i) the ornaments must be called to mind to be considered 
in use, and ii) that curation of meaningful objects in space is only impactful for the individual 
for whom they have meaning. The first point is captured neatly in Whitmores (2001) work, 
which explores the role of cherished objects as tools for reinforcing identity. She declares: 
 Embedded with the essence of life experiences, possessions lend elders at least two types of identity 
continuity. First, possessions serve as concrete and enduring representations of achievements and social 
relationships. Second, as external embodiments of personal goals and feelings, objects allow for a 
continuity of internal and external identity. Offering connections to intangible or lost social and personal 
connections, possessions link elders to aspects of identity that are no longer physically present. The sheer 
physicality of possessions creates a mass of evidence supporting a life of experiences. 
(p59) 
Critically, while the objects Whitmore discusses continue to exist when outside the 
consideration of the owner, they do as an impoverished version of themselves, stripped of 
the personal attachment and meaning they represent. Such possessions are, therefore, only 
in use when being considered, as they become concrete representations and external 
signifiers of the owners identity.  
A threshold perspective, however, offers an additional layer of significance to such material 
objects. As such, while participants in this study were often surrounded by objects that 
helped them recall and reinforce aspects of their Being that were rooted in the past (as 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
discussed by Whitmore, 2001; Miller, 2010; Smith and Ekerdt, 2011 etc), use of those objects 
was not necessarily limited by their active consideration. Instead, objects which populated 
physical thresholds helped to shape and reinforce their practices of dwelling even when 
outside their consideration by, for example, influencing the behaviour of others, demarking 
the visual space, or enforcing particular threshold practices while discouraging others. 
Furthermore, objects could become meaningful not only by themselves embodying past 
identity (as per Whitmore, 2001) but through enabling participants to shape threshold spaces. 
Such engagement might manifest as creating the space through rearranging, clearing away, 
placing, or changing objects (thus exemplifying bauen) or by facilitating the maintenance of 
the dwelling space as in the chamois used to clean windows, the keys used to lock or unlock 
doors, the keychain used to block a keyhole, and so on (thus demonstrating wohnen). Such 
practices demonstrate a continued, though often changed and changing, engagement with 
physical spaces and thresholds, made possible through the use of material objects. 
This research therefore aligns itself with Nord (2013) and calls for a wider interpretation of 
the processes that imbue objects with meaning. Like Nord, participants in this study often 
drew meaning not only from the object itself (as, for example, an item of reminiscence or 
identity reinforcement) but from practical objects that allowed them to accomplish a 
meaningful task. This is as true for Nords visually impaired participant for whom a nightlight 
not only allowed her to continue to navigate her space in the event that staff turned off the 
main light in her flat. The presence and absence of illumination, and thus the light itself, 
transformed her perception of and engagement with her that space after nightfall. As a result, 
the nightlight object was both itself meaningful and actually quite beautiful (p140) and 
represented a meaningful visual threshold that separated the way the space was experienced 
during the day and during the hours of darkness. Such examples demonstrate the importance 
of adopting a perspective that is capable of capturing a multitude of practices and meanings 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
of meaning. A threshold perspective does this by encouraging an engagement with objects 
that looks beyond the perceived value of the object, be it sentimental, practical, or otherwise, 
and to include what such objects allow participants to accomplish. Threshold objects should, 
therefore, be considered meaningful in relation to (i) the history that they represent, and (ii) 
the ways in which they could enable participants to continue to dwell actively and manage 
their threshold spaces.  
From such a perspective, the role of the night light in Nords (2013) study is not only to 
enable the resident to move around and cross the internal thresholds of her home during the 
night (by bridging the sensory threshold between light and dark) but to allow her to control 
when and how those thresholds are closed. This resonates strongly with the experiences of 
participants in this study as some participants relied on objects to navigate vertical thresholds 
(for example Marks technique for putting his shoes on with a litter picker) and others 
capitalised on the properties of objects to enable them to leave the horizontal thresholds 
separating their home and Elsewhere without fear of leaving their keys behind (for example 
Margarets large, fluffy key-chain). Such objects therefore become tools of enablement, and 
are meaningful both in what they enable participants to do, and in who they allow the person 
to continue to be as they assist in addressing and mitigating the challenges introduced by 
their embodied experience of the impairment resulting from their dementia. This introduces 
a further opportunity to expand our consideration of what renders objects meaningful. 
Enabling objects became not only facilitative in the moment but vital tools that facilitated 
participants efforts to manage physical thresholds in a way that allowed them to continue to 
dwell. They become, therefore, meaningful not only in relation to what they help people with 
dementia to do, but who they allow them to be (Thomas, 2007). 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
Managing Threshold Spaces  
Objects arranged around threshold spaces could, in general, be considered as either 
facilitative or troubling. While a small number of examples demonstrated the potential for 
arrangements that could be experienced as facilitative by everyone, (for example with Lizs 
efforts to paint the edges of their garden steps to make them more clearly visible for George), 
most objects could were primarily facilitative of the person with dementia, and were often 
influential in aiding them to resist the influence of unwelcome parties approaching the 
threshold. Isobels door alarm is a clear example of this. Installed initially as an object of 
reassurance, having a door alarm that was set up to alert the local police station once pushed 
allowed Isobel to refrain from interacting with it physically when she did not require it, while 
engaging with it on a conceptual level as a safeguard that could be used if necessary. Such an 
approach enabled her to continue to dwell in the manner she wished to, and supported her 
in acknowledging and responding to risks in a way that allowed her to feel both safe and 
respected (as in Rush, Murphy and Kozak, 2012).  This in turn facilitated her ability to dwell 
and her bolstered confidence in doing so, without requiring the intervention of additional 
technologies designed to regulate or surveil her movements around the threshold (as in, for 
example, White & Montgomery, 2014; Fehling & Dassen, 2017).  
Placing such emphasis on reinforcing the physical threshold that separates Elsewhere from 
the home resonates strongly with Buchs (2015) argument that doorways, as the primary 
entry points, can become sites of resistance as people age. This is discussed by Buch (2015) 
in relation to the introduction of home care packages for older people, where care workers 
were significant both as individuals and as embodied agents of an unwelcome system, a 
process that was certainly experienced by participants of this study. Where this work differs, 
however, is in its construction of home care as a stopgap measure and a harbinger of the 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
social death represented by the eventual move to residential care (Buch, 2015, p44). This 
represents the major differences between previous works that examine older people or 
people with dementia as existing at the threshold, and this research. Critically, I argue that 
those works that situate older people, and particularly older people with dementia as liminal 
often perpetuate rather than challenge the narratives of decay by exploring threshold 
practices only as they relate to the experience of a shrinking world and the potential 
unmaking of the person (ibid, p44). As noted throughout this thesis, these narratives rely 
upon the dual assumptions that people can become unmade (which the Dasein perspective 
refutes), and that those who live in residential care have irrevocably already crossed this 
physical and social threshold into being non-persons. Buch (2015) reflects: 
All but one of the elders I knew well acknowledged that the progression of their ailments would likely 
leave them requiring care that exceeded what they expected to receive through home care; however, several 
expressed the hope that they would die before this was necessary. Yet even as these elders came to see 
their homes as bulwarks against their social unmaking, their homes became increasingly crowded with 
assistive devices and technologies and frequented by a growing number of health care and social service 
providers, transforming them into increasingly liminal spaces 
(p.41) 
In this context, [of receiving home care] elders engaged in boundary practices that reflect and even 
attempt to sustain the ambiguity of their social positionsbetter to be only partly independent than to 
be useless, invisible, and utterly unmade as a social person. 
(p.43) 
Yet, as much as Buch characterises this fear as one of becoming unmade, she also constructs 
the threshold practices of her participants as efforts to balance the need to remain secure 
with the threat of becoming trapped and abandoned (p.40) in their own home. This 
reoccurs elsewhere in the literatures around geographical gerontology, as older people are 
often pushed to the boundary of a literature that forefronts the experiences and 
manifestations of care (i.e. Milligan, 2000; Wang, 2019) and positions older people as 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
prisoners of space (Andrews et al., p1649). The consequences of such constructions are 
clear, as even works with emancipatory intentions are drawn into reinforcing the dominant, 
ablest, and oppressive message that older people with dementia become increasingly 
powerless as their cognitive capacity is compromised.  That the increasing use of assistive 
technologies is presented as a symbol of this powerlessness in Buch (2015, p.41) as opposed 
to enabling or facilitative exemplifies the inherent nihilism of the narratives of decay, as each 
change becomes emblematic of a dissolution of personal power, freedom, and autonomy. 
Such arguments, however well intentioned, become pathways for civilized oppression 
(Harvey, 2015), and are ultimately opposed to both the ideals and the practicalities of a 
disability informed approach (Thomas, 1999; 2007; Thomas and Milligan, 2017) wherein 
technological aids can be viewed both practically and symbolically as objects of 
empowerment and support.  
It is critical to note that, although such narratives are common within the dementia 
literatures, they are at their core an ablest account based in the medicalised assumptions that 
old age and impairment necessarily render the person as a less powerful individual. As such, 
they replicate rather than challenge ablest and ageist notions of older people and people with 
dementia as victims of a hostile society, whose manner of dwelling is limited to efforts to 
preserve and protect a past way of life. Such narratives run directly contrary to the findings 
of this research. Participants organised their thresholds such that they could facilitate both 
exclusion and inclusion; restricting or permitting access as required based on the identity of 
the person on the other side of the threshold. This process of managing and controlling the 
threshold was clear even where participants generally operated an open-door policy. 
Critically, while each had developed strategic methods for securing their home against 
unwanted visitors should they need to do so they nevertheless continued to engage with 
home as a dwelling place and thus, a  meaningful (Holland, 2015)  homespace (Milligan, 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
2000) even when there was a need to facilitate and enable caring practices within it. The 
introduction of caring practices to the home certainly resulted in some adjustment in the 
participants habits of dwelling, yet each was able to do so in a way that allowed them to 
manage and negotiate the physical and social thresholds of care in a way that was aligned 
with their personal history and value system while still receiving support- an insight that is 
often absent from the existing work on caring and aging geographies (i.e. Buse & Twigg, 
2014; Buse et al., 2017).  
It is important to note that, despite the critique offered here, there are a number of aspects 
of Buchs work that resonate strongly with the perspectives and findings of this research. 
Nevertheless, it is in the construction of the threshold as a liminal space, entirely separate 
from the phenomena it connects, and of older people as reactive rather than proactive in 
their management that these works diverge. By working within an ablest narrative, where 
ageing and impairment are a source of tragedy (see Swain & French, 2000; Swain, French 
& Cameron, 2003; Thomas, 2004; Kirkman, 2006; DiZazzo-Miller and Pociask, 2015) Buchs 
(2015) analysis provides limited opportunities to acknowledge the resilience of participants, 
or explore the wealth of their experience. This provides a strong contrast with this research, 
where I argue that the process of making and remaking physical thresholds can be proactive 
as well as reactive. As such, a threshold perspective acknowledges the efforts made by people 
with dementia as they manage thresholds in an increasingly complex context, wherein (for 
example) those who provide care must cross the physical threshold whether they are 
welcome or not. Most importantly, it is necessary to accept that the acceptance of care work 
and carers into the home space does not necessarily (or even appropriately) indicate an 
absence of power on the part of the person with dementia. To the contrary, participants in 
this research often leveraged their power as dwellers to influence how and where the 
institutions and practicalities of care entered into their lives. Examples of participants 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
exercising this power can be seen in both Bobs window-cleaning and Flashs determination 
to feed the birds outside his window. Both instances demonstrate the mens ability to resist 
pressure from care staff to shift their physical thresholds and reduce the area of their physical 
dwelling in ways that disrupt the narratives of decay, even as they relied on those self-same 
staff for care. Furthermore, such power was wielded even where resistance was not an 
option, as participants continued to remake and renegotiate their physical thresholds in the 
aftermath of change. Such renegotiation can be seen by contrasting Marks consistently 
positive social relationships with his care workers to his tense relationship with his care 
provider, particularly where it related to consistency of care. Similarly, Sybils willingness to 
allow her care workers into her home, but her strict oversight over their cleaning duties 
provides another example of the restructuring of thresholds such that passage into physical 
space does not mean the visitor has ultimate power there. In these cases, the physical 
threshold of the doorway might have been reshaped such that the care workers could access 
the home (as in Buch, 2015), but it nevertheless permitted entry into a space where the person 
with dementia dwelled as powerful and effective agent. 
Influencing Troublesome Thresholds 
While the recasting of people with dementia as powerful dwellers with significant influence 
over their home space strikes a distinctly emanatory tone, it would be disingenuous to present 
contests and conflicts around the physical threshold as exclusively untroubled, or 
untroubling. To the contrary, throughout fieldwork participants discussed the threat of their 
physical threshold being breached against their will. Both Margarets disclosure of another 
resident watching her through her keyhole, and Georges experience of being watched 
through his window by Jehovahs Witnesses demonstrate the potential for a threshold to be 
physically restrictive in situations where social norms are followed, but insufficiently 
protective where those on the other side act in an unexpected way. It is arguably this type of 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
risk that Marks upstairs neighbour sought to mitigate when she insisted that he stop keeping 
his keys on the doorframe when the door was unlocked (a measure that was facilitative of 
his memory impairment) and that he move their location to deeper within his hallway where 
they could not be grabbed quickly by a potential intruder. Such examples speak to a number 
of dementia literatures (e.g. Rush, Murpohy & Kozak, 2012; Egan et al., 2017), as well as 
ethical issues around disability, risk taking, and capacity. Had this effort been dictatorial in 
nature, or enforced without Marks agreement, it would counteract his right as a self-
determining adult to make decisions and take risks (Fetherstonhaugh, Tarzia, and Nay, 2013) 
as well as potentially contributing to his physical disablement.  However because this 
intervention was introduced by a member of the inner circle and was implemented in a way 
that accounted for Marks pre-existing patterns of dwelling to avoid introducing disabling 
factors, it was ultimately successful. Such an example highlights the importance of 
interpersonal relationships and supports Thomas (1999; 2007) argument that both 
disablement and enablement are made manifest through relationships. Indeed, it is possible 
to argue that the approach taken by Marks neighbour was successful not only in that it 
addressed a perceived risk without disabling Mark, but in that it did so without requiring 
Mark to internalise disabling beliefs about himself and what he should be able to do as an 
older man with dementia.  
It at this point becomes necessary to emphasise that while separating physical thresholds 
from those that are social or temporal allows for greater clarity of analysis, this clarity comes 
at the cost of nuance. As much as the erasure of the body from the social model of disability 
lead to an impoverished understanding of the ways in which social factors impacted a body 
in space, so too does excluding social factors from the consideration of physical thresholds. 
Explored exclusively in relation to physicality, the insistence of Marks neighbour that he 
change where he stores his keys might result in disablement, and contribute to his oppression 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
(per Thomas, 2004 and Harvey, 2015) through tacitly perpetuating the belief that people with 
dementia should remain close to home. This is evident in much of the literature on wandering 
(see Algase et al., 2004 for a discussion). From this perspective, the neighbours belief that 
her way of arranging Marks home space has more validity than his standard practice could 
be parsed as springing forth from ablest beliefs about competence and what it means to live 
with dementia. In the context of their social relationship, however, and specifically her place 
within Marks inner circle, her influence on his physical threshold is re-contextualised into 
one of enablement, in line with Swain, French, Barns and Thomas (2013). Key to this shift 
was the neighbours knowledge of Mark, and their ability to compromise. The result was an 
arrangement where the keys were removed from the door (as per the neighbours request) 
but kept beneath the entry phone and where Mark kept his notebook, without which he 
never left the house. This arrangement allowed Mark to adjust his patterns of dwelling such 
that he could still find his keys, leave his house and lock his doors at night without difficulty, 
while still accommodating his neighbours concern. Such an example, while mundane, 
resonates deeply with the difficulties that surround risk taking, enablement, and living with 
dementia (i.e. Rush, Murphy and Kozak, 2012). Particularly, through viewing the doorway as 
a site of resistance, wherein Marks management of the physical threshold was influenced 
more by the intervention of someone he trusted and cared for than by a risk he did not 
himself perceive. Similar patterns emerged with Sybil, though with more strains of resistance, 
as she reflected that she used her sticks when navigating the garden primarily in order to 
avoid her daughters irritation and concern, rather than as a response to her own mobility 
needs. 
Throughout fieldwork, participants discussed their experiences of managing physical 
thresholds. Each of these reflections was deeply personal and tied to their lived history, their 
gender, their social class, and their physical health. As a result, it is impossible to identify a 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
single threshold that all people with dementia will find either facilitative or disabling, just as 
it is impossible to dictate that their dwelling must be confined by the walls of their home, 
beginning and ending at the front door. Such diversity in experience highlights the need to 
recognise the experience of dementia as diverse in both physiological progression and 
experiential meaning (as in Nygard and Borell, 1998). It was only through listening and 
analysing from a perspective that was open to multiple interpretations of what and where a 
physical threshold might be that it became possible to understand the extent of management 
that occurred there. Mark, for example, maintained an open threshold at his front door, 
through which visitors like myself, his neighbours, or friends could walk after only a cursory 
knock once they had been instructed how to bypass the buzzer. The site of Marks dwelling-
as-protection (wohnen) in fact manifested in the shared space at the door to his close. Here 
visitors met with a technological barrier in the form of the buzzer, and here Marks congenial 
relationship with his neighbours exhibited tension over the placement of the large mat inside 
the door. How this threshold was arranged affected, in turn, how Mark engaged with his 
front door, as only those known to himself or his neighbours could bypass the buzzer system 
without first announcing themselves. Secure in this knowledge, his front door could remain 
unlocked. This strategy runs contrary to Margarets method of management, which treated 
other residents as a potential threat who should be barred from entry by default rather than 
congenial near-dwellers. Such differences highlight not only the impact of the individual and 
their personal experience on the manifestation and management of the threshold space, but 
makes it necessary to consider their negotiation as a social (as well as physical) phenomena. 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
Relational Arrangements and Social Thresholds 
Summary of Findings  
Chapter Six explored the ways in which participants experienced, managed, and navigated 
social thresholds and relationships as part of their day-to-day experience of living with 
dementia. The following section explores the ways in which viewing social thresholds 
concurrently through the lenses provided by Thomas social-relational approach to disability, 
and Heideggers understanding of Dasein provides valuable insights into the complexities 
involved in navigating social relationships with dementia. To allow for clear analysis, and to 
build coherent connections to existing literature, this section consists of four parts. The first 
acknowledges the importance of separating the difficulties associated with dementia, through 
either impairment effects or the imposition of disability, from a persons impairment. This is 
particularly important given both the potential for an individual to experience different levels 
of impairment over time and the difficulty associated with accurately predicting the 
progression of the dementias. The second builds upon this understanding to highlight the 
ways in which people with dementia engage with key people as facilitators, innovators, and 
curators as their dementia progresses. The third segment explores the ways in which 
individuals who contribute to the oppression, disablement, or disrespect of the person with 
dementia are met at the social threshold. Finally the forth explores the impact of relational 
ableism and civilised oppression on the way in which participants conceptualised and 
constructed themselves as people with dementia.  
Always With-Dementia 
While much of the strength of the social model comes from its dramatic inversion of the 
biomedical understanding of disability, and its easily communicated sound bite of disability 
= social barriers (Thomas, 2004, p.24) it is worth noting that one of the most influential 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
aspects of Thomas social-relational approach comes from its nuance. By separating 
(additional) disability from (biological) impairment and (experiential) impairment effects, the 
social relational approach facilitates a discussion about how people experience their 
impairments without presuming that this is either predictable or consistent. Such recognition 
of the personal experience of impairment creates a space wherein the social aspects that 
affect how one processes bodily sensations, such as pain (e.g. Corker and French, 1998; Wall, 
1999) or, in this study, forgetfulness, confusion, irritability, and anxiety, can be discussed 
alongside discussions of the biological factors at the root of that impairment. Such 
accommodations are necessary, particularly when discussing the experience of living as an 
older person with dementia, as each participant parsed their experience in different ways, as 
they sought to differentiate between impairment effects resulting from their dementia, and 
the normal ageing process.  
One factor that was of particular note, however, was the ubiquitousness of each persons 
dementia. While research literatures must by design limit the scope of their investigation to 
a few aspects of the phenomena they intend to elucidate, broadening the scope over time 
and successive publications, the lived experience allows for no neat division. There are a 
number of points throughout Chapters Five, Six and Seven, (and indeed in the whole data 
corpus) where participants expressed awareness that while they might at any moment feel 
secure, capable, and confident, this did not indicate a freedom from their condition. Rather, 
the unpredictability of the dementia disease lead to participants cultivating a state of regular 
awareness, wherein they were perpetually with-dementia, despite not necessarily experiencing 
significant impairment effects in the moment. This is perhaps the one area in which this 
research expands upon Thomas construction of disability as a phenomenon that occurs 
where impairment effect meets social reaction (2004, p579) and does so by placing a specific 
focus on the temporality of Dasein. Indeed, it is the consideration of participants as Dasein, 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
and thus innately temporal Beings with a past, present, and oncoming future, allowed for a 
particular insight into the ways in which potential, or expected, impairment effects can 
contribute to disability for people with dementia.  
This prospective disablement is clear, for example, where participants discussed the need to 
change their current ways of dwelling and being to accommodate a potential future incidence 
of impairment. Importantly, while some of these efforts were targeted towards avoiding a 
potentially negative social reaction should their impairments become obvious to others (and 
thus, arguably fall within Thomas 2007 construction), others were concerned with the 
pragmatic aspects of managing unpredictable impairment effects. Nigels efforts to plan out 
strategies ahead of time that he could use should he become disorientated while in the 
community provides a key example of this. Such instances arguably challenge the social 
relational approach, as Nigel was not concerned with the social responses associated with 
being outed as someone with dementia, but with the practical challenges presented by being 
suddenly and unpredictably unable to find his way home. It is this unpredictability of the 
disease and its associated impairment effects that necessitated a constant and active 
management of situations such that if the person became confused or distressed, there were 
strategies in place that would allow them to manage the situation independently or seek the 
necessary support. Indeed, for several participants including Margaret and Nigel continuing 
to access public spaces was contingent on feeling confident in their ability to manage a 
relapse while accessing that space. That such strategies were required implies that there was 
a need for enabling measures to counterbalance disabling factors; yet the factors that would 
contribute to such future disablement were not yet clear.  
Such insight is vital when considered in the context of the current push towards the creation 
of dementia friendly communities and initiatives (Lin, 2017). Approaching these initiatives 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
with a threshold perspective allow for additional insights how the four cornerstones 
(Crampton, Dean & Eley, 2012) of place, people, resources, and networks are made manifest 
in each community as interested parties are encouraged to question anew the location and 
character of physical thresholds in space, social thresholds between people with dementia, 
others in the community and the place itself, and the temporal thresholds that have the 
potential to radically influence the accessibility and friendliness of the space depending on 
the time of day or season. Resultantly, this work demonstrates the importance of considering 
dementia friendliness as a phenomena that extends beyond the end phase of the project and 
instead involves including people with dementia throughout planning, implementation, and 
assessment (Alzheimers Disease International, 2016). It is only by listening to and seeking 
to understand at a deeper level the experiences of people with dementia as powerful disabled 
agents in their own right (as in Thomas, 2007 and Boyle, 2014), that these initiatives might 
avoid inadvertently recreating in new spaces the same troubled and oppressive thresholds 
that existed before the introduction of supposedly friendly interventions (Harvey, 2015).  
It is in acknowledging this temporality as a key aspect of the embodied experience of the 
person with dementia that it is possible to explore more fully the experience of living with 
the impairments and impairment effects resulting from the dementia disease. Nevertheless, 
in doing so this work raises key questions around how people with dementia could, or should, 
be enabled to continue to live their lives as they choose when the temporal aspects of their 
condition represents a profound unknown.  
Dementia, Relationships and the Social Threshold 
How participants tailored and refined their methods of managing their physical threshold 
was often profoundly influenced by how they managed their social thresholds. This can be 
seen in the earlier example of Marks neighbour requesting that he change his habits of 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
storing his keys at the doorway to lessen the risk they could be stolen, as well as throughout 
the body of Chapter Six. While such exemplars provide support for the adoption and 
implementation of person-centred approaches which are rooted in a knowledge of the 
individual as an individual, it would be incorrect to suggest that mere knowledge of Marks 
practices and the opportunity to suggest the change would necessarily result in the same 
outcome. Put more succinctly; the change required not only the opportunity to identify a 
potential risk and introduce a new strategy, but a position of familiarity and esteem from 
which to suggest it. The effect of trying to approach such matters from outside the persons 
circle of confidence, by contrast, can be seen in Hazels resistance to her sisters efforts to 
curtail her driving on the basis of her dementia diagnosis. Indeed, it is worth noting that 
those outside the inner circle may never be offered the opportunity to contribute such insight 
as it was with Margarets decision to block her keyhole without disclosing to staff her 
experiences of being spied upon. Crossing this threshold is therefore, arguably, an even 
greater challenge than successfully navigating a person with dementias physical thresholds, 
particularly where wider relationships of care render those thresholds more permeable than 
they might be otherwise.  
So how might one navigate this threshold? What separates those who are permitted to see 
the daily indignities of life, the aches and pains and urinary tract infections (Shakespeare 
and Watson, 2001 p.12) that, however unwelcome, have a profound impact on a persons 
experience of being-in-the-world? Clearly, such passage does not rely on kinship bonds, or 
on the provision of care, for Mark revoked his daughters access to his inner circle both 
legally (through revoking her power of attorney and removing her from his will) and 
informally through ceasing his communication with her. Hazel, too, rejected, deflected, and 
redirected her sisters attempts to manage her risky activity of driving, resisting her siblings 
influence based on her perceived lack of understanding. While much might be learned from 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
examining those patterns of interaction that typified the relationships between participants 
with dementia and those in their inner circle, it is equally valuable to explore examples of 
failed threshold crossings.  
Throughout fieldwork, tales of failed crossings were typified by a belief that the person 
attempting to cross could not be trusted in some manner with the insight afforded to the 
inner circle. By contrast, those in the inner circle could be relied upon to interact with the 
person with dementia as a whole, undiminished individual who was living with, but not 
defined by, a chronic and degenerative health condition. While this distinction was often 
couched in the language of knowledge- particularly that those who were held outside the 
inner circle would not or did not understand- that friends, professionals and clinicians could 
be rejected with the same justification suggests that a lack of empirical knowledge was not 
the primary concern. Rather, where participants discussed those who tried to pry, or intrude 
into the inner circle, they often reflected that while the individual might understand dementia, 
they did not understand their dementia, or the reverse, that the individual knew them well, 
but did not know what it was like for them to live with dementia. Such resistance to intrusion 
across the social threshold ensured not only the ability to restrict the experience of 
vulnerability to those relationships that were enabling, but to reject and mask the indignities 
from those who might introduce the very patterns of civilized oppression (Harvey, 2015), 
disablism and psychoemotional disablism (Thomas, 1999; 2007) that feed the narratives of 
decay. Yet, the relationality of the threshold space (whether physical or social in nature) often 
required compromise on both sides, such as in Sybils acceptance of care- on her terms- and 
Margarets protection of her bathroom space as entirely private despite the presence of 
support in other areas of her home.  This arguably reflects a tension inherent in the 
construction of care, as argued by Morris (1997). From her perspective as an accomplished 
disability theorist and disabled woman, Morris argued that the social construction of care 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
and caring created insurmountable power imbalances and devalued the person who received 
it. While such a radical position is beyond the remit of this work, it is worth noting that many 
of those who failed to cross into the inner circle were seen as potential providers of this 
oppressive care, where they would assume power over the person with dementia, introducing 
dependence and inequity, while those within the inner circle provided assistance. This 
assistance (in line with Morris, 1997, p.59) was communicated as a more equitable 
arrangement where trusted people provided assistance, much as the person with dementia 
themselves either had in the past, or might in the future (such as with Isobel and her change 
in position from the person who provided lifts for her family, to someone who received 
them after she surrendered her car).  
It is the acknowledgement of the person with dementia as someone of equal value to those 
without dementia, someone who requires assistance but perhaps, not care (Morris, 1997) 
that arguably lies at the heart of Kitwoods wider works (1990, 1997). Such relationships 
reflect the continuing obligation of one individual to another as they are bound together in 
relationships of support and concern. Critically however this connection is deeper than a 
spoken, written, or formalized recognition of the individual as a person with a lived history, 
(Kitwood, 1997). All participants of this study who regularly received care would have 
experienced person centered care in practice (given the values of the Scottish Social Services 
Council, 2013) yet the challenges negotiating thresholds in the context of human care staff 
and inhuman systems of care had a significant impact on how Sybil, Mark, Margret, Bob, and 
Flash managed their thresholds and organized their lives. A relational perspective allows for 
greater nuance and acknowledges the person as not only an individual with preferences based 
in the past but as someone who inhabits the present and looks forwards into the future. 
Furthermore, while person centered care focuses on the person being at the heart (SSSC, 
2013) of their care, it presents this relationship as primarily mono-directional. By contrast, 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
participants in this study constantly negotiated bidirectional relationships between 
themselves and their carers, and themselves and the institutions of care. Taking a Dasein 
perspective requires an active acknowledgement of the enduring web of connections within 
which each person is situated. Such an approach, therefore, highlights the power the 
individual can wield in the telling and retelling of their experiences, as well as in their 
organization of threshold spaces.  
It is worth noting that throughout fieldwork and throughout the analysis of the data, 
particularly as it is presented in Chapter Six, one factor that was often present but rarely 
directly addressed was the language that the participants used to communicate their story 
and the ways in which they anchored their experiences to the wider dementia narrative. This 
theme is expressed most clearly in Hazels efforts to separate herself as a person with 
dementia from others who have what she considers the bad dementia. Diametrically 
opposed to the paradigmatic healthy disabled person, who is permanently and predictably 
impaired presented by Wendell, (2001, p.21) the person with bad dementia is someone 
who has lost their reason, and their ability to be reasoned with. As a spectral threat, the bad 
dementia touched each of the participants in a different way, rearing its head in Georges 
fear of becoming like those he saw on TV, in the way Hazel contrasted herself to her 
neighbour whose dementia was more advanced, in Nigels repeated assertion that he was still 
quite clever and so on. Just as the social model created an allegorical disabled person that 
at once represented all disabled people and none, so too does the bad dementia reflect the 
realities of dementia without accurately capturing the totality and depth of the experience. 
As a cohort, participants discussed a variety of impairment effects related to their dementia, 
including aggression, frustration, memory loss, anxiety, depression, confusion, 
hallucinations, sensory distortion, executive dysfunction, and slowed cognition, in effect 
discussing common symptoms of dementia (Zhao et al., 2016) as they were experienced the 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
context of, and understood through, their lived experience. Yet, despite sharing numerous 
traits and experiences with the allegorical other with bad dementia, participants always 
constructed themselves as separated from that dementia, incapable of aligning their rich, 
lived experiences as undiminished Dasein with the caricature constructed by the narratives 
of decay. The result was the construction of a spectral entity that must always be resisted. 
The bad dementia walked alongside, showing itself in the lives of others with dementia who 
were further along (Hazel) casting a long shadow that introduced fear and doubt to their 
own thoughts of the future. It is this continued construction of the bad dementia, and those 
who live with it, as less knowable, less whole, and less human that the dementia literatures 
must seek to actively reject. It is crucial to recognize, however, that such a radical deviation 
from the narratives of decay cannot be implicit in the philosophy of the work. It is not 
sufficient to argue, for example, for the agency and voice of those with dementia who can 
overcome the disabling aspects of the sociopolitical environment to engage with activism, 
for example (as in Bartlett, 2014) for while such works are valuable they do not directly 
challenge the societal link between cognition and selfhood or value. Instead, active, strategic 
and continued steps must be taken to acknowledge and facilitate the agency of people with 
dementia throughout their life course, especially where traditional vocal modes of 
communication and advocacy are complicated by cognitive impairment (as in Boyle, 2014).  
Being-Towards and Temporal Thresholds with Dementia 
The exploration and analysis of temporal thresholds arguably represent the most contentious 
argument put forth by this thesis. It is only through acknowledging the influence of time as 
the medium through which Dasein moves and experiences that the importance of the 
temporal threshold can be explored. Indeed, each of the literatures discussed in this thesis 
can only manifest temporally. From this perspective both disabling and enabling 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
relationships can only be played out through time; whether this is the time required to 
identify, implement, and maintain physical objects such as calendars and taxi bookings, or 
the willingness to allow the person with dementia extra time to think during a conversation. 
Similarly, disabling factors played out over and through time, in the difficulty of accessing 
clinical support for diagnosis, in short appointment times or meeting slow physical or 
cognitive processes with exasperation rather than empathy. To this end, the first two themes 
considered in this last section relate to the interaction between dementia, time, and social 
spaces; and dementia, time, and physical spaces respectively. The chapter concludes by 
highlighting the value of exploring the thresholds experiences of people with dementia as 
undiminished embodied disabled Dasein and identifying future directions. 
Relationships, Time and Dementia.  
Time, and a sense of temporality, had a profound influence on how participants understood 
and discussed their relationships with others, particularly those within their inner circle. Such 
an observation is not, in and of itself, novel. How people with dementia and their trusted 
people engage with time has been the subject of a range of investigations, from those which 
pinpoint key narrative events as existential coordinates around which an individuals 
understanding of lived experience is organised (Orona, 1990, p.1253), to those that 
investigate the use of specialised clocks and technologies to aid with temporal positioning 
(Topo et al., 2007 and Georges clock in Chapter Six). Participants were also often acutely 
aware of the time family members dedicated to their care, and, as Kitwood (1997b) noted, 
on guard against becoming burdensome (p.15), something that for participants in this 
study was often judged on the basis of the amount of time their care required. Whether it 
was in Marks discussion of his carers as struggling under excessive caseloads with 
insufficient time and support, Sybils frustrations at being visited at a time that was 
convenient to the staff but that often varied in line with their other commitments, or, 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
contrastingly, her concerns at how much time her daughter spent organising her care, time 
often played a key role in how participants organised their lives, and managed thresholds. It 
is important to note, too, that while participants might struggle to keep track of time (Topo 
et al., 2007), that did not stop it being an object of frequent attention, and frustration. Time, 
and thus temporal thresholds, became contentious not only when participants needed to 
leave the house or attend events at an appointed time, thus contending with a difficulty in 
keeping time (Phinney, 1998), but when others crossed into their home space, carrying their 
temporality with them. Such temporalities contributed to the frustration discussed by Sybil, 
Mark, and George in relation to waiting for people to attend their home, in either a caring 
(Sybil or Mark) or contracting (George) capacity. In each case, participants related a sense of 
frustration at being unable to rely upon the punctuality of others, something each saw as 
disrespectful even when they understood the structural problems that might contribute to a 
loss of consistency. It is particularly critical to note at this juncture that the problem was not 
lateness per se, particularly for Mark and Sybil who were visited by care workers multiple 
times a day, but a lack of predictability in general. While waiting for care workers to help 
them dress in the morning might influence their plans for the day, it was equally frustrating 
to have care arrive early to prepare them for bed at night, limiting their evening activities.  
The friction between the temporalities of Elsewhere, particularly as it affected the provision 
of care services, and the controlled time of the home represents the most unruly threshold. 
Drawing its character from either side of itself, the threshold represents a space of active 
negotiation and compromise, where the phenomena on each side meet and intermingle in a 
space that is at once discrete and beholden to the phenomena that meet there. Where this 
causes friction, however, is in the creation of a space that potentially pleases neither party. 
The care worker with a large caseload finds the pace of the home too slow, or the preferred 
timing incompatible with their responsibilities and the person with dementia finds the pace 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
of Elsewhere too fast, or restricting. Such friction results in difficult negotiations; is it better 
that Mark receive his care too early, or too late? Does arranging care workers to aid with 
changing into sleep attire tacitly restrict the freedom of people with dementia such that they 
cannot access Elsewhere spaces after a certain hour in the same manner as other adults 
without impairment? Taken from this perspective, does changing the clothes of a grown 
adult into sleepwear early and arriving late in the morning to aid with daytime dressing 
represent a method of control, curfew and restriction? It would certainly be inappropriate to 
suggest that these methods are usually or routinely targeted to restrict and oppress people 
with dementia. Such maliciousness is not required, however, where people with dementia are 
restricted through the processes of civilized oppression as the subtlety of Harveys 
framework renders it possible to at once recognize the good faith and intentions of care 
workers, and the contributions of their actions towards oppression (Harvey, 2015). To raise 
such questions however highlights a complex tangle wherein people with dementia as 
disabled people can as easily be enabled and disabled by the provision of providers of care 
as in other relationships (Morris, 2004; Thomas & Milligan, 2017) yet the temporal reality of 
care requires individuals to be supported sequentially. As such, there must be someone who 
is visited first, and who is by extension restricted by the processes of dressing and night-
time personal care earlier in the day than those who are visited later.? This is a problem that 
is difficult to solve, and stretches far beyond the remit of these thesis into questions that 
require the balancing of care prioritisation, provision, and financing against personal rights, 
freedoms and desires. Nevertheless it manifests at, and is a prime example of, a temporal 
threshold drawn between two competing temporalities.  
It is also important to note that the narratives of decay, the tales of diminishment and 
reduction that this thesis is diametrically opposed to, operate on similar contested temporal 
thresholds. Indeed, time is an instrumental component of the narratives of decay, in which 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
dementia is constructed as a process which violates the spirit through a process of decay 
that is tantamount to a living death that leaves only the body as a physical reminder of the 
person that has been lost (Post, 2000 p245; Davis, 2004; Milne and Peet, 2008; Beard, 
Knauss and Moyer, 2009 and Herskovits, 1995 respectively). It is the portrayal of dementia 
as a diagnosis of inevitable decline and loss that can lead those who provide care to adopt 
pessimistic and defeatist attitudes (Kissel and Carpenter, 2007; McCleery, 2008) as dementia 
care fails to provide the cure that the medial model extols as the ultimate and only goal of 
care (Shakespeare and Watson, 2002). It is this sense of nihilism and the construction of a 
dementia diagnosis as the loss of both future potential and potential futures that the 
narratives of decay perpetuate. It is this narrative that the use of Dasein and disability theory 
is intended to disrupt. Indeed, this study aligns itself with the perspectives of Beard, Knaus, 
and Moyer (2009) in viewing dementia not as a cause of immediate debilitation but a 
circumstance requiring new and innovative types of interaction (p.234). Indeed, I argue that 
a Dasein perspective facilitates this further by untethering cognition from Being; 
undercutting arguments that contend that increasing cognitive impairment is comparable to 
a diminishment of the person themselves. Such a positioning allows for an engagement with 
the concept of thresholds that constructs relationships as occurring between two (or more) 
equally valuable Dasein who are drawn together across a social threshold. Proceeding from 
this premise allows relationships to be viewed through the lens provided by Thomas (1999; 
2007) Social Relational Approach to disability which highlights the disabling and enabling 
practices as they are made manifest in the moment at the social threshold.  
Taken together, these two frameworks demand that individuals without dementia accept the 
enduring humanity, validity, and value of those with a dementia diagnosis. It demands that 
they engage with them in a way that respects their rights and agency even as they provide 
support for their impairments. Such a stance requires committing to an understanding of 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
dementia that includes not only the persons past (as clearly required by personhood, 
Kitwood 1997) but by being present with them in the now, and understanding their 
continued existence as a being who is always towards the future. Refusing to engage with 
that future-facing temporal threshold contributes to the fear of the unknown. It reinforces 
the negative images that present people with dementia as those who have been deprived of 
their mind little by little (Van Gorp and Vercuysse, 2012, p.1276); victims of a terrifying 
time bomb that will affect everyone if [they] live long enough (Peel, 2014, p.892) while 
simultaneously attempting to justify an erosion of rights and dignities (see Bailey, Ridley and 
Greenhill, 2010). It is necessary, therefore, to acknowledge not only the ways in which people 
with dementia control, manage, or cross temporal spaces, but the ways in which those 
without dementia contribute to and perpetuate the very systems of civilized oppression that 
disable them. People with dementia must have the opportunity to consider their future, both 
as they continue to live, and as they reach the end of their life (see Hellstrom and Torres, 
2015). This change, too, shall take time and likely meet with resistance (Harvey, 2015). 
Time and Physicality 
In many ways, the challenges of adapting the temporalities of physical spaces for people with 
dementia presents less difficulty than addressing those relational and cultural barriers 
discussed in the previous section. As mentioned at the outset of this thesis, an appetite 
already exists for the creation of dementia friendly spaces and communities.  This is fuelled 
in no small part by the Department of Healths aim to ensure that over half of all people 
living with dementia will be living within a dementia friendly community by 2020 
(Department of Health, 2015). The question raised by this research however is whether the 
creation of dementia friendly spaces represents a siloing of people with dementia, a process 
that maintains the disabling aspects of public spaces in exchange for special provisions to 
allow people with dementia to access the space. This danger has been explored elsewhere, 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
highlighting areas where the creation of accessible space has created grey ghettos (Ayalon 
and Green, 2012), where the very adaptation of this space has resulted in a lack of broader 
action, resulting in a marginalisation of residents and a loss of opportunity. Taken from a 
disability perspective, and leveraging the powers provided by the Equalities Act (2010), it is 
possible to make a strong argument that much as wheelchair users have a right to access 
public facilities, so too do people with dementia. The provision of special spaces is, in this 
regard, certainly not preferable to the recognition of people with dementias rights as citizens 
(Rochford-Brennan, 2018), just as creating ghettos (Ayalon and Green, 2012; Harhaj, 2014) 
or warehouses (Wild et al., 2018) is not comparable to the creation of an accessible society. 
Where deference is owed to people with dementia, however, is in the primacy of their 
experiences of disablement (Thomas, 2006). The assumption that a person who does not live 
with a cognitive impairment, particularly a degenerative cognitive impairment, might intuit 
the systematic barriers that oppress disabled people with dementia is the very hubris that 
much of the disability literatures seek to address. Critically, researchers must engage in 
reflection to explore the ways in which their language (DEEP, 2015), actions, practice, or 
underlying beliefs might contribute to the civilised oppression of those they mean to research 
with. This, too requires time- both to facilitate people with dementia to take part in research 
and to allow researchers time to reflect on their own ways of being-in-the-world as people 
without dementia. This research drew significant benefit from creating a fieldwork space 
where the participant could dictate how long each visit lasted and when they might be 
undertaken. This process required me to leave my own temporalities outside when I entered 
the research space. It is through recognising temporal thresholds, and the embodied 
temporalities we enact as Beings-in-the-world that we might be more facilitative as 
researchers, and thus facilitate rather than disable people with dementia to participate 
(Dewing, 2007). 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
By approaching the temporal threshold with a Dasein perspective, it is possible to highlight 
the importance of viewing the person not only as someone with a lived history, but someone 
with a future that is perpetually coming-towards. Where people with dementia are denied 
agency, where they are restricted based on their diagnosis rather than their embodied 
impairment effects, they are robbed of their ability to effectively manage their future 
threshold. Whether it is in attempting to convey to others the potential outcome of the 
disease, in wondering if spouses would remarry, or in collecting elephant tea towels, it is as 
important to facilitate future threshold crossings, as it is to reminisce and cross the threshold 
to the past. It is necessary, therefore, to not only attend to and facilitate the growth of the 
dementia literatures and dementia activism into citizenship and beyond, but to ensure it is 
rooted deeply in an acceptance of a perpetually undiminished self. It is only by doing so, only 
by rejecting outright the narratives of decay and dissolution that we may move forward, as 
researchers, activists, practitioners, and people to assert: we do not treat people living with 
dementia as people to honour their past, but to enrich their present and enable their future. 
They are not lost, lesser, shadows, or shells. They are valid, valuable, whole, and 
undiminished. Always. 
Limitations  
While the research generally, and this thesis specifically, drew great strength from its 
ethnographic method, it by its nature inherits the weaknesses of a written ethnography. As 
such, the design of the study, the recruitment of participants, the gathering of data, and the 
analysis and composition of the written text are all tightly bound to who I am as a researcher 
and my experiences of being with participants in the field. My findings and reflections are 
therefore a reflection of my observations in the field. These are filtered through the narrative 
process and reconstructed in a written format that must then be taken in and processed by 
8: Synthesis and Discussion 
an audience. I have however done my best to capture a world that is both shared and worlds 
apart (Ashforth, 2005 pxi), portraying the undiminished brilliance of their being as best as 
I am able in the process.  
It should be noted that this study has its procedural limitations. Recruiting primarily through 
groups that advertised themselves as dementia inclusive or dementia friendly tacitly, though 
unintentionally, excludes those who do not attend such groups or do not see themselves as 
represented by them. It is possible, even likely, that their lived experiences would offer 
further nuance and different insights into managing and navigating threshold spaces. 
Similarly the inclusion of people of colour, of people whose dementia was more advanced, 
or people who were more geographically diverse might all have provided new illuminations.  
As such this work is, as all ethnographies are, limited in its generalisability and scope; and yet 
it is only through undertaking this work on a small scale and with sufficient depth that the 
findings have come to be.  
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
9: CONCLUSION  
This thesis offers a number of meaningful contributions to the body of academic knowledge. 
Principle amongst these is the introduction and exploration of the threshold concept, for it 
is through examining the experiences of people with dementia at the various physical, social, 
and temporal thresholds that we might better understand the ways in which disablism, 
civilised oppression, and the narratives of decay are made manifest in peoples lives. This 
work therefore owes much to the work of previous scholars, for meaningful progress can 
only be forged incrementally and collaboratively, by drawing together the expertise and 
perspectives of people with a wide range of thought and experience.  The following sections, 
therefore, detail the ways in which this thesis has make particular contributions to the 
academe, before returning to consider each of the research questions in turn, in light of the 
findings presented in Chapters Five, Six and Seven, and ending with a discussion of potential 
avenues for future research.  
Thresholds  
The primary contribution made by this thesis is in the development and application of 
the concept of thresholds as transcending architectural features and physical space. By 
moving beyond such limited notions about what and where a threshold might be, this thesis 
constructs an analytical concept that is both internally consistent and sufficiently flexible to 
be applied in a range of fields. There are two aspects of the threshold concept that are 
particularly valuable in this respect the construction of the threshold as an active space, and 
its construction as a relational phenomenon. Firstly, through viewing a threshold as a space 
that is both distinct and beholden to the phenomena that it draws together, a threshold 
approach acknowledges both activity (through the drawing together) and the capacity for 
9: Conclusion 
change and evolution as the phenomena on either side shift. An optimistic example of this 
might be seen in returning to this thesis a decade from now, and re-reading it in a 
sociocultural climate where people with dementia do not experience the same degree of 
stigmatisation, marginalisation and dehumanisation that they do at present. I would hope 
that such a reader would find the contents of Chapter Five, and the subsequent discussions 
of social thresholds as painstakingly negotiated to avoid disablement and derision, dated and 
difficult to apply to their lived reality. That such a reader could, however, explore anew the 
ways in which people with dementia encountered and managed social thresholds in this 
future context demonstrates the value of the threshold perspective as a flexible approach 
that enables the capture of multiple ways of being-in-the-world. Furthermore, by viewing 
thresholds as a space where two phenomena meet, it is possible to move beyond the physical, 
social and temporal thresholds explored in this thesis. Indeed, there is a strong argument for 
applying a threshold perspective to other social-relational barriers highlighted in Thomas 
(1999; 2007) work, whether they occur between individual and care staff, frontline staff and 
management, practice and policy, or along other culturally relevant lines such as gender, 
religion, ethnicity and so on. Such investigations would further benefit from a framework 
which explicitly positions both sides of the threshold as powerful and active in their 
respective areas, avoiding any reconstruction of narratives where either side is constructed 
as powerless, passive, or objects of pity, something that is crucial when exploring the 
experiences of marginalised people.  
The Dasein Perspective  
A further contribution of this thesis is grounded in its use of Heideggerian theory, and 
particularly its construction of the person with dementia as Dasein-with-dementia. This shift 
away from implicit Cartesian constructions of the person that forefront cognitive function a 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
prerequisite to self allows for a unilateral rejection of the narratives of decay. The implications 
of this are profound. Because Dasein is not contingent on cognition, it cannot be eroded 
through cognitive impairment. Because Dasein is always present in-the-world and 
experiencing it, people with dementia can never be constructed as removed or absent from 
the world, nor can they be discussed as empty, hollow, or lost. Instead, it becomes necessary 
to explore the experiences of people with dementia from a position that both explicitly and 
implicitly affirms the enduring undiminished character of Dasein-with-dementia, whose 
experiences of being in the world may be transformed, but are valid nevertheless. As a result, 
adopting a Dasein perspective becomes about more than a flight of philosophical fancy. By 
understanding people with dementia as Dasein, it becomes possible to erase not only the 
harmful effects of the narratives of decay, but to silence the narrative entirely, for Dasein is 
immune to the very processes these constructions rely on. To be able to reject these 
narratives out of hand rather than battling with them as adversaries worthy of engagement 
has the potential to profoundly impact the way in which we as researchers communicate, 
how we convey our results to practice, how practitioners engage, and ultimately how people 
with dementia come to understand what it means to be-with-dementia. That a Dasein 
perspective allows an explicit consideration of the spatial and relational aspects of being-in-
the-world as dwelling and as being-with-others allows for greater nuance of conceptualisation 
and, ultimately, a richer understanding of what it means to live with dementia.  
Dwelling  
In 2011, Buffel et al., sought to capture the complex relationships that develop places and 
the people who dwell there. Individuals, they argued are not only shaped by exchanges 
with places; people also shape and create the environment in everyday (inter)action (p.20). 
While such a statement opens the way for a nuanced discussion of relational thresholds, it 
9: Conclusion 
does so only in relation to geographical gerontology and place making practices. This is, in 
part, the thinking that I have sought to extend by drawing on Heideggers concept of 
dwelling, and of Dasein as dwellers (1957/1993, p15). Because those who dwell are 
constantly engaged in practices of building and creating (bauen) and preservation (wohnen) 
there will always be a meaningful and on-going relationship between the dweller and the 
place in which they dwell. From such a perspective, the understanding of people with 
dementia as undiminished dwellers allows this work to situate itself both within the context 
of the Neighbourhoods and Dementia Project, and the wider dementia literatures.  
It is worth noting, too, that this field is still in its relative infancy. Keady et al., (2012) 
highlighted a distinct trend in the way in which people with dementia were treated in the 
literature as distinct and separate from the wider social and material world. This construction 
of people with dementia as fundamentally passive and separate from resulted in there being 
no research [] that explore[d] everyday neighbourhood practices for those affected by 
[dementia] (p.160) at the time of the review. This has changed substantially over the last six 
years, in no small part due to the work of researchers aligned with the wider Neighbourhoods 
and Dementia project. It is through drawing together eight distinct work packages that the 
Neighbourhoods project has been able to   
centralise the vision and values of people living with dementia and their carers in research practice; 
embrace creativity, innovation and shared stories; and empower the experience of people living with 
dementia, their carers and neighbourhood networks.  
(Swarbrick et al., 2016, p3)  
Being attached to this project has, in turn, played a significant role in furthering the empirical 
contributions of this thesis. For example, where Ward et al., (2017) used walking interviews 
as a major component of their data collection, I was able to incorporate walking interviews 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
as an optional activity, creating a more egalitarian distribution of power between myself and 
my participants who chose not only when, where, and for how long we walked, but if we 
walked at all. Similarly, my work drew valuable insight from that of Ferguson-Coleman 
and Young, (2017) in relation to the challenges that arise when people live with both hearing 
impairments and dementia, while broadening the scope to include a broader range of sensory 
impairment. This thesis also contributes to the Neighbourhoods project by offering novel 
insights; through interpreting inaccessible spaces as potentially oppressive and disabling, 
through exploring the experiences of people with dementia as they negotiate the physical 
thresholds between home and the neighbourhood spaces of Elsewhere, and by providing a 
philosophical grounding that makes the person with dementia as Dasein and, thus, dweller 
as inextricable from their lived environment. As a result, this thesis contributes both to the 
neighbourhood project and to the wider dementia literature by exploring not only how 
people with dementia experience spaces, relationships and temporalities, but also how they 
draw, redraw and manage the threshold spaces that separate them from Elsewhere.   
What thresholds do people with dementia encounter in the course 
of  their everyday lives? 
People with dementia encounter a range of thresholds in the course of their day-to-day 
experience, including physical, social, and temporal thresholds. Through the use of 
hermeneutic phenomenology, this thesis was able to conclude that thresholds occurred 
where participants encountered phenomena beyond their control, creating a threshold that 
was at once managed by the participant, and beholden on outside forces. As a result, physical 
thresholds often manifested horizontally at doorways and windows. Social thresholds 
occurred between the participant and others, and were particularly evident when 
differentiating between trusted people within a participants inner circle and those who were 
not, for example in contrasting Hazels relationship with her husband, and her relationship 
9: Conclusion 
with her sister. Finally, temporal thresholds occurred where the present as it was lived, 
intersected with past as it was gathered together in memory and the future as it was looked 
towards. It is important to note, however, that while all of the participants in this study all 
routinely encountered physical, social and temporal thresholds in the course of their day-to-
day lives, they differed significantly in how they drew upon their sense of dwelling, their lived 
history and their use of resources to manage and navigate these threshold spaces. 
How do people with dementia manage threshold spaces? 
While participants differed significantly in regards to the specific resources they called upon 
to manage threshold spaces, there were nevertheless commonalities between participants in 
what kinds of resources were used for what purpose. An example of this is the use of the 
inner circle of trusted people who could be relied upon to act as confidantes, innovators 
and aides without fear of stigmatisation or disablement. While the makeup of this inner circle 
varied dramatically depending on the individuals social network and lived experience, these 
relationships were key to maintaining independence and managing situations that might 
otherwise result in disablement, whether that was through providing direct aid, or indirect 
help through managing physical resources like pill diaries, colanders, or technologies. I 
contend that it is this enabling aspect that differentiates individuals within the inner circle 
from those outside of it. The inner circle were always discussed in a way that aligns itself 
from a Dasein perspective; as individuals who interacted with the person with dementia as a 
whole, undiminished person with impairments, rather than a remnant of a former self, now 
lost to disease and decay. As a result, those within the inner circle were often the only people 
who could be trusted with insight into the difficulties that the person with dementia 
experienced in everyday life. The introduction of this vulnerability into the relationship 
ensured that neither kinship nor formal arrangement could guarantee access to this relational 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
space, and outside efforts to forcefully situate an individual into the inner circle often met 
with targeted acts of resistance and threshold renegotiation.   
How does investigating thresholds facilitate greater insight and 
support better outcomes for people living with dementia?  
As one of the main contributions of this thesis, it is necessary at this point to highlight the 
three key advantages that are associated with adopting the threshold perspective. The first of 
these is a core facet of the threshold concept; its nonprescriptive approach. It is only by 
recognising that thresholds will manifest differently for different people over the course of 
their lives that it is possible to gain a meaningful insight into how they are made manifest in 
the present moment. Participants in this study, for example, all engaged in threshold practices 
around the main doorways into and out of their homes, however such a finding may hold 
true in other cultural contexts, in intergenerational homes, or where the person was admitted 
to a hospital ward, and so on. This is not to say that physical thresholds would not prove 
meaningful in such situations. Rather, adopting a thresholds perspective that allows for a 
multifaceted and relational experience of space that does not presuppose the location of the 
threshold based the assumptions of the person without dementia.   
The second advantage to the threshold perspective further builds on this foundation, by 
explicitly requiring those adopting a threshold perspective to engage with both sides as 
wielding agency and power. This positioning is particularly impactful in the context of 
dementia research and practice, where the narratives of loss and decay too often cast people 
living with dementia as passive victims of a shrinking world (c.f. Duggan et al., 2008; Buch, 
2015). Such an assumption is antithetical to a threshold approach, which recognises not only 
the external forces that shape the threshold between home and Elsewhere, self and other 
and so on, but the efforts and strategies employed by the individual, and their impact on the 
9: Conclusion 
threshold. This relationality allows for an acknowledgement of the micro and macro social 
forces that may serve to enable or disable the person with dementia without resorting to a 
nihilistic view wherein the person themselves is powerless to resist such contestations. Such 
an approach, therefore, would allow for those providing care services to recognise the 
influence wielded by both the care provider and the service user, as well as prompting 
meaningful reflections upon how these relations are played out in threshold spaces.  
Finally, taking a threshold perspective invites a recursive engagement with both the space 
itself, and the forces that shape either side of the threshold. This builds both upon the first 
advantage mentioned above, in that it recognises the subjective nature of threshold spaces, 
and upon the second, as it acknowledges that changes on either side of the threshold may 
impact the threshold itself. This allows both for improvement in cases where, for example, 
the neighbourhood surrounding the persons home is altered such that it enables easier 
transition between home and Elsewhere, and challenges where, for example, adverse 
weather, changes in infrastructure or a deterioration in health shift or remake the threshold 
entirely. Engaging with the threshold perspective in this way, therefore, not only facilitates a 
meaningful discussion around the enabling and disabling factors that shape the thresholds 
itself, but encourage all involved to explicitly engage with people with dementia as whole and 
undiminished individuals with a lived present and an oncoming future.  
What is the benefit of  exploring the experiences of  people with 
dementia as disabled people? 
There are significant benefits to be gained from approaching dementia from a disability 
perspective, both for people with dementia and for the wider dementia community. The 
most significant of these is entirely straightforward at a superficial level, but becomes more 
complex and contested when examined further: people with dementia are disabled people. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
The implications of adopting this position are twofold. Firstly, considering people with 
dementia as disabled people rather than people with disabilities necessitates a social model 
perspective, challenging established notions of how people with dementia become disabled. 
Specifically, this requires a distinction between impairment in slowed cognition, 
impairments in memory, executive function, way-finding and so on and disability, which is 
introduced and reinforced through societal expectations, social stigma, building design etc. 
Adopting a disability perspective transforms the narrative from one that constructs people 
as victims of dementia to one that situates them as people living with impairment who are 
victims of civilised oppression (Harvey, 2015). It is this oppression, and not the presence of 
impairment, that results in systematic marginalisation, stigmatisation, and fear. Indeed, to 
follow Thomas social-relational approach allows for a more nuanced insight of how this 
oppression can be enacted in the life of the individual than is achievable through the 
frameworks provided by the traditional social model, or other post-structuralist 
interpretations. Moving beyond the physical oppression of the original social model to one 
in which bureaucratic, architectural and political barriers are acknowledged alongside the 
interpersonal and internal mechanisms of disablement allows for a greater insight into the 
lived experiences of people with dementia for whom many of the barriers are not physical 
but attitudinal. Similarly, by accepting the body as a pre-social object, there is a greater 
opportunity to acknowledge narratives and experiences of embodied discomfort in a way 
that enables communication between professionals rooted in the broader disciplines of 
biology, psychology and sociology, facilitating a holistic approach to care. Critically, because 
this approach communicates in a way that is accessible to those from different disciplines, it 
can recognise the reality of dementia as a degenerative cognitive disease with real, pre-social 
biological effects while still offering a critique of those mechanisms of oppression which 
serve to limit what people with dementia can do, and who they can be. This final point creates 
9: Conclusion 
opportunities to open avenues between the growing fields of dementia research and activism 
with the well-established, politically powerful, disability movement. This serves to amplify 
the voices of people with dementia as people disabled by society, providing greater avenues 
for challenging the ablest assumptions that serve to undermine and oppress people with 
dementia, to their significant detriment. 
Future Directions  
This thesis makes original contributions through its introduction of the thresholds approach 
and its exploration of the experiences of people with dementia at physical, social and 
temporal thresholds; there are areas of the research that warrant further attention and opens 
up two primary avenues for future research.  
Firstly, there is the opportunity to expand the geographic scope of the study. While this thesis 
explored which thresholds were meaningful for people with dementia in Central Scotland, 
these participants were predominantly living in urban or suburban environments where 
access to services including public transportation could be managed with relative ease. This 
is easily contrasted with the difficulties associated with accessing services such as pharmacies 
in the Highlands (Rushworth, Cunningham, Pfleger, Hall and Stewart, 2017). Participants in 
this study arranged their relationships and physical practices in a manner in keeping with 
living in or near large population centres, and participants often knew their neighbours by 
sight, but not by name. It is likely, given the particular culture associated with rural Scotland, 
and particularly the Scottish Highlands and Islands (for example, as described in Foster, 
Munoz and Leslies 2018 investigation into Mens Sheds in the Highlands) that these 
thresholds would be experienced and negotiated differently by those living in these areas. As 
such, further research into experiences of people with dementia living in these rural settings 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
is warranted. Secondly, there is the potential to develop a participatory and activist study that 
moves beyond dementia. Although this thesis has argued for the inclusion of people with 
dementia into the wider disability community, and for their concerns to be addressed by 
disability activism, there remains a distinct divide between recommendation and action. 
There is, as a result, a need for future research to draw on the experiences of those disability 
researchers who have faced similar challenges in incorporating groups with mental illnesses 
or chronic illness into the wider disability community in order to identify and address 
potential barriers to inclusion.   
Final Thoughts  
This ethnographic exploration of thresholds reframes what it means to live with dementia. 
Viewed through a social relational lens, living with dementia is living life as a whole and 
undiminished person who remains powerful agents in their own right. The result is a call to 
challenge not only the oppressive systems of power that disable people with dementia, but 
to examine closely the belief systems upon which our practices are built. To what extent do 
we, as researchers, practitioners, professionals and members of society ascribe to the belief 
that an individuals worth can be measured by their cognitive capacity. How do we betray our 
best intensions, how do we contribute, through action or inaction, to the systems of civilised 
oppression which target people with dementia on the basis of their impairment? Moreover, 
having reflected upon our role, what do we do next?   
9: Conclusion 
The phrase Someone ought to do something was not, by itself, a helpful one.  People who used 
it never added the rider and that someone is me. 
(Pratchett, 1996, p111) 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
REFERENCES 
Ahmed, S. (2018). British Muslims perceptions of social cohesion: from multiculturalism to 
community cohesion and the war on terror. Crime, Law and Social Change, 1-15. 
Ajjawi, R., & Higgs, J. (2007). Using Hermeneutic Phenomenology to Investigate How 
Experienced Practitioners Lear n to Communicate Clinical Reasoning. The qualitative report, 12(4), 
612-638. 
Albinsson, L., & Strang, P. (2003). Existential concerns of families of late-stage dementia patients: 
questions of freedom, choices, isolation, death, and meaning. Journal of palliative medicine, 6(2), 225-
Algase, D. L., Moore, D. H., Vandeweerd, C., & Gavin-Dreschnack, D. J. (2007). Mapping the 
maze of terms and definitions in dementia-related wandering. Aging & mental health, 11(6), 686-698. 
Alzheimers Disease International (2016) Dementia friendly communities: key 
principles. London: Author 
Alzheimer's Society. (2017). What is dementia? London: Author. 
Andersen, E. (2008). Being below the horizon: the dwelling place of the nurse aide. International 
Journal of Human Caring, 12(4), 15-20. 
Andrews, G. J., Milligan, C., Phillips, D. R., & Skinner, M. W. (2009). Geographical gerontology: 
mapping a disciplinary intersection. Geography Compass, 3(5), 1641-1659. 
Angus, J., & Reeve, P. (2006). Ageism: A threat to aging well in the 21st century. Journal of Applied 
Gerontology, 25(2), 137-152. 
Annells, M. (1996). Hermeneutic phenomenology: Philosophical perspectives and current use in 
nursing research. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 23(4), 705-713. 
References 
Ashforth, A. (2005). Witchcraft, violence, and democracy in South Africa. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Atkinson, P. (1992). Understanding ethnographic texts. London:  Sage 
Ayalon, L., & Green, V. (2012). Grief in the initial adjustment process to the continuing care 
retirement community. Journal of Aging Studies, 26(4), 394-400. 
Bailey, S., Ridley, J., & Greenhill, B. (2010). Challenging behaviour: a human rights-based approach. 
Advances in Mental Health and Intellectual Disabilities, 4(2), 20-26. 
Barclay, L. (2016). In sickness and in dignity: a philosophical account of the meaning of dignity in 
health care. International journal of nursing studies, 61, 136-141. 
Bartlett, R. (2014). Citizenship in action: the lived experiences of citizens with dementia who 
campaign for social change. Disability & Society, 29(8), 1291-1304. 
Bartlett, R., Windemuth-Wolfson, L., Oliver, K., & Dening, T. (2017). Suffering with dementia: 
the other side of living well. International Psychogeriatrics, 29(2), 177-179. 
Basting, A.D., (2009). Forget memory: Creating better lives for people with dementia. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press 
Baumbusch, J. L. (2011). Conducting critical ethnography in longterm residential care: experiences 
of a novice researcher in the field. Journal of advanced nursing, 67(1), 184-192. 
Beard, R. L., Knauss, J., & Moyer, D. (2009). Managing disability and enjoying life: How we re-
frame dementia through personal narratives. Journal of Aging Studies, 23, 227-235. 
Behuniak, S. M. (2011). The living dead? The construction of people with Alzheimer's disease as 
zombies. Ageing & Society, 31(1), 70-92. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Bennett, M. (2013). The financial industry business ontology: Best practice for big data. Journal of 
Banking Regulation, 14(3-4), 255-268. 
Berger, R. J., & Lorenz, L. S. (2015). Disability and qualitative inquiry: Methods for rethinking an 
ableist world. Farham: Ashgate Publishing 
Berger, R. J., Feucht, J. A., & Flad, J. (2014). Disability, augmentative communication, and the American 
dream. Lanham: Lexington Books. 
Blackman, T. (2006). Placing health: neighbourhood renewal, health improvement and complexity. 
Bristol: Polity Press. 
Blain-Moraes, S., Chesser, S., Kingsnorth, S., McKeever, P., & Biddiss, E. (2013). Biomusic: a 
novel technology for revealing the personhood of people with profound multiple disabilities. 
Augmentative and Alternative Communication, 29(2), 159-173. 
Bond, J., & Corner, L. (2001). Researching dementia: are there unique methodological challenges 
for health services research?. Ageing & Society, 21(1), 95-116. 
Bonner, A. F., Field, T. S., Lemay, C. A., Mazor, K. M., Andersen, D. A., Compher, C. J., ... & 
Gurwitz, J. H. (2015). Rationales that providers and family members cited for the use of 
antipsychotic medications in nursing home residents with dementia. Journal of the American Geriatrics 
Society, 63(2), 302-308. 
Bontekoe, R. (1996) Dimensions of the Hermenutic Circle. New York: Humanity Books 
Bourbonnais, A., & Ducharme, F. (2010). The meanings of screams in older people living with 
dementia in a nursing home. International Psychogeriatrics, 22(07), 1172-1184. 
Boyle, G. (2014). Recognising the agency of people with dementia. Disability & Society, 29(7), 1130-
1144. 
References 
Brady, M. C., Fredrick, A., & Williams, B. (2012). People with aphasia: capacity to consent, research 
participation and intervention inequalities. International Journal of Stroke, 8(3), 193-196. 
Brewer, J. D. (2000) Ethnography. Buckingham, Open University Press 
Brisenden, S. (1986). Independent living and the medical model of disability. Disability, Handicap & 
Society, 1(2), 173-178. 
Brooker, D. (2003). What is person-centred care in dementia?. Reviews in clinical gerontology, 13(3), 
215-222. 
Brooks, M. (2006). Man-to-man: A body talk between male friends. Qualitative Inquiry, 12, 185-
Brorsson, A., hman, A., Lundberg, S., Cutchin, M. P., & Nygrd, L. (2018). How accessible are 
grocery shops for people with dementia? A qualitative study using photo documentation and focus 
group interviews. Dementia, 1471301218808591. 
Buber, M. (1970). I and Thou. (W. Kaufman Trans.) USA: Charles Scribner's Sons. (Original Work 
Published 1923) 
Buch, E. D. (2013). Senses of care: Embodying inequality and sustaining personhood in the home 
care of older adults in Chicago. American ethnologist, 40(4), 637-650. 
Buffel, T., Vert, D., De Donder, L., De Witte, N., Dury, S., Vanwing, T., & Bolsenbroek, A. 
(2011). Theorising the relationship between older people and their immediate social living 
environment. International Journal of Lifelong Education, 31(1), 13-32. 
Buse, C., & Twigg, J. (2014). Women with dementia and their handbags: Negotiating identity, 
privacy and home through material culture. Journal of aging studies, 30, 14-22. 
Buse, C., & Twigg, J. (2016). Materialising memories: Exploring the stories of people with dementia 
through dress. Ageing & Society, 36(6), 1115-1135. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Buse, C., Nettleton, S., Martin, D., & Twigg, J. (2017). Imagined bodies: Architects and their 
constructions of later life. Ageing & Society, 37(7), 1435-1457. 
Card, C. (2002). The atrocity paradigm: A theory of evil. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Carpiano, R. M. (2008). Come take a walk with me: The Go-Along interview as a novel method 
for studying the implications of place for health and well-being. Health & place, 15(1), 263-272. 
Carson, V. B., Vanderhorst, K. J., & Koenig, H. G. (2015). Help My Mother Is Lost and I Cannot 
Find Her. In Care Giving for Alzheimers Disease (pp. 43-50). Springer, New York, NY. 
Chacko, E. E., Wright, W. M., Worrall, R. C., Adamson, C., & Cheung, G. (2015). Reactions to 
driving cessation: a qualitative study of people with dementia and their families. Australasian 
Psychiatry : Bulletin of Royal Australian and New Zealand College of Psychiatrists, 23(5), 4969. 
Chao, S. Y., Chen, C. R., Liu, H. Y., & Clark, M. J. (2008). Meet the real elders: reminiscence links 
past and present. Journal of Clinical Nursing, 17(19), 2647-2653. 
Chard, G., Liu, L., & Mulholland, S. (2009). Verbal cueing and environmental modifications: 
Strategies to improve engagement in occupations in persons with Alzheimer disease. Physical & 
Occupational Therapy in Geriatrics, 27(3), 197-211. 
Clark, A., & Emmel, N. (2010). Using Walking Interviews. Realities Toolkit# 13. ESRC National. 
Clarke, A. (2006). Qualitative interviewing: Encountering ethical issues and challenges. Nurse 
Researcher, 13(4). 
Clarke, C. L., & Keady, J. (1996). Researching dementia care and family caregiving: Extending 
ethical responsibilities. Health Care in Later Life, 1(2), 85-95. 
Cooney, C., Howard, R., & Lawlor, B. (2006). Abuse of vulnerable people with dementia by their 
carers: can we identify those most at risk?. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry: A journal of the 
psychiatry of late life and allied sciences, 21(6), 564-571. 
References 
Corbin, J., & Morse, J. M. (2003). The unstructured interactive interview: Issues of reciprocity and 
risks when dealing with sensitive topics. Qualitative inquiry, 9(3), 335-354. 
Corker, M., & French, S. (1999). Disability discourse. Buckingham, England: Open University Press. 
Cotrell, V., & Schulz, R. (1993). The perspective of the patient with Alzheimer's disease: a neglected 
dimension of dementia research. The Gerontologist, 33(2), 205-211. 
Crampton, J., Dean, J., Eley, R., & AESOP Consortium. (2012). Creating a dementia-friendly York. 
York: Joseph Rowntree Foundation. 
Crow, L. (1996). Including all of our lives: renewing the social model of disability. In Barnes, C., 
& Mercer, G. (Eds.). Exploring the divide: Illness and disability. Leeds: Disability Press. 
Crowther, S., Smythe, E., & Spence, D. (2014). The joy at birth: An interpretive hermeneutic 
literature review. Midwifery, 30(4), e157-e165. 
Crowther, S., Smythe, E., & Spence, D. (2015). Kairos time at the moment of birth. Midwifery, 
31(4), 451-457. 
Davidson, J., & Milligan, C. (2004). Embodying emotion sensing space: introducing emotional 
geographies. Social and cultural geography 5(4): 523-532. 
Davis, D. H. (2004). dementia: sociological and philosophical constructions. Social Science & 
Medicine, 58(2), 369-378. 
de Laine, M. (1997). Ethnography, theory and applications in health research. Sydney: MacLennan 
and Petty. 
Dementia Engagement and Empowerment Project (DEEP). (2015). Dementia words matter: 
Guidelines on language about dementia. Retrieved from http://dementiavoices.org.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2015/03/DEEP-Guide-Language.pdf. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Denzin, N. K. (2003). Performance ethnography: Critical pedagogy and the politics of culture. 
London: Sage. 
Department of Health for England and Wales. (2001). National Service Framework. London: Author. 
Department of Health. (2015). Prime Minister's challenge on dementia 2020. London: Author. 
Dewing, J. (2002). From ritual to relationship: a person-centred approach to consent in qualitative 
research with older people who have a dementia. Dementia, 1(2), 157-171. 
Dewing, J. (2007). Participatory research: A method for process consent with persons who have 
dementia. dementia, 6(1), 11-25. 
Dewing, J. (2008). Personhood and dementia: revisiting Tom Kitwoods ideas. International journal 
of older people nursing, 3(1), 3-13. 
Diprose, R. (2011). Building and belonging amid the plight of dwelling. Angelaki, 16(4), 59-72. 
DiZazzo-Miller, R., & Pociask, F. D. (2015). Dementia in the Context of Disability. Physical & 
Occupational Therapy in Geriatrics, 33(2), 139-151. 
Doctor, F., Iqbal, R., & Naguib, R. N. (2014). A fuzzy ambient intelligent agents approach for 
monitoring disease progression of dementia patients. .Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized 
Computing, 5(1), 147-158. 
Donegan, K., Fox, N., Black, N., Livingston, G., Banerjee, S., & Burns, A. (2017). Trends in 
diagnosis and treatment for people with dementia in the UK from 2005 to 2015: a longitudinal 
retrospective cohort study. The Lancet Public Health, 2(3), e149-e156. 
Dorenlot, P. (2005). Applying the social model of disability to dementia: present-day challenges. 
Dementia 4(4), 459-461 
References 
Draper, J. (2002). It's the first scientific evidence': men's experience of pregnancy confirmation. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing, 39(6), 563-570. 
Draucker, C. B. (1999). The critique of Heideggerian hermeneutical nursing research. Journal of 
advanced nursing, 30(2), 360-373. 
Duggan, S., Blackman, T., Martyr, A., & Van Schaik, P. (2008). The impact of early dementia on 
outdoor life: Ashrinking world'?. Dementia, 7(2), 191-204. 
Dugmore, O., Orrell, M., & Spector, A. (2015). Qualitative studies of psychosocial interventions 
for dementia: a systematic review. Aging & mental health, 19(11), 955-967. 
Dwyer, S. (2010). The deprivation of liberty safeguards and people with dementia: Implications for 
social workers. British Journal of Social Work, 40(5), 1503-1516. 
Edwards, C., & Titchen, A. (2003). Research into patients perspectives: relevance and usefulness 
of phenomenological sociology. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 44(5), 450-460. 
Ellis, C. (2007). Telling secrets, revealing lives: Relational ethics in research with intimate others. 
Qualitative inquiry, 13(1), 3-29. 
Ellis, C. (2016). Interviewing and storytelling from a relational ethics of care. In: I. Goodson, A. 
Antikainen, P. Sikes, M. Andrews  (Eds). The Routledge international handbook on narrative and life history, 
Ellis, C., & Patti, C. (2014). With heart: Compassionate interviewing and storytelling with 
Holocaust survivors. Storytelling, Self, Society, 10(1), 93-118. 
Emerson, R. M., Fretz, R. I., & Shaw, L. L. (2001). Participant observation and fieldnotes. In. 
Atkinson, P., Coffey, A., Delamont, S., Lofland, J., & Lofland, L. Handbook of ethnography, London: 
Sage 352-368. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Equality and Human Rights Commission. (2010). Employment: Statutory Code of Practice. Equality and 
Human Rights Commission. 
Fauth, E. B., & Gibbons, A. (2014). Which behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia 
are the most problematic? Variability by prevalence, intensity, distress ratings, and associations 
with caregiver depressive symptoms. International journal of geriatric psychiatry, 29(3), 263-271. 
Fehling, P., & Dassen, T. (2017). A critical systematic review and synopsis of the alignment of 
scientific developments in surveillance technology in nursing care facilities. Journal of Nursing, 4(1), 
Ferguson-Coleman, E., & Young, A. (2017). Storying stories to represent the lived experience of 
Deaf people living with dementia in research. In J. Keady, L.C. Hydn, A. Johnson & C. Swarbrick 
(Eds) Social Research Methods in Dementia Studies (pp. 169-191). London: Routledge. 
Fetherstonhaugh, D., Tarzia, L., & Nay, R. (2013). Being central to decision making means I am 
still here: the essence of decision making for people with dementia. Journal of aging studies, 27(2), 
143-150. 
Fetterman, D. M. (1998). Ethnography. In L. Bickman & D. J. Rog (Eds.), Handbook of applied social 
research methods, 473-504. Thousand Oaks: Sage. 
Finkelstein, V. (1980). Attitudes and disabled people: Issues for discussion (No. 5). World Rehabilitation 
Fund, Inc.. 
Flowers, P., Larkin, M., & Smith, J. A. (2009). Interpretative phenomenological analysis: Theory, 
method and research. London: Sage 
Fontana, A., & Smith, R. W. (1989). Alzheimer's disease victims: The unbecoming of self and 
the normalization of competence. Sociological perspectives, 32(1), 35-46. 
References 
Foster, E. J., Munoz, S. A., & Leslie, S. J. (2018). The personal and community impact of a Scottish 
Men's Shed. Health & social care in the community, 26(4), 527-537. 
Frank, A. (2004). Moral non-fiction: Life writing and childrens disability. In P. J. Eakin (Ed.), The 
ethics of life writing (pp. 174-194). Ithaca: Cornell University Press. 
Freund, P. (2001). Bodies, disability and spaces: the social model and disabling spatial 
organisations. Disability & Society, 16(5), 689-706. 
Gadsby,H., (Writer), Parry, M., & Olb, J. (Directors). (2018). Nanette [Comedy Special]. United 
States: Netflix. 
Garcia, C. M., Eisenberg, M. E., Frerich, E. A., Lechner, K. E., & Lust, K. (2012). Conducting go-
along interviews to understand context and promote health. Qualitative health research, 22(10), 1395-
1403. 
Geertz, C. (1973). The Interpretation Of Cultures. New York: Basic Books 
Giaccaria, P., & Minca, C. (2011). Topographies/topologies of the camp: Auschwitz as a spatial 
threshold. Political Geography, 30(1), 3-12. 
Glaser, B. G., Strauss, A. L., & Strutzel, E. (1968). The discovery of grounded theory; strategies 
for qualitative research. Nursing research, 17(4), 364. 
Godfrey, M., Townsend, J., Surr, C., Boyle, G., & Brooker, D. (2005). Prevention and service provision: 
Mental health problems in later life. Institute of Health Sciences & Public Health Research : Leeds. 
Godwin, B., & Waters, H. (2009). In solitary confinement: Planning end-of-life well-being with 
people with advanced dementia, their family and professional carers. Mortality, 14(3), 265-285. 
Goodley, D. (2012). Dis/entangling critical disability studies. Disability & Society, 28(5), 631-644. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Greenwood, D. (1998). A review of:Dementia reconsidered: The person comes first. The 
European Journal of Psychotherapy, Counselling & Health, 1(1), 154-157. 
Gross, J., Harmon, M. E., Myers, R. A., Evans, R. L., Kay, N. R., Rodriguez-Charbonier, S., & 
Herzog, T. R. (2004). Recognition of self among persons with dementia: Pictures versus names as 
environmental supports. Environment and Behavior, 36(3), 424-454. 
Hammersley, M. (2018). What is ethnography? Can it survive? Should it?. Ethnography and 
Education, 13(1), 1-17. 
Hammersley, M., & Atkinson, P. (1983). Ethnography: Principles in practice. London: Routledge 
Harhaj, N. (2014). They come here because itsa place of refuge: Residential Care Facilities with 
Cultural Affiliations (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from Queens University Repository 
Harper, D. (2012) Visual sociology.  Oxon: Routledge 
Harvey, J. (1999). Civilized oppression. Oxford: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers. 
Harvey, J. (2015). Civilized oppression and moral relations: Victims, fallibility, and the moral 
community. United States: Palgrave Macmillan 
Heidegger, M. (1993). Building Dwelling Thinking. In D. F. Krell (ed.), Basic Writings, (2nd ed). San 
Francisco: Harper Colins. (Original work published 1954) 
Heidegger, M., (1962) Being and Time.  J. Macquarrie & E. Robinson (eds. and trans). Oxford: 
Blackwell. (Original Work published 1927) 
Hellstrom, I., & Torres, S. (2014) The not yet horizon: understandings of the future amongst 
couples living with dementia. Dementia, 15, 15621585. 
Hellstrom, I., Nolan, M., Nordenfelt, L., & Lundh, U. (2007). Ethical and methodological issues 
in interviewing persons with dementia. Nursing Ethics, 14(5), 608619. 
References 
Her Majesty's Stationary Office. (2005). Mental Capacity Act London: Author 
Herskovits, E. (1995). Struggling over subjectivity: Debates about the self and Alzheimer's 
disease. Medical anthropology quarterly, 9(2), 146-164. 
Hockey, J. L. (1990). Experiences of death: An anthropological account. Edinburgh:  Edinburgh University 
Press. 
Hofmann, B. (2017). Suffering: harm to bodies, minds, and persons. Handbook of the philosophy of 
medicine, 129-145. 
Holland, C. (2015). Public places and age. In: J. Twigg & W. Martin (eds) Routledge Handbook of 
Cultural Gerontology. New York: Routledge, 455-462. 
Holland, K., Blood, R. W., Thomas, S., Karunaratne, A. & Lewis, S. (2010). 'That's not reality for 
me': Australian audiences respond to The Biggest Loser. Annual International Communications 
Association Conference pp. 1-26. 
Holloway, I., & Biley, F. C. (2011). Being a qualitative researcher. Qualitative health research, 21(7), 
968-975. 
Holmn, K., Ericsson, K., & Winblad, B. (2000). Social and emotional loneliness among non-
demented and demented elderly people. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, 31(3), 177-192. 
Hoxie, R. E., & Rubenstein, L. Z. (1994). Are older pedestrians allowed enough time to cross 
intersections safely?. Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 42(3), 241-244. 
Hughes, J., King, V., Rodden, T., & Andersen, H. (1995). The role of ethnography in interactive 
systems design. interactions, 2(2), 56-65. 
Hugo, J., & Ganguli, M. (2014). Dementia and cognitive impairment: Epidemiology, diagnosis, and 
treatment. Clinics in geriatric medicine, 30(3), 421-442. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Hurdley, R. (2013) Home, materiality, memory and belonging: keeping culture. Basingstoke: 
Palgrave Macmillan 
Imrie, R. (2000). Disability and discourses of mobility and movement. Environment and Planning A, 
32(9), 1641-1656. 
Jackson, J. E. (1990). I am a fieldnote: Fieldnotes as a symbol of professional identity. In Sanjek, 
R. (Ed.). Fieldnotes: The makings of anthropology. London: Cornell University Press 
Jarldorn, M. (2016). Picturing creative approaches to social work research: Using photography to 
promote social change. Aotearoa New Zealand Social Work, 28(4), 5. 
Jones, D. W. (1998). Distressing histories and unhappy interviewing. Oral History, 26(2), 49-56. 
Karlawish, J. H., Casarett, D. J., & James, B. D. (2002). Alzheimer's disease patients' and caregivers' 
capacity, competency, and reasons to enroll in an earlyphase Alzheimer's disease clinical trial. 
Journal of the American Geriatrics Society, 50(12), 2019-2024. 
Keady, J., Campbell, S., Barnes, H., Ward, R., Li, X., Swarbrick, C., ... & Elvish, R. (2012). 
Neighbourhoods and dementia in the health and social care context: a realist review of the literature 
and implications for UK policy development. Reviews in Clinical Gerontology, 22(2), 150-163. 
Kemmis, S. (2006). Participatory action research and the public sphere. Educational action research, 
14(4), 459-476. 
Kincaid, C., & Peacock, J. R. (2003). The effect of a wall mural on decreasing four types of door-
testing behaviors. Journal of Applied Gerontology, 22(1), 76-88. 
Kissel, E. C., & Carpenter, B. D. (2007). It's all in the details: Physician variability in disclosing a 
dementia diagnosis. Aging and Mental Health,11(3), 273-280. 
Kitwood, T. (1990). Concepts in developmental psychology. Concern for others: A new 
psychology of conscience and morality. US: Taylor & Frances. 
References 
Kitwood, T. (1993). Person and process in dementia. International journal of geriatric psychiatry, 8(7), 
541-545. 
Kitwood, T. (1997). Dementia reconsidered: The person comes first. Philadelphia, PA: Open University 
Press. 
Kivimki, M., & Singh-Manoux, A. (2018). Prevention of dementia by targeting risk factors. The 
Lancet, 391(10130), 1574-1575. 
Knoblauch, H. (2005). Focused ethnography. Forum qualitative sozialforschung/forum: 
qualitative social research 6 (3). 
Koen, J. D., & Yonelinas, A. P. (2014). The effects of healthy aging, amnestic mild cognitive 
impairment, and Alzheimers disease on recollection and familiarity: A meta-analytic review. 
Neuropsychology review, 24(3), 332-354. 
Kontos, P., & Martin, W. (2013). Embodiment and dementia: Exploring critical narratives of 
selfhood, surveillance, and dementia care. Dementia, 12(3), 288-302. 
Latimer, J. (2018). Afterword: materialities, care,ordinary affects, power and politics. Sociology of 
health & illness, 40(2), 379-391. 
Laverty, S. M. (2003). Hermeneutic phenomenology and phenomenology: A comparison of 
historical and methodological considerations. International journal of qualitative methods, 2(3), 21-35. 
Leech, B. L., (2002) Asking Questions: Techniques for Semistructured Interviews PS: Political 
Science and Poltiics 35(4) 665-668 
Lin, S. Y. (2017). Dementia-friendly communities and being dementia friendly in healthcare 
settings. Current opinion in psychiatry, 30(2), 145. 
Livingston, G., Sommerlad, A., Orgeta, V., Costafreda, S. G., Huntley, J., Ames, D., ... & Cooper, 
C. (2017). Dementia prevention, intervention, and care. The Lancet, 390(10113), 2673-2734. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Locke, J. (1975). An essay concerning human understanding. Oxford: Clarendon Press. (Original Work 
Published 1694) 
Lofland, J., & Lofland, L. H. (2006). Developing analysis. In. Analyzing social settings: A Guide to 
Qualitative Observation and Analysis. (4th Ed.) California: Wadsworth Thomson 
Lpez, D., & Snchez-Criado, T. (2009). Dwelling the telecare home: place, location and 
habitability. Space and Culture, 12(3), 343-358. 
Lovatt, M. (2018). Becoming at home in residential care for older people: a material culture 
perspective. Sociology of health & illness, 40(2), 366-378. 
Lovett, H. (1996) Learning to Listen: Positive approaches and people with difficult behaviour. 
London: Jessica Kingsley 
Lowenthal, D. (2015). The past is a foreign country-revisited. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Luborsky, M. R. (1994). The cultural adversity of physical disability: Erosion of full adult 
personhood. Journal of Aging Studies, 8(3), 239-253. 
Luntly, M. (2006) Keeping track, autobiography, and the conditions for self-erosion In: J. C., 
Hughes, S. J., Louw & S. R., Sabat, (eds)dementia: Mind, meaning, and the person. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Lyman, K. A. (1989). Bringing the social back in: A critique of the biomedicalization of dementia. 
The Gerontologist, 29(5), 597-605. 
Malinowski, B. (1922) Argonauts of the western Pacific. New York: Dutton 
Manthorpe, J., & Samsi, K. (2016). Person-centered dementia care: current perspectives. Clinical 
interventions in aging, 11, 1733. 
References 
Marino, G. D., & Marino, S. E., (2014) Paying Homage to the Silence of Suffering In:  R. M. Green, 
&  N. J. Palpant (Eds.). Suffering and bioethics. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Martyr, A., Nelis, S. M., Quinn, C., Wu, Y. T., Lamont, R. A., Henderson, C., ... & Morris, R. G. 
(2018). Living well with dementia: a systematic review and correlational meta-analysis of factors 
associated with quality of life, well-being and life satisfaction in people with dementia. Psychological 
medicine, 48(13), 2130-2139. 
Mason, J., & Davies, K. (2009). Coming to our senses? A critical approach to sensory methodology. 
Qualitative research, 9(5), 587-603. 
McCleery, J. (2008). Severe and enduring mental illness in old age. In R. Jacoby, C. Oppenheimer, 
T. Dening, & A. Thomas (Eds.), The Oxford textbook of old age psychiatry (pp. 627639). Oxford 
University Press: Oxford. 
McCracken, K., and Phillips, D. R. (2005). International demographic transitions. In: G.J. Andrews 
and D.R. Phillips,(eds) Ageing and place: perspectives, policy, practice. New York: Routledge, pp. 3660. 
McKillop, J. (2002). Did research alter anything. In H. Wilkinson, The perspectives of people with 
dementia: Research methods and motivations, 109-113. London: Jessica Kingsley 
McKillop, J. (2016), Driving and dementia  my experiences, Peer to peer resource, Edinburgh: 
Life Changes Trust. 
McKnight, J. L. (1987). Regenerating community. Social Policy,17(3), 5458. 
McMillan, D. W., & Chavis, D. M. (1986). Sense of community: A definition and theory. Journal of 
community psychology, 14(1), 6-23. 
McRuer, R. (2006). Crip theory: Cultural signs of queerness and disability. New York: New York 
University Press. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Milby, E., Murphy, G., & Winthrop, A. (2017). Diagnosis disclosure in dementia: Understanding 
the experiences of clinicians and patients who have recently given or received a diagnosis. 
Dementia, 16(5), 611-628. 
Millen, D.R. (2000).  Rapid Ethnography: Time Deepening Strategies for HCI Field Research. 
Proceedings of the 3rd Conference on Designing Interactive Systems: Processes, Practices, 
Methods, and Techniques New York: ACM 
Miller, D. (2010). Stuff. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Miller, L. M. S., & Bell, R. A. (2012). Online health information seeking: the influence of age, 
information trustworthiness, and search challenges. Journal of aging and health, 24(3), 525-541. 
Miller, T., & Boulton, M. (2007). Changing constructions of informed consent: Qualitative research 
and complex social worlds. Social science & medicine, 65(11), 2199-2211. 
Milligan, C. (2000). Bearing the burden: towards a restructured geography of caring. Area, 32(1), 
49-58. 
Milligan, C. (2000). Bearing the burden: towards a restructured geography of caring. Area, 32(1), 
49-58. 
Milligan, C., & Morbey, H. (2013). Older men who care: understanding their care and support 
needs. University of Lancaster 
Milligan, C., & Power, A. (2009). The changing geography of care. A companion to health and medical 
geography, 567-586. 
Milne, A., & Peet, J. (2008). Challenges & resolutions to psycho-social well-being for people in 
receipt of a diagnosis of dementia: A literature review. Alzheimers Society: London. 
Minkler, M., & Fadem, P. (2002). " Successful Aging:" A Disability Perspective. Journal of Disability 
Policy Studies, 12(4), 229-235. 
References 
Mintzer, J. E., Brawman-Mintzer, O., Mirski, D. F., & Barkin, K. (2000). Anxiety in the behavioral 
and psychological symptoms of dementia. International Psychogeriatrics, 12(S1), 139-142. 
Morgan, M. F., Cuskelly, M., & Moni, K. B. (2014). Unanticipated ethical issues in a participatory 
research project with individuals with intellectual disability. Disability & Society, 29(8), 1305-1318. 
Morris, J. (2004). Independent living and community care: a disempowering framework. Disability 
& Society, 19(5), 427-442. 
Namazi, K. H., & Johnson, B. D. (1991). Physical environmental cues to reduce the problems of 
incontinence in Alzheimer's disease units. American Journal of Alzheimer's Care and Related Disorders 
& Research, 6(6), 22-28. 
Namazi, K. H., Rosner, T. T., & Rechlin, L. (1991). Long-term memory cuing to reduce visuo-
spatial disorientation in Alzheimer's disease patients in a special care unit. American Journal of 
Alzheimer's Care and Related Disorders & Research, 6(6), 10-15. 
Nastasi, B. K., Varjas, K., Schensul, S. L., Silva, K. T., Schensul, J. J., & Ratnayake, P. (2000). The 
Participatory Intervention Model: A framework for conceptualizing and promoting intervention 
acceptability. School psychology quarterly, 15(2), 207. 
Nord, C. (2013). A day to be lived. Elderly peoples' possessions for everyday life in assisted living. 
Journal of Aging Studies, 27(2), 135-142. 
Nuffield Council on Bioethics (2009) Dementia: Ethical Issues. Nuffield Council on Bioethics: 
London. 
Nunkoosing, K. (2005). The problems with interviews. Qualitative health research, 15(5), 698-706. 
Nygrd, L. (2006). How can we get access to the experiences of people with dementia? Suggestions 
and reflections. Scandinavian Journal of Occupational Therapy, 13(2), 101-112. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Nygrd, L., & Borell, L. (1998). A life-world of altering meaning: Expressions of the illness 
experience of dementia in everyday life over 3 years. The Occupational Therapy Journal of Research, 
18(2), 109-136. 
Oakley, A., (1981). Interviewing Women: a Contradiction in Terms. In H. Roberts (Ed.). Doing 
Feminist Research. London: Routledge pp. 30-61. 
hln, J., Ekman, I., Zingmark, K., Bolmsj, I., & Benzein, E. (2014). Conceptual development 
of at-homeness despite illness and disease: A review. International journal of qualitative studies on 
health and well-being, 9(1), 23677. 
Oliver, M. (1990). Politics of disablement. Macmillan International Higher Education. 
Oliver, M. (1996) Understanding disability. London: Macmillan. 
Oliver, M. (2013). The social model of disability: Thirty years on. Disability & society, 28(7), 1024-
1026. 
Orona, C. J. (1990). Temporality and identity loss due to Alzheimer's disease. Social Science & 
Medicine, 30(11), 1247-1256. 
Paterson, C. (2008). Assisted suicide and euthanasia: a natural law ethics approach. Routledge. 
Paterson, K., & Hughes, B. (1999). Disability studies and phenomenology: The carnal politics of 
everyday life. Disability & Society, 14(5), 597-610. 
Patra, R. (2006). A Comparative Study on Vaastu Shastra and Heidegger's Building, Dwelling and 
Thinking. Asian Philosophy, 16(3), 199-218. 
Peel, E. (2014). The living death of Alzheimer's versus Take a walk to keep dementia at bay: 
representations of dementia in print media and carer discourse. Sociology of health & illness, 36(6), 
885-901. 
References 
Petersen, A. J. (2011). Research with individuals labeled other: Reflections on the research 
process. Disability & Society, 26(3), 293-305 
Phinney, A. (1998). Living with dementia from the patient's perspective. Journal of Gerontological 
Nursing, 24(6), 8-9. 
Pink, S. (2009). Doing sensory ethnography. London: Sage. 
Pink, S. (2012) (ed.) Advances in visual methodology. London: Sage. 
Pink, S., & Morgan, J. (2013). Shortterm ethnography: Intense routes to knowing. Symbolic 
Interaction, 36(3), 351-361. 
Post, S. (2000) The concept of Alzheimer disease in a hypercognitive society. In: Whitehouse, P.J., 
Maurer, K., & Ballenger, J.F (Eds.) Concepts of Alzheimer disease: Biological, clinical and cultural perspectives, 
245-256. Johns Hopkins University Press: London. 
Pratchett, T. ( 2008). Foreword. In: Alzheimers Society. Dementia out of the Shadows. London: 
Alzheimers Society. 
Pratchett, T. (1996) Hogfather London: Victor Gollancz 
Pratt, R. (2002). Nobodys ever asked how I felt. In Wilkinson, H. The perspectives of people with 
dementia: Research methods and motivations. London: Jessica Kingsley Publishers 165-182. 
Radden, J., & Fordyce, J. M., (2006) Into the Darkness: Losing Identity with DementiaIn: J. C., 
Hughes, S. J., Louw & S. R., Sabat, (eds) dementia: Mind, meaning, and the person. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
Rader, J., Tournquist, E. M., & Black, T. (1996). Individualized Dementia CareCreative, 
Compassionate Approaches. Journal for Nurses in Professional Development, 12(3), 163-165. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Read, S. T., Toye, C., & Wynaden, D. (2017). Experiences and expectations of living with dementia: 
A qualitative study. Collegian, 24(5), 427-432. 
Reeve, D. (2008). Negotiating Disability in Everyday Life: The Experience of Psycho-Emotional 
Disablism, PhD Thesis, Lancaster: Lancaster University. 
Reeve, D. (2014) Psycho-emotional disablism in the lives of people experiencing mental distress, 
in H. Spandler, J. Anderson and B. Sapey (eds) Madness, Distress and the Politics of Disablement, 
Bristol: Policy Press, pp. 99-112. 
Richardson, M. (2000). How we live: participatory research with six people with learning 
difficulties. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 32(6), 1383-1395. 
Rogers, A. S. F.,  (2017). Claiming the law: an ethnography of Bolivian women's access to justice and legal 
consciousness (Doctoral dissertation). Retrieved from Stirling Online Research Repository 
Rush, K. L., Murphy, M. A., & Kozak, J. F. (2012). A photovoice study of older adults' 
conceptualizations of risk. Journal of Aging Studies, 26(4), 448-458. 
Rushworth, G. F., Cunningham, S., Pfleger, S., Hall, J., & Stewart, D. (2018). A cross-sectional 
survey of the access of older people in the Scottish Highlands to general medical practices, 
community pharmacies and prescription medicines. Research in Social and Administrative Pharmacy, 
14(1), 76-85. 
Sabat, S. R., & Harr, R. (1992). The construction and deconstruction of self in Alzheimer's disease. 
Ageing & Society, 12(4), 443-461. 
Schutz, A. (1970) (On Phenomenology and Social Relations. Ed. by Helmut R. Wagner, Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
Scottish Executive (2007) Guidance to Local Authorities: Provision of Community Care Services 
to Adults with Incapacity CCD5/ 2007. Edinburgh:  The Stationery Office 
References 
Selltiz, C., Johoda, M., Deutsch, M., & Cook, S.W. (1965) Research Methods in Social Relations London: 
Methuen 
Shakespeare, T. (1996). Rules of engagement: doing disability research. Disability & Society, 11(1), 
115-121. 
Shakespeare, T. (2004). Social models of disability and other life strategies. Scandinavian Journal of 
Disability Research, 6(1), 8-21. 
Shakespeare, T., & Watson, N. (2001). The social model of disability: an outdated ideology?. In 
Exploring theories and expanding methodologies: Where we are and where we need to go (pp. 9-28). Emerald 
Group Publishing Limited. 
Slattery, P., & Rapp, D. (2003). Ethics and the foundations of education: Teaching convictions in 
a postmodern world. Boston: Allyn & Bacon 
Smith, G. V., & Ekerdt, D. J. (2011). Confronting the material convoy in later life. Sociological Inquiry, 
81(3), 377-391. 
Smythe, E. (2011). From beginning to end: How to do hermeneutic interpretive phenomenology. 
In G. Thomson, F. Dykes, & S. Downe (Eds.), Qualitative research in midwifery and childbirth: 
Phenomenological approaches (pp. 3554). London: Routledge 
Spence, D. G. (2017). Supervising for robust hermeneutic phenomenology: Reflexive engagement 
within horizons of understanding. Qualitative health research, 27(6), 836-842. 
Stanley, L. (1990). Doing ethnography, writing ethnography: a comment on Hammersley. Sociology, 
24(4), 617-627. 
Stephens, A., Cheston, R., & Gleeson, K. (2012). An exploration into the relationships people with 
dementia have with physical objects: An ethnographic study. Dementia, 12(6), 697-712. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Surr, C. A. (2006). Preservation of self in people with dementia living in residential care: a socio-
biographical approach. Social science & medicine, 62(7), 1720-1730. 
Swain, J., & French, S. (2000). Towards an affirmation model of disability. Disability & society, 15(4), 
569-582. 
Swain, J., French, S., & Cameron, C. (2003). Controversial issues in a disabling society. McGraw-Hill 
Education (UK). 
Swain, J., French, S., Barnes, C., & Thomas, C. (Eds.). (2013). Disabling barriers-enabling environments. 
London: Sage. 
Swarbrick, C. M., Doors, O., Scottish Dementia Working Group, EDUCATE, Davis, K., & 
Keady, J. (2016). Visioning change: Co-producing a model of involvement and engagement in 
research (Innovative Practice). Dementia, 1471301216674559. 
Tedlock, B. (2000). Ethnography and Ethnographic Representation. In  Denzin, N., & Lincoln, Y. 
Handbook of Qualitative Research (2nd Ed). Thousand Oaks: Sage. 
Thomas, C. (1999). Female forms: Experiencing and understanding disability. McGraw-Hill 
Education (UK). 
Thomas, C. (2004). How is disability understood? An examination of sociological approaches. 
Disability & society, 19(6), 569-583. 
Thomas, C. (2007). Sociologies of disability and illness: Contested ideas in disability studies and 
medical sociology. Macmillan International Higher Education. 
Thomas, C. (2010). Negotiating the contested terrain of narrative methods in illness contexts. 
Sociology of health & illness, 32(4), 647-660. 
Thomas, C. (2012). Theorising disability and chronic illness: Where next for perspectives in 
medical sociology?. Social Theory & Health, 10(3), 209-228. 
References 
Thomas, C., & Milligan, C. (2015). How can and should UK society adjust to dementia?. Joseph 
Rowntree Viewpoint. 
Thomas, C., & Milligan, C. (2017). Dementia, disability rights and disablism: understanding the 
social position of people living with dementia. Disability & Society, 33(1), 115-131. 
Thomas, C., & Milligan, C. (2018). Dementia, disability rights and disablism: understanding the 
social position of people living with dementia. Disability & Society, 33(1), 115-131. 
Thomas, P., Gradwell, L., & Markham, N. (1997). Defining impairment within the social model of 
disability. Greater Manchester Coalition of Disabled People. Available online: http://disability-
studies.leeds.ac.uk/files/library/thomas-pam-Defining-Impairment-within-the-Social-Model-of-
Disability. pdf (accessed on 11 September 2018). 
Thyrian, J. R., Eichler, T., Reimann, M., Wucherer, D., Dreier, A., Michalowsky, B., & Hoffmann, 
W. (2016). Depressive symptoms and depression in people screened positive for dementia in 
primary careresults of the DelpHi-study. International psychogeriatrics, 28(6), 929-937. 
Titchen, A. (Ed.) (1993) Changing Nursing Practice through Action Research. Oxford: National Institute 
for Nursing. 
Topo, P., Saarikalle, K., Begley, E., Cahill, S., Holthe, T., & Macijauskiene, J. (2007). " I don't know 
about the past or the future, but today it's Friday"Evaluation of a time aid for people with 
dementia. Technology and Disability, 19(2, 3), 121-131. 
Tregaskis, C. (2002). Social model theory: The story so far. Disability & Society, 17(4), 457-470. 
Twigg, J. (2008). Clashing Temporalities In: A. Martin-Matthews & J. Philips (eds)Aging and Caring 
at the Intersection of Work and Home Life. East Sussex: Taylor and Francis 
Union of the Physically Impaired Against Segregation (UPIAS). (1975). Fundimental Principles. 
London: Author. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
van den Hoonaard, D. K. (2005). Am I doing it right?: Older widows as interview participants 
in qualitative research. Journal of Aging Studies, 19(3), 393-406. 
Van der Zalm, J. E., & Bergum, V. (2000). Hermeneuticphenomenology: providing living 
knowledge for nursing practice. Journal of advanced nursing, 31(1), 211-218. 
Van Gorp, B., & Vercruysse, T. (2012). Frames and counter-frames giving meaning to dementia: 
A framing analysis of media content. Social Science & Medicine, 74(8), 1274-1281. 
Van Maanen, J. (1988) Tales of the field: On wrlting ethnography. Chicago: University of Chicago Press 
van Manen, M. (1997). Researching lived experience: Human science for an action sensitive pedagogy (2nd ed.). 
University of Alberta, Edmonton: Althouse Press. 
Wall, P. D. (1999). Pain: the science of suffering. New York: Columbia University Press. 
Wang, M. S. (2019). Is Home the Best Place for Aging? the Complex Landscape of Eldercare. Social 
work in public health, 34(4), 330-342. 
Ward, R., & Campbell, S. (2013). Mixing methods to explore appearance in dementia care. 
Dementia, 12(3), 337-347. 
Ward, R., Clark, A., & Hargreaves, M. (2012). What does neighbourhood mean for carers of 
people with dementia? Journal of Dementia Care, 20(2), 33-36. 
Ward, R., Clark, A., Campbell, S., Graham, B., Kullberg, A., Manji, K., ... & Keady, J. (2018). The 
lived neighborhood: understanding how people with dementia engage with their local 
environment. International psychogeriatrics, 30(6), 867-880. 
Warneken, F., Graefenhain, M., & Tomasello, M. (2012). Collaborative partner or social tool? New 
evidence for young childrens understanding of joint intentions in collaborative activities. 
Developmental Science, 15, 5461. 
References 
Watson, N. (2012). Theorising the lives of disabled children: How can disability theory help?. 
Children & Society, 26(3), 192-202. 
Way, D., & Tracy, S. J. (2012). Conceptualizing compassion as recognizing, relating and (re) acting: 
A qualitative study of compassionate communication at hospice. Communication Monographs, 79(3), 
292-315. 
Weinberg, D. (2006). The language of social science: A brief introduction. In P. Drew, G. 
Raymond, & D. Weinberg (Eds.), Talk and interaction in social research methods (pp. 97112). London, 
England: Sage. 
Wendell, S. (2001). Unhealthy disabled: Treating chronic illnesses as disabilities. Hypatia, 16(4), 17-
White, E. B., Montgomery, P., & McShane, R. (2010). Electronic tracking for people with dementia 
who get lost outside the home: a study of the experience of familial carers. The British Journal of 
Occupational Therapy,73(4), 152-159. 
Whitmore, H. (2001). Value that marketing cannot manufacture: Cherished possessions as links to 
identity and wisdom. Generations, 25(3), 57-63. 
Wild, A., Clelland, D., Whitelaw, S., Fraser, S., & Clark, D. (2018). Mapping the housing with 
care concept with stakeholders: insights from a UK case study. Journal of Integrated Care, 26(4), 
257-266. 
Wiles, J. L., Leibing, A., Guberman, N., Reeve, J., & Allen, R. E. (2012). The meaning of aging in 
place to older people. The gerontologist, 52(3), 357-366. 
Wilkinson, H. (2002). Including people with dementia in research. The perspectives of people with 
dementia: Research methods and motivations, 9-25. 
A Qualitative Investigation of Negotiating Threshold Spaces with Dementia 
Williams, S. J. (1999). Is anybody there? Critical realism, chronic illness and the disability debate. 
Sociology of Health & Illness, 21(6), 797-819. 
World Health Organization (WHO) (2002). The World Health Report 2002. Geneva: WHO 
Young, I. M. (1990). Justice and the Politics of Difference, (2011 edition). New Jersey:  Princeton 
University Press. 
Zhao, Q. F., Tan, L., Wang, H. F., Jiang, T., Tan, M. S., Tan, L., ... & Yu, J. T. (2016). The 
prevalence of neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer's disease: systematic review and meta-
analysis. Journal of affective disorders, 190, 264-271. 
Zingmark, K., Norberg, A., & Sandman, P. O. (1993). Experience of at-homeness and 
homesickness in patients with Alzheimer's disease. American Journal of Alzheimer's Care and Related 
Disorders & Research, 8(3), 10-16 
Ahmed, S. (2018). British Muslims perceptions of social cohesion: from multiculturalism to 
community cohesion and the war on terror. Crime, Law and Social Change, 1-15. 
Ajjawi, R., & Higgs, J. (2007). Using Hermeneutic Phenomenology to Investigate How 
Experienced Practitioners Lear n to Communicate Clinical Reasoning. The qualitative report, 12(4), 
612-638. 
Albinsson, L., & Strang, P. (2003). Existential concerns of families of late-stage dementia patients: 
questions of freedom, choices, isolation, death, and meaning. Journal of palliative medicine, 6(2), 225-
Algase, D. L., Moore, D. H., Vandeweerd, C., & Gavin-Dreschnack, D. J. (2007). Mapping the 
maze of terms and definitions in dementia-related wandering. Aging & mental health, 11(6), 686-698. 
Alzheimer's Society. (2017). What is dementia? London: Author. 
References 
Andersen, E. (2008). Being below the horizon: the dwelling place of the nurse aide. International 
Journal of Human Caring, 12(4), 15-20. 
Andrews, G. J., Milligan, C., Phillips, D. R., & Skinner, M. W. (2009). Geographical gerontology: 
mapping a disciplinary intersection. Geography Compass, 3(5), 1641-1659. 
Angus, J., & Reeve, P. (2006). Ageism: A threat to aging well in the 21st century. Journal of Applied 
Gerontology, 25(2), 137-152. 
Annells, M. (1996). Hermeneutic phenomenology: Philosophical perspectives and current use in 
nursing research. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 23(4), 705-713. 
Ashforth, A. (2005). Witchcraft, violence, and democracy in South Africa. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
Atkinson, P. (1992). Understanding ethnographic texts. London:  Sage 
Ayalon, L., & Green, V. (2012). Grief in the initial adjustment process to the continuing care 
retirement community. Journal of Aging Studies, 26(4), 394-400. 
Bailey, S., Ridley, J., & Greenhill, B. (2010). Challenging behaviour: a human rights-based approach. 
Advances in Mental Health and Intellectual Disabilities, 4(2), 20-26. 
Barclay, L. (2016). In sickness and in dignity: a philosophical account of the meaning of dignity in 
health care. International journal of nursing studies, 61, 136-141. 
APPENDIX A: MENTAL CAPACITY PROTOCOL.  
Crossing the threshold 
Is the potential participant orientated in time, place and person? 
'Hello my name is Catherine, Im here today to talk to you about the Threshold project...'  Casually 
introduce questions that relate to date and time without them being too obvious, e.g.  Before we start 
can I just get a few details please?' 
Is the participant able to tell their name, where they live and the 
month? 
(The researcher should use their discretion here. Even in the early stages of dementia it is possible 
that people may get dates and years wrong, this shouldnt be a test.  The point is to ensure that the 
participant is orientated to the here and now, can tell us who they are and more or less the time of 
year.) 
PROTOCOL 
Section 1 
Give person information about study, what it is about and what it 
will involve. 
References 
This study is looking at peoples experiences of moving between spaces: what it is like to go from 
being at home to being out in the neighbourhood, before coming home again. Im interest in what 
these places mean to you, how they make you feel, and if anything makes it easier or harder for you 
to go between them. Im particularly interest in whether this has changed as youve gotten older, or 
since you received your dementia diagnosis. 
To do this, I would like to visit you at home several times, for as short or as long as you like. This 
might mean I visit you about three times for a longer period, or about six times for a short while. 
During my visits I would like to do a number of things with you. 
I would like to talk with you about what your home, community and neighbourhood mean to you- 
how you think about them and how being there makes you feel. I would also like to talk about what 
it is like to go from your home, out into your neighbourhood and back; I would like to get an idea of 
the things that make this easier and harder for you.  
If it is possible, I would like to have these conversations with you as we go out and about. This can 
be going somewhere close by you were planning on visiting anyway, or somewhere in your 
neighbourhood that we can visit together. If it is alright with you, I would like you to wear a small 
microphone during these walks so I can accurately capture what you are saying.  
I would also like you to take photographs of places or items that are important to you as you move 
around between being at home and being out in your neighbourhood. You can use your own device 
for this, like a phone or an ipad, or I can lend you a camera to use if you like. We will talk about these 
pictures together the next time I visit you, before we go out and about.  
During this research you might notice that I spend a lot of time taking notes. This is to help me 
remember what has happened during my visit, what I was thinking, and anything else that might be 
useful in my next visit. You can ask to see my notes at any time.  
If you wanted to stop a visit early, or to stop being part of the study entirely, you only have to let me 
know. It is your right as a participant to withdraw from the study at any time. You do not have to tell 
me why you want to stop if you dont want to. 
Do you have any questions youd like to ask me  anything from the information sheet?'' 
SECTION 2 
The participant will be encouraged to talk to a friend/relative/carer about the project, and also have 
them present at the consent process. Different options in terms of the formats of information and how 
consent is recorded are detailed below. 
The researcher will go through the information sheet with the potential participant.  
1. Has the person understood the information? 
Given what Ive just said, or what was in the information sheet; could you tell me in your 
own words what you think this study is about? 
2. Is the person able to retain the information?   
Could you tell me what you would do as part of the study? 
References 
3. Has person understood the information relevant to their decision whether to take part in the 
study? 
4. Has the person used the information given in deciding whether to take part? 
Are you happy to take part in the study? Can you tell me why?  
5. Has the person communicated their decision to you on whether or not to take part? 
SECTION 3 
Evidence of the above five points 
1. Understanding means being able to grasp the facts and being able to weigh the options of 
against one another.  
In answering the questions in section 2, the participant will demonstrate their comprehension 
of what is being asked of them as well as their ability to retain information.  
The researcher will maintain a record of the capacity check process and the conversation 
held with the participant.  
2.  Can the person use their understanding to weigh up their choices and make a decision? 
Researchers can gauge this through asking about specific parts of the study and how the 
participant would be involved.  
'What do you think this means for you if you decide to take part? 
Can you tell me a little bit about how many times I will visit you?  
Can you tell me if you would prefer longer visits, shorter visits or a mix?  
3. The participant is able to communicate that they want to take part in the research and wh 
Is the person able to provide evidence as above? 
Yes No 
Advise the participant that they may like to 
identify a personal consultee or advise who their 
welfare attorney or guardian is at this point in 
case they should lose the capacity to make 
decisions regarding the research project during 
their participation (refer to the information 
booklet).  
Find out if the person is feeling unwell or if 
there is any reason why they might not be 
able to show capacity to consent today. If 
they have been poorly talk to their family 
carer and consider whether it may be better 
to return another day to carry out consent. If 
the person does not have capacity for the 
first stage of the fieldwork then they will not 
be recruited to the study. 
Ask the person if they agree to take part in the 
study and if so ask them to sign a consent 
form. 
Offer: 
 1. A standard consent whereby the person 
References 
agrees to and initials each aspect of the study 
that they agree to. This includes 
understanding about voluntary withdrawal 
and issues of confidentiality along with how 
the interview will be recorded. The person is 
then able to sign, print and provide the date. 
The participant will receive a copy of their 
consent. 
2. The altered consent form allows the 
participant to tick the boxes to show that they 
have read and understood each aspect of the 
study that they are agreeing to. They will be 
offered this alternative if they are having 
some difficulty with writing and are 
struggling to carry out the process of 
initializing each box.  They will be asked to 
sign the form but again may be supported 
with printing their name and dating the 
consent.  We will ask for their family carer or 
a nominated person to be present to ensure 
that they can support the participant with the 
process of consent. The participant will 
receive a copy of their consent. 
3. If the person is able to give informed 
consent but can no longer write with ease 
then they will have their consent process 
filmed/audio-recorded. This will be stored in 
a consent file on university systems in the 
same way as for written consents. An 
accompanying form will be completed with a 
witness to the recording process. This will be 
kept on file and the participant will be given 
a copy. 
References 
Process Consent 
At each subsequent research visit the researcher will undertake a verbal assessment of the 
participants desire to remain within the research study.  
She will remind them that their participation is voluntary and that they are free to stop the 
interview at any stage, or to withdraw completely from the study at any time, without 
prejudice.  
The researcher will remind participants that the data will be confidential and of how it 
will be stored.   
She will check that the participant still wishes to continue with the research project and 
the next data collection exercise. 
This Protocol was Adapted from the Neighbourhoods; Our People, Our Places study. 
This Protocol has been drawn up with reference to the: 
The Adults with Incapacity (Scotland) Act 2000  
The Mental Capacity Act, (2005) for England and Wales 
Communication and  Assessing Capacity: A guide for social work and health care staff. 
(2008) The Scottish Government: Edinburgh. 
Dewing, J 2008, Process consent and research with older persons living with dementia, 
Association of Research Ethics Journal, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 59-64. 
APPENDIX B: INFORMATION SHEET.  
Crossing Thresholds Study 
Participant Information Sheet. 
Hello My name is Catherine  
I am a PhD student at the University of Stirling 
About My Study 
I am interested in how people with dementia move 
between spaces 
Like from their home to their neighbourhood or 
community.  
I would like you to help me with my project.  
References 
I would like to visit you at home  
These can be short visits or long visits, it depends 
what works for you. 
I can come to your home up to six times, so if you 
would like short visits, or are tired or unwell, I can 
come back another day. 
We will talk about what home means to you 
And what your community and neighbourhood mean 
to you. 
Then we will talk about what it is like to move 
between these places. 
What makes it easier? 
What makes it harder? 
What do you do to help you get out and about? 
Some of these chats might take place in your home, 
I would like to audio or video record these. You can 
choose which you would like.  
I would like to come with you on a trip into your 
neighbourhood.  
It doesnt have to be anything special; if you are 
going for your groceries, thats just fine. 
I would like to audio record our chats while we are 
getting ready to go out, taking a walk and coming 
back into the house. For this you would wear a small 
microphone clipped to your coat or jacket, and carry 
the recorder in your pocket.  
You can always ask to see, or hear, any of the audio 
or video I have taken during my visits.  
References 
Things I Need you to Know 
You do not have to agree to talk to me, or take part 
in my study. 
Even if you say yes now, you can change your mind 
at any time. 
You will still get the help you need if you decide not 
to speak to me. 
You can ask your friends or relatives what they think 
before you give your answer.  
I will keep your information confidential; I will not 
tell anyone your name or where you live. 
I will only share something you tell me if it indicates 
that someone else is at risk of harm.  
I would talk to you about this before I speak to 
anyone else.  
References 
The films, Photographs, Writing and Audio records of 
our meetings will be stored safely. 
If I would like to use any film or photographs that 
might identify you (at meetings, or in articles) I will 
always ask.  
What Now? 
If you would not like to take part in the study, please 
let me know when I speak with you again. 
If you would like to take part I need to keep a record 
that you have agreed to do so.  
You can do this in two ways; 
You can sign a consent form 
Or we can film your decision.  
In case you become unhappy, stressed or unwell 
during one of my visits I would like to take the name 
and telephone number of someone I can call to check 
in on you after I leave.  
References 
I will not tell this person what we have spoken 
about without your permission.  
Because you have the right to change your mind 
between visits, I will check again each time I visit 
with you to make sure you are still happy to take 
part.  
If you are not happy, or feel uncomfortable, you can 
choose to: 
Stop a visit- I will make sure you are in your own 
home, and go away. I will call and check on you 3 
days later to see if you want to schedule another 
visit.  
Stop taking part in the study- I will make sure you 
are in your own home, and go away. I will not visit 
you again, but I will use the information that came 
out of our previous visits. 
Stop and withdraw your data from the study- I will 
make sure you are in your own home, and go away. 
I will not visit you again, and I will not use any 
information from our previous visits in my study.  
You do not have to tell me why you want to stop if 
you do not want to: It is your choice to take part or 
Who do I speak to? 
If you would like to speak to me, you can reach me 
Phoning 01786 467623 and asking for 
Catherine Pemble. 
References 
Emailing  catherine.pemble@stir.ac.uk 
Mailing  Room 3T5 
    School of Applied Social Science 
    Colin Bell Building 
    University of Stirling, Stirling 
    FK9 4LA 
If you have a problem or a complaint, you can talk 
to Dr. Richard Ward by: 
Phoning   01786 466324 
Emailing   richard.ward1@stir.ac.uk 
Mailing    Room 4S43 
    School of Applied Social Science 
    Colin Bell Building 
    University of Stirling, Stirling 
   FK9 4LA 
References 
APPENDIX C: CONSENT FORM. 
Crossing Thresholds Study 
Participant Consent Form 
        Please initial:  
I have read and understood the information 
sheet for Crossing Thresholds study. 
I have been given the chance to think about the 
information, ask questions and receive 
satisfactory answers about the Crossing 
Thresholds study. 
I know that my participation is voluntary and 
that I can choose to stop or withdraw at any 
time.  
I know that if I choose to stop, or withdraw, I do 
not have to give a reason.   
I understand that all information will be kept 
confidential. 
I agree to being visited by the researcher 
(Catherine Pemble). 
I agree to allow the researcher (Catherine 
Pemble) to take notes during her visits.  
I agree to interviews being audio recorded. 
I agree to interviews being video recorded.   
I agree that the researcher can use the pictures 
I take for this study for analysis. 
I know that the researcher will not use any 
image or information that can be used to 
identify me in published work.  
References 
I understand that the research team may use 
pictures or images for published work where I or 
my home cannot be identified. 
I agree to the use of anonymised quotes in 
publications. 
I agree to take part in the above 
study. 
Participant Name ______________________ 
Signature  ______________________ 
Date _______________  
Researcher Name______________________ 
Signature  ______________________ 
Date  _______________ 
If I become unhappy, stressed or unwell during 
one of Catherine Pembles visits, I would like her 
to contact: 
Name_________________________ 
Telephone _________________________ 
Relationship_________________________ 
