Palladium-mediated CH Functionalization 
of Aliphatic Amines via High Valent 
Palladium(IV) Intermediates 
William George Whitehurst  
Trinity College 
University of Cambridge  
This dissertation is submitted for the Degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
Department of Chemistry  
University of Cambridge  
Lensfield Road 
Cambridge 
CB2 1EW 
May 2020 
Declaration 
Declaration  
This thesis is submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the Degree of Doctor of 
Philosophy. It describes the work carried out in the Department of Chemistry from October 
2016 to March 2020. This dissertation is the result of my own work and includes nothing which 
is the outcome of work done in collaboration except where indicated in the text. 
William G. Whitehurst  
14th May 2020 
Statement of Length 
This dissertation does not exceed the word limit of 60,000 words as set by the Degree 
Committee for the Faculty of Physics and Chemistry.  
William G. Whitehurst  
14th May 2020 
Abstract 
Abstract: Palladium-mediated CH Functionalization of Aliphatic 
Amines via High Valent Palladium(IV) Intermediates 
William George Whitehurst 
The search for new and distinct disconnection strategies is one of the foremost challenges in 
synthetic organic chemistry. To this end, transition metal-catalyzed CH functionalization 
represents a current area of research which aims to develop transformations that directly convert 
CH bonds to CC or Cheteroatom bonds, often enabling the synthesis of functionalized 
products that are not readily accessible using classical synthetic methods.  
 The work disclosed in this thesis concerns the Pd-mediated CH functionalization of 
unprotected aliphatic amines, in which the amine nitrogen coordinates to the Pd centre to 
promote cyclometalation to the key palladacycle intermediate. Specifically, research focused 
on the design and optimization of novel oxidants that would provide mild and general 
conditions to oxidize amine-derived palladacycles to high valent PdIV intermediates capable of 
undergoing a variety of reductive elimination pathways to afford a diverse range of 
functionalized products.  
Abstract 
 Hypervalent iodine(III) reagents were initially investigated as oxidants in the 
development of a Pd-catalyzed intramolecular  CH amination process to form azetidine 
products from hindered cyclic amines. Following this, aryl halides containing coordinating 
groups at the ortho position were discovered as efficient palladacycle oxidants in which the 
ortho-group pre-coordinates to the palladium centre to facilitate the oxidative addition of the 
carbonhalogen bond. Employing 2-halobenzoic acid reagents, a Pd-catalyzed  CH arylation 
of acyclic secondary amines was developed involving in situ decarboxylation of the aryl group. 
Conversely, exchanging the ortho-carboxylic group for an acyl sulfonamide resulted in a switch 
in the selectivity of reductive elimination to form azetidines. Subsequently, organometallic 
studies using an aryl iodide reagent containing two ortho-carboxylic acid groups provided 
access to isolable aminoalkyl PdIV complexes that were stable at room temperature, allowing 
for the study of the structure and reactivity of these previously elusive high valent intermediates.  
In addition to C(sp3)H functionalization of all-alkyl amines, C(sp2)H 
functionalization of benzylamines was investigated, with a modified aryl iodide reagent 
enabling a Pd-catalyzed CH arylation-lactamization process to form a 7-membered ring lactam 
product. Finally, a stoichiometric study on benzylamine-derived palladacycles led to the 
discovery of an unprecedented dehydrogenative intramolecular CC coupling reaction under 
oxidative conditions employing 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylic acid and an electrophilic fluorine 
oxidant. Preliminary investigations provided support for a PdIV-mediated CH activation step 
preceding CC bond formation.  
Acknowledgements 
Acknowledgements 
My deepest thanks to Professor Matthew Gaunt for giving me the opportunity to work in his 
Group. You have cultivated an amazing environment for scientific research that I was honoured 
to be a part of. I am profoundly grateful for the guidance and support you have given to me over 
the years and have learnt a great deal from your approach to conducting and communicating 
research. Perhaps someday I will reach your level of skill at Chemdraw.  
Thanks to all the members of the Gaunt group who I have crossed paths with. Though you may 
not realise it, every one of you has had a positive influence on me as a scientist and as a person. 
Special thanks to Manuel and Chuan for taking me under their wing in the first year and for 
providing my first experience of novel organic chemistry actually working. Henry, not only 
was it a pleasure working with you on a project but I have cherished our many discussions over 
the years. Nils, given your likely discomfort in reading acknowledgements, I will just say that 
it was awesome working with you, though I think I have now heard AC/DCs Thunderstruck 
enough for one lifetime Roopender  speaking with you over the years, it is apt that this work 
is towards a Doctor of Philosophy. I just always thought it was funny that hard work never 
goes unrewarded came from the laziest postdoc Ive ever known. Finally, thanks to Antonio, 
Jesus, Henry and Roopender for proof-reading this thesis.  
Many thanks to Nic, Naomi and Carlos for your support and hard work in maintaining the labs. 
Thanks to Duncan and Andrew for all your help and advice with NMR experiments. Thanks to 
Dr. Bond for conducting all the X-ray crystallographic analysis and to the University of 
Cambridge and EPSRC Mass Spectrometry Services for obtaining HRMS data. Thanks to the 
EPSRC for funding my PhD studies. Above all, thanks to my family for their unwavering 
support. 
Abbreviations 
Abbreviations 
   denotes a transition state  
%wt   percentage weight purity 
()   racemic mixture 
[]TD    specific (optical) rotation 
   angstrom, 1 x 10-10 m 
Ac   acetyl 
aq.   aqueous  
APAO   acetyl-protected aminomethyl oxazoline 
AQ   8-aminoquinoline (auxiliary)  
Ar   generic description for an aryl group 
atm   atmosphere  
BDE   bond dissociation energy  
BINOL  1,1'-bi-2-naphthol 
Bn   benzyl 
Boc   tert-butyloxycarbonyl 
bpy   2,2-bipyridine 
BQ   1,4-benzoquinone 
Bu   butyl 
Bz   benzoyl 
C   Celsius  
c   concentration  
cal   calories  
cat.    catalytic  
CMD   concerted metalation-deprotonation  
cod   1,5-cyclooctadiene 
Cy   cyclohexyl  
   chemical shift relative to a defined standard 
DCE   1,2-dichloroethane 
DCM   dichloromethane 
DFT   density functional theory 
DG   directing group 
DME   1,2-dimethoxyethane 
DMAP   4-dimethylaminopyridine 
DMF   dimethylformamide 
DMSO   dimethylsulfoxide 
DiPEA   N,N-diisopropylethylamine 
d.r.   diastereomeric ratio 
E(+)   generic description for an electrophile 
ee   enantiomeric excess 
equiv   equivalent 
e.r.   enantiomeric ratio 
ESI   electrospray ionisation 
Et   ethyl 
eu   entropy unit (cal K-1 mol-1) 
fac   facial 
Fc   ferrocenium  
FG   functional group 
Abbreviations 
g   gram 
GC-MS  gas chromatography-mass spectrometry 
Gly   glycine 
Grubbs II  Grubbs catalyst 2nd generation 
h   hour 
HFIP   hexafluoro-2-propanol 
HMDS   hexamethyldisilazide 
HPLC   high performance liquid chromatography 
(HR)MS  (high resolution) mass spectrometry 
HTIB   hydroxy(tosyloxy)iodobenzene 
Hz   Hertz  
i   iso 
IBA   2-iodosylbenzoic acid 
Int   intermediate  
IR   infrared  
J   coupling constant  
k   kilo or rate constant 
K   degrees Kelvin or equilibrium constant 
KIE   kinetic isotope effect 
L   litre or generic description for a ligand 
Leu   leucine 
   micro 
M   mega or moles per litre or generic symbol for metal atom 
m   meta 
m   milli  
Me   methyl 
Mes   2,4,6-trimethylphenyl (mesityl) 
min   minute 
mol   mole 
M.p.   melting point 
MPAA   mono-N-protected amino acid  
Ms   methanesulfonyl 
M.S.   molecular sieves  
W   microwave irradiation 
m/z   mass-to-charge ratio 
[N]   generic symbol for an amine-derived N-directing group 
n   normal  
n.d.   not determined 
NFSI   N-fluorobenzenesulfonimide 
NFTPT  N-fluoro-2,4,6-trimethylpyridinium triflate 
NMP   N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone 
NMR   nuclear magnetic resonance 
NOE   nuclear Overhauser effect  
Ns   4-nitrobenzenesulfonyl 
Nu() or Nuc  generic description for a nucleophile 
o   ortho 
[O]   generic description for an oxidant 
obs   observed (from experiment)  
p   para 
Ph   phenyl 
Abbreviations 
Phe   phenylalanine 
PhI(DMM)  phenyl iodonium dimethylmalonate 
phen   phenanthroline  
Phth   1,3-dihydro-1,3-dioxoisoindolyl (phthalimido) 
pin   pinacol 
Piv   pivaloyl 
ppm   parts per million 
Pr   propyl 
pyr   pyridine  
quant.   quantitative (yield) 
R   generic description for a carbon-containing group 
rac   racemic 
Ref.   reference 
Rf   retention factor 
rt   room temperature 
s   second 
SM   starting material 
SN1   unimolecular nucleophilic substitution  
SN2   bimolecular nucleophilic substitution  
T   temperature 
t   tertiary (tert) 
TBS   tert-butyldimethylsilyl 
TCE   1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane 
TDG   transient directing group  
Tf   trifluoromethanesulfonyl (triflyl) 
TFA   trifluoroacetic acid or trifluoroacetate 
THF   tetrahydrofuran 
TIPS   triisopropylsilyl 
TLC   thin layer chromatography 
TMP   2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine  
TMS   trimethylsilyl 
Tol   tolyl 
TS   transition state 
Ts   4-toluenesulfonyl (tosyl) 
V   volt  
Val   valine 
X   generic description for a halide, pseudohalide, or counter anion 
Table of Contents 
Table of Contents 
Abstract: Palladium-mediated CH Functionalization of Aliphatic Amines via High Valent 
Table of Contents 
4.2.4. Pincer-ligated Aryl PdIV Complexes: Evidence for PdIV-mediated CH Activation
6.2.2. Pd-catalyzed CH Functionalization by ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition . 139 
Table of Contents 
Introduction 
1. Introduction 
1.1. CH Functionalization by Transition Metal-mediated CH Activation 
1.1.1. Definitions of CH Functionalization and CH Activation  
CH functionalization is a class of chemical transformation involving the conversion of CH 
bonds within organic molecules into other types of bonds in order to modify the carbon 
framework (CC bond formation) or install functional groups (Cheteroatom bond formation). 
While a multitude of reactions fall into this broad definition, the work in this thesis specifically 
focuses on CH functionalization reactions proceeding via transition metal mediated CH 
activation (Scheme 1). CH activation is defined as the stoichiometric or catalytic reaction of a 
transition metal complex with classically unreactive CH bonds of hydrocarbons to form 
products or catalytic intermediates containing a new metalcarbon bond.13 The metalcarbon 
bond is a versatile synthetic intermediate due to the plethora of reactivity modes available to 
the metal centre, such as insertion, -hydride elimination, transmetalation or oxidation, that can 
occur prior to bond-forming reductive elimination. Types of CH functionalization that fall 
outside of this definition of CH activation include (i) reactions that do not form an 
organometallic complex resulting from CH bond cleavage (e.g. electrophilic aromatic 
substitution, insertion of metal carbenes or nitrenes, and radical hydrogen atom abstraction 
processes), and (ii) reactions that do not involve transition metal complexes (e.g. directed ortho-
metalation of arenes by organolithium bases).   
Scheme 1. Transition metal-mediated CH activation. [M] = transition metal complex; FG = functional group. 
1.1.2. Overview: Concept, Challenges and Opportunities  
CH functionalization is a highly attractive strategy for chemical synthesis, given that it utilizes 
the most abundant type of bond found in organic molecules: the carbonhydrogen bond. 
Consequently, compared to more straightforward synthetic approaches involving the coupling 
Introduction 
of pre-functionalized nucleophilic and electrophilic partners, such as in nucleophilic 
substitution or metal-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions, CH functionalization offers a 
fundamentally more direct approach to constructing and derivatizing molecules. Nonetheless, 
despite its conceptual appeal, CH functionalization presents two significant challenges to the 
realization of efficient and useful processes (Scheme 2).47 Firstly, CH bonds have high bond 
strengths (bond dissociation energy, BDE(alkyl) = 95100 kcal mol-1, BDE(aryl) = 105110 
kcal mol-1),8,9 and CH bonds remote from functional groups have low polarity (pKa(alkyl) = 
4853, pKa(benzene) = 43).
10 Secondly, the ubiquity of CH bonds, despite being a primary 
advantage of the CH functionalization approach, presents a formidable challenge given that 
the conditions of the reaction must be sufficiently discerning to react with one particular CH 
bond in the presence of many other CH bonds with similar properties.  
Scheme 2. Challenges of CH functionalization: (1) CH bond strength and polarity, and (2) site selectivity.  
While reactive free radicals were known for more than a century to functionalize CH 
bonds in alkanes, it was not until the 1950s and the increasing interest in organo-transition 
metal chemistry that the challenge of both reactivity and selectivity could be adequately 
met.3,11,12 In particular, mild CH activation with transition metal complexes was readily 
demonstrated for a range of d-block elements, indicating the diverse applicability of such a 
mechanistic paradigm and the potential for exploiting the distinct properties of different metals. 
To date, several decades of research have led to increasingly efficient and selective catalytic 
systems that have established CH functionalization as a powerful alternative disconnection 
strategy for the synthetic chemist.  
1.1.3. CH Activation: Mechanisms of CH Bond Cleavage 
Central to the development of CH activation has been the understanding of possible 
mechanisms by which CH bond cleavage can occur. In general terms, following ligand 
displacement to form an agostic interaction, there are two limiting scenarios for transition 
Introduction 
metal-mediated CH activation: insertion or substitution (Scheme 3).3,1316 Insertion proceeds 
by an oxidative addition mechanism, whereas substitution is classically associated with either 
a -bond metathesis or electrophilic substitution mechanism.  
Scheme 3. CH activation mechanisms: oxidative addition, -bond metathesis and electrophilic substitution. 
Oxidative addition is typical of low valent, electron-rich late transition metals (Fe0, Ru0, 
CoI, RhI, IrI/III) that can accommodate the +2 increase in oxidation state and coordination 
number.3 The insertion of the metal can occur for alkyl or aryl CH bonds, resulting in the 
concomitant formation of MH and MC bonds. The concerted three-centred transition state 
comprises forward charge transfer from the filled  CH orbital to an empty metal d orbital, 
and reverse charge transfer from a filled metal d-orbital to the * of the CH bond.14 -Bond 
metathesis is a concerted substitution mechanism and is common for d0 early transition metals 
(Groups 3, 4, Lanthanides and Actinides) where oxidative addition is not possible due to the 
lack of valence d-orbital electrons.3 The substitution process occurs via a concerted four-centre 
transition state that exchanges the bonds between a hydrocarbon moiety and a metalalkyl or 
metalhydride complex. Conversely, electrophilic substitution is a stepwise substitution 
mechanism that is associated with highly electrophilic late and post-transition metals (PdII, 
PtII/IV, AuIII, HgII).3 The mechanism is limited to aromatic CH bonds, given that electrophilic 
attack by the metal complex leads to a new metal-carbon bond to form a cationic Wheland-type 
intermediate prior to deprotonation of the ipso CH bond by an anionic ligand on the metal.  
Recently, computational investigation into the mechanism of CH activation across a 
range of transition metals has suggested that CH bond cleavage is better represented by a 
Introduction 
continuum of electrophilic, ambiphilic, and nucleophilic pathways leading to novel 
mechanisms for CH activation being proposed.14,17 Significantly, in accordance with the 
discovery of carboxylate salts as beneficial additives for CH activation,15 another prominent 
mechanistic pathway was identified pertaining to a substitution mechanism with characteristics 
of both -bond metathesis and electrophilic substitution. It is now widely understood that Lewis 
basic heteroatom-containing ligands can substantially lower the activation barrier to cleaving 
CH bonds at a metal centre by acting as an internal base. The ambiphilic mechanism  known 
as concerted metalationdeprotonation (CMD, Scheme 4)  involves simultaneous interaction 
between the Lewis acidic metal and the CH bond, and of the CH proton with the nucleophilic 
internal base. For a bound carboxylate, CMD occurs via a concerted six-membered transition 
state leading to concomitant metalation and proton transfer.15 Notably, the concertedness of the 
mechanism allows for the activation of both alkyl and aryl CH bonds. When a suitable internal 
base ligand is present, CMD is the major activation pathway for a range of transition metals 
including PdII, IrIII, RhIII, CoIII and RuII.  
Scheme 4. Mechanism of concerted metalation-deprotonation (CMD) involving a carboxylate as internal base.  
1.1.4. Cyclometalation: Directed CH Activation  
The development of new reactions using CH activation relies on successfully achieving high 
levels of site selectivity, that is, the activation of a particular CH bond over all others in the 
molecule. Control of site selectivity is crucial for a synthetically useful process because it 
avoids the formation of regioisomeric mixtures which may be difficult to separate. While a 
number of catalytic systems have obtained selectivity on the basis of the steric or electronic 
properties of the substrate,1821 the approach that has attracted by far the most interest has been 
the use of directing groups (DG, Scheme 5).2230 The directing group reversibly coordinates to 
the metal centre to promote intramolecular conversion of a proximal CH bond to a metalC 
bond in a process known as cyclometalation. The directing group favours CH activation both 
in terms of kinetics, by increasing the local effective concentration of the metal complex, as 
well as thermodynamics, by stabilising the metallacycle intermediate by chelation.19,30 In 
Introduction 
general, there is a strong kinetic and thermodynamic preference for cyclometalation via a 5-
membered ring metallacycle, though 4- to 7-membered ring metallacycles are also readily 
formed.29 Cyclometalation may be a reversible or irreversible process, depending on the type 
of directing group, transition metal and reaction conditions. Lastly, the resulting 
cyclometalation complex may undergo derivatization (or functionalization) to complete the 
overall directed CH functionalization process.  
Scheme 5. Directed CH Activation: reversible coordination, cyclometalation and functionalization.  
Stoichiometric cyclometalation was first reported in the early 1960s,2931 initially with 
Group 10 transition metals (1963-1965: Ni, Pd, Pt)32,33 to form ortho-metalated complexes of 
azobenzenes, followed by various phosphorus-directed metallacycles of other platinum group 
metals (1967-1969: Ir, Rh, Ru; Figure 1).3436 An important consequence of directing groups 
was that alkyl group C(sp3)H activation also became possible under mild conditions, allowing 
for the isolation of metallacycles resulting from the cleavage of benzylic (Hartwell, 1970)37 and 
later methyl C(sp3)H bonds (Shaw, 1978).38  
Figure 1. Early examples of cyclometalation complexes. Left: C(sp2) metallacycles. Right: C(sp3) metallacycles. 
However, it was not until the 1990s that directing groups became widely used in the 
development of catalytic CH activation processes. In 1993, seminal work by Murai and 
Chatani39 reported the Ru-catalysed coupling of aryl ketones with olefins, providing the first 
Introduction 
example of an efficient catalytic CH activation process in which high selectivity, yields and 
good scope were attained (Scheme 6a). The reaction proceeds via a ketone-directed oxidative 
addition of a Ru0 catalyst into the ortho CH bond, forming a ruthenacycle intermediate which 
can react with olefins to form ortho-alkylated products. Over the subsequent decades, a 
significant number of directing groups were designed for transition metal-catalysed CH 
activation, enabling a wide array of different CH functionalization processes. In this regard, 
arguably the most widely employed directing group to date has been the venerable 8-
aminoquinoline amide (AQ) auxiliary, first reported by Daugulis in 2005 for Pd-catalyzed C
H arylation (Scheme 6b).40 The AQ auxiliary is a uniquely versatile directing group for CH 
activation,4147 having been used for a range transition metals across the periodic table including 
first-row metals, for both C(sp2)H and C(sp3)H activation, for a variety of different bond 
formations, as well as in the activation of structurally complex intermediates towards the 
synthesis of natural products.4850  
Scheme 6. Transition metal-catalyzed directed CH activation: (a) Murai & Chatanis Ru-catalyzed ortho-CH 
alkylation, and (b) Daugulis 8-aminoquinoline amide directing group.  
1.1.5. C(sp2)H versus C(sp3)H Activation  
Within the field of CH activation a clear distinction is made between the activation of aromatic 
C(sp2)H and alkyl C(sp3)H bonds. Although transition metal complexes are capable of 
cleaving both types of CH bond, activation of aromatic C(sp2)H bonds is generally much 
more facile than for alkyl C(sp3)H bonds (Figure 2). Notably, this reactivity difference 
between CH bonds is generally consistent regardless of the mechanism of activation. While 
C(sp2)H bonds are typically more acidic and less hindered than C(sp3)H bonds, an additional 
Introduction 
reason for the diminished activation barrier for aromatic C(sp2)H bonds stems from the fact 
that the -system of the arene can interact with the metal centre to preassemble a reactive 
conformation, facilitating the formation of an agostic interaction and hence CH 
activation.2,20,51 Interestingly, activation of alkenyl C(sp2)H bonds has been significantly less 
explored than for aromatic systems due to the competitive reactivity of alkenes themselves as 
well as their proximal C(sp3)H bonds.52,53 Indeed, C(sp3)H bonds which are adjacent to 
unsaturated arene or alkene groups, such as benzylic or allylic CH bonds, are also readily 
cleaved by metals and are considered as electronically-activated C(sp3)H bonds due to their 
low bond strength and increased acidity (BDE(allylic CH) = 8590 kcal mol-1, pKa = 43)
compared to electronically unactivated C(sp3)H bonds. In particular, allylic CH activation is 
often extremely facile due to the ready formation of -allyl complexes and typically does not 
require the assistance of a directing group.4,54 Finally, comparing types of unbiased C(sp3)H 
bonds, methyl groups are more readily activated over methylene groups on the basis of sterics, 
and inner-sphere CH bond cleavage at tertiary centres is very rare.55 A general reactivity trend 
for metal-mediated directed CH activation is shown in Figure 2. 
Figure 2. Reactivity trend for metal-mediated cyclometalation (alkenyl and allylic cases excluded for clarity). 
Introduction 
1.2. Palladium-mediated Directed CH Activation  
To date, palladium has been the most widely employed element for metal-mediated or -
catalyzed directed CH functionalization (Scheme 7).5,9,18,30,31,41,44,45,5665 The reason for its 
prevalence can be attributed to two important factors. Firstly, PdII complexes bearing 
carboxylate ligands are among the most active species for cleaving CH bonds, being able to 
activate both C(sp2)H and C(sp3)H bonds with high levels of efficiency. In fact, PdII 
complexes are largely unrivalled in the context of more challenging directed C(sp3)H 
activation;45,58,59,63,65 whereas essentially all other transition metals require the use of strongly 
coordinating bidentate directing groups, or high temperature or harshly acidic conditions to 
cleave unactivated alkyl C(sp3)H bonds, PdII complexes can mediate C(sp3)H activation with 
a broad range of directing groups (including weakly coordinating monodentate DGs)31 under 
mild, functional group tolerant conditions. Secondly, the metallacycles resulting from CH 
activation (termed, palladacycles)6671 have a distinctly versatile reactivity in that bond-forming 
reductive elimination can occur through a variety of oxidative, reductive as well as redox 
neutral pathways, meaning that multiple different mechanisms are often possible for a particular 
type of bond formation. This mechanistic flexibility afforded by palladium has facilitated the 
development of catalytic transformations, establishing palladium catalysis as the foremost 
approach for metal-mediated directed CH functionalization.  
Scheme 7. Pd-mediated directed CH activation: broad applicability to a variety of DGs and bond formations.  
1.2.1. CMD Mediated by Palladium(II) Carboxylate Complexes 
CH activation by a CMD mechanism is available to a variety of transition metals. However, it 
is apparent that palladium is uniquely placed in the Periodic Table to satisfy the requirements 
of the ambiphilic mechanism across a range of substrate classes. Notably, while palladium can 
readily access oxidation states between 0 and +4, CH activation almost exclusively occurs at 
a square planar PdII centre.5,31,72  
Introduction 
A pioneering experimental study into the mechanism of palladium(II) acetate-mediated 
C(sp2)H activation was carried out by Ryabov in 1985 on the ortho-palladation of N,N-
dimethylbenzylamine in chloroform (Scheme 8).73,74 Ryabov proposed that coordinatively 
unsaturated complex 1 forms prior to CH activation. The cleavage of the CH bond had an 
associated kinetic isotope effect (KIE, kH/kD) of 2.2 and a large, negative activation entropy of 
60.7 cal K-1 mol-1 indicative of a highly ordered transition state (TS-1). Consequently, Ryabov 
suggested that the transition state features concerted PdC bond formation and acetate-assisted 
CH bond cleavage (i.e. CMD).28,73,75 A computational study of the reaction by Davies and 
Macgregor76 in 2005 supported the proposal of CMD, highlighting the importance of the agostic 
CH complex 2 that precedes near-barrierless CH bond cleavage to 3. Notably, the study did 
not find evidence supporting the formation of a Wheland-type intermediate characteristic of a 
stepwise electrophilic substitution mechanism. 
Scheme 8. Mechanism for palladium(II) acetate-mediated C(sp2)H activation of N,N-dimethylbenzylamine. 
Computed energies shown in parentheses in kcal mol1. eu = cal K-1 mol-1. 
Recently, more detailed studies on PdII-mediated aromatic C(sp2)H activation have 
attributed the broad applicability of the CMD mechanism to the potential for significant 
asynchronicity in the transition state.17,77 For example, CH bond cleavage can either be more 
or less advanced than PdC bond formation depending on the relative electrophilicity of the 
PdII centre and electronic properties of the substrate. Conversely, such a detailed analysis of 
CMD has not been conducted for alkyl C(sp3)H activation, with the mechanism being largely 
derived by analogy with sp2 systems. An early study that implicated a CMD mechanism for 
PdII-mediated C(sp3)H activation was conducted by Fagnou78 in 2007 for a Pd0-catalyzed 
intramolecular CH arylation to form dihydrobenzofuran products (7, Scheme 9). DFT studies 
were conducted from PdII intermediate 5 formed from the oxidative addition of a phosphine-
ligated Pd0 complex into the CBr bond of 4, with a low energy transition state (TS-2, G = 
27.0 kcal mol-1) being found involving carboxylate-assisted CMD of the pendant methyl group 
to form 6-membered palladacycle 6. An alternative mechanism involving C(sp3)H oxidative 
Introduction 
addition was considered but ruled out on the basis of the instability of the resulting 
alkyl,hydride-PdIV intermediate (G = 47.7 kcal mol-1 relative to 5).  
Scheme 9. Mechanism of PdII-mediated C(sp3)H activation: computational studies conducted by Fagnou.  
1.2.2. Mechanisms of Palladacycle Functionalization & Catalytic Manifolds 
The PdII metallacycle formed upon directed CH activation contains a PdC bond which can 
be functionalized by one of two general mechanistic pathways  the high valent or low 
valent pathway  depending on the types of intermediates formed prior to reductive 
elimination (Scheme 10).5,31,59 The high valent pathway involves oxidation of the PdII 
metallacycle to form a PdIV intermediate, typically by employing an electrophilic organohalide 
or iodine(III) reagent. These reactive PdIV species can mediate a range of reductive elimination 
pathways, including CC as well as more challenging Cheteroatom bond formations. Notably,  
Scheme 10. Palladacycle functionalization: (a) high valent & low valent pathways and (b) Pd0/PdII mechanism. 
Introduction 
under certain conditions, aromatic C(sp2)-palladacycles also have the possibility to form higher 
speciation PdIII/PdIII dimers upon oxidation, which have been associated with more facile 
bimetallic oxidation and reductive elimination processes.7982 On the other hand, the low valent 
pathway involves a redox-neutral step, such as transmetalation of a nucleophilic coupling 
partner or insertion of an unsaturated reagent such as an alkene, followed by reductive 
elimination. 
In the context of catalytic processes, the high valent pathway results in the formation of 
a PdII by-product that is at the required oxidation state to mediate another CH activation. 
Conversely, the low valent pathway releases a Pd0 by-product that must undergo oxidation to 
PdII by a reagent known as the terminal oxidant to turnover the catalytic cycle. The terminal 
oxidant is typically a CuII or AgI additive, benzoquinone or simply oxygen.5 In catalysis, the 
low valent mechanism is generally limited to CC bond formation given that CH activation 
requires a vacant site of coordination and thus does not usually tolerate the strongly donating 
and bulky phosphines required to promote Cheteroatom bond reductive elimination from a 
PdII centre.83 An exception to the use of phosphine ligands in CH activation concerns a less 
common catalytic manifold wherein the steps of the low valent pathway are reversed (Pd0/PdII 
mechanism),31,59 such as in the intramolecular C(sp3)H arylation of Fagnou (above, Scheme 
9). Here, an electron-rich Pd0 complex first undergoes oxidative addition to PdII, followed by 
CH activation and reductive elimination. Although the Pd0/PdII manifold is an effective 
terminal oxidant-free low valent strategy, particularly for undirected C(sp2)H  arylation,84 for 
directed C(sp3)H activation this mechanism is typically limited to activated benzylic positions 
or intramolecular transformations.60 
1.2.3. PdII-catalyzed C(sp3)H Functionalization of Aliphatic Amines  
Aliphatic amines are essential molecules for society, in particular due to their high 
representation in bio-active molecules such as alkaloid natural products and pharmaceutical 
agents (Figure 3).8590 While the polar nitrogen-containing functional group of aliphatic amines 
and their derivatives often plays a key role in the interactions with biomolecules such as proteins 
through hydrogen bonding, the nucleophilic character of amines also provides an opportunity 
for interaction with transition metals for exploiting in catalytic processes. PdII-catalyzed 
C(sp3)H functionalization directed by amine-derived monodentate or bidentate nitrogen 
directing groups has emerged as a powerful method to streamline the synthesis of complex 
Introduction 
aliphatic amines by the site-selective modification of the hydrocarbon framework.59,65 A 
general catalytic cycle for this process is shown in Scheme 11. Starting from a catalyst-bound 
nitrogen-containing aliphatic molecule, directed CH activation by a PdII centre via 
carboxylate-assisted CMD first takes place to form a palladacycle containing a cyclometalated 
amine derivative. The palladacycle is then functionalized via a high valent PdII/PdIV or low 
valent PdII/Pd0 mechanism to form the derivatised product, which is released from the catalyst 
by the binding of another substrate molecule. Catalytic reactions are categorised based on the 
type of directing group strategy that is used. In general, there are three main sub-classes:65 (i) 
pre-installed amine-derived directing groups, (ii) in situ-formed and cleaved (transient) 
directing groups and (iii) native amine-directed (or DG-free) strategy.  
Figure 3. Bio-active aliphatic amines: (a) alkaloid natural products; (b) small molecule pharmaceutical drugs.  
Scheme 11. General catalytic cycle for PdII-catalyzed C(sp3)H functionalization of aliphatic amines.  
[N] = amine-derived N-directing group.  
Before entering a discussion of the relevant literature, an important aspect to highlight 
about PdII-mediated CH activation is the frequent use of stoichiometric AgI salt additives in 
the reaction conditions of catalytic processes. While not an ideal additive due to the relatively 
high cost and associated toxicity of silver salts, it is evident that AgI additives have broadly 
Introduction 
resulted in improved catalytic efficiency for a wide variety of cases, and in some instances are 
essential for the transformation, which has enabled the realization of increasingly challenging 
catalytic processes.59,65 On the one hand, rudimentary roles of AgI salts include their use as 
terminal oxidants in low valent functionalizations, or as halide abstractors in high valent 
functionalizations using aryl or alkyl iodide reagents that result in unreactive PdIIiodide 
complexes being formed (Scheme 12).91 On the other hand, recent analysis has attributed their 
widespread use to a more intimate role in catalysis, with the proposal that AgI is involved in 
heterobimetallic interactions with PdII to facilitate the CH bond cleavage.9295 Although the 
majority of evidence to date has been from computational studies, there is increasing support 
in favour of this privileged role of silver in CH activation making it an important consideration 
in mechanistic discussion.  
Scheme 12. Roles of silver(I) salts: (a) terminal oxidant, (b) halide abstraction, (c) bimetallic CH activation.  
1.2.3.1. Amine-derived Directing Group Strategy 
The original and most explored approach to Pd-catalyzed amine CH functionalization has been 
the amine-derived directing group strategy (Scheme 13).40,65 The strategy involves the prior 
installation of a DG through a covalent linkage to the amine nitrogen, with the DG being an 
electron-withdrawing or chelating moiety that facilitates directed CH activation by the 
palladium catalyst. After functionalization, the DG is removed in a subsequent step to reveal 
the final product. The drawbacks of the strategy are that two (or more) steps are added to the 
synthetic sequence and that the use of a DG, if not recovered, leads to stoichiometric waste. 
Nonetheless, there are several benefits to using pre-installed directing groups. Firstly, DG 
installation typically converts the amine into an amide or sulfonamide, which protects the 
amine-nitrogen and significantly increases the thermal and chemical stability of the substrate. 
Secondly, DGs often provide a dominant interaction with the catalyst, making the catalytic 
processes tolerant of other coordinating functional groups. Thirdly, the DG can be modified at 
will in order to improve catalytic efficiency or alter site selectivity. Overall, despite its 
Introduction 
shortcomings, the amine-derived directing group strategy is the most straightforward approach 
to catalytic CH activation, resulting in its widespread use for amine functionalization.  
Scheme 13. Amine-derived directing group strategy: DG installation and removal required.  
The first example of Pd-catalyzed C(sp3)H functionalization of an aliphatic amine 
derivative was reported by Daugulis40 in 2005, in which substrates bearing the picolinamide 
directing group (8) underwent CH arylation when using aryl iodides in the presence of AgOAc 
(Scheme 14A). The picolinamide DG is a strongly coordinating bidentate auxiliary that forms 
a 5-membered ring chelate with the PdII catalyst, promoting the formation of both the 
Scheme 14. Pd-catalyzed picolinamide-directed C(sp3)H activation: CC bond-forming reactions.  
Introduction 
palladacycle as well as the subsequent oxidative functionalization. Selective mono-arylation 
was observed with complete selectivity for the  position, indicating the preference of the DG 
to promote cyclometalation via a 5-memebred palladacycle to form a 5,5-bicycle around the 
metal centre. Oxidative addition of the aryl iodide to the palladacycle forms putative PdIV 
intermediate 9, which undergoes C(sp3)C(sp2) bond reductive elimination to give arylated 
product 10. Although good catalytic efficiency was achieved, undesirable features of the 
reaction were the use of aryl iodide as solvent and the high reaction temperature (130 oC).  
Following the seminal work of Daugulis, in 2011 Chen96 developed an improved 
protocol for the picolinamide-directed  C(sp3)H arylation (Scheme 14B). The reaction was 
conducted with only a small excess of aryl iodide (1.5 equivalents) and at a lower temperature 
of 80 oC. The reaction was demonstrated for -methylene activation of cyclohexylamine 
derivatives (11) to afford products bearing the aryl group on the same face as the picolinamide 
DG (12). Alkenyl iodides could also be employed under slightly modified conditions to provide 
-alkyenylated products. Significantly, Chen found that the picolinamide DG within product 
12a could not be hydrolytically cleaved in satisfactory yield, presumably due to the steric 
hindrance of the quaternary centre adjacent to the amide nitrogen. Consequently, a modified 
picolinamide DG was designed, containing a silyl-protected hydroxymethyl substituent at the 
3-position of the pyridine ring (11b). After conducting the CH arylation (12b), the modified 
DG could be cleaved under acidic aqueous conditions (1 M aq. HCl, MeOH, 80 oC) wherein 
the deprotected alcohol attacks the proximal carbonyl to cleave the amide linkage (13) and 
release the desired primary amine product 14. Subsequently, other CC bond forming processes 
were developed with picolinamide-protected substrates (15, Scheme 14C), such as alkylation 
with primary alkyl iodides (16; Chen, 2013)97 and alkynylation using a TIPS-protected alkynyl 
bromide (17; Balaraman, 2018).98 Interestingly, the alkylation procedure employed an unusual 
dibenzyl phosphate additive, which was proposed to act as a phase transfer catalyst to solubilize 
the AgI salt. Increased AgI concentration was thought to assist in the reaction between the 
palladacycle and alkyl iodide by weakening of the CI bond, thus facilitating the oxidation of 
the PdII centre.  
Alongside the development of CC bond-forming reactions, the picolinamide DG was 
also used to mediate Cheteroatom bonding-forming reactions. In 2012, Chen99 reported the 
intramolecular  CH amination of picolinamide-containing substrates (18) to form strained 
azetidine products (20) by employing PhI(OAc)2 as oxidant (Scheme 15A). The mechanism 
involves oxidation of the palladacycle by PhI(OAc)2 to form a Pd
IV intermediate bearing acetate 
ligands (19), which can undergo CN bond reductive elimination of the deprotonated amide of  
Introduction 
Scheme 15. Pd-catalyzed picolinamide-directed C(sp3)H activation: Cheteroatom bond-forming reactions. 
the DG onto the carbon of the activated  position. The by-product (21) resulting from 
competing CO bond reductive elimination from the PdIV intermediate was also observed in 
the majority of cases as the minor product, indicating the significant challenge associated with 
PdIV chemistry for selective bond-forming reductive elimination. Notably, the yield of cyclized 
azetidine product correlated with the degree of branching along the activated alkyl chain, and 
in fact, for an example with no -substituent (18: R1 = CO2Me, R
2 = H), the acetoxylated 
product became the major product (70% CO, 25% CN). In the same article,99 Chen reported 
the formation of pyrrolidines using the same conditions via activation of the  position, which 
was simultaneously reported by Daugulis.100 Given that the favoured position of activation is 
the  position, substrates for the pyrrolidine-forming reaction required -substitution (e.g. 22) 
to block this position and thus prevent undesired side-reactions. Analogous to the azetidine 
Introduction 
formation, the homologous 6-memebred palladacycle is oxidized by PhI(OAc)2 to form a Pd
intermediate (23) which promotes cyclization to the pyrrolidine (24).  
A selective  CH acetoxylation reaction using the picolinamide DG was later 
developed by Chen101 (25 to 27, Scheme 15C). Although PhI(OAc)2 was once again used, 
selectivity for acetoxylation over intramolecular amination was improved by the addition of a 
sub-stoichiometric amount of Li2CO3. The role of Li2CO3 was not elucidated, but it was 
proposed that Li+ could favour the imidate resonance form of the picolinamide (26) and thus 
minimize CN bond reductive elimination, which requires an anionic N-ligand.102,103 The 
ability to modify the PdIV intermediate was also exploited by Chen for a  CH alkoxylation 
reaction.104 Using PhI(OAc)2 in the presence of an alcohol co-solvent, the putative Pd
intermediate was found to undergo ligand exchange with alkoxide ligands (28) prior to 
reductive elimination, enabling the formation of alkoxylated products (29) in good yield. Only 
trace quantities of azetidine or acetoxylated by-products were observed under the optimized 
reaction conditions, and primary, secondary and tertiary alcohol coupling partners could all be 
employed.  
While the picolinamide represented a major advance for the CH functionalization of 
aliphatic amines, Chens original study in 201196 (Scheme 14B) highlighted the difficulty in 
removing the DG. As a result, in 2013, two new DGs were developed that could be cleaved 
under mild conditions. Carretero105 reported the sulfonamide analogue of the picolinamide DG 
(30, Scheme 16A) and demonstrated that efficient catalysis could be achieved for a  CH 
arylation procedure. The arylated product (31) was subjected to weakly acidic conditions to 
cleave the sulfonamide bond and furnish the unprotected amine (32). Simultaneously, Ma106 
reported the 2-methoxyiminoacetyl DG (33, Scheme 16B). After conducting a Pd-catalyzed  
CH arylation (34), the directing group was cleaved under basic conditions at room temperature 
and the product isolated as the Boc-protected amine (35). Significantly, in both cases where 
amino acid derivatives were used as substrates, no erosion of the defined -stereocentre was 
observed upon isolation after the DG removal. Following these studies, two further examples 
of cleavable DGs were disclosed, namely the 5-methylisoxazole-3-carboxamide (MICA)107 
and benzothiazole-2-sulfonyl (Bts)108 DGs. Very recently, Maes109 reported an improved 
removal protocol for the picolinamide DG (Scheme 16C). The picolinamide was derivatised 
with Boc2O followed by Ni-catalyzed transesterification to give the Boc-protected amine 
product (38) and ethyl 2-picolinate (39). The protocol was demonstrated for a variety of 
substrates containing functional groups sensitive to acidic or basic hydrolysis conditions. In 
addition, 39 could be recycled for use in further amidation reactions of aliphatic amines.  
Introduction 
Scheme 16. Development of cleavable DGs and improved removal protocol for the picolinamide DG.  
In 2014, Yu110 demonstrated that monodentate nitrogen-DGs could also promote 
directed C(sp3)H activation in the presence of a mono-N-protected amino acid (MPAA) ligand 
(Scheme 17A). Yu employed N-triflyl protected amines (40) and aryl boronate ester coupling 
partners in combination with Ag2CO3, 1,4-benzoquinone and Na2CO3 additives to enable a Pd-
catalyzed  CH arylation process (41) proceeding via a low valent PdII/Pd0 mechanism. The 
ligand that provided the highest catalytic efficiency was N-acetyl-protected tert-leucine, and 
significantly, no reaction was observed in the absence of the ligand. Subsequently, the essential 
role of the MPAA ligand was elucidated using computational methods, in which the carbonyl 
of the N-acetyl group was found to act as the internal base in the CMD step (TS-3).111,112 
Crucially, the increased basicity of the N-acetyl amide relative to acetate vastly improves the 
activity of the PdII catalyst by reducing the barrier to CH bond cleavage. In 2018, Yu113 
reported an enantioselective variant of the  CH arylation reaction of triflamide substrates 
(Scheme 17B). A series of chiral acetyl-protected aminomethyl oxazoline (APAO) ligands were 
developed to enable either an enantioselective ethyl group desymmetrization (42 to 43) or a 
kinetic resolution of non-symmetric triflamides (44 to 45). -Alkenylation could also be 
achieved using vinyl boronate esters, and overall, the functionalized products were produced in 
good yield and high enantioselectivity. Finally, Yu developed a pyrrolidine-forming reaction 
Introduction 
from the -CH activation of N-triflyl or -nosyl protected amines (46) using activated acrylate 
or styrene coupling partners (Scheme 17C).114 A modified catalyst system was employed, 
involving a pyridine or quinoline-based ligand instead of an MPAA. A selection of three 
different ligands were used depending on the class of substrate in order to obtain high yields 
across a broad range of aliphatic amine derivatives with varying substitution patterns. In terms 
of mechanism, the reaction initially produces -alkenylated intermediates by a low valent 
PdII/Pd0 mechanism, via cyclopalladation, olefin insertion and -H elimination, which 
subsequently undergo in situ cyclization via Michael addition or oxidative aza-Wacker 
cyclization to give the saturated or unsaturated pyrrolidine derivatives (47), respectively.  
Scheme 17. Pd-catalyzed CH functionalization directed by sulfonamide-protected aliphatic amines.  
A series of DGs have been developed which promote the activation of CH bonds at 
positions other than the -position relative to the amine nitrogen. An early example of such a 
case was the  CH acetoxylation of Boc-protected amines (48) by Yu115 in 2006 (Scheme 
Introduction 
18A). While the use of PhI(OAc)2 as oxidant alone gave no reaction, the combination of 1:1 
PhI(OAc)2 and I2 (leading to in situ formation of iodine monoacetate, IOAc) provided -
acetoxylated products (50) in good to high yields. The reaction was found to functionalize -
methyl groups only and not -methylene groups, resulting in the proposal of Boc-directed C
H activation via a 5-memebred palladacycle (49) as opposed to an alternative radical pathway. 
Later, in 2015 Yu116 developed a Pd-catalyzed -CH arylation of saturated azacycles and 
acyclic N-methylamines using a more strongly coordinating tert-butyl thioamide directing 
group (51, Scheme 18B). The reaction employed aryl boronic acids as arylating agents, which 
provided the -arylated products (52) with high mono-arylation selectivity. Interestingly, 1,4-
benzoquinone was found to be the most effective terminal oxidant, whereas AgI salts led to 
deleterious oxidation of the thioamide to an unreactive amide by-product. Due to the exquisite 
mono-selectivity of the reaction, a one-pot , di-arylation procedure was developed to provide 
hetero-difunctionalized pyrrolidines (53). Notably, exclusive trans stereoselectivity (>20:1 d.r.) 
Scheme 18. Pd-catalyzed  and  CH functionalization of aliphatic amine derivatives.  
Introduction 
was observed in all cases as a result of a highly stereoselective second CH activation wherein 
the steric interaction between the t-Bu of the thioamide and -aryl substituent is minimized. 
Yu117 later developed an enantioselective -arylation of thioamides by employing a chiral 
BINOL-derived phosphoric acid ligand.  
More recently,  CH functionalization procedures have been developed. For example, 
in 2016 Dong118 reported the  CH acetoxylation of N-alkyl tosylhydrazone substrates (54), 
which were readily accessed in a one-pot, three-step synthetic procedure from free primary 
amines (Scheme 18C). The reaction was proposed to occur via a 6,5-bicyclic palladacycle 
intermediate (55) that provided exclusive selectivity for -methyl group activation, followed by 
oxidative functionalization with PhI(OAc)2. In 2017, Daugulis
119 reported an alternative -
directing auxiliary in the form of N-alkyl pyrazoles (57, Scheme 18D). A  CH arylation 
reaction was developed using aryl iodides, with a 3,5-dimethyl substitution pattern on the 
pyrazole being found to provide the highest yields of arylated products (58). Subsequent 
ozonolysis with reductive work-up afforded the corresponding -phenethylamine as the N-Ac-
protected product (59).  
 The more remote -position of aliphatic amines can also be accessed with the amine-
derived DG strategy. In 2014, Yao and Zhao120 reported an oxalyl amide DG (60) that acts as a 
bidentate N,O-ligand for Pd (Scheme 19A). Using PhI(OAc)2, intramolecular  CH amination 
was achieved via a 5,6-bicyclic palladacycle (61) to give pyrrolidine derivatives (62). In 
general, the yields of cyclized products correlated with the degree of substitution along the alkyl 
chain undergoing CH activation, reflecting the impact of the Thorpe-Ingold effect in favouring 
the intramolecular CN bond reductive elimination from the putative PdIV intermediate over 
competing pathways such as acetoxylation. Nonetheless, for the linear n-butylamine derived 
substrate (60, R1 = R2 = R3 = H), the pyrrolidine was still obtained in a reasonable 25% yield. 
In later reports, the oxalyl amide DG was also found to enable  C(sp3)H functionalization 
processes, such as arylation121,122 and acetoxylation,123 indicating that transformations 
proceeding via a 5,5-bicyclic palladacycle are also are readily promoted under different reaction 
conditions. Conversely, -selective CH alkenylation with internal alkyne coupling partners 
was reported by Shi124 in 2016, wherein picolinamide-containing substrates (63) were 
functionalized at a -methyl position in the presence of -methyl and -methylene CH bonds 
(Scheme 19B). Deuteration studies showed that CH activation at the typically favoured -
position was reversible under the reaction conditions. Consequently, the -selectivity was 
explained by the Curtin-Hammett principle, in which the 5- and 6-membered palladacycles are 
in equilibrium but with the less stable 6-membered palladacycle (64) being more reactive 
Introduction 
towards insertion by the alkyne. The 8-membered palladacycle resulting from alkyne insertion 
into 64 undergoes protodemetalation by AcOH or HFIP to furnish the -alkenylated product 
(65), liberating a PdII centre and thus providing a rare example of a redox-neutral PdII/PdII 
functionalization mechanism.  
Scheme 19. Pd-catalyzed  CH functionalization of aliphatic amine derivatives.  
In 2016, Sanford125 reported the transannular CH arylation of saturated aza-
heterocycles (Scheme 20A). The remote functionalization was achieved using an unusual 
tertiary amine-based bidentate DG containing a pendant fluorinated arylamide moiety (50). The 
DG selectively promoted the activation of  CH bonds within the cyclic amine to form a 
transannular palladacycle (51), which was functionalized using aryl iodide coupling partners to 
provide -arylated derivatives (52). Notably, CsOPiv was used to abstract iodide from the Pd 
centre to turn over the catalytic cycle, whereas more commonly employed AgI salts led to 
undesired -oxidation of the substrate to the iminium. In general, the CH activation was 
facilitated by the use of bicyclic amine substrates that could stabilize the resulting boat 
conformation of the cyclopalladated amine, though a simple piperidine-derived substrate was 
also employed with good efficiency (55% yield). Additionally, the protocol was demonstrated 
for the late-stage functionalization of pharmaceutical drugs, with -arylated derivatives of 
varenicline and cytisine being prepared. In 2018, Sanford126 developed a second-generation set 
of conditions for the transannular CH arylation, whereby the yield of the reaction could be 
improved by the addition of a 2-picolinic acid or 2-quinaldic acid ligand (53 to 54, Scheme 
20B). The ligand was found to be responsible for recovering the catalyst from an insoluble 
Introduction 
material that formed during the reaction, but was suggested to not be involved in reducing the 
barrier to rate-limiting CH activation based on the similar KIEs observed in the presence and 
absence of ligand (kH/kD = 3.2 and 3.3, respectively). However, the increased catalytic 
efficiency resulted in a noticeably improved scope of the reaction, allowing for previously 
unreactive tropane and homotropane cores to be directly functionalized for the first time.  
Scheme 20. Transannular CH activation of saturated aza-heterocycles by Sanford.  
1.2.3.2. Transient Directing Group Strategy  
The transient directing group (TDG) strategy127133 involves the in situ installation and removal 
of a DG, enabling auxiliary-controlled CH activation to be conducted in a one-pot procedure 
(Scheme 21). Although the strategy was originally developed in the late 1990s for Rh-
catalyzed olefin hydroacylation processes,134 it was not until 2016 that TDGs were exploited 
for Pd-catalyzed C(sp3)H functionalization with the report of benzylic CH arylation of o-
tolualdehydes by Yu.135 In terms of aliphatic amine functionalization, a reversible covalent 
linkage between the amine nitrogen and a TDG additive forms a temporary mono- or bidentate 
DG, most commonly involving reversible imine formation between a primary amine substrate 
and TDG-containing aldehyde. Depending on the reaction efficiency, the TDG additive may be 
used in stoichiometric or catalytic quantities. Overall, the TDG strategy maintains the benefits 
of the amine-derived DG approach, but overcomes the major limitation relating to added steps 
for DG installation and removal. Nonetheless, TDGs remain in their infancy for Pd-catalyzed 
amine functionalization and have only been demonstrated for CH arylation processes to date, 
indicating that further research is required to improve the scope of transformations available to 
this type of strategy.  
Introduction 
Scheme 21. Transient directing group (TDG) strategy: reversible in situ installation and removal of the DG. 
One of the first examples of a TDG strategy for Pd-catalyzed amine C(sp3)H 
functionalization was reported by Dong136 in 2016 (Scheme 22A). Primary amines (55) were 
directly combined with a stoichiometric amount of quinoline-8-carbaldehyde (56) in the 
presence of the PdII catalyst, a pyridine base and diaryliodonium salt coupling partners. The in 
situ-formed imine promoted  CH activation to form a 6,5-bicyclic palladacycle (58), which 
underwent oxidative functionalization to give arylated products in protected form (57) after 
methoxyamine work-up and benzoylation. In 2017, Murakami137 developed a similar strategy 
using a bulky 3,5-di-tert-butylsalicylaldehyde TDG (60) for the  CH arylation of primary 
amines using aryl iodides (Scheme 22B). The optimised protocol involved prior formation of 
the imine by the heating of the free amines (59) with TDG 60, followed by the sequential 
addition of the PdII catalyst and reagents for the arylation process. The TDG once again 
Scheme 22. Imine-based transient directing group strategies using stoichiometric TDG additives.   
Introduction 
promoted selective -functionalization via a 6,5-bicyclic palladacycle (62), with the amine 
products (61) being isolated after acidic work-up and Boc-protection. Interestingly, in both the 
cases of Dong and Murakami, although decreasing the equivalency of the TDG additive to sub-
stoichiometric amounts led to diminished yields, the yields were found to be greater than the 
TDG loading suggesting that reversible exchange of the TDG between product and substrate 
molecules was occurring during the reaction.  
In 2017, Ge138 reported a  CH arylation of -tertiary primary amines (63) using 
catalytic quantities of a TDG additive (Scheme 23A). Using aryl iodides, AgTFA and 10 mol% 
Pd(OAc)2, 20 mol% of inexpensive glyoxylic acid monohydrate (64) was used as the TDG 
additive to provide moderate to good yields of -arylated products (66) via a carboxy-imine 
intermediate. The optimised conditions required the addition of water (4 equivalents) to 
promote the dynamic exchange of the TDG by reversible imine formation and hydrolysis. The 
directed CH activation proceeded via a 5,5-bicyclic palladacycle (65), which was confirmed 
under stoichiometric palladium conditions by the isolation of a stable pyridine-ligated complex 
(65: R1 = R2 = Me, L = pyridine). Significantly, the Pd-catalyzed reaction gave 0% yield in the 
absence of the AgTFA additive. Subsequently, in 2019, further mechanistic studies by Wang 
and Dang95 elucidated the essential role of the AgI salt through in situ mass spectroscopy and 
DFT analysis. In particular, it was deduced that CH activation was facilitated by a bimetallic 
PdII/AgI CMD mechanism (TS-4) as opposed to a more straightforward monometallic PdII-
mediated CMD step (G = 5.0 kcal mol-1).  
Around the same time as Ge, Yu139 also developed a catalytic TDG method for the  C
H arylation of primary amines, once again employing aryl iodides in combination with AgTFA 
(67 to 70, Scheme 23B). The first-generation conditions, reported in 2016, involved the use of 
20 mol% 2-hydroxynicotinaldehyde (68) as the TDG additive which enabled  CH activation 
via a 6,5-bicyclic palladacycle (69). Notably, the scope of Yus reaction was significantly 
broader than Ges method, given that -tertiary substitution was not required and that more 
challenging -methylene activation was also made possible. However, a limitation to the 
reaction was that -methylene CH arylation was not sufficiently robust to allow for the 
coupling of heteroaryl iodides. With the discovery of electron-poor 2-pyridone ligands as more 
active carboxylate surrogates for PdII-mediated CH activation,140,141 Yu142 reported a second- 
generation reaction employing 6-chlorosalicylaldehyde (71) as the TDG additive with a 
separate pyridone ligand (72). DFT studies on the mechanism of the pyridone-assisted 
functionalization have confirmed that CH bond cleavage is facilitated by the ligated anionic 
pyridone acting as the internal base in the CMD mechanism (TS-5).141 Crucially, the greater 
Introduction 
activity afforded by the pyridone ligand enabled a significantly improved scope with heteroaryl 
iodide coupling partners, as well as the use of previously unreactive heteroaryl bromides.  
Scheme 23. Imine-based transient directing groups using catalytic TDG additives by (a) Ge and (b, c) Yu.  
 While developing the second-generation reaction, Yu142 discovered that  CH 
activation could be achieved by simply altering the size of the chelate of the TDG (Scheme 
23C). Whereas the formation of a 6-memebred chelate with TDG 68 and 71 gave exclusively  
CH activation, using ketoacid 74 as the TDG resulted in a 5-memebred chelate that promoted 
 CH activation via a 5,6-bicyclic palladacycle (77). Using a slightly modified pyridone ligand 
Introduction 
(75), the CH arylation procedure transformed ,-disubstituted primary amines (73) to -
arylated products (76) in generally good yield and high diastereoselectivity (up to >10:1 d.r.). 
Conversely, low yields (ca. 20%) were obtained in the absence of -substitution (73: R2 = H) 
and for -methylene CH arylation.  
In 2018, Young143 reported a distinct TDG approach using carbon dioxide for in situ 
protection of aliphatic amines (78) as N-carbamate salts (79, Scheme 24). Using otherwise 
similar conditions to Ge and Yu, the CO2-mediated conditions provided an efficient CH 
arylation procedure to afford -arylated derivatives (81). Significantly, given that imine 
formation was not invoked, Youngs reaction could functionalize both primary, and for the first 
time with TDGs, secondary amine substrates. For primary amines, 12 equivalents of CO2 in 
the form of dry ice were used, while secondary amines required a higher loading of 30 
equivalents of CO2. In terms of mechanism, it was proposed that the initially formed carbamate 
(79) promotes  CH activation via a putative 7-memebred palladacycle intermediate (80). 
However, it should be noted that complex 80 was neither directly observed nor isolated.  
Scheme 24. Carbon dioxide-mediated  CH arylation via an in situ-formed carbamate TDG.  
1.2.3.3. Native Amine-directed Strategy 
The native amine-directed strategy exploits the innate coordinating ability of the amine nitrogen 
within unprotected amine substrates to direct the PdII catalyst for CH activation.65 As a result, 
the strategy does not require the addition of exogenous DGs or TDG additives and is therefore 
conceptually the most straightforward and atom efficient approach to directed amine 
functionalization. A general catalytic cycle is shown in Scheme 25 using Pd(OAc)2 as catalyst.
The first step involves binding of the Lewis basic free amine (82) to the PdII centre to form a 
mono-amine PdII complex (83). The 2-carboxylate ligand within 83 can interconvert to a 1-
carboxylate to reveal a vacant site of coordination, promoting CH activation to from a 
palladacycle containing the cyclometalated amine (86). Complex 86 then undergoes 
functionalization to furnish the derivatized amine product (87) and return the active catalyst. 
However, despite its simplicity, the native amine-directed strategy is associated with two main 
Introduction 
challenges which must be overcome to achieve catalysis.65 Firstly, aliphatic amines have a high 
affinity for PdII centres and often associate twice to form thermodynamically stable trans bis-
amine PdII complexes (84).144 Significantly, because 84 is coordinatively saturated in the square 
plane, the bis-amine complex is unable to undergo cyclometalation and is therefore an off-cycle 
intermediate. Secondly, the mono-amine complex 83 is susceptible to PdII-mediated -hydride 
elimination that results in oxidative degradation of the amine substrate as well as reduction of 
the catalyst after reductive elimination from the Pdhydride intermediate. As a result of these 
unique challenges, although the stoichiometric activation of unprotected amines was among the 
first reported examples of cyclometalation,74,145 catalysis using a native amine-directed strategy 
was not achieved until almost a decade after Daugulis seminal example of a catalytic DG-
mediated process.40,146 
Scheme 25. Native amine-directed CH functionalization of aliphatic amines: catalytic cycle & challenges.    
The first example of a Pd-catalyzed C(sp3)H functionalization directed by an 
unprotected aliphatic amine was reported in 2014 by Gaunt146 (Scheme 26). The reaction 
conditions included the use of Pd(OAc)2 as catalyst and PhI(OAc)2 as oxidant, resulting in an 
intramolecular  methyl CH amination process to furnish strained aziridine products (90). Key 
to the success of the catalytic process was the use of hindered cyclic secondary amines known 
as morpholinones (88) wherein the positions -to-nitrogen were fully substituted (88: R, R  
H). Employing these substrates had the effect of both destabilizing the unreactive bis-amine 
PdII complex due to steric congestion, as well as preventing degradation of the substrate by 
Introduction 
offering no possible sites for -hydride elimination. Notably, the reaction was thought to 
proceed via a four-membered palladacycle (89), which was confirmed under stoichiometric 
palladium conditions by the formation of a stable phosphine-ligated complex (92). Although 
four-membered C,N-palladacycles had been previously isolated,71,147 Gaunts example was the 
first to be formed through a CH activation mechanism. Exposure of 92 to PhI(OAc)2 yielded 
the aziridine via oxidative functionalization, demonstrating the unusual reductive elimination 
event from a putative PdIV intermediate to form the aziridine product. Subsequently, the 
hindered aziridines could be ring-opened by different nucleophiles such as thiolate, azide, 
fluoride or electron-rich heterocycles to provide diversely -functionalized aliphatic amines 
(91). In 2016, the Pd-catalyzed aziridine formation was incorporated into a continuous flow set-
up, allowing for large quantities of hindered aziridines to readily synthesized.148  
Scheme 26. Intramolecular  CH amination of hindered secondary amines to form aziridines.   
In 2015, a more detailed investigation into the mechanism of the aziridine-forming 
reaction was reported by Gaunt.149 The first step of the catalytic cycle was proposed to be 
coordination of the amine substrate (93) to the PdII catalyst to form the mono-amine complex 
(95; Step 1, Scheme 27), which would be followed by either unproductive binding of a second 
equivalent of amine (96) or productive CH activation to the four-membered ring palladacycle 
(97, Step 2). Kinetic analysis found that the reaction was first order in Pd catalyst, zero order 
in PhI(OAc)2 and had complex order in amine substrate, changing from 1 order at low reaction 
conversion to first order at high conversion. These kinetic data indicated that the turnover 
limiting step (TOLS) occurred prior to oxidation of the palladacycle, and that the bis-amine PdII 
complex (96) was indeed an off-cycle intermediate. A primary KIE was observed for the 
Introduction 
reaction (kH/kD = 3.8) which showed that CH activation was the TOLS. Interestingly, 
computational DFT analysis of the transition state for cyclopalladation via CMD (TS-6) 
revealed the importance of a hydrogen-bonding interaction between a 1-acetate and the NH 
bond of the ligated amine which assisted in the assembly of the reactive conformation for CH 
activation (Scheme 28). Additionally, dispersion-interaction analysis rationalized the observed 
regioselectivity for methyl group activation proximal to the carbonyl of the lactone on the basis 
of the greater acidity of the CH bonds relative to the distal methyl groups in 93. Next, oxidation 
of the palladacycle by PhI(OAc)2 was suggested to access a tri-acetate bound Pd
IV intermediate 
Scheme 27. Mechanism of the Pd-catalyzed intramolecular  CH amination to form aziridines.  
Scheme 28. Computational DFT analysis of the transition state for native amine-directed C(sp3)H activation.  
Introduction 
(98; Step 3) that could undergo product-forming reductive elimination. Once again, DFT 
analysis provided crucial insight, in which a low energy pathway was calculated proceeding by 
NH deprotonation (99; Step 4) prior to intramolecular CN bond reductive elimination to the 
aziridine (100; Step 5). Conversely, higher energy pathways were calculated for direct reductive 
elimination from intermediate 98, or for initial amine de-coordination followed by outer-sphere 
SN2 attack of the activated -position. The mechanistic studies led to a re-evaluation of the 
catalytic reaction conditions. In particular, it was found that the addition of 20 equivalents of 
acetic acid resulted in a dramatically increased reaction rate, presumably due to protonation of 
the amine substrate (94) lowering the concentration of free amine (93) and thus disfavouring 
formation of the off-cycle bis-amine complex. 
In 2017, an enantioselective version of the aziridine-forming reaction was developed 
involving the activation of prochiral methyl groups in -dimethyl substituted morpholinones 
and piperazinones (101, Scheme 29).150 Under slightly modified conditions that included a 
chiral BINOL-derived phosphoric acid ligand (R)-TRIP, the corresponding enantioenriched 
aziridines (102) were accessed in good yield and high enantioselectivity (up to 97:3 e.r.). Later, 
computational DFT studies by Zhang151 elucidated the enantio-determining transition state for 
the CH activation (TS-7), whereby the chiral phosphoric acid was found to act as an anionic 
spectator ligand that is hydrogen-bonded to the amine(NH), creating a chiral environment for 
an acetate-assisted CMD process.  
Scheme 29. Enantioselective Pd-catalyzed aziridine-forming reaction using a chiral phosphoric acid ligand.  
In 2014, Gaunt146 also developed a catalytic  CH carbonylation process of hindered 
tetramethylpiperidine (TMP) substrates (103, Scheme 30A). The reaction once again proceeded 
via a four-membered palladacycle (104), which was functionalized by a low valent mechanism 
involving CO insertion and C(O)N bond reductive elimination to afford -lactam products 
(105). Catalytic Cu(OAc)2 was used to re-generate the Pd
II catalyst with air being used as the 
terminal oxidant. Notably, the palladacycle could be isolated under stoichiometric palladium 
Introduction 
conditions as the acetate-bridged trinuclear complex in the solid state (106). Shortly after, in 
2015, Gaunt152 reported a  CH arylation process of TMP substrates employing boronic acid 
coupling partners (107 to 108, Scheme 30B). Crucially, a MPAA ligand (N-acetyl 
phenylalanine) was required to ensure good yields of the -arylated products along with 1,4-
benzoquinone and Ag2CO3 as other essential additives. The product utility was demonstrated 
by conducting two subsequent amine-directed ortho C(sp2)H functionalizations to access 
complex polycyclic amine derivatives (109).  
Scheme 30. Pd-catalyzed  CH (a) carbonylation and (b) arylation of hindered tetramethylpiperidine substrates.   
While the first examples of the native amine-directed strategy all involved  CH 
activation of hindered secondary amines, it was later shown that  CH activation was possible 
as well. In 2017, Gaunt153 reported the  CH alkenylation of morpholinones (110) using 
electron-poor olefin coupling partners, which proceeded via the -alkenylated intermediate 
(111) followed by a diastereoselective aza-Michael addition to form stereo-defined pyrrolidine 
products (112, Scheme 31A). Similar to the  CH arylation of TMP substrates, addition of an 
MPAA ligand (N-acetyl glycine) led to improved reaction yields in the catalytic transformation. 
In order to probe the selectivity for  versus  CH activation within hindered secondary 
amines, an intramolecular competition experiment was conducted under stoichiometric 
palladium conditions without the MPAA ligand using a morpholinone containing appropriately 
disposed -methyl and -methyl groups proximal to the lactone carbonyl (110: R1 = R2 = R3 = 
Me). By NMR analysis of the resulting palladacycles, a 3:1 ratio of : CH activation was 
observed, demonstrating a preference for the formation of a four-membered palladacycle (113) 
over a five-membered palladacycle (114). However, upon subjecting the mixture of 
Introduction 
palladacycles to ethyl acrylate in HFIP at 60 oC, only the pyrrolidine product was formed (115, 
24%). Conversely, the yield of 115 increased to 51% in the presence of N-acetyl glycine, 
indicating that the MPAA ligand had altered the ratio of the two palladacycles (113:114). The 
result of the stoichiometric functionalization was explained by deuterium labelling studies, 
which revealed that CH activation was in fact reversible in the presence of the MPAA ligand 
but was irreversible in its absence.  
Scheme 31. Pd-catalyzed  CH alkenylation & competition between  and -methyl group activation.  
In 2015, Gaunt154 reported a series of Pd-catalyzed  CH functionalization processes 
for sterically hindered N,O-ketals (116, Scheme 32). The products of the transformations could 
be converted to amino alcohols under acidic aqueous conditions. Using oxidative PdII/PdIV 
catalysis,  CH acetoxylation with PhI(OAc)2 (117) and  CH arylation with diaryliodonium 
salts (118) were developed. Notably, the arylation procedure employed dimethyl-substituted 
N,O-ketal substrates (116: R = Me) which provided higher yields relative to the simple 
cyclohexanone-derived N,O-ketals. Conversely, using low-valent PdII/Pd0 catalysis,  CH 
carbonylation (119) and  CH alkenylation (120) procedures were developed. In both cases, 
the reactions produced small quantities of the unsaturated 5-memebred ring by-product 
containing a double bond between the  and  positions, and therefore sequential hydrogenation 
steps were used to convert the by-products to the desired saturated equivalents. The utility of 
the N,O-ketal functionalization strategy was showcased in the four-step synthesis of the 
pharmaceutical drug fingolimod (124), a treatment for multiple sclerosis (Scheme 32E). 
Starting from a commercial amino-diol (121), the N,O-ketal substrate (122) was synthesized in 
two steps by ketone condensation and silyl protection, followed by the Pd-catalyzed  CH 
Introduction 
arylation process to access the arylated derivative (123). Finally, global deprotection under 
acidic conditions provided fingolimod (124) in excellent yield.   
Scheme 32. Pd-catalyzed  CH (a) acetoxylation, (b) arylation, (c) carbonylation and (d) alkenylation of N,O-
ketal substrates. (e) Application of the  CH arylation in the four-step synthesis of fingolimod.  
In general, Pd-catalyzed CH functionalization of aliphatic amines is effective for 
hindered substrates because the off-cycle bis-amine PdII complex is significantly destabilized 
by steric repulsions, promoting the formation of a coordinatively unsaturated intermediate that 
can undergo CH activation. However, the ability to functionalize less hindered amines is 
typically more desirable given that these types of amines are more commonly encountered in 
molecules of interest, such as pharmaceutical drugs. Preliminary investigations by Gaunt155 on 
the functionalization of less hindered amines indicated that catalytic  CH carbonylation was 
potentially viable (Scheme 33A). For example, using the previously developed catalytic 
conditions for TMP substrates,146 N-cyclohexylisopropylamine (125) underwent  CH 
carbonylation to the -lactam (126) in 23% yield. While this was a promising initial result, it 
was found that the putative palladacycle intermediate (127) could not be observed indicating 
that an alternative mechanism could be operating (vide infra). In 2016, Gaunt155 reported an 
optimized method for the synthesis of -lactams (Scheme 33B). Extensive screening of the 
reaction conditions enabled the discovery of efficient catalytic conditions, which included the 
Introduction 
addition of a hindered acid additive (1-adamantanecarboxylic acid or 2,4,6-trimethylbenzoic 
acid), benzoquinone (1,4-benzoquinone or phenyl-1,4-benzoquinone) and a monodentate N-
donor ligand (Li-quinoline 130 or quinuclidine 131). Significantly, the transformation 
displayed broad scope, which was enabled by the development of two protocols that were used 
depending on whether more substituted (Protocol A) or less substituted (Protocol B, Scheme 
33B) amine substrates were being employed. Under the improved conditions, N-
cyclohexylisopropylamine was carbonylated in 83% yield (126). Moreover, a wide range of 
functionally diverse aliphatic amines were tolerated in the reaction (132135), including 
complex pharmaceutical compounds such as salbutamol (133) and dobutamine (135).  
Scheme 33. Pd-catalyzed  CH carbonylation: (a) preliminary result and (b) optimized catalytic reaction.  
The mechanism of the  CH carbonylation reaction was extensively explored in order to 
explain the generality of the reaction and the role of different additives.155 In particular, 
computational DFT analysis was used to support each step of the proposed mechanism (Scheme 
34). Firstly, the amine (136) binds to the Pd-carboxylate catalyst, forming a mono-amine 
complex (137, Step 1) which is in equilibrium with the bis-amine complex (138). CO then 
coordinates to form a Pd-carbonyl complex (139, Step 2), wherein a low energy pathway was 
calculated involving attack of the carboxylate onto the CO ligand (Step 3). The resulting Pd-
Introduction 
anhydride intermediate (140) was proposed to undergo attack by the amine onto the proximal 
Pd-acyl moiety to form a Pd-carbamoyl complex (141, Step 4), which was also supported 
computationally. During this step, the bulky acid additive was suggested to favour attack of the 
proximal carbonyl over attack of the distal carbonyl of the Pd-anhydride, which was necessary 
given that distal attack would give an N-acylated by-product. Notably, N-acetylation was a 
major by-product in the absence of the bulky acid additive. Next, a relatively facile CH 
activation process from 141 was predicted in silico (G = +25.6 kcal mol-1, Step 5) wherein 
the reactive conformation is reinforced by a hydrogen-bond between the second equivalent of 
bound amine and the N-acyl moiety, resulting in a 5-membered N-acyl palladacycle (142). 
Additionally, deuterium labelling studies revealed that the CH activation was reversible. 
Finally, benzoquinone-assisted reductive elimination affords the -lactam product (143, Step 
6) and gives a Pd0 intermediate that is re-oxidized to the PdII carboxylate active catalyst. Here, 
the Pd0 complex was thought to be stabilized by the addition of the N-donor ligand (130 or 131) 
prior to re-oxidation by the Cu co-catalyst. 
Scheme 34. Proposed mechanism for the  CH carbonylation of less hindered amines.  
Introduction 
The original report for  CH carbonylation of less hindered amines was generally only 
effective for -methyl activation. In 2017, an efficient -methylene carbonylation was 
reported,156 in which the use of bisphosphine ligand xantphos was found to give high yields of 
trans di-substituted -lactams (144 to 146, Scheme 35). While the reaction was thought to 
proceed via an analogous Pd-carbamoyl intermediate (145), the role of the xantphos ligand, 
outside of stabilizing Pd0 species, was unclear. Interestingly, control reactions showed that the 
mono-phosphine oxide variant of xantphos was as effective as xantphos itself (80%, 146), 
whereas the di-phosphine oxide led to a large drop-off in yield (23%).  
Scheme 35. -Methylene carbonylation of less hindered aliphatic amines using xantphos as ligand. 
Recently, primary amines have also been employed in the native amine-directed 
strategy for CH functionalization. Given that primary amines are significantly more 
coordinating than secondary amines, in general, acidic solvents have been used in order to 
protonate the primary amine substrate and thus lower the concentration of free amine that could 
form off-cycle bis-amine complexes. The first example of native primary amine-directed 
functionalization was reported by Shi157 in 2017, which simply used PhI(OAc)2 and catalytic 
Pd(OAc)2 in acetic acid at 120 
oC to obtain -acetoxylated products (147 to 148, Scheme 36A). 
Notably, the conditions were found to partially acetylate the amine-nitrogen during the course 
of the reaction, and therefore global acetylation was conducted as a second step. Crucially, the 
control reaction employing an N-acetylated starting material gave zero conversion, supporting 
the intermediacy of the primary amine-directed five-membered ring palladacycle (150). In 
2019, Yao158 reported a  CH arylation of unprotected primary amines using aryl iodides (147 
to 149, Scheme 36B). Yao159 also reported an alternative arylation procedure using 
diaryliodonium salts in a separate work. In the same year, Bannister160 reported the  CH 
arylation of primary amines using aryl iodide coupling partners in the presence of an electron-
poor 2-nitrobenzoic acid ligand (151 to 153, Scheme 37). By analogy with the  CH 
functionalization processes, the reaction was proposed to proceed via the six-membered 
Introduction 
palladacycle intermediate (152). Overall, although primary amine-directed CH 
functionalization has been shown to be possible under relatively forcing conditions (acidic 
solvent and high temperatures), it is important to note that the reactions have much narrower 
scope than for the TDG strategies presented previously, indicating that the native primary amine 
functional group is generally less effective at mediating CH activation compared to the in situ-
formed TDGs.  
Scheme 36. Pd-catalyzed  CH functionalization of primary amines: (a) acetoxylation and (b) arylation. 
Scheme 37. Pd-catalyzed  CH arylation of unprotected primary amines.  
Very recently, Gaunt161 reported a Pd-catalyzed tertiary amine-directed CH 
functionalization (Scheme 38). Tertiary aliphatic amines are particularly challenging substrates 
given their sensitivity to undergo oxidative degradation through facile PdII-mediated -hydride 
elimination. However, it was found that employing an MPAA ligand (N-acetyl tert-leucine) 
suppressed this deleterious side reaction, and instead promoted efficient CH activation at the 
-position (TS-8). Using boronic acid coupling partners in combination with Ag2CO3 and 1,4-
benzoquinone additives, a wide array of tertiary amines (154) were transformed to their -
arylated derivatives (155). The substrate scope included the functionalization of simple 
commercial amines (156) as well as more complex pharmaceutical drug compounds such as 
trimipramine (157). Moreover, since the ligand employed was chiral (and enantiopure), 
Introduction 
subjecting prochiral tertiary amines to the conditions resulted in enantioenriched chiral amine 
products (158). For the methyl group desymmetrization of amine leading to 158, the observed 
enantioselectivity was proposed to result from the chair-like transition state of the CH 
activation step, wherein the pseudo-axial N-methyl group is positioned away from the bulky 
tert-Bu group of the ligand and the spectating -methyl group is positioned in the pseudo-
equatorial position to avoid a repulsive 1,3-diaxial interaction.  
Scheme 38. Pd-catalyzed  CH arylation of tertiary aliphatic amines using an MPAA ligand.  
Introduction 
1.3. Organometallic Chemistry of Alkyl PdIV Complexes 
High valent PdIV complexes70,72,162167 have intrigued chemists for decades by virtue of their 
distinct electronic and structural properties relative to more commonly encountered PdII and 
Pd0 complexes. PdIV complexes are accessed by the oxidation of PdII complexes and have d6 
occupancy, octahedral geometry and are diamagnetic (Scheme 39). Classically, PdIV complexes 
have been viewed as extremely reactive and elusive intermediates given their lower stability 
compared to PtIV complexes.70,168 In particular, PdIV intermediates have a strong tendency to 
undergo reductive elimination processes, making these high valent species valuable as 
intermediates in catalytic processes. However, there are often multiple different reductive 
elimination pathways that are available to the PdIV intermediate. For example, the anionic 
ligands transferred by the oxidant may reductively eliminate to effect the reverse reaction back 
to starting materials (Path a, Scheme 39), two different adjacent ligands may couple to form a 
different product (Path b), or alternatively, two trans ligands may undergo reductive elimination 
via more a complex mechanism involving ligand isomerization or an outer-sphere process (Path 
c). Consequently, studying the structure and reactivity of well-defined PdIV complexes has 
become important for understanding ways of controlling the selectivity of reductive elimination 
for the development of catalytic processes.  
Scheme 39. PdIV complexes: access by oxidation of PdII complexes and decomposition by reductive elimination. 
Alkyl PdIV complexes  organometallic complexes containing one or more -bound 
alkyl ligands  are important intermediates in catalytic transformations of organic molecules, 
such as in Pd-catalyzed C(sp3)H functionalization reactions. Yet, due to the transient nature 
of PdIV species, it was not until relatively recently that stable, crystallographically characterized 
examples of alkyl PdIV complexes were isolated. Early indications for the observation of these 
complexes occurred in the late 1970s by Yamamoto169 and early 1980s by Stille,170 wherein 
phosphine-ligated alkyl PdII complexes were reacted with halogens or alkyl halides. Notably, 
although phosphines are effective ligands for PdII centres, they are generally less effective for 
Introduction 
stabilizing PdIV centres and consequently stable high valent complexes were not isolated. 
Conversely, harder nitrogen-based multidentate ligands proved to be better suited for stabilizing 
the hard Lewis acidic PdIV centre. In 1986, pioneering work by Canty171 reported the first 
example of an isolable alkyl PdIV complex, containing a 2,2-bipyridyl supporting ligand and 
fac-Me3Pd
IV organometallic group, with an iodide completing the octahedral coordination 
sphere (PdIMe3(bpy), 159, Figure 4). Shortly after, in 1987, Canty
172,173 found that fac-
tridentate tripodal supporting ligands gave increased stability, with the use of a neutral 
tris(pyrazol-1-yl)methane ligand giving a stable cationic alkyl PdIV complex 
([PdMe3{(pz)3CH}]I, 160). In 1994,
174,175 the isoelectronic anionic tris(pyrazol-1-yl)borate 
ligand was employed to generate the neutral tripodal ligand-supported PdIV complex 
(PdMe3{(pz)3BH}, 161). Interestingly, it was not until 2000
176 that a phosphine-ligated alkyl 
PdIV complex was characterized by crystallography. The complex was synthesized by Canty 
through the displacement of a PdIV-bound triflate with PMe2Ph to give a cationic phosphine-
PdIV product ([PdMe3(phen)(PMe2Ph)][OTf], 162). In 2003, Cmpora
177 moved away from the 
fac-trialkyl ligand arrangement and instead synthesised a new type of stable PdIV complex 
containing a cyclometalated (Calkyl,Caryl) group known as a cycloneophyl ligand (163). Finally, 
in 2010, Vicente178 reported the first example of an isolable PdIV complex containing a mer-
tridentate pincer ligand (164).  
Figure 4. The evolution of stable alkyl PdIV complexes: seminal examples (19862010).  
A series of factors affect the stability of PdIV complexes.167 Firstly, rigid ligand scaffolds 
that reinforce the octahedral geometry result in more stable complexes compared to using 
flexible ligands. Accordingly, bipyridine is more stabilizing than tetramethylethylenediamine 
(tmeda), while phenanthroline is more stabilizing than bipyridine. Secondly, tridentate ligands 
are significantly more stabilizing than bidentate ligands, which is a result of the fact that 
Introduction 
reductive elimination typically requires coordinative unsaturation to occur (see: Section 1.3.3.). 
As a direct comparison, while complex 159 slowly decomposes above 10 oC in solution, 
complex 161 is stable up to at least to 80 oC.171,175 Thirdly, more electron-rich (Lewis basic) 
ligands offer greater stability for the electron-poor PdIV centre. For example, the anionic 
[(pz)3BH]
 ligand is more stabilizing than the neutral (pz)3CH ligand. Finally, cyclometalated 
carbon ligands such as the cycloneophyl group increase the stability of the complex by 
increasing the barrier to reductive elimination. Whereas the fac-Me3 group can undergo facile 
reductive elimination of ethane, intramolecular C(sp3)C(sp2) bond reductive elimination of the 
cycloneophyl group to form a strained benzocyclobutane is a much less favoured process.  
1.3.1. Synthesis of Alkyl PdIV Complexes & Mechanisms of Oxidation  
The most common approach to synthesizing alkyl PdIV complexes has been to employ alkyl 
halide reagents to oxidize the PdII centre to a PdIV centre. Cantys original synthesis171 of 
PdIMe3(bpy) (159) involved subjecting PdMe2(bpy) (165) to methyl iodide in acetone which 
led to instantaneous formation of 159 (Scheme 40A). The fac-arrangement of methyl ligands 
gave rise to a 2:1 ratio of methyl protons in the 1H NMR spectrum (H = 1.85, 6H; 1.14, 3H). 
After 30 minutes at room temperature, the complex had completely decomposed to ethane and 
PdIMe(bpy) (166). The kinetics of the oxidation were later analysed by Puddephatt,179,180 who 
found that the reaction had overall second order kinetics (first order in 165 and MeI) and a 
large negative entropy of activation (S = 35 cal K-1 mol-1). Together, these observations 
strongly indicated an SN2 mechanism, which was later confirmed using 
1H NMR at low 
temperature to directly observe the cationic intermediate (167) resulting from the reversible  
Scheme 40. Synthesis of PdIMe3(bpy) and elucidation of the mechanism of oxidation.  
Introduction 
attack of 165 on methyl iodide (Scheme 40B).173 Using methyl iodide-d3, scrambling of the CH3 
and CD3 ligands was observed both within the cationic intermediate (167) and final Pd
product (168). 
Cantys synthesis of tripodal ligand-supported PdIV complexes was also achieved using 
alkyl halides.175 For example, starting from the dimethyl (tmeda)PdII precursor, tmeda was first 
displaced by the more coordinating [(pz)3BH]
 ligand to form an anionic PdII complex (169 to 
170, Scheme 41A). The [(pz)3BH]
 ligand is known as a scorpionate ligand,181 given that it 
binds to PdII in a bidentate fashion while leaving the third pyrazolyl group tail primed to 
capture the PdIV centre upon oxidation. Canty showed that a series of activated alkyl halide 
reagents could be employed, providing access to the methyl, ethyl, benzyl and 1-allyl PdIV 
complexes (161, 171ac). In an analogous manner, an anionic pallada(II)cyclopentane complex 
(172) was oxidized by a series of two-electron oxidants such as halogens, a hypervalent iodine 
reagent or even water to access hydroxy, chloride, bromide or iodide PdIV complexes (173ad, 
Scheme 41B).182,183 The oxidation of 172 by water (releasing H2 gas) is particularly unusual 
given that H2O is not typically considered as an oxidant. As such, the reaction demonstrated the 
unique ability of the scorpionate ligand to significantly facilitate the oxidation from PdII to PdIV.  
Scheme 41. Synthesis of [(pz)3BH]-ligated Pd
IV complexes: (a) alkyl halides or (b) other two-electron oxidants.  
Cmpora and Palma showed that high valent cycloneophyl-ligated PdIV complexes 
could be synthesized by either two-electron177 or one-electron oxidants.184 Interestingly, the 
negatively charged PdII complex containing the tripodal borate ligand (174) could be 
crystallized after counter-cation exchange (175), allowing for the observation of the primed 
PdII-bound scorpionate ligand in the solid-state.184 Subjecting 174 to one equivalent of Diazald, 
a two-electron oxidant, provided the nitrosyl PdIV complex (163, Scheme 42A). Conversely, 
Introduction 
using 2 equivalents of [Cp2Fe][PF6] (FcPF6) as an outer-sphere one-electron oxidant in the 
presence pyridine yielded the cationic PdIV complex (176, Scheme 42B). The added pyridine 
played a crucial role in stabilizing the resulting PdIV product by completing the octahedral 
coordination sphere, with the oxidation being additionally facilitated by the use of a more 
electron-rich pyridine such as DMAP. Later, cyclic voltammetry (CV) studies by Sanford185 on 
the tetramethylammonium salt of the PdII precursor complex (177) in acetonitrile/pyridine 
showed a single oxidation wave with an onset potential of 0.10 V versus Fc/Fc+ corresponding 
to the PdII/PdIV redox couple. Significantly, the fact that two separate one-electron oxidation 
events were not observed by CV was in agreement with the known instability of the PdIII 
oxidation state. Conversely, when conducting CV on the NiII analogue (178) in acetonitrile, 
Sanford observed two distinct oxidation processes with onset potentials of 1.10 and +0.10 V 
versus Fc/Fc+, corresponding to the NiII/NiIII and NiIII/NiIV redox couples.  
Scheme 42. Synthesis of cycloneophyl PdIV complexes by oxidation with (a) Diazald or (b) FcPF6; (c) Cyclic 
voltammetry studies comparing the redox properties of cycloneophyl PdII and NiII complexes. 
The mechanism of sequential one-electron oxidations of alkyl PdII complexes to PdIV 
complexes was first explored by Sanford186 (Scheme 43A). Reacting PdMe2(
tBu2bpy) (179) 
with FcPF6 in acetone-d6 led to quantitative formation of the solvated cationic Pd
II complex 
containing one methyl ligand (180) and approximately 50% yield of ethane. Upon repeating the 
reaction in the presence of 10 equivalents of NaI, instantaneous formation of a 1:1 mixture was 
observed comprising the stable trimethylated PdIV iodide complex (182) and a PdII complex 
bearing one methyl and one iodide ligand (183). After 24 h, decomposition of the PdIV complex 
led to the overall generation of one equivalent of 183 and half an equivalent of ethane. 
Introduction 
Consequently, it was proposed that FcPF6 mediates a single electron oxidation of 179 to a 
putative cationic PdIII intermediate (181), which rapidly undergoes disproportion with a second 
molecule of 181 to give the observed products 182 and 183 in the presence of excess iodide. 
Although the PdIII intermediate was not directly observed, a timely subsequent study by 
Mirica187 provided the first example of an isolable monomeric PdIII complex (Scheme 43B). A 
dimethyl PdII precursor ligated to a tetradentate N4-donor ligand bound in a bidentate manner 
(184) was oxidized with one equivalent of FcPF6 to furnish a stable cationic Pd
III complex (185). 
Upon oxidation, the tetradentate N4 ligand filled the two axial positions within 185 to form a 
distorted octahedral complex. Notably, counter-anion exchange enabled structural 
determination of the monomeric PdIII complex by X-ray crystallography (186).  
Scheme 43. (a) Sequential one-electron oxidation mechanism. (b) Isolation of an alkyl PdIII complex.  
1.3.2. PdIV-mediated CC Bond Reductive Elimination  
One of the most important uses of stable alkyl PdIV complexes is for the study of reductive 
elimination mechanisms for different ligand systems and types of bond formation. In 1988, 
Puddephatt179 conducted the first studies on CC bond reductive elimination from a PdIV centre 
using Cantys original bipyridyl PdIV complex (159, Scheme 44). The reductive elimination 
quantitatively produced ethane and the PdII by-product (166), being studied in a variety of 
Introduction 
solvents in the presence or absence of excess NaI. The reaction was found to have a first order 
kinetic profile and was inhibited by excess NaI, indicating that the reaction involved reversible 
dissociation of iodide prior to a concerted CC bond reductive elimination. Furthermore, the 
reaction occurred faster in more polar solvents, supporting the intermediacy of a charged 
intermediate following iodide dissociation (187). The activation parameters were obtained in 
the case of acetone solvent and absence of added iodide: Ea = 16  3 kcal mol
-1, S = 16  8 
cal K-1 mol-1. The low activation energy reflected the facile formation of ethane, while the 
negative activation entropy was attributed to the re-organisation of solvent upon the formation 
of a charged intermediate.  
Scheme 44. Mechanism of reductive elimination from PdIMe3(bpy). 
The synthesis of differentially substituted trialkyl PdIV complexes enabled the 
selectivity of CC bond reductive elimination to be analysed for the bipyridyl-supported PdIV 
complexes. In 1994, Boersma188 reacted PdMePh(bpy) (188) with methyl iodide to form 
PdIMe2Ph(bpy) as a 1:1 mixture of configurational isomers (189, 190; Scheme 45A). A 
preference for methyl group reductive elimination was observed, giving a 4:1 ratio of ethane to 
toluene along with the associated PdII by-products (191 and 166, respectively). Conversely, 
reacting 188 with benzyl bromide gave a single isomer of a PdIV complex that contained three 
different carbon ligands: methyl, phenyl and benzyl (192). Reductive elimination from 192 
exclusively produced toluene and PdII complex 193. Overall, while the involvement of the 
methyl group in the reductive elimination was generally favoured, there was no clear 
explanation for the selectivity of CC bond formation. Moreover, the mechanism was further 
complicated by the fact that the PdIV complexes could undergo facile exchange processes of the 
alkyl ligands. For example, subjecting PdBrMePhBn(bpy) (192) to PdMe2(bpy) (165) led to 
rapid transfer of the benzyl and bromide ligands to form the more stable (less encumbered) PdIV 
complex PdBrMe2Bn(bpy) (194) and the respective Pd
II by-product PdMePh(bpy) (188, 
Scheme 45C).  
Introduction 
Scheme 45. Selectivity of CC bond reductive elimination from (a) PdIMe2Ph(bpy) and (b) PdBrMePhBn(bpy).  
(c) Alkyl ligand exchange processes between PdIV centres.  
One of the first cases where CC bond reductive elimination from an alkyl PdIV 
intermediate was implicated in a catalytic process was for the Catellani reaction;165,189,190 which 
was developed over several years in the early 1990s through stoichiometric organometallic 
studies. The reaction originated from the observation of Inoue191 that the insertion of an aryl 
PdII complex into norbornene results in an alkyl PdII product that is stable to -hydride 
elimination due to the absence of syn- hydrogens (195, Scheme 46). However, it was the 
pioneering studies of Catellani189,192195 which identified that these arylnorbornylpalladium(II) 
complexes could promote ortho CH functionalization processes in the presence of suitable 
electrophiles. For example, reacting dimeric PdII complex 195 with ethyl iodide in the presence 
of K2CO3 led to di-ortho-alkylation of the pendant aryl group (Scheme 46A).
192 Moreover, due 
to the steric encumbrance of the resulting intermediate (196), spontaneous -carbon elimination 
occurred to release norbornene and provide a new doubly alkylated -aryl PdII complex (197). 
Finally, hydrogenolysis of the PdC bond liberated the 1,3-diethylated arene (198). The 
mechanism of the norbornene-assisted CH functionalization was extensively studied by 
Catellani. Subjecting 195 to KOPh with added phenanthroline ligand enabled the isolation of 
the palladacyclic complex (199),193 unequivocally confirming this as an intermediate in the 
reaction pathway (Scheme 46B). Then, reacting palladacycle 199 with p-nitrobenzyl bromide 
led to the formation of a PdIV complex (200) that was stable for several hours at room 
temperature, allowing for characterization of the high valent complex by NMR spectroscopy.195 
Introduction 
Interestingly, 200 was the first example of an observable PdIV complex containing a 
metallacycle. CC bond reductive elimination from 200 resulted in the exclusive coupling of 
the benzyl and aromatic groups (201), which was in contrast to the bond-forming selectivity of 
the trialkyl bipyridyl-PdIV complexes that disfavoured the coupling of the benzyl group (e.g. 
192 to 193). Following the seminal work of Catellani, a vast array of catalytic transformations 
were developed that utilized the directing ability of norbornene for the synthesis of poly-
substituted aromatic derivatives.190,196 Notably, the methodological development of Catellani-
type processes remains an active field of research up to the current day,190 reflecting the 
remarkable versatility of this type of reactivity mode.  
Scheme 46. Development of the Catellani reaction: (a) norbornene-assisted ortho-CH alkylation. (b) Evidence 
for a cyclometalated alkyl PdIV intermediate and the formation an observable benzyl PdIV complex.  
1.3.3. PdIV-mediated C(sp3)heteroatom Bond Reductive Elimination  
In the late 1990s, studies began to focus on C(sp3)heteroatom bond reductive elimination 
from alkyl PdIV intermediates. However, obtaining selectivity for the desired Cheteroatom 
bond formation over competing CC coupling proved challenging. For example, Canty197 found 
that simply reacting PdMe2(bpy) (165) with benzoyl peroxide led to an unstable Me2Pd
intermediate (202) that underwent both CC and CO bond reductive eliminations to give a 
60:40 mixture of ethane and methyl benzoate (Scheme 47A). Later, a more detailed study198 
involved the synthesis of a Me3Pd
IV benzoate complex (203) from the oxidation of 165 with 
MeI followed by halide abstraction with Ag[O2CPh], but reductive elimination gave only 
ethane (Scheme 47B). Conversely, around the same time, Goldberg199,200 demonstrated that a 
Introduction 
Me3Pt
IV acetate complex (205) could mediate CO bond reductive elimination with high 
selectivity under certain conditions (Scheme 47C). Notably, the reaction was highly solvent 
dependent, favouring CO bond formation in non-polar solvents such as benzene but 
completely switched to CC bond formation in polar solvents such as acetone. A consistently 
high yield of CO coupling from PtMe3(OAc)(dppe) (205) was also obtained when an excess 
of Bu4NOAc was added, allowing the mechanism of the reaction to be studied in detail. It was 
found that the reaction was independent of the concentration of exogenous acetate, faster in 
more polar solvents and accelerated by the addition of acetic acid. Consequently, Goldberg 
proposed that CO bond reductive elimination occurred via acetate dissociation to form a 
cationic 5-coordinate PtIV intermediate, followed by outer-sphere attack by acetate (206). 
Notably, this outer-sphere SN2-type mechanism proved to be general for high valent Group 10 
[M]4+ transition metals for CO and CN bond reductive eliminations (vide infra).  
Scheme 47. CO bond reductive elimination from (a) Me2Pd
IV, (b) Me3Pd
IV and (c) Me3Pt
IV intermediates.  
Although C(sp2)X reductive elimination (X = O, N, S) from low valent PdII centres83 
and C(sp3)X reductive elimination (X = O, N) from high valent PtIV centres199201 were 
extensively studied throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, it was not until the 2010s that 
C(sp3)heteroatom bond reductive elimination was studied from high valent PdIV centres. In 
2012, Sanford202 developed the first system that enabled selective C(sp3)heteroatom bond 
formation from a stable alkyl PdIV complex (Scheme 48). Based on the previous work of 
Introduction 
Cmpora and Palma177 forming cycloneophyl PdIV complexes (e.g. 163, Scheme 42), Sanford 
synthesized an analogous PdIV fluoride complex supported by a bipyridyl ligand (209) by 
reacting the PdII precursor (207) with N-fluoro-2,4,6-trimethylpyridinium triflate (NFTPT, 
208). Complex 209 was formed as a single isomer in near-quantitative yield by the oxidative 
transfer of fluoride and triflate groups from 208 to 207. 209 was found to have notable stability 
to moisture and, rather than hydrolysing the PdF bond as was often observed in PdII 
complexes,203 the addition of water to 209 simply displaced the labile triflate ligand to form a 
cationic PdIV aquo complex (210). Alternatively, subjecting 209 to pyridine gave the pyridine-
ligated cationic PdIV complex (211), which underwent clean C(sp3)F bond reductive 
elimination at 80 oC to give the fluorinated -aryl PdII complex (213). Significantly, 213 was 
the sole product of the reductive elimination and hence C(sp2)F coupling involving the 
aromatic group was not detected. From kinetic experiments, the CF bond formation from 211 
was found to have a first order kinetic profile and had negative first order dependency with 
respect to added pyridine. Consequently, Sanford proposed initial dissociation of pyridine to 
form a cationic 5-coordinate intermediate (212), followed by inner sphere CF bond reductive 
elimination. An alternative mechanism involving fluoride dissociation from 212 followed by 
outer-sphere nucleophilic attack by fluoride was ruled out on the basis that this would require 
the formation of a dicationic 14-electron PdIV intermediate that would be highly disfavoured.  
Scheme 48. C(sp3)F bond reductive elimination from cycloneophyl PdIV complex: synthesis and mechanism.  
Sanford204 next explored PdIV-mediated C(sp3)N bond reductive elimination. 
Subjecting the stable high valent cycloneophyl complex 209 to NH2Ts and Cs2CO3 resulted in 
instantaneous ligand exchange of the triflate ligand for NHTs, forming two isomeric PdIV
NHTs complexes in a 6:1 ratio (Schme 49A). The NHTs ligand was trans to the methylene of 
Introduction 
the cycloneophyl group in the major isomer (214) and trans to the -aryl of the cycloneophyl 
in the minor isomer (215). Heating the isomeric PdIV complexes resulted in a mixture of 
reductive elimination pathways, in which the desired C(sp3)N bond formation occurred in only 
9% yield to form the palladacyclic product (216) after internal N-displacement of the fluoride 
ligand. Interestingly, the major pathway was in fact C(sp3)F bond reductive elimination (217, 
49%), with intramolecular CC bond reductive elimination also taking place in 29% yield to 
form the benzocyclobutane product (218). However, as was previously observed in the case of 
PtIV chemistry199,200 (Scheme 47C), Sanford found that adding extra nucleophile to the reaction 
greatly improved the efficiency and selectivity of the desired bond formation. Adding 1 
equivalent of soluble NMe4NHTs, the yield of 216 increased to 85% and only traces of side-
products 217 and 218 were formed. Furthermore, adding 2 equivalents of bipyridine ligand as 
well provided a further increase in the yield of 216 to 98%. Kinetic studies showed that the 
reaction was first order in the PdIV complexes (214, 215) and zero order in added nucleophile 
(NMe4NHTs), indicating that a dissociative ionization of the N-nucleophile followed by outer-  
Scheme 49. C(sp3)N bond reductive elimination from a cycloneophyl PdIV complex. 
Introduction 
sphere attack of the cationic PdIV complex was the likely mechanism. Indeed, later 
computational DFT studies by Zimmerman103 calculated a low energy pathway involving an 
outer-sphere mechanism (221 to 223), originating from the major isomeric form of the PdIV 
intermediate (219; Path a, Scheme 49B). However, DFT analysis also revealed an alternative 
pathway which was similar in energy starting from the minor PdIV isomer (220), involving N-
to-O ligand isomerization of the sulfonamide followed by intramolecular attack of the pendant 
nitrogen within a neutral 6-coordinate intermediate (222, Path b). 
The same cycloneophyl PdIV complex (209) could also be used to study C(sp3)O bond 
reductive elimination.205,206 Adding 1 equivalent of a range of oxyanion nucleophiles as their 
sodium salts (NaOR, R = Ph, Ac, NO2, Ts) to 209 at 10 
oC in CD3CN gave rise to an 
equilibrium mixture of the neutral oxyanion-ligated complexes (224) and the cationic 
acetonitrile-bound complex (225, Scheme 50). Subsequently, adding an excess of the 
nucleophiles, raising the temperature to between 2550 oC and then washing with brine resulted 
in exclusive formation of C(sp3)O coupled products that were isolated as alkyl PdII chloride 
complexes in 6888% yield (226ad). From kinetic experiments, the reductive elimination was 
once again first order in the PdIV complex and zero order in added nucleophile. Crucially, given 
that the oxyanion ligand cannot isomerize to a different coordination mode to promote an inner- 
Scheme 50. C(sp3)O bond reductive elimination from a cycloneophyl PdIV complex.  
Introduction 
sphere reductive elimination mechanism, it was proposed that the mechanism occurred simply 
via outer-sphere nucleophilic attack of the cationic PdIV intermediate. In addition, a notable 
effect of the counter-cation of the oxyanion was observed. For example, reacting 209 with 
NaONO2 and NBu4ONO2 at 25 
oC led to exclusively C(sp3)O bond reductive elimination in 
the former case (>98% 226c) but gave a mixture of C(sp3)O and C(sp3)F reductive 
elimination in the latter case (56% 226c, 44% 228). Using 19F NMR, a 1:1 interaction was 
observed between the Lewis acidic Na+ cation and the Lewis basic PdIVF (227), whereas no 
interaction was observed for the tetrabutylammonium salt. Based on the experimental results, 
this Lewis acid-base interaction was proposed to inhibit C(sp3)F bond reductive elimination. 
Compared to Sanfords study on C(sp3)O bond formation, divergent reactivity was 
observed by Mirica207 wherein a cycloneophyl-ligated PdIV complex underwent selective 
aromatic C(sp2)O bond reductive elimination as opposed to alkyl group reductive elimination. 
Oxidation of a PdII complex supported by a scorpionate-type Me3tacn ligand (Me3tacn = 
N,N,N-trimethyl-1,4,7-triazacyclononane; 229) by dioxygen led to quantitative formation of 
a cationic PdIV hydroxide complex (230, Scheme 51). Heating 230 in DMSO to 110 oC resulted 
in exclusive C(sp2)O bond reductive elimination (231), presumably via an inner-sphere 
mechanism, which gave the phenol product (232) after protodemetalation. Crucially, the 
C(sp3)O reductive elimination product was not detected. However, it was not clear whether 
this alternative reactivity could be attributed to the difference in supporting ligand (Me3tacn 
versus bpy) or was a feature of hydroxide reductive elimination, given that the use of NaOH or 
NMe4OH with Sanfords complex (209) gave a complicated mixture of products.
Scheme 51. C(sp2)O bond reductive elimination from cycloneophyl PdIV(Me3tacn) complex.  
Finally, Sanford185 showed that PdIV complexes which do not contain ligands that 
readily dissociate (to form 5-coordinate cationic intermediates) can also undergo nucleophile-
mediated reductive elimination by direct outer-sphere attack of the neutral six-coordinate PdIV 
complex. For example, a PdIV centre ligated by a cycloneophyl group, [(pz)3BH] and CF3 
ligands was attacked by O- and N-centred nucleophiles to form C(sp3)heteroatom coupled 
Introduction 
products (234) in good to high yields (Scheme 52). Notably, in this instance, kinetic studies 
revealed that the reductive elimination was first order in both 233 and added nucleophile, 
supporting a straightforward SN2 mechanism involving the six-coordinate Pd
IV complex (TS-
Scheme 52. C(sp3)heteroatom reductive elimination by outer-sphere attack of a 6-coordinate PdIV complex. 
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
2. Pd-catalyzed  C(sp3)H Amination to Form Azetidines 
2.1. Background & Previous Work 
Following the discovery of the Pd-catalyzed aziridine formation by the intramolecular  CH 
amination of hindered secondary amines,146 it was thought that the homologous  CH 
amination process could be possible under similar conditions using PdII/PdIV catalysis (Scheme 
53A). Crucially, the  functionalization would result in the formation of four-membered ring 
azetidine products in a single step,208 which would be a valuable transformation given that 
classical methods for azetidine synthesis typically require highly functionalized precursors 
capable of mediating an internal displacement that are often challenging and time-consuming 
to prepare.209212 However, while it was previously shown that subjecting morpholinone 93 to 
PhI(OAc)2 and catalytic Pd(OAc)2 gave exclusively aziridine formation (100, 74%; Scheme 
53B),146 reaction of the -diethyl homologue (235) gave exclusively  CH acetoxylation (237, 
75%; conducted by Dr M. Nappi; Scheme 53C) with no detectable amount of the desired 
azetidine (238) being formed. For the -acetoxylation process, computational DFT analysis 
carried out by Dr B. G. N. Chappell calculated that the favoured reductive elimination pathway 
involved outer-sphere attack by acetate onto a cationic PdIV intermediate (236), which was  
Scheme 53. (a) Proposal for azetidine formation. Comparison of (b)  versus (c)  CH functionalization using 
PhI(OAc)2 as oxidant. Reaction C conducted by Dr M. Nappi. DFT study conducted by Dr B. G. N. Chappell.  
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
analogous to the mechanistic proposal of Sanford205 from the study of C(sp3)O bond reductive 
elimination from stable PdIV complexes (see Section 1.3.3.). The Pd-catalyzed  CH 
acetoxylation of hindered secondary amines was later re-optimized and studied in detail using 
kinetic and computational analysis to gain further insight into the divergent selectivity for 
reductive elimination from aminoalkyl PdIV intermediates.213 
 Evidently, intramolecular  CH amination proved to be less favoured than for the 
aziridine-forming -functionalization reaction, and thus a distinct approach was necessary in 
order to mediate a selective azetidine formation over competing reductive elimination 
pathways. Previously, in 2016, Shi214 had demonstrated that the selectivity of reductive 
elimination from a PdIV centre could be controlled by varying the type of DG that was used 
(Scheme 54). Using PhI(OAc)2 and catalytic Pd(OAc)2, substrates containing triazole amide-
based DGs (239) selectively produced either azetidine products (240) when using a bidentate 
variant of the DG, or -acetoxylation (241) when using a tridentate variant containing a tethered 
pyridine. Although the specific reason for this switch in bond-forming selectivity was unclear, 
the reactions demonstrated the ability to favour azetidine formation based on the ligand 
environment around the PdIV centre. Nonetheless, the strategy of Shi could not be applied within 
a native amine-directed strategy due to the requirement for chelating auxiliary groups.  
Scheme 54. Controlling the selectivity of reductive elimination through choice of directing group.  
In parallel with the current work was the report by Liu and Wu,215 which showed that 
reductive elimination could alternatively be controlled by the choice of oxidant (Scheme 55). 
Rather than using PhI(OAc)2, pentafluoroiodobenzene (C6F5I) was employed as part of a 
picolinamide-directed -methylene functionalization reaction to promote intramolecular CN 
bond reductive elimination, forming bicyclic azetidine products (242 to 244). Importantly, the 
putative PdIV intermediate (243) resulting from oxidative addition contained the highly 
electron-withdrawing pentafluorophenyl ligand that did not undergo CC bond reductive 
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
elimination (arylation) or acetoxylation (from AgOAc), but instead provided high selectivity 
for the desired cyclization process.  
Scheme 55. Reagent-controlled reductive elimination to promote intramolecular C(sp3)N bond formation.  
The ability to control the selectivity of reductive elimination from aminoalkyl PdIV 
intermediates derived from native amine-directed CH activation remained an unsolved 
challenge. In the search for a suitable oxidant that could promote selective azetidine formation, 
it was hypothesized that, rather than aiming for a direct CN bond forming process, the 
reductive elimination of a leaving group could instead be used to form an intermediate that 
would be prone to cyclization. Specifically, instalment of a tosylate group was an attractive 
strategy given that it would exploit the proclivity of aminoalkyl PdIV intermediates to undergo 
outer-sphere CO bond reductive elimination pathways (Scheme 56). For example, oxidative 
transfer of a tosylate group to the amine-derived palladacycle (245) would result in a PdIV 
intermediate (246) which could undergo dissociative ionization followed by SN2-type attack of 
the PdIV-bound alkyl group (247). The resulting  CH tosyloxylation product (248) would then 
spontaneously cyclize to form the azetidine derivative (238).  
Scheme 56. Proposed strategy for azetidine formation:  CH tosyloxylation followed by internal displacement. 
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
The preliminary experiments for the Pd-catalyzed  CH amination of hindered 
secondary amine 235 were conducted by Dr M. Nappi and Dr C. He. Firstly, simply combining 
PhI(OAc)2 with TsOH  as an additive (two equivalents each) in PhMe at 80 
oC gave none of 
the desired azetidine product (238; Table 1, entry 1), indicating that free TsOH was not 
beneficial for reactivity. However, employing a pre-formed tosylated iodine(III) reagent 
hydroxy(tosyloxy)iodobenzene (HTIB, also known as Kosers reagent)216 provided the first 
observation of 238, albeit in 6% yield (entry 2). Using AgOAc as an additive with HTIB 
increased the yield to 27% (entry 3). Meanwhile, cyclic iodonium oxidants217 were also tested, 
with 2-iodosylbenzoic acid (IBA) giving 17% yield when used with AgOAc (entry 4). Notably, 
exchanging IBA for a tosylated cyclic iodonium oxidant (249), originally reported by 
Zhdankin218 in 1994, increased the yield to 52% (entry 5). The reaction was optimized by Dr 
M. Nappi and Dr C. He using oxidant 249 to provide the azetidine product in 81% yield, which 
included increasing the equivalency of 249 and AgOAc to three equivalents each, lowering the 
temperature to 60 oC and changing the solvent to 1,2-DCE (entry 6). The control reaction 
removing the palladium catalyst gave no yield of 238 as was expected (entry 7), though 
removing the AgOAc additive also significantly hindered the reaction with only traces of 
azetidine formed (entry 8). While the specific role of AgOAc was not elucidated, the in situ 
formation of AgOTs was ruled out by a further control reaction exchanging AgOAc for AgOTs  
Table 1. Reaction Discovery and Optimisation.a  
Entry Oxidant (equiv) Additive (equiv) T (oC) Solvent  Yield (%)b 
1 PhI(OAc)2 (2) TsOH (2) 80 PhMe 0 
2 HTIB (2)  80 PhMe 6 
3 HTIB (2) AgOAc (2) 80 PhMe 27 
4 IBA (2) AgOAc (2) 80 PhMe 17 
5 249 (2) AgOAc (2) 80 PhMe 52 
6 249 (3) AgOAc (3) 60 1,2-DCE 81 
7c 249 (3) AgOAc (3) 60 1,2-DCE 0 
8 249 (3)  60 1,2-DCE trace 
9 249 (3) AgOTs (3) 60 1,2-DCE 0 
aReactions were conducted by Dr M. Nappi and Dr C. He. bYields were determined by 1H NMR using 1,1,2,2-
tetrachloroethane or Ph3CH as internal standard. 
cNo Pd(OAc)2.  
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
that provided 0% yield (entry 9). Finally, a stoichiometric palladium experiment was conducted 
by Dr C. He, wherein the 5-memebered palladacycle was synthesized as the trinuclear acetate-
bridged complex (250) in 84% yield by subjecting 235 to 1.5 equivalents of Pd(OAc)2 in 
chloroform at 60 oC (Scheme 57). Reacting complex 250 with oxidant 249 in 1,2-DCE at 60 oC 
gave the azetidine (238) in 51% yield, confirming the intermediacy of the palladacycle as well 
as indicating that the silver(I) additive was not essential for the palladacycle oxidation nor for 
the product-forming reductive elimination step.  
Scheme 57. Stoichiometric palladation of 235 and reaction with oxidant 249. Reactions conducted by Dr C. He.  
Having discovered an effective method for azetidine formation, computational DFT 
analysis was conducted by Dr B. G. N. Chappell to elucidate the reaction pathway (Scheme 
58). Following oxidation of the palladacycle by oxidant 249, a low energy pathway was 
calculated involving dissociation of the tosylate ligand from the PdIV intermediate (251) to 
generate the corresponding cationic PdIV species (252). From 252, two potential reductive 
elimination mechanisms were calculated: (i) amine(NH) deprotonation followed by direct  
Scheme 58. Computational DFT analysis of possible reductive elimination pathways. Conducted by Dr B. G. N. 
Chappell. Ar1 = 2-I-C6H4CO2H, Ar
2 = 4-Me-C6H4. 
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
CN bond reductive elimination (G = 29.3 kcal mol-1, TS-10; Path a) and (ii) outer-sphere 
attack by the displaced tosylate (G = 15.7 kcal mol-1, TS-11; Path b). In line with our 
proposed strategy, COTs bond reductive elimination via an outer-sphere mechanism (Path b) 
was found to be significantly lower in energy. 
The scope of hindered secondary amines was explored by Dr M. Nappi and Dr C. He 
(Scheme 59). Maintaining the -ethyl group required for  CH activation, the second  
substituent was varied with alkyl chains containing different functional groups such as protected 
alcohols, fluoride, phthalimide, ester and aryl groups, providing the desired azetidines in good 
to excellent yield (254ah, 5381%). The -position distal to the lactone carbonyl was also 
changed from a geminal dimethyl group to a spirocyclic cyclohexyl moiety (254i, 83%). 
Finally, changing the morpholinone core for an aryl-substituted piperazinone core provided the 
azetidine in moderate yield (254j, 48%).  
Scheme 59. Scope of amines with fully substituted  and  positions. Yields are for isolated products.  
Reactions conducted by Dr M. Nappi and Dr C. He. 
Significantly, Dr C. He discovered that the  CH amination reaction also extended to 
chiral amino acid-derived substrates containing -gem-diethyl substitution (255, Scheme 60). 
These substrates contained an -H substituent that was previously found to be incompatible 
with the more oxidizing PhI(OAc)2 reagent due to deleterious oxidation of the amine,
146,213 
highlighting the improved chemoselectivity of oxidant 249. Moreover, while the azetidines 
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
were obtained in moderate yields for substates derived from alanine, phenylalanine and serine 
(256ac, 5066%), the azetidine products were produced with high diastereoselectivity (up to 
>20:1 d.r.) resulting from the desymmetrization of the -gem-diethyl group, providing 
essentially enantio- and diastereopure chiral products. In each case, the major diastereomer was 
formed from the activation of the ethyl chain syn to the -H substituent, presumably as a result 
of the PdII catalyst binding to the least hindered face of the secondary amine leading to CH 
activation from this face of the morpholinone (257 versus 258, Scheme 61).  
Scheme 60. Scope of amino acid-derived amines. Yields are for isolated products. All reactions by Dr C. He.  
Scheme 61. Rationale for the observed diastereoselectivity of the  CH activation.  
2.2. Project Aims 
Upon joining the project of the Pd-catalyzed  CH amination, several areas of research 
remained to be explored. Firstly, we were interested in further investigating the scope of chiral 
amino acid-derived morpholinone substrates (Figure 5A). Given that the reaction selectively 
activated the alkyl chain on the least hindered face of the chiral morpholinones, we aimed to 
synthesize isomerically pure substrates that maintained a suitably displaced  CH bond on the 
least hindered face (anti to the amino acid-derived R-group) but with various spectator alkyl 
groups containing different functionality on the more hindered face. Consequently, it was 
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
necessary to develop a diastereoselective synthetic protocol in order to access these substrate 
molecules. Secondly, it was planned to test the reaction on acyclic secondary amine substrates 
(Figure 5B). For previously reported Pd-catalyzed CH functionalization reactions employing 
unprotected secondary amines, the scope of acyclic substrates had been extremely limited. 
However, the specific reason for this difficulty was unclear and therefore it was planned to use 
the azetidine-forming reaction as a means to further study this area of chemical space.  
Figure 5. Project aims for the Pd-catalyzed  CH amination reaction.  
2.3. Results & Discussion 
2.3.1. Diastereopure Chiral Morpholinone Substrates  
Previously, hindered secondary amines derived from amino acids containing the -gem-diethyl 
group could be synthesized using the Bargellini reaction.219 For example, the morpholinone 
derived from alanine (255a) was prepared by reacting L-alaninol (259a) with 3-pentanone and 
chloroform in the presence of sodium hydroxide, initially forming a sodium carboxylate 
intermediate (260) that was cyclized under high temperature acidic conditions (concentrated 
aq. HCl, 100 oC; Scheme 62A). However, given that we required a stereoselective synthesis for 
morpholinones containing two different  substituents, the Bargellini reaction could not be used 
because it would not be able to adequately control diastereoselectivity. Consequently, we 
searched for an alternative synthetic approach.  
In 1988, Dellaria220,221 reported the diastereoselective alkylation of glycine enolate 
equivalents formed from morpholinones (262) for the synthesis of non-natural amino acids 
(Scheme 62B). The transformation was simultaneously reported by Williams222,223 using a 
similar method. In particular, highly diastereoselective alkylations were observed for the N-
Boc-protected phenylglycine-derived morpholinone (261) when using lithium or sodium 
hexamethyldisilazide at low temperatures (78 to 100 oC), which gave diastereo- and enantio- 
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
Scheme 62. (a) Example of the Bargellini reaction. (b) Literature precedence for stereoselective synthesis of 
chiral morpholinones and (c) application to -disubstituted morpholinones. Reaction A conducted by Dr C. He. 
pure alkylated products (263, up to >200:1 d.r.). Unprotected non-natural amino acids (264) 
could be generated in two steps by lactone hydrolysis and hydrogenolysis. The model for 
stereoinduction was reasoned on the basis of kinetic control, with four transition states being 
possible: re/si-TS-12 and re/si-TS-13.221 Transition states re/si-TS-13 are favoured over re/si-
TS-12 on the basis of A(1,3) strain wherein the pseudo-axial amino acid-derived phenyl group 
avoids unfavourable steric clashing with the tert-butyl of the Boc protecting group. si-TS-13 is 
then favoured over re-TS-13 as the electrophile approaches from the least hindered face of the 
enolate. We planned to utilize Dellarias stereoselective alkylation method to generate -
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
disubstituted chiral morpholinones as single isomers by carrying out two sequential alkylation 
steps on morpholinones derived from several different amino acids (265, Scheme 62C). 
Notably, -ethylation would be carried out as the final alkylation step (266 to 267) in order to 
place an ethyl chain on the least hindered face of the morpholinone, as required for the Pd-
mediated CH activation.  
Amino acid-derived morpholinones containing simple -n-propyl -ethyl substitution 
were first synthesized. Starting from L-alaninol, L-phenylalaninol and TIPS-protected L-serinol 
(259ac), a sequential 3-step alkyationBoc-protectioncyclisation protocol afforded the 
morpholinone cores (265ac, Scheme 63A). Next, using the conditions developed by Dellaria, 
allylation followed by ethylation provided the -dialkylated morpholinones in 
diastereomerically pure form after chromatography (268ac). The crystal structure of 268a 
revealed the expected pseudo-axial orientation of the alanine-derived -methyl group, as 
dictated by the A(1,3) strain of the N-Boc group, and importantly confirmed the relative 
stereochemistry of the -alkyl substituents. Hydrogenation and Boc deprotection furnished the 
desired substrate molecules (269ac). Following a similar synthetic sequence, the -allyl -
ethyl intermediate derived from N-Ts-protected L-lysine was prepared by Dr C. He. As before, 
hydrogenation and Boc deprotection provided the desired amine substrate (269d, Scheme 63B). 
Scheme 63. Synthesis of morpholinone substrates derived from (a) alanine, phenylalanine, serine and (b) lysine.  
Using different synthetic intermediates, alanine-derived morpholinones with alkyl 
substituents containing functional groups were also accessed. For example, -allyl -ethyl-
substituted intermediate 268a underwent an olefin cross metathesis reaction with ethyl acrylate 
using Grubbs II catalyst to give the ,-unsaturated ester derivative (270), which was 
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
hydrogenated and deprotected to give amine substrate 269e containing an alkyl ester substituent 
(Scheme 64A). Meanwhile, an alkyl phthalimide substituent was incorporated by using an alkyl 
iodide containing a terminal phthalimide in the alkylation sequence of parent morpholinone 
265a (Scheme 64B). Although the doubly alkylated product (272) was formed with moderate 
diastereoselectivity (5:1 d.r.), the major desired diastereomer was chromatographically isolated 
in synthetically useful 37% yield and deprotected to give the amine substrate (269f).  
Scheme 64. Synthesis of alanine-derived morpholinones containing (a) ester and (b) phthalimide groups. 
The synthesised chiral diastereopure morpholinones were subjected to the previously 
described Pd-catalyzed  CH amination conditions (Scheme 65). Alanine, phenylalanine and 
serine-derived substrates containing -n-propyl -ethyl substitution afforded the azetidine 
products in moderate to good yields (273ac, 5564%). Lysine-derived substrate gave a 
synthetically useful yield of the azetidine (273d, 47%), though was noticeably less reactive 
presumably on account of having a coordinating NH-Ts-containing side chain. Alkyl ester and 
phthalimide functional groups were well tolerated under the reaction conditions in the chiral 
alanine-derived substrates (273ef, 5256%). Azetidine 273f was crystalline and hence 
analysed by X-ray characterization of a single crystal. The conformation of the six-membered 
ring showed a characteristic twist-boat, while the azetidine had the expected puckered 
conformation with an angle of pucker of 20.5o. Notably, the mass balance for the reactions was 
between 7080%, indicating substrate decomposition (from -H elimination or amine N-
oxidation) was occurring in all cases under the conditions. A more substituted morpholinone 
core containing gem-dimethyl substitution at the -position (269g) was subjected in the 
reaction to test whether the mass balance could be improved by sterically protecting the -
position, though the azetidine product was formed in essentially the same yield as for the simple 
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
alanine-derived substrate, once again with excellent diastereoselectivity (273g, 56% yield, 
>20:1 d.r.). Several other chiral morpholinone substrates were synthesized and employed in the 
Pd-catalyzed reaction by Dr M. Nappi and Dr C. He (Scheme 65, bottom). A derivative of 
norephedrine containing -methyl and -phenyl substitution afforded the azetidine in good 
yield and excellent diastereoselectivity (273h, 54%, >20:1 d.r.). Derivatives of leucine 
generally were optimal substrates for the reaction, giving high yields of azetidines (273ij, 61
82%), while a Ts-protected tryptophan derivative gave a synthetically useful yield (273k, 35%).  
Scheme 65. Extended scope of amino acid-derived chiral morpholinones.  
Azetidines 273h273j were synthesized by Dr M. Nappi. Azetidine 273k was synthesized by Dr C. He.  
A morpholinone containing -n-propyl -ethyl substitution derived from alanine, but 
containing the ethyl chain on the more hindered face syn to the alanine-derived methyl group, 
was synthesized by Dr C. He (274). As expected, under the Pd-catalyzed conditions the 
corresponding azetidine was not detected (275, Scheme 66).  
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
Scheme 66. -Ethyl substitution on the more hindered face of the morpholinone gave no reaction.  
2.3.2. Acyclic Substrates  
We were interested in employing acyclic substrates in the Pd-catalyzed  CH amination 
reaction in order to move away from the privileged morpholinone scaffold and towards more 
commonly encountered classes of amine. Specifically, the greater conformational flexibility of 
acyclic amines relative to cyclic substrates such as morpholinones makes CH activation more 
challenging due to the greater entropic penalty to cyclometalation. Furthermore, the resulting 
palladacycle is less rigid and therefore it is also more difficult to achieve the PdII to PdIV 
oxidation step. With these considerations in mind, we first tested a hindered acyclic secondary 
amine (276) that was synthesized from reductive ring-opening and Piv-protection of the -
diethyl substituted alanine-derived morpholinone (255a). Importantly, substrate 276 contained 
the same substitution pattern around the amine nitrogen as was in the reactive morpholinone 
substrates and thus was thought to give the highest chance of maintaining productive reactivity.  
Subjecting amine 276 to the Pd-catalyzed conditions as developed previously (80 oC, 
1,2-DCE) gave a low yield of the azetidine product (277, 15% by NMR; Scheme 67). Notably, 
unlike the morpholinone substrates, 277 was formed as a 1:1 mixture of diastereomers 
indicating that the cyclic structure was crucial for inducing stereoselectivity. Although the  
Scheme 67. Investigation of morpholinone-derived acyclic amine: observation of rearranged pyrrolidine product.  
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
conversion was low, a trace amount of another product with the same molecular weight was 
observed when analysing the crude reaction mixture by GC-MS. Subsequently, upon repeating 
the reaction at higher temperature (100 oC, PhMe) the trace side-product was found to increase 
significantly in yield, with the azetidine (277) no longer being observed. After purifying the 
reaction by silica gel chromatography, the new product was identified as the ring-expanded 
pyrrolidine product containing a -quaternary centre (278, 33% isolated, 1:1 d.r.). 
With respect to the mechanism of the pyrrolidine formation, it was proposed that the 
reaction proceeded via the intermediacy of the azetidine given that this product was observed 
under the lower temperature conditions. Upon searching the literature for similar types of ring 
expansion, we found that the expansion of (-chloromethyl) and (-(OMs)-methyl)azetidines 
(279) to 3-substituted pyrrolidines (281) had previously been reported (Scheme 68A).211,224 
Although a concerted mechanism was originally proposed, a study by Couty225 in 2008 strongly 
favoured a stepwise mechanism on the basis that external nucleophiles (e.g. OH, CN, N3
AcO) could intercept the putative bicyclic azetidinium intermediate (280) to form diversely 
functionalized pyrrolidines. By analogy with Coutys observations, it is proposed that the 
initially formed azetidine 277 undergoes an internal displacement of the pivalate group present 
within the alkyl substituent of the azetidine, forming a 3,4-bicyclic azetidinium intermediate 
(282, Scheme 68B). The displaced pivalate anion may then attack the unsubstituted position of 
the three-membered ring, re-forming starting material, or attack the bridgehead position to form 
the observed pyrrolidine product (278). The release of ring strain should provide a 
thermodynamic driving force for conversion of 277 to 278. 
Scheme 68. (a) Coutys ring expansion of azetidines and (b) proposed mechanism from literature precedence.  
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
In order to test the limit of the Pd-catalyzed  CH amination reaction, less hindered 
acyclic secondary amines derived from valine (283) and tert-leucine (284) were employed 
(Scheme 69). These substrates contained two potential sites for -H elimination, with one 
hydrogen substituent at each of the  and  positions, making them more vulnerable to Pd-
mediated decomposition. Nonetheless, pleasingly, under the standard catalytic conditions the 
azetidine was formed for the valine-derived substrate, albeit in low yield (285, 12% by NMR, 
1:1 d.r.). Conversely, the azetidine was not observed for the more substituted tert-leucine-
derived substrate (286), and in both cases, the rearranged pyrrolidine product was not observed 
(287). Overall, despite not providing a synthetically useful yield, the observation of azetidine 
285 provided a crucial indication that a wider range of aliphatic amines could potentially be 
functionalized using a high valent PdII/PdIV-catalyzed CH functionalization strategy.  
Scheme 69. Investigation of acyclic amines derived from valine and tert-leucine.  
2.4. Summary 
The current chapter disclosed the investigation into the scope of the Pd-catalyzed intramolecular 
 CH amination of hindered aliphatic amines that was discovered by Dr M. Nappi and Dr C. 
He. The reaction was effective for a range of cyclic morpholinone substrates, providing access 
to an array of densely substituted azetidine derivatives.   Following the earlier report of  CH 
amination to form aziridines via four-membered ring palladacycle intermediates, the present 
work demonstrated a novel strategy for favouring intramolecular CN bond formation from 
five-membered ring palladacycles over other competing bond-forming processes. Specifically, 
a cyclic iodine(III) tosylate oxidant was used to access a PdIV intermediate capable of 
undergoing selective COTs reductive elimination, installing a tosylate leaving group at the -
position that was spontaneously displaced by the amine nitrogen. The reaction exploited the 
relative facility of the outer-sphere reductive elimination mechanism that is possible for anionic 
oxygen ligands from PdIV intermediates, as opposed to a direct CN bond reductive elimination 
that was found to be disfavoured from five-membered ring palladacycles.  
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation 
Perhaps the most important implication from the work was that high valent PdII/PdIV 
catalysis was demonstrated for the first time to tolerate substrates containing hydrogen 
substituents adjacent to the amine nitrogen. In previous studies, hypervalent iodine(III) oxidants 
had been found to rapidly degrade these types of less substituted amine, and therefore the cyclic 
iodine(III) reagent proved to be highly chemoselective for oxidizing the palladacycle without 
significant background oxidation of the substrate. Consequently, chiral morpholinones derived 
from amino acids containing one -H substituent could be functionalized in good yield, 
generating diastero- and enantiopure azetidine derivatives that would be difficult to otherwise 
synthesize in isomerically pure form. Building on the improved scope of the azetidine-forming 
reaction, the limit of the Pd catalysis was tested by employing acyclic secondary amine 
substrates, which had proven to be challenging for the native amine-directed CH 
functionalization strategy due to their lower reactivity towards cyclometalation. Interestingly, 
the azetidine products of Piv-protected amino-diol substrates derived from morpholinones were 
found to readily undergo ring-expansion processes in situ under the Pd-catalysed conditions. 
Although this transformation was not extensively explored, further optimisation could provide 
a new method for the synthesis of substituted pyrrolidines. Moreover, a less hindered valine-
derived secondary amine with two hydrogen substituents adjacent to the amine nitrogen 
provided a low but promising yield of the corresponding azetidine, providing the first example 
of an oxidative CH functionalization on an unprotected amine substrate that is not a 
morpholinone or derived from a morpholinone. Significantly, this result provided the basis for 
subsequent research described in the following sections, which aimed to expand the scope of 
aliphatic amine-directed PdII/PdIV-catalyzed CH functionalization reactions. 
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
3. Pd-catalyzed CH Functionalization by ortho-DG-assisted 
Oxidative Addition 
3.1. Background & Project Aims 
Since the advent of the native amine-directed CH functionalization strategy, a variety of Pd-
catalyzed  C(sp3)H functionalization processes proceeding via the high valent PdII/PdIV 
manifold were developed. The transformations included (A) -acetoxylation of hindered 
secondary amines using PhI(OAc)2,
154,213 (B) -arylation of N,O-ketals using diaryliodonium 
salts154 and (C)  CH amination of morpholinones using a cyclic iodine(III) tosylate reagent 
(Scheme 70).226 Notably, in all cases hypervalent iodine reagents were employed, which react 
with the intermediate five-membered ring palladacycles via an outer-sphere SN2 oxidation 
mechanism analogous to that of alkyl halide reagents (Scheme 70D).227,228 However, while the 
iodine(III) oxidants could readily oxidize a range of palladacyclic intermediates derived from 
cyclic hindered secondary amines, a fundamental limitation was that less hindered (and more 
nucleophilic) amines were prone to directly reacting with the oxidant through the nitrogen lone 
pair leading to deleterious substrate oxidation to form imines.229231 Therefore, the oxidant must 
be sufficiently reactive to oxidize the palladacycle while avoiding degradation of the amine 
substrate, but for less hindered amines this window for productive reactivity becomes 
vanishingly small. Consequently, while less hindered amines have been demonstrated to be 
cyclopalladated under stoichiometric conditions,71 the scope of catalytic transformations has 
been limited due to incompatibility with known oxidants. Overall, outside of hindered 
morpholinone or N,O-ketal substrates, the discovery of a mild and general method for accessing 
aminoalkyl PdIV intermediates under catalytic conditions has remained an unsolved problem. 
Scheme 70. Summary of PdII/PdIV-catalyzed methods for aliphatic amine-directed  C(sp3)H functionalization.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
In the search for a general method for aminoalkyl palladacycle oxidation, we considered 
whether milder oxidants reacting via an oxidative addition mechanism at the metal centre could 
provide a more selective reactivity mode. Given that the amine nitrogen cannot mediate an 
oxidative addition mechanism, there should no longer be an incompatibility between the 
substrate and oxidant. To date, aryl iodides have been the most commonly used reagent in Pd-
catalyzed CH functionalization reactions and react via oxidative addition to the PdII 
metallacycle, resulting in an aryl PdIV intermediate that typically leads to arylation of the 
substrate via CC bond reductive elimination.59,65 Despite their prevalence in the literature, aryl 
iodides have not yet been reported as coupling partners in a native amine-directed CH 
functionalization process. While aryl iodides are indeed less reactive than their hypervalent 
iodine counterparts, a more fundamental reason for their lack of reactivity stems from the 
mechanistic requirements of the oxidative addition (Scheme 71). Importantly, oxidative 
insertion of the CI bond is known to proceed via an intermediate wherein the aryl iodide is 
coordinated to the metal through the iodine atom or -system of the aryl group.70,232,233 
Therefore, unlike the outer-sphere SN2 mechanism for hypervalent iodine reagents, aryl iodides 
require a vacant site of coordination in order to oxidize the PdII centre. Under catalytic 
conditions whereby the amine is in effective excess, coordination of the aryl iodide to the 
aminoalkyl palladacycle would be in competition with the binding of a second equivalent of 
amine substrate. However, crucially, amine coordination would form a coordinatively saturated 
and thermodynamically stable69,144 trans-bis(amine) palladacycle complex that would be 
unlikely to react with aryl iodides.  
Scheme 71. Aryl iodides are mild oxidants but have not been reported to react with aminoalkyl palladacycles.  
Cognizant of the necessary requirements for the oxidative addition of aryl iodides to 
palladacycle intermediates, we surveyed the literature of auxiliary-controlled C(sp3)H 
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
arylation reactions of amine derivatives and found that a clear trend emerged regarding the 
types of DG that were employed with aryl iodide reagents (Scheme 72). For example, aryl 
iodides were first reported with bidentate directing groups containing an anionic nitrogen group 
and neutral chelating group (denoted as Type I DGs), such as the picolinamide DG used by 
Daugulis40 and Chen96 or 2-pyridiylsulfonamide DG of Carretero.105 The palladacycles that 
result from these Type I DGs contain an exocyclic neutral ligand that may be displaced by the 
aryl iodide prior to oxidative addition (TS-I). Alternatively, bidentate DGs containing a neutral 
nitrogen group and charged chelating group (Type II) are also successfully employed with aryl 
iodides given that the exocyclic ligand is once again a neutral ligand that is able to be displaced 
(TS-II). Type II DGs were employed by Sanford125 in the transannular CH arylation of cyclic 
aliphatic amines and in the TDG strategies of Yu139 and Ge.138 Finally, a third type of bidentate 
DG containing a neutral nitrogen group as well as a neutral chelating ligand (Type III) was used 
in the TDG strategy of Dong.136 In this distinct scenario, the palladacycle contains an exocyclic 
ligand that is anionic, and hence there is no ligand that can be displaced by the neutral aryl  
Scheme 72. Comparison of Pd-catalyzed C(sp3)H arylation reactions promoted by amine-derived DGs.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
iodide reagent without forming a cationic complex. As a result, diaryliodonium salts were 
required to achieve the oxidative CH arylation reaction (TS-III). Significantly, the bis(amine) 
palladacycle complex is analogous to the Type III DG scenario of Dong, given that the stable 
trans arrangement of amine ligands means that there is no labile neutral ligand that can be 
readily displaced by the aryl iodide. 
Following work on the Pd-catalyzed  CH amination reaction, stoichiometric studies 
were conducted (vide infra) wherein it was serendipitously discovered that an aryl iodide 
containing an ortho-carboxylic acid group (2-iodobenzoic acid, 288a)  the side product 
generated from the oxidation of the palladacycle by the cyclic iodine(III) tosylate oxidant 249 
 could itself oxidize aminoalkyl palladacycles to form functionalized amine products (Scheme 
73A). The oxidation was reasoned to proceed by the coordination of the ortho-carboxylate to 
the PdII metallacycle, allowing the CI bond to more readily interact with the metal centre via 
an intramolecular oxidative addition mechanism. As a result, the carboxylate-assisted oxidative 
addition effectively surmounted the issues facing aryl iodides as oxidants for native amine-
directed CH functionalization, namely, their mild reactivity compared with more oxidizing 
hypervalent iodine reagents and the weak interaction of simple aryl iodides with the 
palladacycle. Notably, Vicente234 had previously demonstrated the ability of 2-iodobenzoic acid 
(288a) to oxidize an ONC-pincer PdII complex (289) to the corresponding PdIV complex (291) 
by coordination of the ortho-carboxylate group of the aryl iodide (290), providing observation 
of the oxidative addition to the metal centre (Scheme 73B). However, the facile oxidation mode 
had so far not been utilized within a Pd-catalyzed CH functionalization reaction.  
Scheme 73. (a) Carboxylate-assisted oxidation addition of 2-iodobenzoic acid to aminoalkyl palladacycles.  
(b) Vicentes synthesis of a stable PdIV ONC-pincer complex by employing 2-iodobenzoic acid.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
A series of project aims were set out to explore the oxidative addition chemistry of 
aminoalkyl palladacycles. Firstly, stoichiometric studies were conducted to analyse the 
efficiency of the palladacycle functionalization using 2-iodobenzoic acid and to explore the 
selectivity of bond-forming reductive elimination under various conditions (Figure 6A). 
Secondly, we aimed to exploit the mild nature of the aryl iodide oxidant to develop a catalytic 
process for the CH functionalization of less hindered aliphatic amines than those previously 
employed in native amine-directed functionalization (Figure 6B). Thirdly, we investigated the 
effect of replacing the ortho-carboxylic acid group with different coordinating DGs in order to 
explore the generality and versatility of the ortho-directed oxidative addition reactivity mode 
(Figure 6C).  
Figure 6. Project aims for the carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition to aminoalkyl palladacycles.  
3.2. Results & Discussion 
3.2.1. Stoichiometric Palladacycle Studies 
As disclosed previously in Section 2.3.2., the acyclic valine-derived amine substrate 283 
provided a low but notable 12% yield of the azetidine product in the Pd-catalyzed  CH 
amination reaction. As a result, we were curious whether the low efficiency of the reaction was 
related to the CH activation step or palladacycle functionalization step. An experiment with 
stoichiometric palladium was conducted to study each of these mechanistic steps. The acetate-
bridged trinuclear palladacycle (292) was synthesized by subjecting amine 283 to 1.5 
equivalents of Pd(OAc)2 in chloroform at 50 
oC (Scheme 74A). Although the 1H NMR spectrum 
of 292 was complicated as a result of interconversion between species of different nuclearity in 
solution, the spectrum could be resolved by the addition of pyridine as a coordinating ligand. 
The resolved 1H NMR spectrum showed that a diastereomeric mixture of monomeric 
palladacycles had formed in quantitative yield in a 1:1 ratio (293a:293b). Next, the mixture of 
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
Scheme 74. Cyclopalladation of amine 283 and reaction with oxidant 249: (a) discovery of minor arylated by-
products and (b) proposed reaction pathway involving 2-iodobenzoic acid as arylating agent.  
palladacycles (293) was reacted with the cyclic iodine(III) tosylate oxidant (249) in the presence 
of AgOAc at 60 oC and was found to give the corresponding azetidine product  in 55% yield by 
NMR (285, 22% isolated, 1:1 d.r.). While the stoichiometric experiment had seemingly 
demonstrated that both the activation and functionalization steps of the mechanism were 
proceeding with good efficiency, it was subsequently found that subjecting the trinuclear 
palladacycle directly to oxidant 249 in the absence of pyridine gave no yield of azetidine 285, 
indicating that the pyridine ligand could be involved in lowering the barrier to palladacycle 
oxidation by the stabilization of the resulting PdIV intermediate.184 Consequently, it was 
concluded that oxidant 249 was not sufficiently reactive to efficiently oxidize the palladacycle 
derived from amine 283 under catalytic conditions, in which pyridine would not be present. 
Nonetheless, a more significant observation from this study was that minor arylation by-
products (mono- and di-arylation, 294 and 295) were also formed in the reaction between the 
pyridine-ligated palladacycles (293) and 249, being observed by GC-MS and LC-MS analysis 
(Scheme 74A). Moreover, chromatographic separation and analysis by NMR of these arylation 
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
products indicated that the phenyl groups were being incorporated at remote -positions rather 
than, for example, at nitrogen. Notably, the only potential source of an aromatic group was from 
the iodine(III) oxidant 249. As a result, a reaction pathway was proposed wherein the pyridine-
ligated palladacycles (293) were first oxidized by oxidant 249, generating the -tosyloxylation 
product (296) that would spontaneously cyclize to the azetidine (285) as well as an equivalent 
of 2-iodobenzoic acid (288a) as a by-product of the oxidant (Scheme 74B). It was thought that 
aryl iodide 288a could react with a palladacycle (293) to generate the mono-arylation product 
(294) which could then activate and functionalize once more to generate the di-arylation 
product (295). Interestingly, if this hypothesis was correct, the palladacycle functionalization 
step would involve in situ decarboxylation of the aryl iodide reagent, meaning that the ortho-
carboxylic acid group was acting as a type of traceless DG. 
In order to confirm the proposed reaction pathway, another stoichiometric experiment 
was carried out but, this time, employing an isoleucine-derived substrate (297) that only has 
one -methyl group, so as to remove the possibility of diastereomeric mixtures and multiply 
functionalized products. Subjecting amine 297 to 1.5 equivalents of Pd(OAc)2 led to 
quantitative  CH activation to give the trinuclear palladacycle (298) as a green crystalline 
solid (Scheme 75A). The solid-state structure of 298 was elucidated by X-ray diffraction of a 
single crystal. Adding pyridine to 298 provided the monomeric pyridine-ligated palladacycle 
(299), which was reacted with 2 equivalents of 2-iodobenzoic acid (288a) in the presence of 1 
equivalent of AgOAc in chloroform. Remarkably, at room temperature, full conversion of 
complex 299 was observed after one hour, generating a new Pd complex that contained a 1,2-
disubstituted aromatic group incorporated into the amine and with a second equivalent of 2-
iodobenzoic acid ligated to the Pd centre that was engaged in hydrogen bonding to the NH 
bond of the bound secondary amine (300, 75% by NMR). Changing the solvent from 
chloroform to acetic acid and stirring at room temperature released the -arylated amine product 
(301a, 56% from 297), which was confirmed by single crystal X-ray crystallographic analysis 
of the HCl salt. While the intermediate Pd complex was initially thought to be an alkyl PdIV 
complex that is stable at room temperature, it was later discovered that the complex was in fact 
an unusual seven-membered ring PdII metallacycle (300). The identity of 300 was revealed by 
repeating the stoichiometric reaction with a triarylphosphine-ligated palladacycle (302), leading 
to the formation of a chromatographically stable, but more importantly crystalline, complex 
that could be characterised by X-ray diffraction of a single crystal (303, Scheme 75B; 
phosphine-ligated complexes were synthesized by J. H. Blackwell). Significantly, the 
stoichiometric experiment demonstrated that a facile carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition 
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
occurs between aminoalkyl palladacycles and 2-iodobenzoic acid. Furthermore, the formation 
of the seven-membered ring palladacycle intermediate, resulting from C(sp3)C(sp2) bond 
formation and extrusion of a molecule of CO2, provided direct observation of a novel mode of 
reactivity involving the decarboxylative arylation of -cyclopalladated amines.  
Scheme 75. (a) Carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition resulted in 7-membered ring palladacycle. (b) Structure 
determination of PAr3-ligated 7-membered ring palladacycle. Reactions in (b) conducted by J. H. Blackwell. 
For comparison, palladacycle 299 was subjected to iodobenzene in the presence of 
AgOAc. However, stirring the reaction at 100 oC in 1,2-DCE or AcOH, or conducting the 
reaction in iodobenzene as solvent, gave no conversion to the arylated product 301a (Scheme 
76). Additionally, palladacycle 299 was reacted with diphenyliodonium triflate. While no 
reaction occurred at room temperature, heating to 80 oC resulted in slow conversion to 301a 
(16% after 3 h, 24% after 16 h by NMR). Notably, the mass balance of the reaction was poor, 
with only traces of the starting palladacycle 299 remaining after 16 h at 80 oC. Overall, the use 
of 2-iodobenzoic acid with AgOAc was found to be uniquely effective at oxidizing the 
palladacycle under mild conditions, leading to decarboxylative arylation in good efficiency.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
Scheme 76. Subjecting palladacycle 299 to iodobenzene and diphenyliodonium triflate.   
Given that the decarboxylative arylation was an unexpected and unprecedented 
transformation, we were interested to explore the mechanism of the reaction. Firstly, support 
for the formation of a putative high valent PdIV intermediate was obtained by subjecting 
palladacycle 299 to 2-bromobenzoic acid (304a, Scheme 77). In the presence of AgOAc in 
chloroform at room temperature, the reaction did not lead to the formation of arylation product 
301a, but rather the formation of the PdII benzoate complex (305) wherein the acetate ligand 
had been displaced by 2-bromobenzoate. Given the higher propensity of aryl iodides to undergo 
oxidative addition compared to aryl bromides,233 the fact that the functionalization was not 
observed strongly supports oxidative addition as a mechanistic step. Moreover, the observed 
coordination of the benzoic acid to the PdII centre provides evidence for the coordination of the 
ortho-carboxylic acid group prior to oxidative addition.  
Scheme 77. Support for a putative PdIV intermediate: subjecting palladacycle 299 to 2-bromobenzoic acid.  
Next, we considered the possibility of aryne formation resulting from the metal-
mediated elimination of CO2 and iodide from 2-iodobenzoic acid. In 2010, Greaney
235 reported 
a Pd-catalyzed trimerization reaction of benzoic acid (306) to triphenylene (309) under forcing 
high temperature conditions (150 oC, sulfolane; Scheme 78A). The reaction was proposed to 
proceed via carboxylate-directed cyclometalation (307) followed by decarboxylation to from a 
reactive PdII-aryne intermediate (308) that would undergo trimerization. While the mechanistic 
proposal was not supported by experiment, the work highlighted the possibility of generating 
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
aryne or aryne-like intermediates from a cyclopalladated benzoic acid. By analogy, it was 
hypothesized that the PdIV intermediate (310) formed from the oxidation of the aminoalkyl 
palladacycle by a substituted aryl iodide (288) could potentially undergo decarboxylation at the 
high valent metal centre to generate a pair of regioisomeric PdIV-aryne complexes (311a and 
311b, Scheme 78B). Importantly, CC bond reductive elimination could occur from either the 
position of the iodide (311a) or the carboxylate (311b) leading to a mixture of regioisomeric 
products forming. To determine the regioselectivity, 2-iodo-5-methylbenzoic acid (288b) was 
reacted with palladacycle 299 with AgOAc in chloroform at room temperature (Scheme 78C). 
Scheme 78. (a) Literature precedent for Pd-aryne formation from the decarboxylation of cyclopalladated benzoic 
acid. (b)(d) Investigating the possibility of aryne formation in the decarboxylative arylation of complex 299.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
After protodemetalation by AcOH, the arylated product containing a para-methyl substituent 
was isolated (301b, 58%), with no other arylated amine products being detected. Hence, the 
reaction was completely regioselective, with the CC bond being formed at the position of the 
CI bond in the aryl iodide reagent. Additionally, to check for transient aryne intermediates, 
furan  a well-known aryne trapping reagent or arynophile236,237  was used as the solvent for 
the decarboxylative arylation reaction between 299 and 288a (Scheme 78D). However, the 
seven-membered ring PdII complex formed in similar yield in furan as in chloroform (300, 79% 
by NMR in furan; c.f. 75% in chloroform), with the cycloaddition product of benzyne and furan 
(312) not being observed. Taken together, these mechanistic control experiments suggested that 
aryne intermediates were not being formed in the reaction. 
Next, we planned to investigate the mechanism of CO2 extrusion in the decarboxylative 
arylation. There are two possible points in the reaction pathway at which decarboxylation could 
occur. Firstly, decarboxylation from the PdIV intermediate formed upon carboxylate-assisted 
oxidative addition could occur to generate a Pd-aryne complex, but given that the formation of 
aryne species was not supported experimentally, this pathway was ruled out (Scheme 79A, Path 
a). Secondly, CC bond reductive elimination could occur from the initially formed PdIV 
intermediate to give a PdII-bound amino acid (314), which could then undergo decarboxylation  
mediated by a PdII or AgI metal centre, or by a combination of the two (Path b). Significantly, 
while PdII and AgI-catalyzed decarboxylation reactions were extensively reported in the 
literature,238240 the reactions required elevated temperatures in all cases (>100 oC). The high 
reaction temperatures signified a divergence from the current work, in which decarboxylation 
occurred at room temperature. Consequently, a third mechanistic possibility was proposed, 
wherein decarboxylation and CC bond reductive elimination occur in concert from the PdIV 
intermediate (Path c). In order to distinguish between the stepwise and concerted reaction 
pathways (Paths b and c), the putative amino acid intermediate of the stepwise mechanism was 
synthesized by reacting palladacycle 299 with benzyl 2-iodobenzoate (315)  an ester-protected 
variant of the ortho-carboxylate oxidant that was employed in order to prevent in situ 
decarboxylation (Scheme 79B). While the ortho-ester functional group was far less effective 
than the ortho-carboxylate at promoting the functionalization, the desired arylated product 
(316) could be obtained in 11% yield when using the aryl iodide as solvent in the presence of 
AgOAc at 100 oC. The acetoxylated product (317) was also obtained in 11% yield as a by-
product of the reaction. Hydrogenation of the benzyl-protected intermediate gave the free amino 
acid (318). Subjecting 318 to 1 equivalent of Pd(OAc)2 with AgOAc (01 equivalent) gave no 
reaction at room temperature, but stirring the reactions at 80 oC led to quantitative conversion 
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
to a dimeric palladacycle in which -methylene CH activation had occurred (319, Scheme 
79C). The structure of the dimeric complex was confirmed by X-ray crystallography. 
Furthermore, subjecting 318 to the complete reaction conditions used previously, including 2-
iodobenzoic acid 288a (1.5 equiv Pd(OAc)2, 1 equiv AgOAc, 2 equiv 288a, 2 equiv pyridine 
in CDCl3 at room temperature), gave no reaction. Given that the ortho-carboxylate remained 
intact, it was concluded that amino acid 318 was not an intermediate in the decarboxylative 
arylation, and that decarboxylation must occur prior to CC bond reductive elimination. 
Therefore, it was proposed that the most likely mechanism involved concerted decarboxylation 
and CC bond reductive elimination from a high valent PdIV centre (Path c).  
Scheme 79. (a) Mechanism involving stepwise CC bond reductive elimination to an amino acid followed by 
PdII- or AgI-mediated decarboxylation. (b) Synthesis of amino acid 318 and (c) reaction with PdII and AgI salts.  
The final mechanistic control experiment concerned the role of the silver salt additive. 
Exchanging AgOAc for NaOAc, we were surprised to observe a complete switch in the 
selectivity of reductive elimination, with a mixture of CO coupled products being formed that 
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
incorporated either 2-iodobenzoate (320, 43%) or acetate (317, 10%) at the -position of the 
amine (Scheme 80). A terminal alkene product was also formed in the reaction (321, 10%). 
Crucially, given that the CI bond was present in 320 and that mixture of CO coupled products 
were formed, CO bond reductive elimination was proposed to occur via external nucleophilic 
attack of the putative PdIV intermediate (322).205 Alternatively, carboxylate-mediated 
deprotonation of the -CH bond could explain the formation of the alkene by-product. 
Scheme 80. Exchange of AgOAc for NaOAc led to CO bond reductive elimination.  
Overall, taking into account all the experimental observations, a working hypothesis of 
the mechanism for the Pd-/Ag-mediated decarboxylative arylation is shown in Scheme 81. The 
aminoalkyl palladacycle (299) first undergoes ligand exchange with 2-iodobenzoic acid (288a), 
forming an intermediate from which carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition can take place 
following the dissociation of pyridine (323). The resulting PdIV intermediate (324) contains a 
PdI bond which is proposed to undergo AgI-mediated iodide abstraction to install a 
carboxylate ligand on the PdIV centre (325), triggering a reductive elimination sequence 
involving concerted decarboxylation and CC bond formation. During the reductive 
elimination, the Pd centre undergoes a 1,2-aryl migration241 to produce the observed seven-
membered ring palladacycle complex (300). A recent computational study by Wang and Dang95 
found evidence for a AgI salt in facilitating CC bond reductive elimination from a metalacyclic 
PdIV intermediate, highlighting an additional role of AgI in Pd-catalyzed CH functionalization 
reactions. The current work additionally represents an example wherein the presence of a silver 
salt causes a complete switch in the selectivity of bond-forming reductive elimination.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
Scheme 81. Working mechanistic hypothesis for the carboxylate-assisted decarboxylative arylation reaction.  
3.2.2. Development of Catalysis & Reaction Scope 
We investigated the possibility of developing a catalytic process for the decarboxylative 
arylation reaction. Gratifyingly, employing amine 297 with 1.5 equivalents of 2-iodobenzoic 
acid, 10 mol% Pd(OAc)2, 2 equivalents of AgOAc in chloroform at 80 
oC for 16 hours gave 
51% yield of the -arylated product (301a) with 8% yield of the CO coupled by-product (328
I ; Table 2, entry 1). The amine starting material was also recovered in 35% yield, indicating 
almost complete mass balance (>90%) and thus minimal substrate decomposition under the 
catalytic conditions. Interestingly, using 2-bromobenzoic acid (304a) improved the yield of 
301a to 63%, again with CO coupling as a minor by-product (7% 328Br, entry 2). 
Conversely, employing 2-chlorobenzoic acid (326) or 2-(OTf)-benzoic acid (327) gave no 
conversion to functionalized products (entries 34). Use of Pd catalysts with bulkier 
carboxylate ligands such as Pd(O2CMes)2 or Pd(OPiv)2 gave slight increases in yield of 301a 
(67% and 69%, respectively; entries 56), with commercial Pd(OPiv)2 being selected for the 
remaining optimization reactions. On the other hand, use of AgOPiv resulted in diminished 
yield relative to AgOAc (entries 78). Additionally, pre-forming the silver salt of 2-
bromobenzoic acid was not beneficial, giving 50% yield of 301a when used with Pd(OPiv)2 
(entry 9). Finally, increasing the equivalency of 2-bromobenzoic acid to 2 equivalents and 
extending the reaction time to 20 hours gave a final optimized yield of 301a of 74% (70% 
isolated yield). Removing the Pd catalyst resulted in no conversion (entry 11), whereas 
removing the AgOAc additive gave 6% of the CO coupled product (328Br, entry 12) but 
none of the arylated product (301a), as would be expected from the results of the stoichiometric 
studies. Looking to develop a silver-free  CH acyloxylation reaction, we tested different 
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
inorganic base additives. Adding 2 equivalents of NaOAc improved the yield of 328Br to 
10%, while using CsOPiv provided a further increase to 20% (13% isolated yield of 328Br, 
entry 14). Nonetheless, despite further screening of reaction conditions, we were unable to 
increase the yield to a satisfactory level. Presumably, the absence of the silver salt meant that 
the halogen abstraction from the Pd catalyst as required for catalytic turnover was either not 
occurring (as in the case of NaOAc, TON = 1) or not occurring efficiently (as in the case of 
CsOPiv, TON = 2). As discussed previously, the silver salt may also play a role in facilitating 
the CH activation step through bimetallic interactions with the Pd catalyst.95 Ultimately, the 
likely multi-faceted role of the silver salt could explain the diminished catalytic efficiency of 
the CO bond-forming reaction relative to the decarboxylative arylation process.  
Table 2. Optimization of catalytic reactions for CC and CO bond formation.  
Entry ArX Pd(O2CR)2 Additive 297 (%) 301a (%) 328X (%) 
1 I Pd(OAc)2 AgOAc 35 51 8 
2 Br Pd(OAc)2 AgOAc 17 63 7 
3 Cl Pd(OAc)2 AgOAc 96 0 0 
4 OTf Pd(OAc)2 AgOAc 100 0 0 
5 Br Pd(O2CMes)2 AgOAc 27 67 5 
6 Br Pd(OPiv)2 AgOAc 24 69 4 
7 Br Pd(OPiv)2 AgOPiv 25 57 7 
8 Br Pd(OAc)2 AgOPiv 19 48 5 
9  Pd(OPiv)2 Ag(O2C-2-Br-C6H4)
a 37 50 7 
10b Br Pd(OPiv)2 AgOAc 18 74 (70)
11 Br  AgOAc 100 0 0 
12 Br Pd(OPiv)2  81 0 6 
13b Br Pd(OPiv)2 NaOAc 85 0 10 
14b Br Pd(OPiv)2 CsOPiv 78 0 20 (13)
Percentage yields obtained from 1H NMR analysis of the crude reaction mixtures against an internal standard 
(1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane). aSynthesized by Dr. G. N. Hermann. b2 equiv ArBr, 20 h reaction time. cIsolated yield 
after chromatography.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
Having optimized catalytic conditions for the CC bond-forming decarboxylative 
arylation, we next explored the scope of the reaction. The scope with respect to substituted 2-
bromobenzoic acid reagents (304) was found to be relatively broad for the -arylation of amine 
297 (Scheme 82). In all cases, minor side-products arising from CO coupling were formed in 
<10% yield but no general trend related to electronic properties was identified. 5-Substituted 
aryl bromide reagents giving rise to para-substituted arylated amines were well tolerated 
(301be, 3966%). Notably, the electron-withdrawing CF3 substituent gave a diminished yield 
(39%), potentially indicating that the bromobenzoic acid (used in stoichiometric quantities) 
could be acting as the internal base in the CMD mechanism of CH activation as more acidic 
reagents would be predicted to be less effective in this role. The synthesis of meta-substituted 
arylation products was also demonstrated, with 4-methyl-2-bromobenzoic acid and 6-methyl-
bromobenzoic acid both resulting in the same meta-methyl product after decarboxylation with 
similar efficiency (301fa, 63%; 301fb, 60%). 4-Substituted aryl bromides bearing different 
halide substituents (F, Cl, Br) were also well tolerated (301gi, 4961%). 3-Substituted aryl 
bromides, wherein the 3-substituent is positioned ortho to the CBr bond, could be tolerated 
for spatially small groups such as fluoride or methoxy (301jk, 4651%) that would not  
Scheme 82. Scope of substituted 2-bromobenzoic acid reagents in the -arylation of 297. Yields are of isolated 
products. aReaction conducted by J. H. Blackwell. b2.5 equiv aryl bromide and 2.5 equiv AgOAc were used.   
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
significantly affect the interaction with the Pd centre as required for oxidative addition. Finally, 
a more highly substituted 4,5-dimethoxy arylation product was obtained in good yield (301l, 
61%).  
Several substituted aryl bromide reagents were also found to be ineffective in the 
decarboxylative arylation (Scheme 83). For example, a coordinating free-hydroxyl functional 
group (301m, 0%) and sterically encumbered 3-methyl substituted reagent were found to shut 
down the reaction (301n, 0%). Moreover, heteroaryl bromide reagents derived from 2-
chloropyridine or N-acetyl-protected indole gave no yield of the arylated products (301op, 
0%). Conversely, 3-bromothiophene-2-carboxylic acid produced a low but promising yield of 
the heteroarylated product (301qa, 16% by NMR), which could be slightly increased when 
using the analogous aryl iodide reagent (301qb, 23% by NMR). Although the low efficiency of 
heteroaryl halide reagents represented a drawback of the reaction, the fact that 5-membered ring 
thiophenyl halides were observed to undergo the decarboxylative arylation process highlighted 
a potential starting point for future work into expanding the scope of coupling partners.  
Scheme 83. Unreactive or poorly reactive (hetero)aryl halides. aYield determined by 1H NMR against standard.  
The scope of aliphatic amines was explored, starting with substrates derived from the 
isoleucine scaffold (Scheme 84). Varying the spectator substituent of the secondary amine 
that was not undergoing CH activation, it was found that a range of cyclic alkyl groups could 
be tolerated, including those bearing fluoride, protected ketone, ether, sulfonamide and 
protected-diol functional groups (330ag, 3777%). Acyclic, branched alkyl groups also 
provided arylated products in moderate to good yield (330hi, 4056%). Generally, branching 
at both the  and  positions of the aliphatic amine was required for catalytic reactivity, though 
a 2,6-difluorobenzyl alkyl group was found to provide a moderate yield of arylated product 
(330j, 43%). Varying the -substituent of the alkyl chain undergoing CH activation, it was 
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
found that changing the Piv protecting group for benzoyl or methyl was well tolerated (330k
l, 5758%). In addition, a substrate containing a phthalimide functional group provided the 
corresponding arylation product in good yield (330m, 53%).  
Scheme 84. Scope of aliphatic amines (isoleucine derivatives) with 2-bromobenzoic acid. Yields are of isolated 
products. aReaction conducted by J. H. Blackwell. bReaction temperature was 70 oC. 
The scope of other amino acid-derived secondary amines was also investigated (Scheme 
85). For example, a valine-derived substrate gave the arylated product in good yield, though 
was formed as a mixture of mono- and di-arylated products as was observed in the preliminary  
Scheme 85. Scope of aliphatic amines (other amino amino-acid derivatives). Yields are of isolated products. 
aYield determined by 1H NMR against internal standard. bReaction conducted by J. H. Blackwell.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
stoichiometric studies (60% by NMR, 2:1 mono:di, 294:295; mono d.r. 1:1). A tert-butyl-
protected threonine-derived substrate provided the arylated product in good yield (330n, 65%), 
while the unnatural diastereomer of the isoleucine scaffold gave a moderate yield (45%, 330o). 
Finally, an -tertiary amine substrate was also found to be a suitable substrate for the reaction 
(330p, 50% by NMR; reaction conducted by J. H. Blackwell).  
During the studies on the scope of aliphatic amines, several unreactive substrates were 
identified (Scheme 86). For example, a drawback of the reaction was that both  and  
substitution was required along the chain undergoing CH activation. Hence, amine 331a with 
no -substituent gave zero yield in the reaction. The lack of reactivity was attributed to the 
higher barrier to cyclometalation for substrates containing less alkyl branching. Additionally, 
an -ester substituent was also not tolerated (331b), with the -amino ester position undergoing 
epimerization during the reaction. A less substituted amine containing an -methylene unit 
(331c) was unreactive with only 63% of the substrate recovered, indicating degradative -H 
elimination. A hindered secondary amine derived from tert-amyl amine was also unreactive 
(331d), though the reason for this was unclear. It was possible that the electron-withdrawing 
effect of the proximal oxygen atom in the amino alcohol substrates most commonly employed 
could benefit the reaction by making the amine nitrogen less electron-rich, and therefore 
disfavour over-coordination to the Pd centre to form the off-cycle bis(amine) complex. Finally, 
tetramethylpiperidine (331e) was tried as a substrate and found to be unreactive. Given that the 
 CH activation of 331e was known to be efficient under catalytic conditions, the lack of 
product formation indicated that 2-bromobenzoic acid was unable to functionalize the 
intermediate four-membered ring palladacycle.  
Scheme 86. Unreactive aliphatic amines in the Pd-catalyzed decarboxylative arylation reaction.  
331d was synthesized by Dr. G. N. Hermann.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
3.2.3. ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition 
We were interested in exploring the effect of changing the ortho-carboxylic acid group in the 
aryl halide reagent for another group which could also facilitate the oxidative addition to the 
palladacycle but would not undergo a decarboxylation process. Given that the decarboxylation 
was thought to trigger the CC bond reductive elimination, exchange of the carboxylate could 
lead to different reductive elimination pathways being promoted. As a starting point, the ortho-
carboxylic acid was changed to an ortho-acyl sulfonamide as the pKa values of these functional 
groups are known to be very similar (pKa ~ 5).
242 A stoichiometric experiment employing a 
secondary amine derived from tert-leucine (284) was carried out, in which the pyridine-ligated 
palladacycle (332, 80% yield from 284) was subjected to an aryl iodide containing an ortho-N-
tosylbenzamide group (333, Scheme 87). In the presence of AgOAc, full conversion of 
palladacycle 332 was observed at room temperature and resulted in the formation of the 
azetidine product (286) in 86% yield by NMR. The facile oxidative functionalization of the 
palladacycle demonstrated that the ortho-directed oxidative addition reactivity mode was likely 
being maintained for the acyl sulfonamide group. Moreover, the azetidine was formed as the 
sole amine-containing product, indicating that complete selectivity for intramolecular CN 
bond reductive elimination was obtained using reagent 333. The switch in the selectivity of 
reductive elimination upon changing the ortho-DG in the aryl iodide reagent represented a 
novel approach to promoting different types of bond formation from a common palladacycle 
intermediate. However, upon employing aryl iodide 333 under catalytic conditions (10 mol% 
Pd(OPiv)2, 1.5 equiv 333, 2 equiv AgOAc, CHCl3, 80 
oC), it was found that none of the 
azetidine 286 was formed. Given that not even a trace of azetidine was observed, it was apparent 
that aryl iodide 333 was somehow disrupting the Pd-catalyzed cyclometalation.  
Scheme 87. Use of an aryl iodide reagent containing an ortho-N-tosylbenzamide group.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
It was posited that the catalytic reaction was being inhibited by unproductive acyl 
sulfonamide-directed cyclometalation within the aryl iodide reagent (Scheme 88A). Given that 
the amine (284) and aryl iodide (333) would both be present in stoichiometric amounts during 
catalysis, the palladium catalyst would be distributed between the desired amine-directed 
palladacycle and undesired acyl sulfonamide-directed palladacycle. If the undesired 
palladacycle predominated under the reaction conditions, then no reaction would occur. In 
2014, Fabis243 reported that N-tosylbenzamides (334) could promote a facile room temperature 
ortho-palladation, with a bis(acetonitrile)-ligated palladacycle (335) being isolated in 94% yield 
under stoichiometric conditions (Scheme 88B). Functionalization of palladacycle 335 was 
shown with N-iodosuccinimide (NIS) to quantitatively afford the ortho-iodinated product (336). 
A series of room temperature catalytic transformations were developed by Fabis, as well as a 
stoichiometric radio-iodination procedure using [125I]NIS.243,244 Overall, the studies of Fabis 
demonstrated the effectiveness of the N-tosylbenzamide group as an ortho-DG and therefore 
support the notion of catalyst deactivation within our amine functionalization reaction. Looking 
to overcome the incompatibility of N-sulfonylbenzamide reagents, we proposed to invert the 
acyl sulfonamide group to give the isomeric N-acylbenzenesulfonamide reagent (Scheme 88C). 
It was thought that the modified reagent would destabilize the resulting palladacycle by having 
a larger SO2 unit (relative to a carbonyl) within the backbone of the palladacycle that would  
Scheme 88. (a) Proposed catalyst deactivation by sulfonamide-directed cyclometalation. (b) Precedent for N-
tosylbenzamides as ortho-DGs for Pd-mediated CH activation. (c) Strategy to overcome catalyst inhibition.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
distort the structure of the chelate. Notably, there are no examples of N-
acylbenzenesulfonamide reagents undergoing Pd-catalyzed CH activation in the literature, 
though one example of Rh-catalyzed ortho-arylation has been reported.245 Nonetheless, if the 
formation of the undesired acyl sulfonamide-directed palladacycle could be sufficiently 
disfavoured, then the Pd-catalyzed amine functionalization should in theory proceed.  
Gratifyingly, employing aryl iodide reagents containing the ortho N-
acetylbenzenesulfonamide group did indeed provide catalytic turnover in the CH 
functionalization of amine 284, with complete selectivity for the formation of azetidine 286 
being maintained (Scheme 89A). Using the simplest variant of the aryl iodide reagent (337a), 
25% yield of azetidine 286 was obtained. Interestingly, 4,5-dimethoxy substitution of the aryl 
iodide (337b) led to an increased yield of 40%. Conversely, employing the analogous aryl 
bromide reagent (337c) gave no yield of the azetidine, indicating that the N-
acetylbenzenesulfonamide was less effective in assisting the oxidation of the aminoalkyl 
palladacycle than the ortho-carboxylic acid group. Considering the mechanism of the catalytic 
azetidine formation, it is proposed that the acyl sulfonamide mediates an ortho-directed 
oxidative addition to the palladacycle (338) to form a putative bis(cyclometalated) PdIV 
intermediate (339, Scheme 89B). Presumably, the cyclopalladated aromatic group is prevented 
from undergoing C(sp2)C(sp3) bond reductive elimination due to the relatively strong binding 
of the acyl sulfonamide group to the PdIV centre. Instead, CI reductive elimination (followed 
by cyclization) or direct CN bond reductive elimination occurs to form azetidine 286 as well 
as a PdII by-product that would still contain the cyclopalladated aromatic group (340). In order  
Scheme 89. (a) Achieving catalytic turnover using N-acetylbenzenesulfonamides and (b) proposed mechanism.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
to achieve catalytic turnover, complex 340 must undergo protodemetalation (or alternatively 
transmetalation with AgI) to release the spent oxidant (341) and regenerate the active PdII 
catalyst. Protodemetalation is presumably a reversible process given that by-product 341 could 
undergo CH activation to re-form 340 and sequester the Pd catalyst. From this proposed 
mechanism, the increased efficiency of the 4,5-dimethoxy substituted aryl iodide (337b) 
relative to the unsubstituted variant (337a) could be rationalized on the basis of a more efficient 
protodemetalation of the Pd catalyst, given that the PdC(sp2) bond would likely be weaker in 
intermediate 340 for the more electron-rich reagent.245 Nonetheless, the fact that only moderate 
yields of the azetidine product could be obtained under catalytic conditions indicated that 341 
likely inhibits catalysis, eventually shutting down the reaction at a certain point, and therefore 
the azetidine formation was not explored further using this approach. 
Finally, we trialled the ortho-substituted aryl iodide reagents for amine-directed C(sp2)
H functionalization of benzylamine substrates.159,160,246 We chose to employ a benzylamine 
substrate containing an ortho-bromide substituent (342, Scheme 90) to preclude the formation 
of doubly functionalized products. Surprisingly, subjecting benzylamine 342 to the catalytic 
conditions developed previously for decarboxylative arylation (10 mol% Pd(OPiv)2, 1.5 equiv 
288a, 2 equiv AgOAc, CHCl3, 80 
oC) led to no reaction (Scheme 90A). Given that C(sp2)H 
activation is known to be more facile than C(sp3)H activation, the lack of reactivity was 
attributed to the inability of 2-iodobenzoic acid (288a) to oxidize the benzylamine-derived 
palladacycle. Although it is not obvious why this would be the case for aromatic palladacycles, 
it is possible that the dimeric nuclearity of benzylamine-derived palladacycles that is often 
sustained in solution by bridging carboxylate ligands might prevent the directed oxidative 
addition process.245 On the other hand, employing the ortho-acyl sulfonamide reagent 337a led  
Scheme 90. Pd-catalyzed C(sp2)H functionalization using ortho-DG-assisted oxidative addition.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
to conversion to a functionalized amine product (Scheme 90B). Based on the molecular weight 
identified by LC-MS analysis of the reaction mixture, the product was proposed to be an ortho-
arylated benzylamine in which the acyl sulfonamide group remained intact (343). The 1H NMR 
spectrum showed broad signals, presumably due to restricted rotation about the biaryl linkage, 
which precluded quantitative analysis of the reaction.  
While studying benzylamine functionalization, it was discovered that a modified aryl 
iodide reagent containing an ortho-N-acetylbenzamide (imide) group resulted in the formation 
of an interesting seven-membered ring lactam product (Scheme 91). Under catalytic conditions, 
the reaction between benzylamine 342 and the ortho-imide aryl iodide reagent 344 provided a 
dibenzoazepinone product in good yield (347, 65%). Lactam 347 was a crystalline solid and 
thus the solid-state structure was elucidated by X-ray diffraction of a single crystal, which 
revealed the defined bowl-like structure of the seven-membered ring core. Taking into account 
the previous observation of arylated product 343, the proposed mechanism involves amine-
directed ortho-palladation and imide-assisted oxidative addition to form a putative PdIV 
intermediate (345). The weakly bound imide DG is thought to readily dissociate from the PdIV 
centre to trigger a CC bond reductive elimination to form the ortho-arylated product (346), 
which subsequently undergoes in situ lactamization to the observed dibenzoazepinone product 
(347). Although the Pd-catalyzed CH arylation-lactamization process was not further 
explored, the reaction provided an important proof-of-concept for the application of ortho-DG-
assisted oxidative addition for the functionalization of aromatic benzylamine substrates. In the 
preparation of this thesis, the formation of dibenzoazepinone products via Pd-catalyzed ortho-
CH arylation and lactamization of free benzylamines was reported by Young247 using ortho-
ester aryl iodide reagents.  
Scheme 91. Aryl iodide containing ortho-imide DG led to the formation of a 7-memebred ring lactam product.  
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
3.3. Summary 
The current chapter disclosed the discovery and development of a Pd-catalyzed  CH arylation 
of secondary aliphatic amines. Preliminary stoichiometric studies revealed a facile carboxylate-
assisted oxidative addition of 2-iodobenzoic acid to aminoalkyl palladacycles. In the presence 
of a AgI additive, decarboxylative CC bond reductive elimination from a putative PdIV 
intermediate generated a seven-membered ring palladacycle which was protodemetalated to 
give the -arylated amine product. Mechanistic control experiments discounted the involvement 
of aryne intermediates and provided evidence for an unprecedented room temperature 
decarboxylation step at a high valent PdIV centre. Significantly, in the absence of a silver salt, 
CC bond reductive elimination did not occur and, instead, the PdIV intermediate was 
intercepted by external carboxylate nucleophiles, thus demonstrating the crucial role of AgI in 
determining the selectivity of reductive elimination.  
 Having identified a novel reactivity mode for aminoalkyl palladacycle 
functionalization, a catalytic reaction was developed and optimized for the decarboxylative 
arylation process wherein the ortho-carboxylate group acts as a traceless directing group. The 
Pd-catalyzed reaction represents the first example in which less hindered acyclic aliphatic 
amines have undergone native amine-directed CH functionalization under catalytic 
conditions. It was found that 2-bromobenzoic acid reagents provided improved catalytic 
efficiency compared to 2-iodobenzoic acids, with a broad range of functional substituents being 
tolerated in the aryl component in the reaction. Meanwhile, a variety of secondary aliphatic 
amines derived from chiral amino acids provided moderate to good yields of arylated products. 
However, the main drawback of the reaction was that substates required both  and  
substitution along the alkyl chain undergoing CH activation in order to allow for the efficient 
formation of the palladacycle. This requirement highlighted the limit of native amine-directed 
CH activation using a simple PdII carboxylate catalyst. Substrates with less branching would 
likely require the assistance of a ligand which could lower the barrier to cyclopalladation, such 
as an MPAA or pyridone ligand. Accordingly, a future objective following the current work 
would be to incorporate a ligand-assisted CH activation within an oxidative PdII/PdIV-
catalyzed CH functionalization of aliphatic amines.  
The ortho-carboxylic acid group within the aryl iodide oxidant was exchanged for other 
types of directing groups in order to investigate the generality of the ortho-DG-assisted 
oxidative addition to aminoalkyl palladacycles. Notably, under stoichiometric conditions, aryl 
iodides containing ortho-acyl sulfonamide groups were found to effectively recapitulate the 
ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition  
facile and mild reactivity of the benzoic acid reagents, though the selectivity of reductive 
elimination was different, this time exclusively forming the cyclized azetidine product. In terms 
of catalytic activity, although ortho-N-sulfonylbenzamide aryl iodides provided zero yield of 
the azetidine product, isomeric N-acylbenzenesulfonamide aryl iodides provided the azetidine 
in moderate yield, providing a proof-of-concept for the extension of the ortho-DG-assisted 
oxidative addition reactivity to catalytic Cheteroatom bond-forming processes. Finally, the 
reactivity of the aryl iodide reagents was tested in the context of benzylamine C(sp2)H 
functionalization. Under catalytic conditions, surprisingly, 2-iodobenzoic acid showed no 
reactivity for aromatic functionalization, whereas the newly developed 2-iodo-N-
acetylbenzenesulfonamide reagent gave the ortho-arylated product in which the acyl 
sulfonamide DG remained intact. Conversely, a more useful transformation was observed when 
employing a modified aryl iodide containing an ortho-imide DG, in which cyclization of the 
initially formed arylated product led to the formation of a seven-membered ring 
dibenzoazepinone product. Overall, the ortho-DG-assisted oxidative addition reactivity mode 
was demonstrated as an efficient and modular approach to palladacycle functionalization, and 
it is envisioned that other substrate classes such as carboxylic acids, amides or imines could 
also be functionalized using this approach.  
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
4. Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes Derived from Cyclopalladated 
Amines & Oximes 
4.1. Background & Project Aims 
Alkyl PdIV complexes have been frequently invoked in the proposed mechanisms of Pd-
catalyzed directed C(sp3)H functionalization reactions.59,65 However, direct observation of 
these putative high valent intermediates has been incredibly scarce, presumably due to the 
propensity of PdIV complexes to undergo reductive elimination processes. While pioneering 
organometallic studies by Canty and Sanford have elucidated the key mechanistic features of 
several different reductive elimination pathways using stable alkyl PdIV complexes,167,204,205 
these complexes have contained methyl or cycloneophyl alkyl ligands that do not effectively 
represent cyclometalated substrates that are found in PdII/PdIV-catalyzed reactions.59 
Consequently, there is a dearth of information about the structure and reactivity of alkyl PdIV 
intermediates being formed from the oxidation of cyclopalladated substrates. Acquiring such 
information would provide crucial insight into ways of controlling the efficiency and selectivity 
of product-forming reductive elimination in a catalytic scenario and thus inspire novel 
approaches to the development of Pd-catalyzed CH functionalization reactions. 
To the best of our knowledge, there is only a single example of an isolated alkyl PdIV 
complex containing a cyclometalated substrate that has been used in a catalytic transformation. 
In 2010, as part of a study to develop  CH arylation and alkylation reactions of carboxylic 
acid derivatives containing the bidentate 8-aminoquinolinamide DG, Daugulis248 showed that 
an isocyanide-ligated palladacycle (349) synthesized from a pivalic acid-derived substrate 
(348) underwent oxidation by bromine at low temperature to form the trans-dibromide PdIV 
complex (350, Scheme 92A). Complex 350 decomposed within hours at 0 oC in solution, 
though the complex could be crystallized to unequivocally confirm its structure by X-ray 
crystallography. Nonetheless, there are currently no examples of an alkyl PdIV complex derived 
from a cyclopalladated substrate containing a monodentate nitrogen DG.  
Given the Gaunt groups long-standing interest in native amine-directed C(sp3)H 
functionalization, we aimed to investigate the synthesis of stable and isolable aminoalkyl PdIV 
complexes from cyclopalladated aliphatic amines (Scheme 92B). Although aminoalkyl PdIV 
intermediates have been invoked in numerous catalytic cycles by our group,146,154,213,226,249 to 
date, we have never been able to observe these highly reactive intermediates. Conversely, many 
examples of the respective alkyl PdII metallacycles have been synthesized under stoichiometric 
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
Scheme 92. (a) A rare example of an isolated alkyl PdIV intermediate containing a cyclometalated substrate 
molecule. (b) A stable and isolable aminoalkyl PdIV metallacycle complex remains unreported in the literature.  
conditions, and have often provided an invaluable method of exploring palladacycle reactivity 
without the requirement for catalytic turnover.249 Given that controlling the selectivity of 
reductive elimination has frequently been noted as a significant challenge in native amine-
directed CH functionalization under oxidative conditions,226,249 it was thought that the 
undertaking of an organometallic study into the synthesis and reactivity of aminoalkyl PdIV 
complexes would more clearly identify the controlling factors in the context of aliphatic amine 
functionalization.  
Previous work on carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition of aryl halides to aminoalkyl 
palladacycles provided the foundation of our proposed strategy for synthesizing stable PdIV 
complexes (Scheme 93). Specifically, the observation that subjecting an aminoalkyl 
palladacycle to a combination of 2-iodobenzoic acid and sodium acetate led to a mixture of 
functionalized products resulting from CO bond reductive elimination indicated that a PdIV 
intermediate was being formed, but was sufficiently reactive to couple directly with carboxylate  
Scheme 93. Proposal for the synthesis of stable PdIV complexes using carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition.  
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
nucleophiles present in the reaction mixture. Consequently, we proposed to stabilize the PdIV 
intermediate by exchanging the 2-iodobenzoic acid reagent for an aryl iodide containing two 
ortho-carboxylic acid groups that would potentially form a PdIV complex containing a trianionic 
OCO-pincer ligand. It was thought that the highly electron-rich and chelating pincer ligand 
would adequately stabilize the PdIV centre to allow for isolation of the complex.  
The project aims that were set out for the organometallic study are summarized in Figure 
7. Firstly, we aimed to synthesize a series of pincer-stabilized alkyl PdIV complexes which 
would serve as model complexes for our studies (Figure 7A). Secondly, we planned to explore 
the reactivity of the high valent complexes. In particular, we were most interested in exploring 
the feasibility of different Cheteroatom bond reductive eliminations that are known to be 
promoted by the outer-sphere attack of nucleophilic species (Figure 7B). If reactivity could be 
obtained with high levels of efficiency and selectivity, we planned to study the mechanism of 
the reductive elimination in detail in order to compare with previous organometallic studies 
related to PdIV-mediated C(sp3)heteroatom bond formations.204,205 Finally, we planned to 
investigate the isolation of pincer-stabilized aryl PdIV complexes derived from cyclopalladated 
benzylamine substrates (Figure 7C). Given that aromatic palladacycles had previously been 
found to be unreactive towards carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition (see: Section 3.2.3.), we 
also aimed to explore variations to the pincer ligand scaffold and thus observe the effect that 
ligand changes would have on the structure, stability and reactivity of the resulting PdIV 
complexes.  
Figure 7. Project aims for an organometallic study into the synthesis and reactivity of alkyl PdIV complexes.  
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
4.2. Results & Discussion  
4.2.1. Synthesis & Reactivity of Stable Aminoalkyl PdIV Complexes 
We started by investigating our proposed strategy to employ an aryl iodide containing two 
ortho-carboxylic acid groups. Two different pyridine-ligated PdII metallacycles were used as 
starting materials that were synthesized as part of previous studies  one that contained a 
cyclometalated amine derived from tert-leucine (332) and another derived from isoleucine 
(299, Scheme 94A). The two palladacycles are isomeric at the -position relative to the amine 
nitrogen, with complex 332 having a gem-dimethyl group and 299 having ethyl and hydrogen 
substituents. Subjecting the palladacycles (332 and 299) to 2-iodo-1,3-benzenedicarboxylic 
acid (351) in the presence of AgOAc and pyridine at room temperature led to quantitative 
conversion to new species, as was observed by 1H NMR analysis of the crude reaction mixtures. 
Notably, the products contained several downfield-shifted 1H NMR signals indicating that, if 
the palladacycles had remained intact, oxidation of the Pd centre had likely taken place. 
Conversely, an upfield shift of the amine(NH) signals was also observed (e.g. H 3.49 ppm in 
352 compared to 5.42 ppm in 332), indicating that the NH bond was no longer involved in an  
Scheme 94. (a) Synthesis of stable aminoalkyl PdIV complexes and (b) proposed mechanism of their formation.  
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
intramolecular hydrogen-bonding interaction, as in the starting PdII complexes. Gratifyingly, 
isolation and crystallization of the products (352 and 353, both isolated in 84% yield) provided 
unequivocal confirmation of their structures by X-ray diffraction of single crystals as the 
desired aminoalkyl PdIV complexes. From the solid-state structures, the -aryl dicarboxylate 
group is bound in a meridional tridentate fashion to the octahedral PdIV centre, forming the 
expected OCO-pincer ligand scaffold. Interestingly, the pyridine ligand is trans to the PdIV-
bound alkyl group of the cyclometalated amine, as opposed to being trans to the neutral 
amine(NH) ligand. This is in contrast to what is commonly observed in square planar PdII 
complexes in which the neutral ligands are typically found trans to one another, such as in 
bis(amine) PdII complexes.69,144 As a result of the strong trans influence of the highly donating 
alkyl group, the pyridine ligand is weakly bound to the PdIV centre, which is reflected in the 
observed loss of the pyridine ligand upon exposing the PdIV complexes to vacuum for extended 
periods of time. Full characterization of the complexes in the solution phase was conducted by 
NMR spectroscopy in CDCl3, with 2D NOESY NMR of 353 confirming that the observed 
solid-state configuration was maintained in solution. Furthermore, both complexes were found 
to be indefinitely stable in the solid-state when stored at 5 oC.  
The proposed mechanism of formation for the aminoalkyl PdIV complexes is shown in 
Scheme 94B. Given that the oxidation process occurs at room temperature, it is proposed that 
aryl iodide 351 oxidizes the PdII centre by a carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition (354), 
which in the presence of pyridine, forms the putative PdIV intermediate 355. A ligand 
isomerization process involving rotation about the PdC(sp2) bond of the -aryl ligand then 
takes place, which is likely facilitated by a silver-mediated iodide abstraction from the PdIV 
centre. The resulting complex is the OCO-pincer-ligated PdIV complex containing the observed 
configuration of ligands around the metal centre (352, 353).  
 Having synthesized a pair of isomeric aminoalkyl PdIV complexes, we next investigated 
their reactivity. In the case of complex 352, it became apparent that intramolecular CN bond 
reductive elimination was favoured, forming the azetidine (286, Scheme 95). For example, 
stirring complex 352 at 50 oC as a solution in acetonitrile led to quantitative conversion to 286. 
The reaction was also promoted at room temperature by the presence of acidic or basic 
additives. Conversely, stirring isomeric complex 353 at 50 oC led to a complex mixture of 
decomposition products. As a result, the tendency of 352 to undergo cyclization is attributed to 
the gem-dialkyl effect.250 In particular, the X-ray structures show that the palladacycle of 352 
containing the branched -gem-dimethyl group results in a decrease in the bite angle (Namine
PdCalkyl = 82.4
o in 352 c.f. 84.0o in 353), which brings the amine nitrogen and -activated alkyl 
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
group into closer proximity and thus could facilitate the reductive elimination of these ligands. 
The mechanism of the CN bond reductive elimination was briefly explored by studying the 
kinetics of the reaction in the presence of added pyridine (0, 5 and 10 equivalents). Following 
the reactions by 1H NMR spectroscopy, the reductive elimination was observed to have a first 
order kinetic profile and was zero order in pyridine (Figure 8). Consequently, assuming that 
reductive elimination occurs from a coordinatively unsaturated PdIV intermediate, as is 
generally observed,103,204,205 and that the tridentate OCO-pincer ligand is unlikely to dissociate, 
we propose that the mechanism proceeds via dissociation of the labile pyridine ligand, forming 
solvent-ligated intermediate 356, followed by pyridine-mediated deprotonation of the  
Scheme 95. Aminoalkyl PdIV complex 352 underwent intramolecular C(sp3)N bond reductive elimination.  
Figure 8. Plot of rate constant (kobs) against concentration of added pyridine for the thermal decomposition of 
complex 352. T = 50 oC; [352] = 0.02 M in CD3CN; [added pyridine] = 0.0, 0.1, 0.2 M (010 equivalents).  
0 0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2
[added pyridine] (M)
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
amine(NH) to trigger the CN bond reductive elimination. An alternative mechanism involving 
dissociation of the amine nitrogen prior to outer-sphere SN2-type CN bond formation (357), 
which would also be consistent with the kinetic data, is deemed less likely given that the gem-
dialkyl effect should disfavour cyclization in this case by increasing the barrier to amine 
dissociation. During the course of the azetidine formation, it was found that an insoluble solid 
formed which was thought to be the organometallic PdII by-product. Upon addition of excess 
pyridine and recrystallization of the solid material, the compound was identified as a 
bis(pyridyl) PdII complex by X-ray diffraction (358, Scheme 95). Interestingly, the OCO-pincer 
ligand is bound in a bidentate coordination mode with one of the carboxylate arms twisted 64o 
out-of-plane of the aromatic ring to accommodate the binding of a second molecule of pyridine.  
Next, we investigated the reactivity of the PdIV complexes to external nucleophiles in 
order to explore the viability of different types of Cheteroatom bond formation. However, the 
fully substituted -position of complex 352 hindered the -position to attack by nucleophiles 
and instead led to predominantly cyclization rather than intermolecular -functionalization. On 
the other hand, it was found that the less substituted backbone in complex 353 allowed for 
nucleophile-mediated reductive elimination to proceed with good efficiency (Scheme 96). For 
example, subjecting 353 to soluble tetrabutylammonium salts of acetate, benzoate, phenoxide 
and p-nitrophenoxide in acetonitrile at room temperature gave moderate to high yields of the 
CO coupled products (317, 359361). While full conversion of 353 occurred in all cases, the 
remaining mass balance was attributed to the formation of the olefin by-product 321 resulting 
from -H elimination. Notably, the ratio of CO bond formation to -H elimination correlated 
with the basicity of the anionic nucleophile, varying between 85:15 CO:-H for Bu4NOBz to 
a 40:60 ratio for Bu4NOPh (pKa(BzOH) = 4.25, pKa(PhOH) = 10.0 in water).
10 Based on the 
observed trend, it is plausible that the nucleophile mediates the -H elimination process via an 
outer-sphere anti 1,2-elimination process, though an inner-sphere PdIV-mediated syn 1,2-
elimination cannot be ruled out.251 While sodium salts of the oxyanions generally gave lower 
conversion, highly nucleophilic counter-anions such as azide and iodide were effective as their 
sodium salts. Sodium azide gave almost complete selectivity for CN bond formation (362, 
78% isolated yield), with only traces of olefin 321 being observed, whereas sodium iodide 
formed only the azetidine product (363, 78% isolated yield), presumably after rapid cyclization 
of the initially formed  CI coupled product. Overall, the study demonstrated the viability of 
the outer-sphere attack mechanism for a variety of O- and N-nucleophiles on PdIV intermediates 
containing a cyclometalated amine, affording access to a more diverse range of -functionalized 
products than had previously been reported in Pd-catalyzed amine functionalizations. 
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
Importantly, intermolecular CN reductive elimination had been obtained for the first time in 
the reaction of 353 with sodium azide. Nonetheless, the intimate mechanism of the nucleophile-
mediated reductive elimination was not amenable for study with the current system, given that 
the reactions were complicated by product mixtures in the case of the tetrabutylammonium 
salts, or by the low solubility of the nucleophiles or reaction by-products in the case of the 
sodium salts. As a result, we designed a different alkyl PdIV complex supported by the OCO-
pincer ligand that would be more suited to the purpose of mechanistic experiments.   
Scheme 96. Aminoalkyl PdIV complex 353 underwent nucleophile-mediated reductive elimination.  
Relative product ratios CX coupling:-H elimination determined by 1H NMR; isolated yields in parentheses. 
4.2.2. Synthesis of an Oxime-derived Alkyl PdIV Complex 
We selected an oxime substrate as a surrogate for the aliphatic amines present in the aminoalkyl 
PdIV complexes. Analogously to the amines, the oxime acts as a monodentate-nitrogen DG and 
should in theory behave similarly in the Pd-mediated reactions. However, crucially, the 
cyclometalated oxime is unable to undergo intramolecular CN bond reductive elimination, 
allowing for -H elimination to be blocked with alkyl substituents without promoting an 
undesired cyclization process. Accordingly, the non-volatile O-benzyl oxime derivative of 
pinacolone was chosen as the model substrate (364, Scheme 97A). Subjecting 364 to 1.1 
equivalents of Pd(OAc)2 in chloroform at 80 
oC provided the dinuclear acetate-bridged 
palladacycle (365), which was directly reacted with aryl iodide 351 and Ag2CO3 in acetonitrile-
d3. After two hours at room temperature, full conversion to a new complex was observed by 
NMR spectroscopy, which was proposed to be the acetonitrile-ligated OCO-pincer PdIV 
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
complex (366a, 70% by NMR from 364). Purification of PdIV complex 366a by trituration in 
hexanes (under air) followed by evaporation of the solvent and drying under vacuum enabled 
isolation of the material, though elemental analysis clearly indicated that loss of the acetonitrile 
ligand had occurred (low %N) with a molecule of water taking its place (366b, 62% isolated 
yield). The monohydrate PdIV complex 366b was found to be indefinitely stable in the solid 
state when stored at 5 oC. Although neither complex 366a nor 366b could be successfully 
crystallized, ligation of pyridine gave a crystalline derivative which could be structurally 
characterized by X-ray diffraction of a single crystal (366c). As expected, complex 366c has a 
structure that is analogous to the aminoalkyl PdIV complexes 352 and 353.  
Scheme 97. (a) Synthesis of an oxime-derived alkyl PdIV complex. (b) Crystal structure of PdII metallacycle.  
As an aside, the solid-state structure of a cyclopalladated alkyl oxime as the acetate-
bridged PdII dimer complex has never been reported in the literature. Therefore, while complex 
365 was found not to be crystalline, the O-methyl pinacolone oxime palladacycle was 
synthesized (367 to 368, 73%) and crystallized to reveal the structure by X-ray crystallography 
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
(Scheme 97B). The solid-state structure of complex 368 has a PdPd distance of 2.909  and 
contains eclipsed cyclometalated oxime units with head-to-tail orientation.  
4.2.3. Mechanism of the Nucleophile-mediated Reductive Elimination 
The reaction between oxime-derived PdIV complex 366b and tetrabutylammonium p-
nitrophenoxide (369) was selected to study the mechanism of the nucleophile-mediated 
reductive elimination, as the reaction was found to give quantitative yield of functionalized 
product with a rate of reaction that was convenient for kinetic measurements. To a solution of 
complex 366b in CD3CN at room temperature (forming solvent-ligated 366a in situ), 2 
equivalents of 369 were added (Scheme 98A). Monitoring the reaction by 1H NMR, an 
instantaneous shift in the signals of the PdIV complex occurred, indicating a new organometallic 
species had formed (Scheme 98B). In particular, the benzylic protons of the oxime (Ha, green 
circles) had shifted slightly downfield (from H 5.30 ppm in 366a to 5.43 ppm in 370), whereas 
a larger upfield shift was observed for the PdIV-bound methylene protons (Hb, orange circles; 
from H 3.52 in 366a to 3.10 in 370). Moreover, the two equivalents of p-nitrophenoxide 369 
had split into a 1:1 ratio of signals, with 1 equivalent becoming associated with the Pd complex 
and 1 equivalent remaining as free, unbound nucleophile. Significantly, a 2D 1H1H NOESY 
NMR experiment revealed a cross-peak between the oxime benzylic protons and the aromatic 
protons of the associated p-nitrophenoxide, signalling the binding of the phenoxide nucleophile 
to form a negatively-charged PdIV complex (370). To the best of our knowledge, anionic PdIV 
complexes have rarely been characterized in the literature outside of homoleptic [PdIVX6]
complexes.252,253 The NOESY spectrum also showed exchange (EXSY) cross-peaks relating to 
rapid exchange of free and bound p-nitrophenoxide ligand on the NMR timescale. 
Unfortunately, due to the propensity of complex 370 to undergo reductive elimination, 
particularly in non-polar solvents, crystals suitable for X-ray crystallography were not obtained. 
However, full characterization as a solution in CD3CN by NMR spectroscopy, as well as high 
resolution mass spectrometry data, were consistent with the proposed structure of 370. Heating 
the reaction to 50 oC for 6 h led to quantitative conversion to the -functionalized oxime product 
(371, >95% yield) along with the PdII by-product (372), presumably as a tetrabutylammonium 
salt. Based on the previous work of Sanford studying C(sp3)O bond reductive elimination from 
bipyridine-supported cycloneophyl PdIV complexes (see Section 1.3.3.),205 we proposed an 
analogous mechanism involving reversible dissociation of p-nitrophenoxide from complex 370 
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
Scheme 98. (a) Reaction of 366b with nucleophile 369. (b) Reaction monitoring by 1H NMR spectroscopy.  
to form the putative solvent-ligated PdIV intermediate (366a), which is then attacked by the 
oxyanion nucleophile in an SN2 fashion at the activated -position of the oxime to form the C
O bond. Notably, while in the case of Sanford, a neutral six-coordinate nucleophile-bound PdIV 
complex underwent oxyanion dissociation to form a coordinatively unsaturated cationic 
intermediate, our system involved an anionic starting PdIV complex that reacts via a neutral 
intermediate. The key feature of this reaction mechanism is the reversible binding of the 
nucleophile (Keq) prior to the outer-sphere nucleophilic attack (k2), which is associated with a 
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
zero order kinetic dependence on the nucleophile and thus overall first order kinetic behaviour 
(rate = Keqk2[370]). Conversely, direct nucleophilic attack of a six-coordinate Pd
IV intermediate 
would have first order dependence on the nucleophile and overall second order behaviour.185 
While the rapid exchange of bound and free p-nitrophenoxide ligand was observed by EXSY 
NMR, we undertook kinetic experiments to elucidate the order of the reaction in nucleophile 
 Monitoring the course of the reaction by 1H NMR for the reductive elimination from 
370 in CD3CN at 50 
oC, a first order kinetic profile was observed (Figure 9). Complex 370 
cleanly converted to oxime product 371 without any intermediate being observed. Varying the 
amount of added nucleophile 369 (17 equivalents of unbound 369), we observed a negligible 
change in the observed rate constant (kobs, Figure 10). Therefore, the reaction was zero order in 
nucleophile 369 and first order in PdIV complex 370. These experiments were in accordance 
with the findings of Sanford205 and thus strongly supported the proposed reaction mechanism 
involving dissociation of the p-nitrophenoxide ligand followed by bond-forming outer-sphere 
nucleophilic attack.  
Figure 9. Concentration-time plot for the reaction of PdIV complex 370 to oxime 371.  
T = 50 oC; [370] = 0.02 M in CD3CN; [unbound 369] = 0.02 M (1 equivalent).  
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000
time (s)
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
Figure 10. Plot of rate constant (kobs) versus concentration of excess nucleophile 369 for the reaction of 370 to 
oxime 371. T = 50 oC; [370] = 0.02 M in CD3CN; [unbound 369] = 0.02, 0.06, 0.10, 0.14 M (17 equivalents).  
In order to confirm the presence of the solvent-ligated intermediate and rule out the 
kinetically indistinguishable mechanism of direct inner-sphere CO bond reductive elimination 
from a six-coordinate PdIV complex, the effect of adding pyridine to the reaction was 
investigated. Given that pyridine is a strongly coordinating ligand, its presence should 
significantly slow the reaction by increasing the barrier to forming the putative intermediate 
(366a). For this study, the reaction was conducted in non-coordinating CDCl3 solvent rather 
than CD3CN to more clearly observe the effect of adding a coordinating additive. Adding 0, 1 
or 3 equivalents of pyridine, a stepwise decrease in the rate of reductive elimination was 
observed (Figure 11). Notably, the reaction yields were not significantly affected by the added 
pyridine, with >90% yield of oxime 371 being obtained in all cases. The difference in the initial 
rate for the reactions involving 1 and 3 equivalents of pyridine was approximately three-fold, 
relating to a negative first order dependence of pyridine as would be expected for a reaction 
mechanism requiring pyridine dissociation prior to reductive elimination. In addition, the 
reaction rate in CDCl3 in the absence of pyridine was significantly higher than when the reaction 
was conducted in CD3CN, further indicating the inhibiting effect of coordinating additives. 
Overall, this study strongly supports the formation of a coordinatively unsaturated (in CDCl3) 
or solvent-ligated intermediate (in CD3CN) in the reaction.   
0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08 0.10 0.12 0.14 0.16
[unbound 369] (M)
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
Figure 11. Concentration-time plot for the reaction of 370 to oxime 371 in the presence of pyridine. T = 50 oC; 
[370] = 0.01 M in CDCl3; [unbound 369] = 0.01 M; [pyridine] = 0, 0.01, 0.03 M (03 equivalents).  
Finally, we measured the rate of reaction at different temperatures to determine the 
activation parameters for the CO reductive elimination, H and S (Figure 12). Conducting 
the reductive elimination of 370 in CD3CN in the presence of 1 equivalent of unbound 
nucleophile 369, the rate constants were obtained over a temperature range between 4060 oC 
with 5 oC intervals. From the plot of ln(kobs/T) versus 1/T, the activation parameters were 
calculated as Hobs = +24.3  0.2 kcal mol
1 and Sobs = +0.4  0.6 cal K
1 mol1. Notably, 
given that the proposed mechanism involves two elementary steps  dissociation of the 
nucleophile followed by outer-sphere attack  the activation parameters represent the sum of 
the equilibrium value of the initial dissociation step plus the activation value of the rate-
determining SN2 step (X
obs = X
diss + X
SN2, X = H or S).
254 Hence, while the relatively 
small value for Hobs reflects the overall facility of the reductive elimination, the near-zero 
value for Sobs requires the analysis of each elementary step. As such, the dissociation of the 
nucleophile is predicted to have a large positive S value and the SN2 attack step is predicted 
to have a large negative S value,255 which overall would result in a Sobs value that is small 
in magnitude. Comparatively, unimolecular inner-sphere reductive elimination or bimolecular 
outer-sphere attack of a six-coordinate PdIV complex would both proceed via more ordered 
transition states which would be expected to have a large negative S value. Notably, small 
S values (<10 cal K1 mol1) have previously been observed by Milstein254 and Hartwig256 
for Ir-mediated processes involving two elementary steps with opposing values of S.  
0 2000 4000 6000 8000
time (s)
0 equiv pyridine
1 equiv pyridine
3 equiv pyridine
95% (6 h) 
91% (12 h) 
96% (1 h) 
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
Figure 12. Temperature dependence & determination of activation parameters for the reaction of 370 to oxime 
371: plot of ln(kobs/T) versus 1/T. T = 40, 45, 50, 55, 60 
oC; [370] = 0.02 M in CD3CN; [unbound 369] = 0.02 M.  
4.2.4. Pincer-ligated Aryl PdIV Complexes: Evidence for PdIV-mediated CH Activation  
The OCO-pincer-supported alkyl PdIV complexes enabled a range of different C(sp3)
heteroatom bond reductive eliminations to be directly observed to provide diversely 
functionalized amine and oxime products. While the pincer ligand effectively stabilised the PdIV 
centre as a highly electron-donating ligand scaffold, its tridentate meridional coordination mode 
also kinetically stabilized the high valent complexes by limiting the possibilities for a low 
energy decomposition pathway arising from coordinative unsaturation. Consequently, we were 
interested in investigating pincer-stabilized aryl PdIV complexes derived from cyclopalladated 
benzylamines. In theory, aromatic palladacycles should additionally stabilize the PdIV complex 
by removing the option of a facile nucleophile-mediated outer-sphere reductive elimination 
pathway given that SN2 of the activated C(sp
2) position is not possible. Therefore, if a stable 
PdIV complex containing an ortho-cyclometalated benzylamine could be accessed, it was 
thought that more challenging reductive elimination pathways could be promoted. In particular, 
we aimed to investigate whether intramolecular C(sp2)N bond reductive elimination to form a 
highly strained benzazetidine product was possible from the pincer-supported PdIV centre 
(Scheme 99A). Benzazetidines are highly rigid organic molecules with potential application, 
for example, as novel nitrogen-containing drug scaffolds.257259 However, to date, there are very 
few methods to access these strained bicycles.259262 In fact, the first practical synthetic method 
-15.5
-15.0
-14.5
-14.0
-13.5
-13.0
-12.5
0.00295 0.003 0.00305 0.0031 0.00315 0.0032 0.00325
1/T (K-1)
Hobs = +24.3  0.2 kcal mol1 
Sobs = +0.4  0.6 cal K1 mol1 
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
for the synthesis of benzazetidines was only recently reported in 2016 by Chen,262 who 
employed an auxiliary-controlled Pd-catalyzed CH functionalization strategy (Scheme 99B). 
Benzylamine substrates protected with the picolinamide DG (373) were converted to the 
corresponding benzazetidine products (376) in moderate to good yield using a palladium 
catalyst with a novel polymeric iodine(III) oxidant derived from dimethylmalonic acid, 
PhI(DMM) (374). An acyloxylation product formed from CO reductive elimination followed 
by decarboxylation (377) was also formed as a minor by-product in the reaction. Computational 
DFT analysis by Chen262 supported the formation of a dimeric PdIII intermediate (375), in which 
the two high valent Pd centres are bridged by the dimethylmalonate ligand transferred from the 
oxidant. Given that there is no straightforward reductive elimination pathway of a simple 
monodentate anionic ligand within intermediate 375, the challenging intramolecular CN bond 
formation is made possible. Although the reaction effectively demonstrated that reductive 
elimination of a strained benzazetidine product was possible from a high valent Pd centre, the 
requirement for the picolinamide DG ultimately limits the utility of the reaction. However, the 
bidentate DG played a crucial role not only in promoting the CH activation, but also in 
controlling the selectivity of the reductive elimination. Conversely, methods to control  
Scheme 99. (a) Benzazetidine formation from cyclopalladated benzylamine. (b) Chens benzazetidine synthesis.  
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
reductive elimination for native functional group-directed transformations remains a significant 
challenge which we hoped to address in the current study. 
Given that a branched benzylic position was thought to provide an additional driving 
force for promoting cyclization to the benzazetidine, benzylamine 378 containing a benzylic 
gem-dimethyl group was selected for our studies (Scheme 100A). As for the alkyl systems, the 
pyridine-ligated palladacycle (379) was first synthesized from amine 378 using stoichiometric 
Pd(OAc)2 and was obtained in quantitative yield by NMR. However, subjecting complex 379 
to 2-iodo-1,3-benzenedicarboxylic acid (351) with AgOAc gave no conversion to the predicted 
PdIV complex (380), with the starting palladacycle remaining unreacted. The lack of reactivity 
was attributed to the greater steric profile of the aromatic palladacycle compared to 
palladacycles resulting from methyl group activation, leading to a steric clash between the aryl 
iodide reagent and the backbone of the -aryl group that could hinder the carboxylate-assisted 
oxidative addition (Scheme 100B). Consequently, we proposed to employ a modified pincer 
ligand containing a neutral pyridine core, namely 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylic acid, which in the 
presence of a suitable two-electron oxidant could result in the formation of an ONO-pincer-
supported PdIV complex. Rather than relying on a carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition, the  
Scheme 100. (a) Access to an OCO-pincer aryl PdIV complex was unsuccessful. (b) Proposal for a modified 
ONO-pincer ligand. (c) 2,6-Pyridinedicarboxylic acid ligands have been shown to facilitate oxidation.  
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
pyridine-based pincer could potentially coordinate to the PdII metallacycle to preassemble a 
reactive conformation in order to assist in the oxidation of the metal centre. The proposed 
strategy was inspired by work from Vedernikov,263 who previously showed the effect of 2,6-
pyridinedicarboxylic acid ligands in facilitating the oxidation of palladacycles (Scheme 100C). 
For example, a palladacycle derived from 5-fluoro-8-methylquinoline ligated with 4-
hydroxypyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid (381) was exposed to oxygen under atmospheric 
pressure in AcOH-Ac2O solvent at 60 
oC. Under these mildly oxidizing conditions, the 
acetoxylated product (382) was obtained in high yield via a putative high valent Pd 
intermediate,264 along with a minor carboxylic acid product (383) formed from competing over-
oxidation. Conversely, no reaction was observed in the absence of the pyridine ligand 
highlighting its essential role in the reaction. Based on this stoichiometric result, a catalytic 
reaction was developed for benzylic CH acetoxylation of 8-methylquinoline substrates.263 
 Our studies for the ONO-pincer strategy employed the acetate-bridged palladacycle 
dimer 384 as the starting point (formed from 378 and Pd(OAc)2), which was first subjected to 
the 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylic acid ligand (385) in DMSO for 0.5 h at room temperature before 
adding an oxidant (Scheme 101A). Highly polar solvent was required to maintain solubility of 
the palladacycle once bound with the pincer ligand. Upon screening a variety of oxidants, it 
was found that electrophilic fluorine reagents resulted in high levels of conversion of the 
palladacycle. For example, N-fluoro-2,4,6-trimethylpyridinium tetrafluoroborate (386) gave 
full conversion of the palladacycle after 3 hours at room temperature. However, a stable PdIV 
complex was not observed, and instead a mixture of two reductive elimination products was 
obtained. The minor product was identified as the ortho-hydroxylated product (387, 21% yield). 
On the other hand, the major product was identified as having a molecular weight corresponding 
to the cyclized benzazetidine, though analysis of the isolated compound by NMR revealed that 
a different structure had formed in which the -methylene position within the tetrahydropyranyl 
substituent had undergone activation (388, 70% yield). Major product 388 was a crystalline 
solid allowing for analysis by X-ray crystallography, which revealed its structure as the cyclized 
hydroisoquinoline resulting from CC bond formation between the aromatic ortho-position and 
the -methylene position. Notably, amine 388 was formed as a single diastereomer with a trans-
juncture connecting the hydroisoquinoline and tetrahydropyran ring systems. Although neither 
a stable PdIV complex nor a benzazetidine product was observed, the formation of 388 was a 
highly unusual transformation that warranted further investigation. Crucially, no reaction was 
observed in the absence of ligand 385, with the starting palladacycle 384 remaining unreacted 
in the presence of oxidant 386 alone in DMSO at room temperature.  
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
Scheme 101. (a) Unexpected formation of hydroisoquinoline, proposed mechanism of formation via PdIV-
mediated  C(sp3)H activation and (b) alternative mechanism via PdII-mediated  C(sp3)H activation. 
 Considering the mechanism of the reaction, it was proposed that binding of the pyridine 
ligand and oxidation would first give a PdIV fluoride complex supported by an ONO-pincer 
ligand (389, Scheme 101A). Ligand isomerization (390) and hydrolysis of the PdF bond by 
trace water would then lead to a PdIV hydroxide complex (391) that could undergo C(sp2)O 
bond reductive elimination to give the hydroxylated product 387. Given that the reaction was 
conducted in dry DMSO under N2, the hydrolysis process could be minimized, and instead the 
PdIV fluoride complex 390 could potentially undergo a PdIV-mediated  C(sp3)H activation to 
form an intermediate (392) capable of promoting C(sp2)C(sp3) bond reductive elimination to 
give the hydroisoquinoline 388. PdIV-mediated CH activation is an extremely rare 
phenomenon, with only a handful of cases being reported in the literature (vide infra).72 As a 
result, it is unclear exactly how the CH activation occurs at the PdIV centre, though it is 
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
plausible that one of the carboxylate substituents of the ONO-pincer acts an internal base to 
assist in the CH bond cleavage.265 Because of the rarity of PdIV-mediated CH activation, an 
alternative mechanism for the formation of 388 could be that the pincer-ligated PdII complex 
(393) undergoes  C(sp3)H activation prior to oxidation of the palladacycle (Scheme 101B). 
The PdII-mediated CH activation would lead to a strained 5,4-bicyclic palladacycle (394) or, 
if the amine nitrogen dissociates, a seven-membered ring palladacycle (395). Oxidation of these 
palladacycle intermediates could then result in the observed intramolecular CC bond 
formation. However, this low valent activation mechanism is disfavoured given that the 
electron-rich PdII metallacycle 393 would not be expected to undergo such a challenging 
methylene C(sp3)H activation at room temperature. While both of the resulting metallacycles 
(394, 395) are highly destabilized due to ring strain or the instability of the large ring 
metallacycle, CH activation could be imagined to be more readily accommodated at an 
octahedral PdIV centre which is not limited to having a co-planar arrangement of ligands as in 
square planar PdII complexes. Therefore, although further investigation is required to 
distinguish between the two proposed mechanisms, the formation of hydroisoquinoline 388 is 
currently thought to most likely occur via a PdIV-mediated CH activation process.  
 While C(sp3)H activation has never been directly observed at a PdIV centre, PdIV-
mediated C(sp2)H activation has been examined in several studies by Sanford. For example, 
an early indication of the possibility of high valent CH activation was reported in 2006266 in a 
Pd-catalyzed dimerization of 2-phenylpyridine substrates (396 to 399, Scheme 102A). The 
reaction employed Pd(OAc)2 as catalyst and oxone as the oxidant in alcohol solvent at 25 
Mechanistic control experiments indicated that the first CH activation occurred at a PdII centre, 
followed by oxidation (397) and a second CH activation at a PdIV centre to give a putative 
bis(cyclometalated) PdIV complex (398) that can undergo CC bond reductive elimination. 
Double CH activation at a PdII centre was discounted given that a second CH activation was 
not detected in deuterium labelling studies using the ortho-metalated PdII complex of 396. 
Later, in 2011, Sanford267 conducted an organometallic study reporting the first direct 
observation of CH activation at a PdIV centre (Scheme 102B). A bipyridyl-ligated aryl PdII 
complex containing a pendant phenyl group (400) was oxidized by PhICl2 at 30 
oC to obtain 
a PdIV dichloride intermediate (401) which, upon warming to 25 oC, underwent C(sp2)H 
activation of the pendant phenyl group to form a stable cyclometalated PdIV complex (402).  
Notably, a later study265 found that the high valent CH activation was accelerated in the 
presence of an acetate ligand, indicating that a carboxylate-assisted CH activation process 
analogous to that of PdII-mediated CMD is also possible at a PdIV centre.  
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
Scheme 102. Sanfords PdIV-mediated C(sp2)H activation: (a) a catalytic reaction & (b) organometallic study.   
 Another noteworthy example of high valent Pd-mediated CH activation was the non-
directed Pd-catalyzed aromatic CH fluorination reported by Ritter268 in 2018 (Scheme 103). 
The reaction employed a specifically designed dicationic PdII complex as catalyst (404) in 
combination with electrophilic fluorine reagents (Selectfluor or NFSI) to enable the direct 
fluorination of arene substrates (403) to fluorinated derivatives (405). Significantly, the reaction 
was also effective for the late stage fluorination of several drug molecules, thus showing the 
potential utility of the transformation. The proposed mechanism involved initial oxidation of 
the dicationic PdII catalyst (404) to form a tricationic PdIV fluoride complex (406). Based on 
prior mechanistic studies,269 the PdIV complex 406 was proposed to mediate an outer-sphere 
fluoride-coupled electron transfer event (TS-14) to transfer the fluoride ligand to the arene 
substrate and reform the PdII complex 404. Crucially, in contrast to Sanfords studies, no  
Scheme 103. Ritters C(sp2)H fluorination and the proposed high valent Pd outer-sphere CH activation. 
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
organometallic intermediate resulting from CH activation was invoked in the proposed outer-
sphere mechanism. Therefore, while Ritters mechanism seems less relevant for the current 
work involving a proposed alkyl C(sp3)H activation at a high valent Pd centre, the ability of 
PdIV fluoride complexes to promote unusual one-electron functionalization processes cannot be 
ruled out as a potential reaction pathway. 
 The scope of the PdIV ONO-pincer chemistry was briefly explored using substrates that 
would potentially undergo two sequential C(sp2)H activations or two C(sp3)H activations 
(Scheme 104). Firstly, the acetate-bridged palladacycle dimer of dibenzylamine was 
synthesized (407 to 408). Subjecting complex 408 to ligand 385 and oxidant 386 in DMSO at 
room temperature, pleasingly the desired dihydro-dibenzazepine product (409) was formed in 
45% yield, potentially as a result of a second ortho C(sp2)H activation at a PdIV centre followed 
by CC bond reductive elimination. Secondly, a tetramethylpiperidine substrate (107), known 
to undergo efficient  C(sp3)H activation to form a four-membered palladacycle,146 was 
subjected to stoichiometric Pd(OAc)2 followed by the addition of reagents 385 and 386. In this 
instance, the second CH activation to form bicyclic amine product 410 was not observed and, 
instead, mono- and di-hydroxylated products (411) were observed by LC-MS analysis of the 
crude reaction mixture, along with protodemetalation of the palladacycle to reform starting 
amine 107. However, it was possible that the use of a cyclic piperidine starting material did not 
allow for sufficient conformational flexibility for the second CH activation to take place. 
Nonetheless, while the all-alkyl system was unreactive in the current example, the fact that the 
cyclized product was observed for dibenzylamine indicates that the reaction is not specific to a 
single palladacycle and could potentially enable the modification of a broad range of 
benzylamines.  Further studies into this novel transformation are required to provide a clearer  
Scheme 104. Testing the PdIV-mediated CH activation on dibenzylamine and tetramethylpiperidine substrates.  
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
picture of the mechanism and scope of the reaction, as well as provide information that could 
aid in the design of a catalytic process exploiting this reactivity mode. 
4.3. Summary 
The current chapter disclosed the synthesis and reactivity of stable alkyl PdIV complexes derived 
from cyclopalladated amines and oximes. Stable aminoalkyl PdIV complexes were synthesized 
from pyridine-ligated PdII metallacycles derived from secondary amines by employing an aryl 
iodide reagent containing two ortho-carboxylic acid groups. The oxidation reactions occurred 
at room temperature by a carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition process that resulted in the 
formation of PdIV complexes supported by an OCO-pincer ligand. Two aminoalkyl PdIV 
complexes were synthesized with varying degrees of substitution along the backbone of the 
activated amine. For the PdIV complex containing a fully substituted  gem-dimethyl group, 
intramolecular CN bond reductive elimination was favoured to form the azetidine product. 
Conversely, the PdIV complex containing a mono-substituted -position within the activated 
amine had a lower tendency to cyclize but instead could be intercepted by various O- and N-
nucleophiles to form diversely -functionalized amine products. Notably, a side product 
resulting from -H elimination was observed in the nucleophile-promoted reductive elimination 
reactions, with the extent of the side reaction correlating with the basicity of the added 
nucleophile. Consequently, the PdIV complexes provided crucial insight into the different 
factors affecting the efficiency and selectivity of reductive elimination of functionalized 
aliphatic amines, which has important implications for the design of novel catalytic processes 
in the context of PdII/PdIV-catalyzed functionalization of aliphatic amines.  
 While the amine-derived PdIV complexes were not suitable for conducting a detailed 
study of the mechanism of reductive elimination due to competing side reactions and the 
complexity of the NMR spectra, an analogous oxime-derived PdIV complex provided a more 
straightforward test case. Subjecting an acetonitrile-ligated oxime PdIV complex to 
tetrabutylammonium p-nitrophenoxide as nucleophile resulted in displacement of the 
acetonitrile for the nucleophile and the formation of an anionic PdIV complex. Heating the 
nucleophile-bound PdIV complex led to quantitative reductive elimination of the CO coupled 
product. Kinetic experiments provided evidence for rapid and reversible nucleophile 
dissociation and the formation of a neutral five-coordinate or solvent-ligated PdIV complex prior 
to CO bond reductive elimination by outer-sphere SN2 attack of the oxyanion nucleophile.  
Stable Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
 Finally, the formation of a stable aryl PdIV complex was investigated by the oxidation 
of a cyclopalladated secondary benzylamine substrate bearing an N-tetrahydropyranyl group. 
Significantly, while 2-iodo-1,6-benzenedicarboxylic acid was unreactive with the benzylamine-
derived palladacycle, a different approach employing 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylic acid as an ONO-
pincer ligand in combination with an N-fluoropyridinium oxidant was found to give full 
conversion of the palladacycle at room temperature. Unexpectedly, a cyclized 
hydroisoquinoline product was obtained resulting from the dehydrogenative CC coupling 
between the benzylamine ortho-position and the -position of the pendant tetrahydropyranyl 
substituent within the aliphatic amine. The reaction was proposed to occur by a PdIV-mediated 
 C(sp3)H activation, though further studies are required to confirm this mechanistic proposal. 
Notably, under the same conditions, the palladacycle derived from dibenzylamine reacted in an 
analogous manner to form a cyclized dihydro-dibenzazepine product, indicating the potential 
generality of the novel high valent Pd-mediated transformation.  
Conclusions & Outlook 
5. Conclusions & Outlook 
Pd-catalyzed directed C(sp3)H functionalization has been a focus of research in synthetic 
organic chemistry for nearly two decades and has enabled a diverse range of functional group 
incorporations across numerous substrate classes, including carboxylic acids, carbonyl 
compounds, amines, and their derivatives. Within this context, native amine-directed C(sp3)H 
functionalization has provided a direct method of accessing functionalized aliphatic amines 
without the requirement for directing groups or directing group additives by exploiting the 
innate coordinating ability of the amine nitrogen to promote cyclometalation. Although the 
early work in this area focused on the functionalization of  hindered, cyclic secondary amines, 
significant advances were made in the discoveries of a Pd-catalyzed -C(sp3)H carbonylation 
process to form -lactams and the -arylation of tertiary aliphatic amines using a mono-N-
protected amino acid ligand, both of which showed significantly improved substrate scopes 
relative to the original work using the native amine-directed strategy. Nonetheless, a 
fundamental limitation to these broader scoping catalytic reactions was that they were limited 
to CC bond forming processes, and thus Cheteroatom bond formations remained limited to 
reactions employing hindered cyclic amines.  
An effective strategy to install heteroatomic functional groups had been to utilize the 
facile reductive elimination chemistry of PdIV complexes formed by the oxidation of the amine-
directed PdII metallacycle. However, the formation of aminoalkyl PdIV intermediates typically 
required the use of strong and indiscriminate oxidants that are only compatible with extremely 
hindered amines with fully substituted  and  centres adjacent to the amine nitrogen. As such, 
there was no mild and selective method for accessing PdIV complexes in the context of native 
amine-directed CH functionalization using less substituted aliphatic amine substrates. 
Furthermore, in the absence of a directing group auxiliary that can be modified to alter the 
efficiency and selectivity of reductive elimination from high valent intermediates, the 
selectivity of product-forming reductive elimination for native amine functionalization had 
largely been substrate dependent and often gave undesired product mixtures through multiple 
competing reductive elimination processes. Consequently, the discovery of a reagent or ligand 
to control the selectivity of reductive elimination from aminoalkyl PdIV complexes remained a 
significant unmet challenge.  
 The current work aimed to address the aforementioned shortcomings in the native 
amine-directed strategy, in particular, with the primary objective of uncovering new and general 
methods for accessing PdIV chemistry. The first project that was discussed involved 
Conclusions & Outlook  
intramolecular  C(sp3)H amination to form strained four-membered ring azetidines and 
employed a cyclic iodine(III) tosylate reagent as a novel oxidant in Pd-catalyzed CH 
functionalization.  The reaction was initially developed for the functionalization of hindered 
morpholinone substrates as a novel approach for promoting cyclization from a five-membered 
ring aminoalkyl palladacycle over other competing pathways such as -acetoxylation. Given 
the facility of CO bond forming processes from the oxidation of the five-membered 
palladacycle via outer-sphere reductive elimination pathways, the high selectivity for 
cyclization to the azetidine was achieved by using an oxidant that transferred a tosylate leaving 
group to the amine that would lead to spontaneous cyclization, rather than aiming for a direct 
CN bond reductive elimination that was prohibitively high in energy. However, the current 
work found that the cyclic iodine(III) tosylate oxidant was sufficiently mild such that it could 
tolerate morpholinone substrates derived from chiral amino acid starting materials that 
contained an -H substituent  a class of substrate that was readily decomposed in the presence 
of a previously employed iodine(III) oxidant, PhI(OAc)2 (Scheme 105A). The resulting 
azetidine formation for the chiral substrates occurred with high diastereoselectivity to provide 
diastereo- and enantiopure azetidine derivatives. Although the oxidant had improved 
compatibility with secondary amine substrates, acyclic amines were functionalized in low 
yields, which was attributed to the lower reactivity of the aminoalkyl palladacycles formed from 
these substrates relative to those derived from cyclic morpholinones. Therefore, while the scope 
of the high valent PdII/PdIV catalysis was slightly improved to include chiral morpholinone 
substrates, a general method to access PdIV intermediates was yet to be discovered.  
 Following the intramolecular  C(sp3)H amination process, it was serendipitously 
discovered that an aryl iodide reagent bearing an ortho-carboxylic acid group led to a facile 
carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition of five-membered ring palladacycles formed from the 
-methyl activation of acyclic secondary amines. In the presence of a AgI additive, 
decarboxylative CC bond reductive elimination occurred to furnish -arylated products, with 
mechanistic control studies supporting a novel mechanism involving decarboxylation at a PdIV 
centre. Conversely, the absence of a AgI salt led to a complete switch in the selectivity of 
reductive elimination to give CO coupled products resulting from the external nucleophilic 
attack of the activated -position within the PdIV intermediate by 2-iodobenzoate or acetate as 
O-centred nucleophiles. Crucially, the intramolecularization of the oxidation process enabled 
the weakly oxidizing aryl iodide reagent to be an efficient oxidant that was completely selective 
for the metal centre over the amine substrate, allowing the oxidant to be employed in a catalytic 
scenario in which the unprotected amine was present in stoichiometric quantities. Accordingly, 
Conclusions & Outlook 
Scheme 105. Key research findings: (a) enantiopure azetidine synthesis, (b) decarboxylative  CH arylation by 
carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition & (c) synthesis of stable alkyl PdIV complexes derived from 
cyclometalated amines and oximes. (d) Evidence for PdIV-mediated CH activation.  
a Pd-catalyzed reaction was developed for the decarboxylative  C(sp3)H arylation process, 
wherein it was found that the optimal conditions involved the use of 2-bromobenzoic acid 
reagents rather than 2-iodobenzoic acids (Scheme 105B). A wide range of substituted 2-
bromobenzoic acids were tolerated in the reaction and the scope of secondary aliphatic amines 
included substrates with a variety of different spectating functional groups, demonstrating the 
excellent functional group tolerance of high valent PdII/PdIV catalysis. However, a drawback of 
the reaction was that amine substrates required branching along the chain undergoing CH 
activation at both the  and  positions in order for efficient reactivity to be achieved, indicating 
Conclusions & Outlook  
the low efficiency of  CH activation for less hindered amines under the reaction conditions. 
Nonetheless, the facile mode of palladacycle oxidation was an important advance in high valent 
Pd-catalyzed amine functionalization and represented a potentially general method of accessing 
PdIV chemistry within this context. Furthermore, subsequent studies that exchanged the ortho-
carboxylic acid for an acyl sulfonamide group again changed the selectivity of reductive 
elimination to give azetidine products, showing the versatility of the ortho-DG-assisted 
oxidative addition in being able to mediate both CC as well as different Cheteroatom bond-
forming reductive elimination processes.  
 The final project concerned the synthesis of a new class of alkyl PdIV complexes derived 
from cyclopalladated aliphatic amines and oximes (Scheme 105C). Transiently formed PdIV 
complexes have frequently been invoked as catalytic intermediates in Pd-catalyzed CH 
functionalization reactions, but there are sparingly few examples where the PdIV intermediate 
has been directly observed. Moreover, in the case of the native amine-directed strategy, a PdIV 
complex resulting from the oxidation of a cyclopalladated aliphatic amine had never been 
observed. Consequently, we were interested in isolating an example of an aminoalkyl PdIV 
complex to gain information about the structure and reactivity of these important yet elusive 
intermediates. An aryl iodide reagent containing two ortho-carboxylic acid groups was 
employed, leading to a carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition wherein the resulting PdIV 
intermediate was captured by the second carboxylate substituent to form an OCO-pincer-ligated 
PdIV complex. A pair of aminoalkyl PdIV complexes were synthesized that were stable at room 
temperature in the solid state and in solution. The amine-derived complexes differed in their 
substitution patterns at the -position of the activated alkyl chain of the amine, one with gem-
dimethyl substitution and one with ethyl and hydrogen substituents, which allowed for several 
different reductive elimination pathways to be investigated, including CO and CN bond 
reductive eliminations as well as -hydride elimination from a PdIV centre. Additionally, the 
intimate mechanism of CO bond reductive elimination was elucidated using an analogous 
oxime-derived alkyl PdIV complex, which confirmed that an outer-sphere SN2 attack 
mechanism, commonly observed for high valent Group 10 transition metals, was indeed 
operative for the OCO-pincer ligated complexes. Following the use of the OCO-pincer ligand 
to stabilize the PdIV centre, the analogous ONO-pincer ligand containing a pyridine core was 
utilized in an attempt to stabilize high valent benzylamine-derived aromatic palladacycles that 
were unreactive to carboxylate-assisted oxidative addition. However, upon subjecting 
benzylamine-derived PdII metallacycles to 2,6-pyridinedicarboxylic acid as ligand and an 
electrophilic fluorine reagent as a two-electron oxidant, rather than obtaining a pincer-stabilized 
Conclusions & Outlook 
aryl PdIV complex, an unexpected dehydrogenative CC coupling process was observed to form 
cyclized products (Scheme 105D). The reactions were proposed to proceed by a second CH 
activation event at a PdIV centre, with the transformation being demonstrated for both a C(sp2)
C(sp3) coupling and for a C(sp2)C(sp2) coupling. While further investigation into the reaction 
scope and mechanism is required, unprecedented Pd-mediated reactivity had been discovered 
under stoichiometric conditions in which a pendant alkyl or aromatic group of a cyclopalladated 
benzylamine undergoes a CH activation process under oxidative conditions leading to an 
intramolecular CC coupling.  
 The conclusions drawn from the current work highlight several avenues for future work. 
Firstly, while the catalytic reactions that were developed led to progress in the scope of aliphatic 
amines that could be efficiently functionalized under high valent PdII/PdIV catalysis, particularly 
in the case of acyclic secondary amines for the decarboxylative  CH arylation process, a 
notable limitation was that a high degree of branching along the alkyl chain was still required 
for  CH activation to take place under catalytic conditions, with less substituted substrates 
beyond a certain limit undergoing no reaction or decomposition. Significantly, this limit to the 
reaction scope indicated the point at which the carboxylate ligand-mediated CH activation 
started to be outcompeted by undesired processes such as bis(amine) complex formation or -
hydride elimination, which could not be effectively controlled by simple carboxylate ligands 
around the PdII centre. Directing group auxiliaries were originally developed exactly for the 
purpose of ensuring more efficient cyclometalation, though this strategy represents the 
antithesis of the native functional group-directed approach and thus does not hold the solution. 
On the other hand, more recently, ligands that can facilitate the CH activation step have been 
developed and have been used both in auxiliary-controlled as well as native functional group-
directed transformations to improve the catalyst efficiency.59,65 Typically, these ligands mimic 
the action of the carboxylate ligand as the internal base in the PdII-mediated CMD mechanism 
and lead to improved reactivity by having increased basicity relative to carboxylates, with 
prominent examples including mono-N-protected amino acids and pyridone ligands. Moreover, 
our group recently reported the Pd-catalyzed  C(sp3)H arylation of tertiary amines using an 
MPAA ligand with boronic acid coupling partners,161 demonstrating the feasibility of 
incorporating ligand assistance into the native amine-directed strategy. However, thus far, 
ligands have not been successfully incorporated into a high valent PdII/PdIV-catalyzed process 
for amine functionalization. Therefore, a key objective for future work would be to screen for 
ligands which can assist in the CH activation in the presence of, for example, ortho-DG-
containing aryl halide reagents which have been developed in the current work, in order to 
Conclusions & Outlook  
facilitate cyclopalladation while still maintaining the facile mode of palladacycle oxidation 
(Scheme 106A). Alternatively, a ligand or oxidizing reagent could be developed comprising 
features that would facilitate both cyclopalladation and oxidation in a single component. If 
solved, the development of a truly general PdII/PdIV-catalyzed amine functionalization would 
enable the regioselective late-stage installation of polar heteroatomic functional groups into 
complex amines such as drugs or drug fragments that is not possible with current synthetic 
methods.  
Scheme 106. Future work for the development of PdII/PdIV-catalyzed CH functionalization of amines.  
 Secondly, regarding the scope of Cheteroatom bond-forming processes, to date, CH 
functionalization methods have generally focused on developing individual transformations 
that install one type of heteroatomic functional group, such as acetoxylation or intramolecular 
amination, and therefore are limited to relatively few types of groups that can be incorporated. 
Conversely, methods such as Pd-catalyzed Cheteroatom cross-couplings or allylic substitution 
reactions can incorporate a diverse range coupling partners to form a much broader range of 
products. Pd-catalyzed CH functionalization has, to some extent, addressed this matter by 
using PdII/PdIV catalysis to install a leaving group270 or form a strained ring intermediate146,271 
that can subsequently be reacted with a nucleophile of choice as part of separate step. In fact, 
in the context of the native amine-directed approach, this strategy was exploited in the 
Conclusions & Outlook 
intramolecular  C(sp3)H amination process to form aziridines,146 which could be ring-opened 
with nucleophiles to from -functionalized derivatives. However, despite being a seminal 
contribution, this strategy is not considered as a general solution for diverse heteroatom 
incorporation into amine substrates given that (i)  C(sp3)H activation is currently limited to 
extremely hindered tetramethylpiperidine or morpholinone substrates, and (ii) for  C(ssp3)H 
functionalization, installation of a leaving group and cyclization would lead to a four-membered 
ring azetidine product that would be poorly reactive towards nucleophilic ring-opening 
reactions. Therefore, as was explored in the organometallic studies of stable aminoalkyl PdIV 
complexes, a potential solution could be to intercept high valent PdIV intermediates with 
external nucleophiles as part of a unified catalytic approach that exploits the facility of outer-
sphere reductive elimination processes from alkyl PdIV complexes (Scheme 106B). Given the 
availability of nucleophilic coupling partners and the robustness of outer-sphere SN2-type 
reactivity, a much wide range of products could be obtained than would be possible via 
individually optimized Cheteroatom bond formations. Nonetheless, for this strategy to be 
successful, a novel catalyst would likely be required that does not contain a labile and 
nucleophilic ligand such as a carboxylate which could lead to a competing and potentially 
undesired CO bond reductive elimination and thus product mixtures. Consequently, an 
alternative, albeit less precedented, strategy could be to use a sacrificial oxidant to promote a 
PdIV-mediated CH activation to form a high valent cyclometalation complex which could then 
undergo the nucleophile-mediated reductive elimination. Though further investigation is 
required, the current work has highlighted the potential for a PdIV centre to mediate both alkyl 
as well as aromatic CH activation of amine substrates. Overall, although the development of 
a diverse Cheteroatom bond-forming functionalization remains a relatively distant target, the 
achievement of such an objective would significantly advance the scope and utility of CH 
functionalization processes.  
 Thirdly and finally, as was alluded to before, CH activation at a high valent PdIV centre 
remains a frontier of research in the field of Pd-catalyzed CH functionalization.72 In parallel 
to developing ligands that facilitate CH activation at a PdII centre, an alternative option is to 
develop ligands that promote the formation of PdIV intermediates prior to activation, with the 
more Lewis acidic and reactive PdIV centre being used to facilitate the CH bond cleavage 
(Scheme 106C). Currently, PdIV-mediated CH activation has not been exploited in a Pd-
catalyzed C(sp3)H functionalization reaction. In terms of aliphatic amine functionalization, 
future work in this area should build on the current findings employing pincer ligands and aim 
to develop well-defined organometallic systems which would allow for the efficiency, 
Conclusions & Outlook  
selectivity and mechanism of the oxidative CH activation to be studied in greater detail. 
Meanwhile, development of catalytic systems could be conducted by screening different 
combinations of chelating ligands and oxidants in the presence of various amine substrates in 
order to discover novel high valent transformations. If successful, the development of catalytic 
processes involving PdIV-mediated C(sp3)H activation would establish a new class of reaction 
in the field directed CH functionalization with a complementary mode of reactivity that could 
afford new opportunities for amine functionalization.  
Experimental 
6. Experimental  
6.1. General Information  
NMR spectra were recorded in deuterated solvents using a Bruker AM 400 (400 MHz) or 
Avance 500 (500 MHz) at 298 K (unless otherwise stated). Chemical shifts () are reported in 
parts per million (ppm) relative to tetramethylsilane. Signals were referenced to the residual 
solvent peak (CHCl3 at 7.26 and 77.16 ppm, DMSO at 2.50 and 39.52 ppm, MeOD at 3.31 and 
49.00 ppm, CD3CN at 1.94 and 118.26 ppm and (CD3)2CO at 2.05 and 29.84 ppm for 
1H and 
13C NMR respectively). Coupling constants are reported in Hertz (Hz). Abbreviations for 
splitting patterns are as follows: s, singlet; d, doublet; t, triplet; q, quartet; m, multiplet; br., 
broad. Where coincident coupling constants have been observed, the apparent (app.) 
multiplicity of the proton resonance has been reported. Spectra were analysed using Bruker 
TopSpin software and kinetic experiments were processed using Bruker Dynamics Center. For 
novel compounds, proton and carbon assignments were deduced using 2D NMR methods 
(COSY, DEPT-135, HSQC, HMBC and NOESY). Note: diastereotopic protons located on the 
same carbon atom are labelled, for example, 1-Ha, 1-Hb (arbitrarily unless known). 
Diastereotopic carbons are labelled (arbitrarily unless known) for example 1, 1 etc., where 1 
and 2 are located on the same diastereotopic face. For a mixture of two diastereomers, 
assignments are labelled as 1, 2, 3 and 1*, 2*, 3* etc. to denote the signals of each diastereomer. 
1H NMR analysis of crude reaction mixtures was determined with reference to 1,1,2,2-
tetrachloroethane as an internal standard.  
High-resolution mass spectra (HRMS) were measured on a Micromass Q-TOF 
spectrometer or Waters XEVO GII-S Q-TOF spectrometer at the Department of Chemistry, 
University of Cambridge or on a Thermo Scientific LTQ Orbitrap XL at the EPSRC Mass 
Spectrometry Service, University of Swansea. Infrared (IR) spectra were recorded on a Perkin 
Elmer 1FT-IR Spectrometer or Thermo Fisher Nicolet Summit PRO FTIR Spectrometer as 
solids or films, either through direct application or deposited as solutions in CHCl3, with 
absorptions reported in wavenumbers (cm1). Melting points (m.p.) were recorded using a 
Gallenkamp melting-point apparatus and are reported uncorrected. Optical rotations were 
measured on a Perkin Elmer 343 Polarimeter using a sodium lamp ( 589 nm, D-line). X-ray 
crystallography was performed on a Nonius Kappa CCD or Bruker D8-QUEST PHOTON-100 
at the University of Cambridge Chemistry X-ray Laboratory (by Dr. Andrew Bond). Elemental 
analysis was obtained using a Perkin Elmer 240 Elemental Analyzer (by Stephen Young).  
Experimental  
Tetrahydrofuran, toluene, hexane, diethyl ether, acetonitrile and dichloromethane were 
dried and distilled using standard methods (Perrin, D. D.; Armarego, W. L. F. Purification of 
Laboratory Chemicals; Pergamon Press: Oxford, 1997). For Pd-catalyzed reactions, 
chloroform purchased from Sigma Aldrich was used (anhydrous, stabilised with 0.51% EtOH; 
filtered through basic alumina before use). Pd(OAc)2 (Pd 45.9-48.4%, needles), Pd(OPiv)2 and 
AgOAc (anhydrous, 99%) were purchased from Alfa Aesar. All commercial reagents were 
purchased at the highest quality and used without further purification.  
Unless otherwise stated, all reactions were carried out in oven-dried glassware under 
nitrogen atmosphere. Pd-mediated or -catalysed reactions were conducted in glass microwave 
vials with PTFE/silicone septa. All other reactions, unless otherwise stated, were conducted in 
round-bottomed flasks with rubber septa. Syringes were used to transfer air- and moisture-
sensitive chemicals between reaction vessels. TLC was performed using E. Merck silica gel 60 
F254 pre-coated plates (0.25 mm) and visualised under UV light (254 nm) and KMnO4 staining. 
GC-MS analysis was carried out using a Shimadzu QP2010-SE fitted with a BPX5 column (10 
m, 0.1 mm, 0.1 m film). LC-MS analysis was carried out using a Shimadzu LCMS-2020. 
Purification by column chromatography used Merck Flash Silica Gel 60 (230-400 mesh). 
Isolute SCX-2 resin was purchased from Biotage.  
Experimental 
6.2. Experimental Procedures  
6.2.1. Pd-catalyzed  C(sp3)H Amination to form Azetidines 
Representative Example of Chiral Morpholinone Synthesis 
tert-Butyl (S)-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (265a) 
To a solution of L-alaninol (259a, 3.76 g, 50 mmol, 1 equiv) and triethylamine (12 mL, 85 
mmol, 1.7 equiv) in THF (100 mL) at 0 oC was added ethyl bromoacetate (12.53 g, 75 mmol, 
1.5 equiv) dropwise. The reaction was warmed to room temperature with stirring for 3 h. The 
resulting suspension was re-cooled to 0 oC, filtered and the solids washed with cold THF (100 
mL). Di-tert-butyl dicarbonate (15.3 g, 70 mmol, 1.4 equiv) was added to the combined filtrates 
and stirred at room temperature overnight. The solvent was removed in vacuo and the crude 
residue dissolved in toluene (250 mL) before washing with sat. aq. NaHCO3 and brine (100 mL 
each). The organic phase was separated, dried over MgSO4 and filtered.  
p-Toluenesulfonic acid monohydrate (950 mg, 5 mmol, 0.1 equiv) was added to the 
solution in toluene (diluted to 0.5 L total volume) and heated under reflux using DeanStark 
apparatus for 6 h. After cooling to room temperature, the reaction mixture was washed with 
water (100 mL) and the organic phase separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated. 
The crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1030% ethyl acetate in 
hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless solid (265a, 3.84 g, 17.8 mmol, 36% yield 
over 2 steps). M.p. 8284 oC; lit.272 8586 oC. []
. +1.0o (c 1.0, CHCl3); lit.
272 []
25.0 +6.96o 
(c 2.21, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.43 (dd, J = 11.6, 3.4 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.31  
4.11 (m, 3H, 1-Hb, 2, 4-Ha), 4.05 (d, J = 18.7 Hz, 1H, 4-Hb), 1.46 (s, 9H, 8), 1.26 (d, J = 6.6 
Hz, 3H, 3). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  167.4 (5), 153.5 (6), 81.4 (7), 71.3 (1), 45.5 (2), 
43.8 (4), 28.5 (8), 15.9 (3). IR (neat, cm1) 2975, 1749, 1684, 1414, 1387, 1363, 1240, 1198, 
1156, 1101, 1042, 870, 769. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C10H18N1O4 [M+H]
+ 216.1230, found 
216.1231.  
Experimental  
tert-Butyl (3R,5S)-3-allyl-3-ethyl-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (268a) 
To a solution of tert-butyl (S)-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (265a, 1.08 g, 5 mmol, 
1 equiv) in THF:DME (1:1, 10 mL) at 78 oC was added NaHMDS (2 M in THF, 2.45 mL, 4.9 
mmol, 0.98 equiv) dropwise. After stirring at 78 oC for 0.5 h, neat allyl iodide (1.26 g, 7.5 
mmol, 1.5 equiv) was added dropwise. The reaction was stirred at 78 oC for a further 2 h before 
being quenched at 78 oC with sat. aq. NH4Cl (10 mL) and warming to room temperature. The 
reaction mixture was diluted with diethyl ether (100 mL) and the organic phase separated. The 
aqueous phase was re-extracted with diethyl ether (2 x 50mL) and the combined organics dried 
over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated.  
The crude material was dissolved in THF:DME (1:1, 10 mL) and cooled to 78 oC. 
NaHMDS (2 M in THF, 3 mL, 6 mmol, 1.2 equiv) was added dropwise. After stirring at 78 oC 
for 0.5 h, neat ethyl iodide (2.34 g, 15 mmol, 3 equiv) was added dropwise. The reaction was 
stirred at 78 oC for a further 2 h before being quenched at 78 oC with sat. aq. NH4Cl (10 mL) 
and warming to room temperature. The reaction mixture was diluted with diethyl ether (100 
mL) and the organic phase separated. The aqueous phase was re-extracted with diethyl ether (2 
x 50 mL) and the combined organics dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated. The crude 
material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (015% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to 
give the title compound as a colourless solid (268a, 0.977 g, 3.45 mmol, 69% yield over 2 
steps). M.p. 3941 oC. []
. 20.2o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  5.71  
5.57 (m, 1H, 10), 5.14  5.03 (m, 2H, 11), 4.51 (dd, J = 11.3, 2.3 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.33 (br. s, 1H, 
2), 4.05 (d, J = 11.3 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.12 (br. s, 1H, 9-Ha), 3.00  2.89 (m, 1H, 9-Hb), 2.34  
2.09 (m, 2H, 12), 1.48 (s, 9H, 8), 1.19 (d, J = 6.8 Hz, 3H, 3), 0.93 (dd, J = 7.6, 1.1 Hz, 3H, 13). 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  170.8 (5), 153.2 (6), 134.4 (10), 119.1 (11), 80.7 (7), 70.2 (1), 
67.9 (4), 46.6 (2), 39.1 (9), 31.9 (12), 28.6 (8), 18.1 (3), 9.5 (13). IR (neat, cm1) 2984, 2939, 
1733, 1694, 1475, 1461, 1439, 1367, 1338, 1312, 1267, 1192, 1162, 1100, 1062, 928, 769. 
HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C15H26N1O4 [M+H]
+ 284.1856, found 284.1858. 
Experimental 
(3R,5S)-3-Ethyl-5-methyl-3-propylmorpholin-2-one (269a) 
A solution of tert-butyl (3R,5S)-3-allyl-3-ethyl-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate 
(268a, 829 mg, 2.93 mmol, 1 equiv) in ethyl acetate (30 mL) was subjected to three cycles of 
vacuum/nitrogen backfill. Palladium on activated carbon (Pd/C, 10 wt%, 156 mg, 0.15 mmol, 
5 mol%) was added in one portion, the atmosphere exchanged for hydrogen and the reaction 
stirred at room temperature overnight. The reaction was filtered through Celite and concentrated 
in vacuo to give the hydrogenated product as a colourless solid (835 mg, 2.93 mmol, 
quantitative yield).  
The hydrogenated product (797 mg, 2.79 mmol) was dissolved in dichloromethane (18 
mL) and trifluoroacetic acid (3.6 mL) added. The reaction was stirred at room temperature 
overnight, concentrated in vacuo, basified with sat. aq. NaHCO3 and the product extracted with 
dichloromethane (2 x 50 mL). The combined organics were dried over MgSO4, filtered and 
evaporated to give the title compound as a pale yellow oil (269a, 509 mg, 2.75 mmol, 98% 
yield). []
. 6.0o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.22 (dd, J = 10.5, 3.1 Hz, 
1H, 1-Ha), 3.92 (app. t, J = 10.5 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.37  3.26 (m, 1H, 2), 2.01  1.89 (m, 1H, 9-
Ha), 1.81  1.62 (m, 2H, 6-Ha, 9-Hb), 1.62  1.48 (m, 1H, 7-Ha), 1.47  1.36 (m, 1H, 6-Hb), 
1.35  1.18 (m, 2H, 7-Hb, 11), 1.07 (d, J = 6.3 Hz, 3H, 3), 0.97  0.88 (m, 6H, 8, 10). 13C NMR 
(101 MHz, CDCl3)  173.6 (5), 76.2 (1), 63.3 (4), 44.1 (2), 41.6 (6), 32.4 (9), 17.6 (7), 17.3 (3), 
14.4 (8), 8.1 (10). IR (neat, cm1) 3334, 2963, 2875, 1725, 1462, 1316, 1213, 1180, 1146, 1114, 
1046, 766, 727. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C10H20N1O2 [M+H]
+ 186.1489, found 186.1486.  
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation  
General Procedure A. The morpholinone substrate (1 equiv), Pd(OAc)2 (10 mol%), oxidant 
249 (3 equiv) and silver acetate (3 equiv) in dry 1,2-dichloroethane (0.1 M) were heated in a 
sealed tube at 60 or 80 oC under air atmosphere for 1624 h. The reaction was cooled to room 
Experimental  
temperature, filtered through Celite (eluting with dichloromethane) and basified with sat. aq. 
NaHCO3. The aqueous phase was re-extracted with dichloromethane and the combined 
organics dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated. The crude material was purified by silica 
gel flash chromatography.  
(2S,6S)-2-Methyl-6-propyl-4-oxa-1-azabicyclo[4.2.0]octan-5-one (273a) 
(3R,5S)-3-Ethyl-5-methyl-3-propylmorpholin-2-one (269a, 56 mg, 0.30 mmol) was subjected 
to General Procedure A with heating at 80 oC for 20 h. The crude material was purified by silica 
gel flash chromatography (1040% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to provide the title compound as 
a pale yellow oil (273a, 35 mg, 0.191 mmol, 64% yield). []
. 42.1o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.15 (dd, J = 11.4, 3.3 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.05  3.96 (m, 1H, 1-Hb), 
3.69  3.60 (m, 1H, 10-Ha), 3.02  2.86 (m, 2H, 2, 10-Hb), 2.78  2.68 (m, 1H, 9-Ha), 2.32  
2.22 (m, 1H, 9-Hb), 1.88  1.71 (m, 2H 6-Ha, 6-Hb), 1.50  1.30 (m, 2H, 7-Ha, 7-Hb), 0.97 (d, 
J = 6.4 Hz, 3H, 3), 0.93 (t, J = 7.3 Hz, 3H, 8). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  175.1 (5), 71.8 
(1), 68.0 (4), 59.0 (2), 51.6 (10), 43.6 (6), 28.4 (9), 17.0 (7), 16.7 (3), 14.3 (8). IR (neat, cm1) 
2961, 2932, 2873, 1743, 1468, 1353, 1257, 1187, 1119, 1042, 1031, 789. HRMS m/z (ESI) 
calcd for C10H18N1O2 [M+H]
+ 184.1332, found 184.1331. 
(2S,6S)-2-Benzyl-6-propyl-4-oxa-1-azabicyclo[4.2.0]octan-5-one (273b) 
(3R,5S)-5-Benzyl-3-ethyl-3-propylmorpholin-2-one (269b, 78 mg, 0.30 mmol) was subjected 
to General Procedure A with heating at 80 oC for 20 h. The crude material was purified by silica 
gel flash chromatography (520% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to provide the title compound as a 
pale yellow oil (273b, 48 mg, 0.185 mmol, 62% yield). []
. 131.7o (c 0.9, CHCl3). 
Experimental 
NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.32  7.26 (m, 2H, 6), 7.25  7.14 (m, 3H, 5, 7), 4.19 (dd, J = 11.5, 
3.5 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.02 (app. t, J = 11.1 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.37  3.26 (m, 1H, 14-Ha), 3.08  2.97 
(m, 1H, 2), 2.89  2.80 (m, 1H, 14-Hb), 2.70  2.58 (m, 2H, 3-Ha, 13-Ha), 2.53 (dd, J = 13.3, 
6.6 Hz, 1H, 3-Hb), 2.29  2.18 (m, 1H, 13-Hb), 1.83  1.65 (m, 2H, 10-Ha, 10-Hb), 1.52  1.34 
(m, 2H, 11-Ha, 11-Hb), 0.94 (app. t, J = 7.2 Hz, 3H, 12). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  175.4 
(9), 137.6 (4), 129.5 (5), 128.6 (6), 126.7 (7), 70.0 (1), 68.2 (8), 65.3 (2), 52.7 (14), 43.5 (10), 
39.0 (3), 28.0 (13), 16.9 (11), 14.3 (12). IR (neat, cm1) 2960, 2874, 1746, 1455, 1362, 1288, 
1187, 1147, 1106, 1046, 756, 701. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C16H22NO2 [M+H]
+ 260.1645, 
found 260.1646.  
(2R,6S)-6-Propyl-2-(((triisopropylsilyl)oxy)methyl)-4-oxa-1-azabicyclo[4.2.0]octan-5-one 
(273c) 
(3R,5R)-3-Ethyl-3-propyl-5-(((triisopropylsilyl)oxy)methyl)morpholin-2-one (269c, 107 mg, 
0.30 mmol) was subjected to General Procedure A with heating at 60 oC for 24 h. The crude 
material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (010% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to 
provide the title compound as a colourless oil (273c, 59 mg, 0.166 mmol, 55% yield). []
35.8o (c 1.5, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.50 (dd, J = 11.4, 3.6 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 
4.06 (app. t, J = 11.2 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.71  3.55 (m, 2H, 3-Ha, 12-Ha), 3.42  3.33 (m, 1H, 3-
Hb), 3.07 (dd, J = 17.7, 8.2 Hz, 1H, 12-Hb), 2.99  2.89 (m, 1H, 2), 2.75  2.64 (m, 1H, 11-Ha), 
2.33  2.23 (m, 1H, 11-Hb), 1.83  1.65 (m, 2H, 8-Ha, 8-Hb), 1.48  1.33 (m, 2H, 9-Ha, 9-Hb), 
1.15  0.98 (m, 21H, 4, 5), 0.93 (app. t, J = 7.3 Hz, 3H, 10). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  
175.5 (7), 69.2 (1), 68.2 (6), 65.3 (2), 63.7 (3), 52.8 (12), 43.4 (8), 28.4 (11), 18.1 (5), 16.9 (9), 
14.3 (10), 11.9 (4). IR (neat, cm1) 2942, 2867, 1751, 1465, 1333, 1289, 1162, 1115, 1048, 
1029, 882, 810, 682. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C19H38NO3Si [M+H]
+ 356.2615, found 
356.2618.  
Experimental  
4-Methyl-N-(4-((2S,6S)-5-oxo-6-propyl-4-oxa-1-azabicyclo[4.2.0]octan-2-yl)butyl)benze-
nesulfonamide (273d) 
N-(4-((3S,5R)-5-Ethyl-6-oxo-5-propylmorpholin-3-yl)butyl)-4-methylbenzenesulfonamide 
(269d, 39.6 mg, 0.10 mmol) was subjected to General Procedure A with heating at 80 oC for 
20 h. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (4080% ethyl acetate 
in hexanes) to provide the title compound as a pale yellow oil (273d, 18.5 mg, 0.046 mmol, 
47% yield). []
. 41.0o (c 0.9, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.74 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 
2H, 9), 7.31 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 2H, 10), 4.60  4.48 (m, 1H, 7), 4.15 (dd, J = 11.7, 3.5 Hz, 1H, 1-
Ha), 3.98 (app. t, J = 11.2 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.63  3.51 (m, 1H, 19-Ha), 3.04  2.88 (m, 3H, 6-
Ha, 6-Hb, 19-Hb), 2.75  2.60 (m, 2H, 2, 18-Ha), 2.43 (s, 3H, 12), 2.31  2.21 (m, 1H, 18-Hb), 
1.85  1.63 (m, 2H, 15-Ha, 15-Hb), 1.54  1.17 (m, 8H, 3-Ha, 3-Hb, 4-Ha, 4-Hb, 5-Ha, 5-Hb, 
16-Ha, 16-Hb), 0.93 (app. t, J = 7.2 Hz, 3H, 17). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  175.1 (14), 
143.6 (11), 137.1 (8), 129.9 (10), 127.2 (9), 70.1 (1), 68.5 (13), 63.5 (2), 53.5 (s), 43.5 (15), 
42.9 (6), 32.1 (3), 29.8 (5), 28.2 (18), 22.9 (4), 21.7 (12), 17.0 (16), 14.3 (17). IR (neat, cm1) 
3278, 2930, 2868, 1740, 1462, 1326, 1159, 1094, 1042, 816, 668. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for 
C20H31N2O4S [M+H]
+ 395.1999, found 395.1999.  
Ethyl 4-((2S,6S)-2-methyl-5-oxo-4-oxa-1-azabicyclo[4.2.0]octan-6-yl)butanoate (273e) 
Ethyl 4-((3R,5S)-3-ethyl-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholin-3-yl)butanoate (269e, 77 mg, 0.30 mmol) 
was subjected to General Procedure A with heating at 80 oC for 24 h. The crude material was 
purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1060% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to provide the 
title compound as a pale yellow oil (273e, 43 mg, 0.168 mmol, 56% yield). []
. 65.2o (c 
1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.21  4.08 (m, 3H, 1-Ha, 10), 4.00 (t, J = 11.0 Hz, 
Experimental 
1H, 1-Hb), 3.67  3.59 (m, 1H, 13-Ha), 3.03 -  2.95 (m, 1H, 13-Hb), 2.95  2.85 (m, 1H, 2), 
2.77  2.67 (m, 1H, 12-Ha), 2.38  2.26 (m, 3H, 8-Ha, 8-Hb, 12-Hb), 1.95  1.66 (m, 4H, 6-Ha, 
6-Hb, 7-Ha, 7-Hb), 1.25 (t, J = 7.1 Hz, 3H, 11), 0.97 (d, J = 6.4 Hz, 3H, 3). 13C NMR (101 MHz, 
CDCl3)  175.0 (5), 173.2 (9), 71.8 (1), 67.6 (4), 60.5 (10), 59.0 (2), 51.7 (13), 40.4 (6), 34.1 
(8), 27.7 (12), 19.1 (7), 16.9 (3), 14.4 (11). IR (neat, cm1) 2970, 2875, 1734, 1449, 1376, 1253, 
1177, 1145, 1095, 1037. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C13H22N1O4 [M+H]
+ 256.1543, found 
256.1544.  
2-(3-((2S,6S)-2-Methyl-5-oxo-4-oxa-1-azabicyclo[4.2.0]octan-6-yl)propyl)isoindoline-1,3-
dione (273f) 
2-(3-((3R,5S)-3-Ethyl-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholin-3-yl)propyl)isoindoline-1,3-dione (269f, 99 
mg, 0.30 mmol) was subjected to General Procedure A with heating at 80 oC for 24 h. The crude 
material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1090% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to 
provide the title compound as a colourless solid (273f, 51 mg, 0.155 mmol, 52% yield). M.p. 
127129 oC. []
. 44.4o (c 1.5, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.87  7.79 (m, 2H, 
11), 7.75  7.67 (m, 2H, 12), 4.16 (dd, J = 11.5, 3.3 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.00 (app. t, J = 11.2 Hz, 
1H, 1-Hb), 3.77  3.67 (m, 2H, 8-Ha, 8-Hb), 3.63  3.54 (m, 1H, 14-Ha), 3.01  2.82 (m, 2H, 2, 
14-Hb), 2.74  2.63 (m, 1H, 13-Ha), 2.32  2.20 (m, 1H, 13-Hb), 1.93  1.75 (m, 4H, 6-Ha, 6-
Hb, 7-Ha, 7-Hb), 0.95 (d, J = 6.4 Hz, 3H, 3). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  174.9 (5), 168.5 
(9), 134.1 (12), 132.2 (10), 123.4 (11), 71.8 (1), 67.3 (4), 59.0 (2), 51.5 (14), 38.1 (6), 37.9 (8), 
27.7 (13), 22.9 (7), 16.8 (3). IR (neat, cm1) 2963, 2927, 2851, 1772, 1741, 1707, 1396, 1360, 
1187, 1036, 752, 719. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C18H21N2O4 [M+H]
+ 329.1496, found 
329.1497.  
Experimental  
(2S,6S)-6-Ethyl-2,3,3-trimethyl-4-oxa-1-azabicyclo[4.2.0]octan-5-one (273g)  
(S)-3,3-Diethyl-5,6,6-trimethylmorpholin-2-one (60 mg, 0.30 mmol) was subjected to General 
Procedure A with heating at 80 oC for 20 h. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash 
chromatography (1050% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to provide the title compound as a 
colourless oil (273g, 33 mg, 0.167 mmol, 56% yield). []
. +11.6o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR 
(400 MHz, CDCl3)  3.78  3.63 (m, 1H, 10-Ha), 3.00  2.78 (m, 3H, 3, 10-Hb, 9-Ha), 2.40  
2.30 (m, 1H, 9-Hb), 2.07  1.87 (m, 2H, 7-Ha, 7-Hb), 1.38 (s, 3H, 2), 1.37 (s, 3H, 2), 1.15 (app. 
t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 8), 0.97 (d, J = 6.3 Hz, 3H, 4). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  175.4 (6), 85.7 
(1), 66.8 (5), 65.7 (3), 49.3 (10), 32.8 (7), 27.9 (2), 27.4 (9), 20.8 (2), 14.9 (4), 7.9 (8). IR (neat, 
cm1) 2975, 2939, 2879, 1729, 1455, 1390, 1287, 1206, 1128, 1089, 1021, 960, 732, 700. 
HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C11H20N1O2 [M+H]
+ 198.1489, found 198.1485.  
Synthesis of Rearranged Pyrrolidine Product  
3-Ethyl-1-((S)-1-(pivaloyloxy)propan-2-yl)pyrrolidin-3-yl pivalate (278) 
(S)-2-Ethyl-2-((1-(pivaloyloxy)propan-2-yl)amino)butyl pivalate (276, 103 mg, 0.3 mmol, 1 
equiv), Pd(OAc)2 (6.7 mg, 0.03 mmol, 10 mol%), oxidant 249 (376 mg, 0.9 mmol, 3 equiv) and 
silver acetate (150 mg, 0.9 mmol, 3 equiv) in toluene (3 mL) were heated to 100 oC for 16 h. 
The reaction was cooled to room temperature, filtered through Celite (eluting with 
dichloromethane) and basified with sat. aq. NaHCO3 (5 mL). The aqueous phase was re-
extracted with dichloromethane (3 x 20 mL). The combined organics were dried over MgSO4, 
filtered and evaporated. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography 
(1050% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to give the title compound as a pale orange oil (278, 34 mg, 
0.10 mmol, 33% yield, 1:1 d.r., isolated as a mixture of diastereomers). Note: only minor 
Experimental 
deviations in the 1H NMR signals for the two diastereomers; hence 1H assignments correspond 
to signals from both diastereomers. Separate assignments are made for the 13C signals. 1H 
NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.21  4.11 (m, 2H, 4-Ha), 4.02  3.91 (m, 2H, 4-Hb), 3.09  2.96 
(m, 2H, 7-Ha), 2.94  2.75 (m, 4H, 7-Hb, 15-Ha), 2.73  2.61 (m, 4H, 5, 15-Hb), 2.19  2.04 
(m, 4H, 12-Ha, 14-Ha), 2.00  1.86 (m, 4H, 12-Hb, 14-Hb), 1.22 (s, 18H, 1 or 11), 1.19 (s, 18H, 
1 or 11), 1.13 (app. d, J = 6.4 Hz, 6H, 6), 0.86 (app. t, J = 7.4 Hz, 6H, 13). 13C NMR (101 
MHz, CDCl3)  178.3 (two signals, 3/3* or 9/9*), 177.9 (3 or 9), 177.8 (3* or 9*), 89.0 (8), 
88.9 (8*), 67.1 (two signals, 4/4*), 62.5 (7), 62.2 (7*), 57.2 (two signals, 5/5*), 50.3 (15), 49.9 
(15*), 39.1 (two signals, 2/2* or 10/10*), 38.8 (two signals, 2/2* or 10/10*), 36.8 (14), 36.5 
(14*), 30.0(0) (12), 29.9(5) (12*), 27.2(1) (two signals, 1/1* or 11/11*), 27.1(8) (two signals, 
1/1* or 11/11*), 15.6 (6), 15.5 (6*), 8.2 (two signals, 13/13*). IR (neat, cm1) 2972, 2878, 
1725, 1481, 1461, 1397, 1366, 1282, 1148, 1034, 864, 769. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for 
C19H36N1O4 [M+H]
+ 342.2639, found 342.2642.  
6.2.2. Pd-catalyzed CH Functionalization by ortho-DG-assisted Oxidative Addition 
Stoichiometric Studies Employing 2-Halobenzoic Acids 
Trinuclear palladacycle 298 
To a solution of (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (297, 142 mg, 0.50 
mmol, 1 equiv) in CHCl3 (5 mL) in air at room temperature was added Pd(OAc)2 (168 mg, 0.75 
mmol, 1.5 equiv). The reaction was stirred at 50 oC for 6 h. After cooling to room temperature, 
CHCl3 was evaporated, hexane (10 mL) added, and the solution passed through a pad of Celite. 
The solvent was evaporated to give the title compound as a green foam (298, 280 mg, 0.25 
mmol, quantitative yield). IR (film, cm1) 2933, 1730, 1576, 1396, 1338, 1281, 1145, 1033, 
697. Elemental Analysis calcd for C42H76N2O12Pd3 C: 45.03 H: 6.84 N: 2.50, found C: 44.96 
H: 6.84 N 2.72.  
Experimental  
Pyridine-ligated palladacycle 299 
To a solution of trinuclear palladacycle 298 (56.0 mg, 0.05 mmol, 1 equiv) in CHCl3 (1 mL) 
was added pyridine (16 L, 0.2 mmol, 4 equiv) and the reaction stirred at room temperature for 
5 minutes. The solvent was removed in vacuo, and Et2O (10 mL) added. The resulting 
suspension was filtered through Celite and the filtrate concentrated in vacuo. Hexane (10 mL) 
was added followed by filtration again through Celite. Removal of the solvent and drying under 
high vacuum gave the title compound as a yellow oil (53.0 mg, 0.10 mmol, quantitative yield). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  8.60 (d, J = 5.1 Hz, 2H, 15), 7.74 (t, J = 7.6 Hz, 1H, 17), 7.31  
7.24 (m, 2H, 16), 6.27 (d, J = 6.7 Hz, 1H, 5), 4.70 (app. t, J = 11.2 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.43 (dd, J = 
11.2, 2.8 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.13  3.03 (m, 1H, 6), 2.72  2.60 (m, 2H, 3-Ha, 4), 2.24  2.09 (m, 
2H, 3-Ha, 11), 1.92 (s, 3H, 18), 1.88  1.70 (m, 3H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 14-Ha), 1.66  1.53 (m, 3H, 
1-Ha, 3-Hb, 14-Hb), 1.47  1.05 (m, 15H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 10, 12-Ha,b), 0.91 (t, J = 
7.3 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.9 (8), 177.1 (18), 151.7 (15), 137.4 (17), 
124.8 (16), 64.9 (6), 62.9 (7), 59.9 (4), 47.2 (11), 38.9 (9), 35.2 (3), 32.0 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.9 
(14), 26.2 (2), 26.1 (2), 25.5 (1), 24.1 (12), 23.9 (19), 13.2 (13). IR (film, cm1) 2930, 2857, 
1729, 1588, 1448, 1381, 1327, 1283, 1155, 1041, 759. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for 
C22H37N2O2
106Pd1 [MOAc]
+ 467.1884, found 467.1883. 
Experimental 
(2S,3R)-3-Benzyl-2-(cyclohexylamino)pentyl pivalate (301a) 
A solution of (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol, 
1 equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (33.7 mg, 0.15 mmol, 1.5 equiv) in CHCl3 (1 mL) was stirred in a sealed 
vial at 50 oC for 6 h. The reaction was cooled to room temperature, passed through a Celite plug 
and pyridine (16 L, 0.20 mmol, 2 equiv) added. The reaction was concentrated in vacuo to 
give the crude pyridine-ligated palladacycle (299), which was used directly in the next step.  
  The crude palladacycle 299 was re-dissolved in CHCl3 (1 mL) followed by addition of 
2-iodobenzoic acid (49.6 mg, 0.20 mmol, 2 equiv) and AgOAc (16.7 mg, 0.10 mmol, 1 equiv). 
The reaction was stirred at room temperature for 1 h, passed through a Celite plug and 
concentrated in vacuo. 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane (1 equiv) was added as internal standard, and 
the crude material was analysed by 1H NMR at room temperature as a solution in CDCl3. Seven-
membered palladacycle 300 was observed in 75% yield.  
After removal of the chloroform from Step 2, crude 300 was dissolved in AcOH (1 mL) 
and stirred at room temperature overnight. The solvent was removed in vacuo, followed by 
addition of DCM (10 mL) and washing with sat. aq. NaHCO3 (10 mL). The organic phase was 
separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated. The crude material was 
purified by silica gel flash chromatography (510% EtOAc in hexanes) to give arylated product 
301a as a pale yellow oil (20.0 mg, 0.056 mmol, 56% yield over 3 steps). []
. 11.5o (c 1.0, 
CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.30  7.23 (m, 2H, 17), 7.21  7.13 (m, 3H, 16, 18), 
4.12 (dd, J = 11.1, 5.8 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.00 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.01  2.91 (m, 1H, 
6), 2.84 (dd, J = 13.6, 6.4 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 2.58  2.48 (m, 1H, 4), 2.44 (dd, J = 13.6, 7.9 Hz, 
1H, 14-Hb), 1.88  1.66 (m, 5H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.63  1.55 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.46 
Experimental  
 1.01 (m, 17 H, 1-Ha, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12-Ha,b), 0.90 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 13). 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 141.9 (15), 129.2 (16), 128.4 (17), 125.8 (18), 64.9 
(7), 54.5 (4), 54.0 (6), 44.1 (11), 38.9 (9), 36.2 (14), 34.4 (3), 34.1 (3), 27.3 (10), 26.2 (1), 
25.2(3) (2), 25.1(5) (2), 22.2 (12), 12.5 (13). IR (film, cm1) 2960, 2927, 2853, 1729, 1479, 
1451, 1282, 1154, 1032, 735, 699. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C23H38N1O2 [M+H]
+ 360.2897, 
found 360.2900.  
Pyridine-ligated 7-membered ring palladacycle 300 
In a separate experiment, a purified sample was prepared by dissolving a portion of crude 300 
in CHCl3 and passing through a short plug of silica gel, eluting with CHCl3. The resulting 
solution was concentrated in vacuo and the residue triturated in hexane. The mother liquor 
(containing 300) was separated, filtered through Celite and the solvent removed, giving the title 
compound as a viscous yellow oil. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  8.60 (d, J = 4.8 Hz, 2H, 21), 
7.85 (d, J = 7.4 Hz, 1H, 26), 7.72  7.64 (m, 2H, 23, 29), 7.33  7.26 (m, 1H, 28), 7.24  7.17 
(m, 2H, 22), 7.02  6.92 (m, 2H, 19, 27), 6.90  6.80 (m, 2H, 16, 17), 6.76  6.70 (m, 1H, 18), 
6.37 (d, J = 9.5 Hz, 1H, 5), 5.34 (dd, J = 11.8, 6.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 5.19 (dd, J = 11.8, 2.0 Hz, 
1H, 7-Hb), 3.92 (dd, J = 13.3, 9.5 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 3.62  3.51 (m, 1H, 3-Ha), 3.41  3.30 (m, 
1H, 6), 2.64 (d, J = 13.3 Hz, 1H, 14-Hb), 2.03  1.43 (m, 9H, 1-Ha, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Hb, 3-Ha, 
4, 11, 12-Ha,b), 1.35  0.87 (m, 16H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 10, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, 
CDCl3)  178.5 (8), 152.7 (21), 148.9 (25), 147.5 (20), 146.5 (15), 139.9 (26), 137.5 (23), 134.4 
(19), 130.1 (27), 129.7 (29), 127.5 (28), 126.5 (16), 124.9 (18), 124.6 (22), 123.9 (17), 93.5 
(30), 64.7 (7), 60.6 (6), 56.4 (4), 40.9 (11), 38.7 (9), 36.7 (14), 34.7 (3), 30.8 (3), 28.2 (12), 
27.1 (10), 25.6 (2), 25.3 (2), 24.9 (1), 12.9 (13). Note: significant broadening of 13C signals of 
the 2-I-benzoate ligand. 13C signal for C=O (carbon 24) could not be distinguished from the 
baseline. IR (film, cm1) 2929, 2858, 1724, 1571, 1547, 1449, 1367, 1281, 1146, 1013, 908, 
728, 691. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C28H41N2O2
106Pd1 [M(2-I-benzoate)]
+ 543.2197, found 
543.2200.  
Experimental 
Pyridine-ligated palladacycle with 2-bromobenzoate ligand (305) 
A solution of (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol, 
1 equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (33.7 mg, 0.15 mmol, 1.5 equiv) in CHCl3 (1 mL) was stirred in a sealed 
vial at 50 oC for 6 h. The reaction was cooled to room temperature, passed through a Celite plug 
and pyridine (16 L, 0.20 mmol, 2 equiv) added. The reaction was concentrated in vacuo to 
give the crude pyridine-ligated palladacycle (299) which was used directly in the next step.  
 The crude palladacycle 299 was re-dissolved in CHCl3 (1 mL), followed by addition of 
2-bromobenzoic acid (40.2 mg, 0.20 mmol, 2 equiv) and AgOAc (16.7 mg, 0.10 mmol, 1 
equiv). The reaction was stirred at room temperature overnight, passed through a Celite plug 
and concentrated in vacuo. Analysis of the reaction mixture by NMR indicated 2-
bromobenzoate-ligated palladacycle had formed (305, quantitative yield against internal 
standard). A purified sample was prepared separately by dissolving a portion of crude 305 in 
hexanes and filtering through a short plug of Celite (carried out twice). The solvent was 
removed in vacuo to give the title compound as a colourless oil. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
 8.72 (dd, J = 5.2 Hz, 2H, 15), 7.75 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 1H, 17), 7.51  7.43 (m, 2H, 20, 23), 7.33  
7.28 (m, 2H, 16), 7.21 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 1H, 21), 7.08 (td, J = 7.8, 1.6 Hz, 1H, 22), 6.01 (d, J = 6.4 
Hz, 1H, 5), 4.76 (t, J = 11.2 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.48 (dd, J = 11.2, 2.8 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.22  3.13 
(m, 1H, 6), 2.89  2.77 (m, 1H, 4), 2.72  2.63 (m, 1H, 3-Ha), 2.38  2.29 (m, 1H, 3-Ha), 2.27 
 2.16 (m, 1H, 11), 1.96  1.57 (m, 6H, 1-Ha, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Hb, 14-Ha,b), 1.50  1.09 (m, 15H, 
1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 10, 12-Ha,b), 0.96 (t, J = 7.3 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, 
CDCl3)  178.9 (8), 173.2 (18, extracted from 
1H13C HMBC NMR spectrum), 151.7 (15), 
141.6 (19, extracted from 1H13C HMBC NMR spectrum), 137.3 (17), 132.9 (23), 129.4 (20), 
129.0 (22), 126.8 (21), 124.7 (16), 119.7 (24), 64.4 (6), 62.7 (7), 60.0 (4), 47.4 (11), 39.0 (9), 
34.9 (3), 32.1 (3), 27.4 (10), 27.2 (14), 26.1(3) (2), 26.0(7) (2), 25.5 (1), 24.1 (12), 13.2 (13). 
IR (film, cm1) 2932, 1727, 1604, 1448, 1366, 1282, 1153, 1039, 749. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd 
for C22H37N2O2
106Pd1 [M(2-Br-benzoate)]
+ 467.1884, found 467.1891.  
Experimental  
(2S,3R)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-(4-methylbenzyl)pentyl pivalate (301b) 
A solution of (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol, 
1 equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (33.7 mg, 0.15 mmol, 1.5 equiv) in CHCl3 (1 mL) was stirred in a sealed 
vial at 50 oC for 6 h. The reaction was cooled to room temperature, passed through a Celite plug 
and pyridine (16 L, 0.20 mmol, 2 equiv) added. The reaction was concentrated in vacuo to 
give the crude pyridine-ligated palladacycle (299), which was used directly in the next step.  
The crude palladacycle 299 was re-dissolved in CHCl3 (1 mL), followed by addition of 
2-iodo-5-methylbenzoic acid (52.4 mg, 0.20 mmol, 2 equiv) and AgOAc (16.7 mg, 0.10 mmol, 
1 equiv). The reaction was stirred at room temperature for 3 h, passed through a Celite plug and 
concentrated in vacuo. 
AcOH (1 mL) was added to the crude residue, and the reaction stirred at room 
temperature overnight. The solvent was removed in vacuo, followed by addition of 
dichloromethane (10 mL) and washing with sat. aq. NaHCO3 (10 mL). The organic phase was 
separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated. Purification by silica gel flash 
chromatography (5% Et2O in DCM) gave arylated derivative as a pale yellow oil (301b, single 
regioisomer, 21.5 mg, 0.058 mmol, 58% yield). []
.  14.1 (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 
MHz, CDCl3)  7.10  7.02 (m, 4H, 16, 17), 4.10 (dd, J = 11.1, 5.8 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.97 (dd, J 
= 11.1, 6.2 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.96  2.90 (m, 1H, 6), 2.78 (dd, J = 13.7, 6.5 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 2.49 
(tt, J = 10.2, 3.6 Hz, 1H, 4), 2.40 (dd, J = 13.7, 7.8 Hz, 1H, 14-Hb), 2.31 (s, 3H, 19), 1.87  1.67 
(m, 5H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.63  1.55 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.51  0.99 (m, 17H, 1-Ha, 
2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12-Ha,b), 0.90 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C NMR (126 MHz, 
CDCl3)  178.7 (8), 138.8 (15), 135.3 (18) 129.0(8) (16 or 17), 129.0(6) (16 or 17), 65.1 (7), 
54.4 (4), 53.9 (6), 44.2 (11), 38.9 (9), 35.7 (14), 34.4 (3), 34.2 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.1 (1), 25.3 (2), 
25.2 (2), 22.2 (12), 21.1 (19), 12.5 (13). IR (film, cm1) 2957, 2937, 1730, 1450, 1147, 801. 
HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C24H40N1O2 [M+H]
+ 374.3054, found 374.3054.  
Experimental 
2-((2R,3S)-3-(Cyclohexylamino)-2-ethyl-4-(pivaloyloxy)butyl)benzoic acid (318) 
A solution of (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (297, 567 mg, 2.00 mmol, 
1 equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (673 mg, 3.00 mmol, 1.5 equiv) in CHCl3 (20 mL) was stirred in a 
sealed vessel at 50 oC for 16 h. The reaction was cooled to room temperature, filtered through 
a pad of Celite and pyridine (310 L, 4.00 mmol, 2 equiv) added to the filtrate. The reaction 
was concentrated in vacuo to give the crude pyridine-ligated palladacycle (299), which was 
used directly in the next step.  
A mixture of crude 299, benzyl 2-iodobenzoate (315, 2 mL) and silver acetate (668 mg, 
4.00 mmol, 2 equiv) was heated at 100 oC in a sealed vial overnight. The reaction was cooled 
to room temperature, diluted with dichloromethane (50 mL) and filtered through a pad of Celite. 
The filtrate washed with sat. aq. NaHCO3 (50 mL) and the organics separated, dried over 
MgSO4, filtered and the solvent removed in vacuo. The crude material was purified by silica 
gel flash chromatography (column 1: 515% EtOAc in hexanes; column 2: 510% Et2O in 
DCM), giving an inseparable 1:1 mixture (183 mg, pale yellow oil) of the desired arylated 
product (316, 0.22 mmol, 11% yield) and acetoxylated product (317, 0.22 mmol, 11% yield).  
The mixture of 316 and 317 was dissolved in EtOH (10 mL) and Pd/C (10 wt%, 21 mg, 
0.02 mmol, 10 mol%) added under nitrogen. The atmosphere was exchanged for hydrogen, and 
the reaction stirred under a balloon of hydrogen at room temperature overnight. The reaction 
was filtered through a pad of Celite and the solvent removed in vacuo. The crude residue was 
purified by silica gel flash chromatography (210% MeOH in dichloromethane) to furnish the 
title compound as a colourless crystalline solid (318, 75 mg, 0.19 mmol, 84% yield). []
.  
53.7o (c 0.7, MeOH). 1H NMR (400 MHz, MeOD)  7.71 (dd, J = 7.6, 1.3 Hz, 1H, 19), 7.33 
Experimental  
(td, J = 7.4, 1.5 Hz, 1H, 17), 7.28  7.20 (m, 2H, 16, 18), 4.46 (dd, J = 12.5, 4.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 
4.28 (dd, J = 12.5, 7.7 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.50  3.44 (m, 1H, 6), 3.35 (dd, J = 13.7, 6.2 Hz, 1H, 
14-Ha), 2.97 (tt, J = 11.4, 3.7 Hz, 1H, 4), 2.61 (dd, J = 13.7, 7.4 Hz, 1H, 14-Hb), 2.19  2.02 
(m, 2H, 3-Ha, 11), 1.91  1.73 (m, 3H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.69  1.49 (m, 4H, 1-Ha, 3-Hb, 
12-Ha,b), 1.35  1.15 (m, 13H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 10), 1.04 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C 
NMR (101 MHz, MeOD)  179.2 (8), 176.9 (21), 140.0 (15), 139.0 (20), 131.7 (16), 130.9 
(19), 130.5 (17), 127.6 (18), 63.2 (7), 58.2 (4), 56.9 (6), 45.2 (11), 39.8 (9), 34.6 (14), 30.9 (3), 
28.9 (3), 27.5 (10), 26.0 (1), 25.8 (2), 25.6 (2), 24.7 (12), 12.6 (13). IR (neat, cm1) 2969, 
2856, 1731, 1580, 1558, 1370, 1149. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C24H38N1O4 [M+H]
404.2795, found 404.2792.   
6,5-Bicyclic palladacycle dimer 319 
A solution of 2-((2R,3S)-3-(cyclohexylamino)-2-ethyl-4-(pivaloyloxy)butyl)benzoic acid (318, 
8.1 mg, 0.02 mmol, 1 equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (4.5 mg, 0.02 mmol, 1 equiv) in CDCl3 (0.5 mL) 
was stirred at room temperature for 6 h. Analysis of the reaction by 1H NMR indicated that 318 
had displaced acetate from Pd(OAc)2, but that negligible conversion had occurred (trace 319).  
The reaction was subsequently heated at 80 oC overnight. After cooling to room temperature, 
the mixture was filtered through a plug of Celite. Analysis by NMR indicated formation of 
cyclometallated complex 319 (quantitative yield against internal standard, single diastereomer). 
The same result was obtained following the above procedure with addition of 1 equivalent of 
AgOAc. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.47 (d, J = 7.4 Hz, 1H, 17), 7.23  7.15 (m, 2H, 19, 
20), 7.11 (t, J = 6.9 Hz, 1H, 18), 5.17 (t, J = 11.2 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.65 (dd, J = 11.2, 2.2 Hz, 1H, 
7-Hb), 4.44 (d, J = 8.7 Hz, 1H, 5), 4.23 (d, J = 11.4 Hz, 1H, 14), 3.50  3.40 (m, 1H, 6), 2.80 
(d, J = 11.4 Hz, 1H, 3-Ha), 2.74  2.59 (m, 2H, 4, 11), 2.20  2.10 (m, 1H, 3-Ha), 1.86  1.67 
(m, 3H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 12-Ha), 1.65  1.43 (m, 2H, 1-Ha, 3-Hb), 1.35  1.01 (m, 17H, 1-Hb, 2-
Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 10, 12-Hb, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.8 (8), 173.7 (21), 145.7 
Experimental 
(15), 136.8 (16), 130.7 (17), 130.3 (19), 123.2 (18), 120.8 (20), 62.9 (7), 62.8 (6), 59.7 (4), 46.8 
(11), 39.2 (14), 39.1 (9), 34.9 (3), 32.2 (3), 27.5 (10), 26.1 (2), 25.9 (2), 25.5 (1), 21.2 (12), 
14.0 (13). IR (neat, cm1) 3217, 2932, 2855, 1730, 1630, 1594, 1576, 1545, 1446, 1302, 1282, 
1141, 730. Elemental Analysis calcd for C48H70N2O8Pd2 C: 56.75 H: 6.95 N: 2.76, found C: 
56.85 H: 7.17 N 2.87.  
-Functionalized amine products 320, 317 and 321 
A solution of (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (297, 57 mg, 0.20 mmol, 1 
equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (67 mg, 0.3 mmol, 1.5 equiv) in CHCl3 (2 mL) was stirred in a sealed vial 
at 50 oC for 6 h. The reaction was cooled to room temperature, passed through a Celite plug and 
pyridine (32 L, 0.40 mmol, 2 equiv) added. The reaction was concentrated in vacuo to give 
the crude pyridine-ligated Pd(II) metallacycle (299) which was used directly in the next step.  
 The crude palladacycle 299 was re-dissolved in CHCl3 (2 mL), followed by addition of 
2-iodobenzoic acid (99 mg, 0.40 mmol, 2 equiv) and NaOAc (16 mg, 0.20 mmol, 1 equiv). The 
reaction was stirred at room temperature for 48 h, passed through a Celite plug and concentrated 
in vacuo. The crude residue contained a mixture of three products (320, 317 and 321), which 
were separated by silica gel flash chromatography (column 1: 010% Et2O in DCM; column 2: 
520% EtOAc in hexanes).  
Experimental  
(2S,3S)-3-(Cyclohexylamino)-2-ethyl-4-(pivaloyloxy)butyl 2-iodobenzoate (320)  
The title compound was isolated as a pale yellow oil (320, 46 mg, 0.087 mmol, 43% yield). 
 5.6o (c 2.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.99 (d, J = 7.9 Hz, 1H, 18), 7.77 
(dd, J = 7.7, 1.6 Hz, 1H, 21), 7.40 (t, J = 7.7 Hz, 1H, 20), 7.15 (td, J = 7.9, 1.6 Hz, 1H, 19), 
4.44 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.6 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 4.37 (dd, J = 11.1, 4.8 Hz, 1H, 14-Hb), 4.15 (dd, J = 
11.2, 5.8 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.03 (dd, J = 11.2, 5.8 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.13  3.07 (m, 1H, 6), 2.49 (tt, 
J = 10.1, 3.8 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.92  1.63 (m, 5H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.63  1.51 (m, 2H, 
1-Ha, 12-Ha), 1.48  1.34 (m, 1H, 12-Hb), 1.30  0.82 (m, 18H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-
Hb, 5, 10, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 166.7 (15), 141.5 (18), 135.5 (16), 
132.7 (19), 130.9 (21), 128.1 (20), 94.1 (17), 65.7 (14), 65.0 (7), 54.6 (4), 53.9 (6), 41.9 (11), 
39.0 (9), 34.6 (3), 34.1 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.2 (1), 25.2 (2), 25.0 (2), 20.1 (12), 12.6 (13). IR 
(neat, cm1) 2966, 2928, 2854, 1729, 1463, 1287, 1250, 1152, 1106, 1017, 743. HRMS m/z 
(ESI) calcd for C24H37I1N1O4 [M+H]
+ 530.1762, found 530.1752. 
(2S,3S)-3-(Acetoxymethyl)-2-(cyclohexylamino)pentyl pivalate (317) 
The title compound was isolated as a colourless oil (317, 7.1 mg, 0.021 mmol, 10% yield). 
. +17.8o (c 0.4, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.19  4.07 (m, 3H, 7-Ha, 14-
Ha,b), 3.98 (dd, J = 11.3, 6.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.02  2.96 (m, 1H, 6), 2.46 (tt, J = 10.1, 3.7 Hz, 
1H, 4), 2.04 (s, 3H, 16), 1.86  1.66 (m, 5H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.62  1.43 (m, 2H, 
1-Ha, 12-Ha), 1.39  0.92 (m, 19H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12-Hb, 13). 13C 
NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (8), 171.3 (15), 65.0 (7), 64.4 (14), 54.5 (4), 53.9 (6), 41.7 
Experimental 
(11), 39.0 (9), 34.5 (3), 34.1 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.2 (1), 25.2 (2), 25.0 (2), 21.2 (16), 20.2 (12), 
12.5 (13). IR (neat, cm1) 2966, 2929, 2858, 1732, 1481, 1367, 1283, 1234, 1154, 1034. HRMS 
m/z (ESI) calcd for C19H36N1O4 [M+H]
+ 342.2639, found 342.2642.  
(S)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-methylenepentyl pivalate (321) 
The title compound was isolated as a colourless oil (321, 5.6 mg, 0.020 mmol, 10% yield). 
. +19.8o (c 0.4, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  5.03 (br. s, 1H, 14-Ha), 4.93 (d, 
J = 1.2 Hz, 1H, 14-Hb), 4.10 (dd, J = 10.9, 5.4 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.95 (dd, J = 10.9, 7.5 Hz, 1H, 
7-Hb), 3.56  3.49 (m, 1H, 6), 2.38 (tt, J = 10.2, 3.6 Hz, 1H, 4), 2.15  1.87 (m, 3H, 3-Ha, 12-
Ha,b), 1.82  1.66 (m, 3H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.62  1.54 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.29  0.87 (m, 18H, 
1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.4 (8), 149.6 
(11), 111.2 (14), 66.7 (7), 59.4 (6), 53.7 (4), 38.9 (9), 34.8 (3), 33.3 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 
25.4 (2), 25.0 (2), 24.9 (12), 12.3 (13). IR (neat, cm1) 2966, 2929, 2851, 1733, 1481, 1283, 
1151, 1035, 798. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C17H32N1O2 [M+H]
+ 282.2428, found 282.2431. 
Pd-catalyzed Decarboxylative  C(sp3)H Arylation  
General Procedure B. To a 25 mL microwave vial containing a 10 mm magnetic stirrer bar 
were added Pd(OPiv)2 (3.1 mg, 0.01 mmol, 10 mol%), AgOAc (33.4 mg, 0.2 mmol, 2 equiv) 
and aryl bromide (0.2 mmol, 2 equiv). Under air, a solution of amine (0.1 mmol, 1 equiv) in 
CHCl3 (1 mL) was added via syringe and the vial sealed with a crimp cap with silicone/PTFE 
septum. The vial was placed in an oil bath pre-heated to 80 oC, and the reaction stirred at this 
temperature for 20 h. After cooling to room temperature, the reaction was filtered through a 
short plug of Celite and the filtrate concentrated in vacuo. The crude residue was purified by 
silica gel flash chromatography, wherein the arylated product was separated from remaining 
starting material and minor CO acyloxylation by-product.  
Experimental  
(2S,3R)-3-Benzyl-2-(cyclohexylamino)pentyl pivalate (301a) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl 
pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromobenzoic acid. Purification by silica gel flash 
chromatography (510% EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a pale yellow oil (301a, 
25.1 mg, 0.070 mmol, 70% yield). Spectral data were presented previously in the Experimental.  
(2S,3R)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-(4-fluorobenzyl)pentyl pivalate (301c) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl 
pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromo-5-fluorobenzoic acid. Purification by silica 
gel flash chromatography (25% EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a pale yellow 
oil (301c, 20.4 mg, 0.054 mmol, 54% yield). []
. 11.8o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 
MHz, CDCl3)  7.11 (dd, J = 8.5, 5.5 Hz, 2H, 16), 6.95 (app. t, J = 8.5 Hz, 2H, 17), 4.09 (dd, J 
= 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.97 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.94  2.88 (m, 1H, 6), 2.80 
(dd, J = 13.8, 6.6 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 2.54  2.44 (m, 1H, 4), 2.41 (dd, J = 13.8, 7.7 Hz, 1H, 14-
Hb), 1.88  1.65 (m, 5H, 2-Ha,b, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.64  1.54 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.44  0.96 (m, 
17H, 1-Hb, 2-Ha,b, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12-Ha,b), 0.90 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C NMR (101 
MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 161.3 (d, 
1JCF = 243 Hz, 18), 137.6 (d, 
4JCF = 3.3 Hz, 15), 130.4 (d, 
3JCF = 7.7 Hz, 16), 115.1 (d, 
2JCF = 20.9 Hz, 17), 64.9 (7), 54.3 (4), 53.8 (6), 44.4 (11), 38.9 (9), 
35.4 (14), 34.6 (3), 34.3 (3), 27.3 (10), 26.2 (1), 25.2 (2), 25.1 (2), 22.1 (12), 12.5 (13). 19F 
NMR (376 MHz, CDCl3)  118.9. IR (film, cm
1) 2960, 2925, 2854, 1729, 1509, 1460, 1282, 
1222, 1155. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C23H37F1N1O2 [M+H]
+ 378.2803, found 378.2800.  
Experimental 
(2S,3R)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-(4-methoxybenzyl)pentyl pivalate (301d) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl 
pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromo-5-methoxybenzoic acid. Purification by silica 
gel flash chromatography (25% Et2O in DCM) gave the title compound as a pale yellow oil 
(21.1 mg, 0.054 mmol, 54% yield). []
. 9.0o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
 7.07 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 2H, 16), 6.82 (d, J = 8.5 Hz, 2H, 17), 4.09 (dd, J = 11.1, 5.9 Hz, 1H, 7-
Ha), 3.97 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.2 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.79 (s, 3H, 19), 2.95  2.89 (m, 1H, 6), 2.75 (dd, J 
= 13.8, 6.6 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 2.53  2.44 (m, 1H, 4), 2.39 (dd, J = 13.8, 7.8 Hz, 1H, 14-Hb), 1.87 
 1.65 (m, 5H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.63  1.55 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.45  0.97 (m, 17H, 
1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12-Ha,b), 0.90 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C NMR (101 
MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (8), 157.8 (18), 133.9 (15), 130.1 (16), 113.8 (17), 65.1 (7), 55.4 (19), 
54.4 (4), 53.9 (6), 44.4 (11), 38.9 (9), 35.3 (14), 34.6 (3), 34.4 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.3 (2), 
25.2 (2), 22.2 (12), 12.5 (13). IR (film, cm1) 2927, 2855, 1728, 1512, 1461, 1282, 1246, 1155, 
1037. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C24H40N1O3 [M+H]
+ 390.3003, found 390.2995.  
(2S,3R)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-(3-methylbenzyl)pentyl pivalate (301f) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl 
pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and either 2-bromo-4-methylbenzoic acid or 2-bromo-6-
methylbenzoic acid. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (010% EtOAc in hexanes) 
gave the title compound as a pale yellow oil. Using 2-bromo-4-methylbenzoic acid: 23.4 mg, 
0.063 mmol, 63% yield (301fa). Using 2-bromo-6-methylbenzoic acid: 22.5 mg, 0.060 mmol, 
Experimental  
60% yield (301fb). []
. 10.8o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.16 (app. t, 
J = 7.9 Hz, 1H, 19), 7.01  6.94 (m, 3H, 16, 18, 20), 4.10 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.98 
(dd, J = 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.95  2.89 (m, 1H, 6), 2.77 (dd, J = 13.6, 6.8 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 
2.54  2.38 (m, 2H, 4, 14-Hb), 2.32 (s, 3H, 21), 1.87  1.68 (m, 5H, 2-Ha,b, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 
1.65  1.49 (m, 2H, 1-Ha, 5), 1.46  0.99 (m, 16H, 1-Hb, 2-Ha,b, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 10, 12-Ha,b), 
0.91 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 141.8 (15), 137.8 (17), 
130.0 (16), 128.2 (19), 126.6 (18), 126.2 (20), 65.0 (7), 54.4 (4), 53.9 (6), 44.1 (11), 38.9 (9), 
36.1 (14), 34.6 (3), 34.3 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.2(4) (2), 25.1(7) (2), 22.2 (12), 21.5 (21), 
12.5 (13). IR (film, cm1) 2960, 2926, 2854, 1729, 1479, 1460, 1282, 1154. HRMS m/z (ESI) 
calcd for C24H40N1O2 [M+H]
+ 374.3054, found 374.3055. 
(2S,3R)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-(3-fluorobenzyl)pentyl pivalate (301g) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl 
pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromo-4-fluorobenzoic acid. Purification by silica 
gel flash chromatography (5% EtOAc in hexanes) provided the title compound as a pale yellow 
oil (310g, 21.3 mg, 0.056 mmol, 56% yield). []
. 12.0o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 
MHz, CDCl3)  7.26  7.17 (m, 1H, 19), 6.94 (d, J = 7.6 Hz, 1H, 20), 6.90  6.83 (m, 2H, 16, 
18), 4.09 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.97 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.95  2.88 
(m, 1H, 6), 2.84 (dd, J = 13.6, 6.5 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 2.54  2.39 (m, 2H, 4, 14-Hb), 1.87  1.66 
(m, 5H, 2-Ha,b, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.64  1.55 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.46  0.97 (m, 17H, 1-Hb, 2-Ha,b, 
3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12-Ha,b), 0.90 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 
(8), 163.0 (d, 1JCF = 245 Hz, 17), 144.7 (d, 
3JCF = 7.1 Hz, 15), 129.7 (d, 
3JCF = 8.3 Hz, 19), 124.9 
(d, 4JCF = 2.7 Hz, 20), 115.9 (d, 
2JCF = 20.8 Hz, 16), 112.7 (d, 
2JCF = 21.0, 18), 64.8 (7), 54.3 
(4), 53.9 (6), 44.1 (11), 38.9 (9), 36.0 (14), 34.6 (3), 34.4 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.2 (2), 25.1 
(2), 22.1 (12), 12.5 (13). 19F NMR (376 MHz, CDCl3)  115.0. IR (film, cm
1) 2959, 2927, 
2851, 1729, 1589, 1480, 1449, 1282, 1153, 781. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C23H37F1N1O2 
[M+H]+ 378.2803, found 378.2802.  
Experimental 
(2S,3R)-3-(3-Chlorobenzyl)-2-(cyclohexylamino)pentyl pivalate (301h) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl 
pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromo-4-chlorobenzoic acid. Purification by silica 
gel flash chromatography (010% EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a pale yellow 
oil (301h, 24.2 mg, 0.061 mmol, 61% yield). []
. 15.3o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 
MHz, CDCl3)  7.23  7.12 (m, 3H, 16, 18, 19), 7.04 (app. d, J = 7.3 Hz, 1H, 20), 4.08 (dd, J = 
11.1, 6.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.97 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.93  2.87 (m, 1H, 6), 2.82 (dd, 
J = 13.7, 6.8 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 2.54  2.38 (m, 2H, 4, 14-Hb), 1.87  1.66 (m, 5H, 2-Ha,b, 3-Ha, 
3-Ha, 11), 1.64  1.55 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.46  0.98 (m, 17H, 1-Hb, 2-Ha,b, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 
12-Ha,b), 0.91 (t, J = 7.3 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 144.2 (15), 
134.1 (17), 129.6 (19), 129.3 (16), 127.4 (20), 126.1 (18), 64.7 (7), 54.3 (4), 53.8 (6), 44.1 (11), 
38.9 (9), 35.9 (14), 34.6 (3), 34.3 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.2 (2), 25.1 (2), 22.1 (12), 12.5 
(13). IR (film, cm1) 2959, 2929, 2851, 1729, 1478, 1282, 1153, 769. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd 
for C23H37Cl1N1O2 [M+H]
+ 394.2507, found 394.2506.  
(2S,3R)-3-(3-Bromobenzyl)-2-(cyclohexylamino)pentyl pivalate (301i) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B (note: 2.5 equiv aryl bromide and 2.5 equiv AgOAc 
were used) from (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 
mmol) and 2,4-dibromobenzoic acid. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (510% 
EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a pale yellow oil (301i, 21.3 mg, 0.049 mmol, 
49% yield). []
. 14.8o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.35  7.28 (m, 2H, 
Experimental  
16, 18), 7.17  7.06 (m, 2H, 19, 20), 4.08 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.96 (dd, J = 11.1, 
6.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.93  2.86 (m, 1H, 6), 2.81 (dd, J = 13.7, 6.8 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 2.53  2.38 
(m, 2H, 4, 14-Hb), 1.86  1.66 (m, 5H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.64  1.55 (m, 1H, 1-
Ha), 1.47  0.97 (m, 17H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12-Ha,b), 0.91 (t, J = 7.3 Hz, 
3H, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 144.5 (15), 132.2 (16), 129.9 (19), 129.0 
(18), 127.9 (20), 122.5 (17), 64.7 (7), 54.3 (4), 53.7 (6), 44.1 (11), 38.9 (9), 35.9 (14), 34.6 (3), 
34.3 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.2 (2), 25.1 (2), 22.1 (12), 12.5 (13). IR (film, cm1) 2956, 2929, 
2852, 1728, 1477, 1281, 1153, 770. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C23H37Br1N1O2 [M+H]
438.2002, found 438.2005.  
(2S,3R)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-(2-fluorobenzyl)pentyl pivalate (301j) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl 
pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromo-3-fluorobenzoic acid. Purification by silica 
gel flash chromatography (510% EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a pale yellow 
oil (301j, 17.4 mg, 0.046 mmol, 46% yield). []
. 11.9o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, 
CDCl3)  7.20  7.12 (m, 2H, 16, 18), 7.07  6.95 (m, 2H, 17, 19), 4.10 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.1 Hz, 
1H, 7-Ha), 4.00 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.97  2.91 (m, 1H, 6), 2.85 (dd, J = 13.7, 6.3 
Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 2.55  2.45 (m, 2H, 4, 14-Hb), 1.89  1.67 (m, 5H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 
11), 1.63  1.56 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.47  0.99 (m, 17H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12-
Ha,b), 0.90 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (8), 161.5 (d, 
1JCF = 
245 Hz, 20), 131.6 (d, 3JCF = 5.2 Hz, 16), 128.8 (d, 
2JCF = 15.7 Hz, 15), 127.6 (d, 
3JCF = 8.1 Hz, 
18), 123.9 (d, 4JCF = 3.4 Hz, 17), 115.4 (19), 64.9 (7), 54.3 (4), 54.0 (6), 42.8 (11), 38.9 (9), 
34.6 (3), 34.3 (3), 29.7 (d, 3JCF = 1.4 Hz, 14), 27.3 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.3 (2), 25.2 (2), 22.3 (12), 
12.4 (13). 19F NMR (376 MHz, CDCl3)  117.6. IR (film, cm
1) 2960, 2927, 2854, 1729, 
1492, 1454, 1283, 1229, 1154, 754. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C23H37F1N1O2 [M+H]
378.2803, found 378.2804.  
Experimental 
(2S,3R)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-(2-methoxybenzyl)pentyl pivalate (301k) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl 
pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromo-3-methoxybenzoic acid. Purification by silica 
gel flash chromatography (510% Et2O in DCM) gave the title compound as a pale yellow oil 
(301k, 19.7 mg, 0.051 mmol, 51% yield). []
. 5.8o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, 
CDCl3)  7.17 (app. t, J = 7.8 Hz, 1H, 18), 7.11 (d, J = 7.1 Hz, 1H, 16), 6.87 (app. t, J = 7.4 Hz, 
1H, 17), 6.83 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 1H, 19), 4.12 (dd, J = 11.0, 5.9 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.00 (dd, J = 11.0, 
6.3 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.80 (s, 3H, 21), 2.99  2.92 (m, 1H, 6), 2.85 (dd, J = 13.4, 5.8 Hz, 1H, 14-
Ha), 2.57  2.48 (m, 1H, 4), 2.41 (dd, J = 13.4, 8.1 Hz, 1H, 14-Hb), 1.90  1.79 (m, 3H, 3-Ha, 
3-Ha, 11), 1.78  1.68 (m, 2H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha), 1.64  1.56 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.45  0.99 (m, 17H, 
1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12-Ha,b), 0.88 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C NMR (101 
MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (8), 157.7 (20), 131.0 (16), 130.1 (15), 127.1 (18), 120.3 (17), 110.3 (19), 
65.4 (7), 55.2 (21), 54.5 (4), 54.2 (6), 42.3 (11), 38.9 (9), 34.5 (3), 34.3 (3), 30.8 (14), 27.4 
(10), 26.3 (1), 25.3(3) (2), 25.2(8) (2), 22.7 (12), 12.5 (13). IR (film, cm1) 2926, 2854, 1728, 
1494, 1465, 1285, 1242, 1155, 1032, 751. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C24H40N1O3 [M+H]
390.3003, found 390.3003.  
(2S,3R)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-(3,4-dimethoxybenzyl)pentyl pivalate (301l) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl 
pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromo-4,5-dimethoxybenzoic acid. Purification by 
silica gel flash chromatography (520% EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a pale 
Experimental  
yellow oil (301l, 25.8 mg, 0.061 mmol, 61% yield). []
. 15.2o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR 
(400 MHz, CDCl3)  6.78 (d, J = 7.9 Hz, 1H, 19), 6.74  6.67 (m, 2H, 16, 20), 4.10 (dd, J = 
11.1, 6.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.97 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.88  3.83 (m, 6H, 21, 22), 2.96 
 2.89 (m, 1H, 6), 2.75 (dd, J = 13.6, 6.7 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 2.54  2.45 (m, 1H, 4), 2.40 (dd, J = 
13.6, 7.6, 1H, 14-Hb), 1.90  1.66 (m, 5H, 2-Ha,b, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.64  1.55 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 
1.46  0.99 (m, 17H, 1-Hb, 2-Ha,b, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12-Ha,b), 0.91 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 13). 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 148.8 (17), 147.3 (18), 134.6 (15), 121.0 (20), 112.6 
(16), 111.3 (19), 65.1 (7), 56.1 (21 or 22), 55.9 (21 or 22), 54.4 (4), 53.9 (6), 44.4 (11), 38.9 
(9), 35.9 (14), 34.6 (3), 34.4 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.3 (2), 25.2 (2), 22.2 (12), 12.5 (13). 
IR (film, cm1) 2959, 2927, 2852, 1727, 1515, 1463, 1281, 1261, 1237, 1155, 1031, 765. 
HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C25H42N1O4 [M+H]
+ 420.3108, found 420.3108.  
(2S,3R)-3-Benzyl-2-((1-tosylpiperidin-4-yl)amino)pentyl pivalate (330f) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3S)-3-methyl-2-((1-tosylpiperidin-4-
yl)amino)pentyl pivalate (329f, 43.8 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromobenzoic acid. Purification by 
silica gel flash chromatography (1020% EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a 
colourless oil (330f, 39.8 mg, 0.077 mmol, 77% yield). []
. 7.6o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR 
(400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.64 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2H, 4), 7.32 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2H, 3), 7.27  7.21 (m, 
2H, 21), 7.19  7.13 (m, 1H, 22), 7.09 (d, J = 7.5 Hz, 2H, 20), 4.02 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 
11-Ha), 3.93 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 11-Hb), 3.65  3.56 (m, 2H, 6-Ha, 6-Ha), 2.84  2.77 
(m, 1H, 10), 2.71 (dd, J = 13.7, 7.0 Hz, 1H, 18-Ha), 2.53  2.36 (m, 7H, 1, 6-Hb, 6-Hb, 8, 18-
Hb), 1.87  1.75 (m, 2H, 7-Ha, 7-Ha), 1.74  1.65 (m, 1H, 15), 1.48  1.06 (m, 14H, 7-Hb, 7-
Hb, 9, 14, 16-Ha,b), 0.88 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 17). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (12), 
143.6 (2), 141.6 (19), 133.2 (5), 129.7 (3), 129.1 (20), 128.4 (21), 127.8 (4), 126.0 (22), 64.3 
(11), 53.9 (10), 51.2 (8), 45.1 (6), 45.0 (6), 43.9 (15), 38.9 (13), 36.1 (18), 32.8 (7), 32.3 (7), 
27.3 (14), 22.1 (16), 21.6 (1), 12.5 (17). IR (film, cm1) 2964, 2932, 2875, 1725, 1479, 1340, 
Experimental 
1284, 1164, 1092, 1047, 934, 727. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C29H43N2O4S1 [M+H]
515.2938, found 515.2931.  
(2S,3R)-3-Benzyl-2-(isopropylamino)pentyl pivalate (330h) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3S)-2-(isopropylamino)-3-methylpentyl 
pivalate (329h, 24.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromobenzoic acid. Purification by silica gel flash 
chromatography (410% EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a colourless oil (330h, 
17.9 mg, 0.056 mmol, 56% yield). []
. 1.8o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
 7.30  7.24 (m, 2H, 15), 7.20  7.13 (m, 3H, 14, 16), 4.12 (dd, J = 11.1, 5.9 Hz, 1H, 5-Ha), 
3.98 (dd, J = 11.1, 5.9 Hz, 1H, 5-Hb), 2.96  2.86 (m, 2H, 2, 4), 2.82 (dd, J = 13.6, 6.6 Hz, 1H, 
12-Ha), 2.45 (dd, J = 13.6, 7.7 Hz, 1H, 12-Hb), 1.82  1.71 (m, 1H, 9), 1.47  1.09 (m, 12H, 3, 
8, 10-Ha,b), 1.03 (app. t, J = 6.5 Hz, 6H, 1, 1), 0.91 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 11). 13C NMR (101 
MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (6), 141.9 (13), 129.2 (14), 128.4 (15), 125.9 (16), 64.9 (5), 54.3 (4), 46.2 
(2), 44.2 (9), 38.9 (7), 36.2 (12), 27.4 (8), 23.9 (1), 23.7 (1), 22.3 (10), 12.5 (11). IR (film, cm
1) 2963, 2933, 1730, 1479, 1463, 1380, 1282, 1154, 737, 699. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for 
C20H34N1O2 [M+H]
+ 320.2584, found 320.2587.  
(2S,3R)-3-Benzyl-2-(cyclohexylamino)pentyl benzoate (330k) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl 
benzoate (329k, 30.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromobenzoic acid. Purification by silica gel flash 
chromatography (5% EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a colourless oil (330k, 21.5 
Experimental  
mg, 0.057 mmol, 57% yield). []
. +10.4o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  
7.99 (d, J = 7.9 Hz, 2H, 10), 7.57 (app. t, J = 7.4 Hz, 1H, 12), 7.44 (app. t, J = 7.7 Hz, 2H, 11), 
7.30  7.24 (m, 2H, 19), 7.22  7.15 (m, 3H, 18, 20), 4.37 (dd, J = 11.1, 5.9 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.23 
(dd, J = 11.1, 6.2 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.12  3.06 (m, 1H, 6), 2.87 (dd, J = 13.7, 6.7 Hz, 1H, 16-Ha), 
2.60  2.49 (m, 2H, 4, 16-Hb), 1.90  1.79 (m, 3H, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 13), 1.78  1.67 (m, 2H, 2-Ha, 
2-Ha), 1.64  1.56 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.53  1.01 (m, 8H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 14-
Ha,b), 0.94 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 15). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  166.8 (8), 141.9 (17), 133.1 
(12), 130.4 (9), 129.7 (10), 129.2 (18), 128.5 (11), 128.4 (19), 125.9 (20), 65.8 (7), 54.5 (4), 
54.1 (6), 44.4 (13), 36.3 (16), 34.6 (3), 34.3 (3), 26.3 (1), 25.2(4) (2), 25.1(8) (2), 22.4 (14), 
12.5 (15). IR (film, cm1) 2931, 2852, 1719, 1451, 1271, 1112, 1026, 710. HRMS m/z (ESI) 
calcd for C25H34N1O2 [M+H]
+ 380.2584, found 380.2585.  
N-((2S,3R)-3-Benzyl-1-methoxypentan-2-yl)cyclohexanamine (330l) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from N-((2S,3S)-1-methoxy-3-methylpentan-2-
yl)cyclohexanamine (329l, 21.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromobenzoic acid. Purification by 
silica gel flash chromatography (1020% EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a pale 
yellow oil (330l 16.8 mg, 0.058 mmol, 58% yield). []
. +1.1o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 
MHz, CDCl3)  7.30  7.24 (m, 2H, 15), 7.20  7.13 (m, 3H, 14, 16), 3.43 (dd, J = 9.5, 4.7 Hz, 
1H, 7-Ha), 3.34  3.25 (m, 4H, 7-Hb, 8), 2.99  2.88 (m, 2H, 6, 12-Ha), 2.54  2.44 (m, 1H, 4), 
2.29 (dd, J = 13.6, 8.9 Hz, 1H, 12-Hb), 1.92  1.67 (m, 5H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 9), 1.64 
 1.56 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.37  0.98 (m, 8H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10-Ha,b), 0.86 (t, 
J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 11). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  142.5 (13), 129.3 (14), 128.3 (15), 125.7 
(16), 73.5 (7), 59.0 (8), 54.6 (6), 54.1 (4), 43.5 (9), 36.2 (12), 34.8 (3), 34.1 (3), 26.4 (1), 25.5 
(2), 25.4 (2), 22.6 (10), 12.4 (11). IR (film, cm1) 2925, 2852, 1494, 1450, 1109, 734, 699. 
HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C19H32N1O1 [M+H]
+ 290.2478, found 290.2480.  
Experimental 
2-((2S,3R)-3-Benzyl-2-(cyclohexylamino)pentyl)isoindoline-1,3-dione (330m) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B (note: reaction temperature was 70 oC) from 2-
((2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl)isoindoline-1,3-dione (329m, 32.8 mg, 0.10 
mmol) and 2-bromobenzoic acid. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (column 1: 
510% EtOAc in hexanes; column 2: 210% Et2O in DCM) gave the title compound as a 
colourless oil (330m, 21.4 mg, 0.053 mmol, 53% yield). []
. +8.6o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR 
(400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.85  7.78 (m, 2H, 10), 7.74  7.68 (m, 2H, 11), 7.20  7.14 (m, 2H, 18), 
7.13  7.07 (m, 3H, 17, 19), 3.70 (dd, J = 13.6, 5.8 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.59 (dd, J = 13.6, 8.1 Hz, 
1H, 7-Hb), 3.10  3.03 (m, 1H, 6), 2.83 (dd, J = 13.6, 6.4 Hz, 1H, 15-Ha), 2.50  2.40 (m, 2H, 
4, 15-Hb), 1.75  1.61 (m, 4H, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 12), 1.59  1.45 (m, 3H, 1-Ha, 2-Ha, 13-Ha), 
1.44  1.32 (m, 1H, 13-Hb), 1.29  0.93 (m, 8H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 14), 0.92  0.79 
(m, 1H, 3-Hb). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  168.9 (8), 142.0 (16), 134.0 (11), 132.2 (9), 
129.1 (17), 128.3 (18), 125.8 (19), 123.3 (10), 54.4 (4), 54.3 (6), 44.6 (12), 39.8 (7), 36.1 (15), 
34.5 (3), 34.0 (3), 26.2 (1), 25.0 (2), 24.9 (2), 22.8 (13), 12.6 (14). IR (film, cm1) 2928, 2851, 
1771, 1710, 1432, 1395, 722. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C26H33N2O2 [M+H]
+ 405.2537, found 
405.2535.  
Arylation of L-valine derivative 283 
(S)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-methylbutyl pivalate (283, 53.9 mg, 0.20 mmol) was subjected to 
General Procedure B (note: scale was doubled), using 2-bromobenzoic acid as the arylating 
agent. To hydrolyse CO coupled by-products, the crude material was re-dissolved in EtOH (2 
mL) and K2CO3 (83 mg, 0.60 mmol, 3 equiv) added. The reaction was stirred at room 
Experimental  
temperature for 2 h. The solvent was removed in vacuo and the resulting material analysed by 
1H NMR, indicating 40% yield mono-arylation (294, 1:1 d.r.), 20% di-arylation (295) and 39% 
remaining starting material (283). Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (010% Et2O 
in dichloromethane) enabled isolation of the arylated products. Mono-arylation: 294 
(diastereomer 1), colourless oil (8.9 mg, 0.026 mmol, 13% yield); 294 (diastereomer 2), 
colourless oil (7.0 mg, 0.020 mmol, 10% yield). Diarylation: 295, colourless oil (12.4 mg, 0.029 
mmol, 15% yield).  
(2S,3R/S)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-methyl-4-phenylbutyl pivalate (294) 
Diastereomer 1. []
. 6.1o (c 0.5, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.30  7.23 (m, 
2H, 16), 7.21  7.12 (m, 3H, 15, 17), 4.11  3.99 (m, 2H, 7-Ha,b), 2.91  2.81 (m, 2H, 6, 13-
Ha), 2.51 (tt, J = 10.3, 3.8 Hz, 1H, 4), 2.36 (dd, J = 13.3, 9.3 Hz, 1H, 13-Hb), 2.03  1.92 (m, 
1H, 11), 1.91  1.67 (m, 4H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.64  1.55 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.32  0.98 
(m, 15H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10), 0.85 (d, J = 6.9 Hz, 3H, 12). 13C NMR (101 
MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (8), 141.6 (14), 129.2 (15), 128.4 (16), 125.9 (17), 65.3 (7), 56.6 (6), 54.7 
(4), 39.6 (11), 38.9 (9), 37.1 (13), 34.7 (3), 34.3 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.3 (2), 25.1 (2), 
14.6 (12). IR (neat, cm1) 2927, 2850, 1729, 1479, 1455, 1282, 1156, 1031, 742, 699. HRMS 
m/z (ESI) calcd for C22H36N1O2 [M+H]
+ 346.2741, found 346.2743.   
Diastereomer 2. []
. +3.3o (c 0.5, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.30  7.25 (m, 
2H, 16), 7.21  7.14 (m, 3H, 15, 17), 4.21 (dd, J = 11.3, 5.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.02 (dd, J = 11.3, 
5.9 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.92 (dd, J = 13.3, 4.7 Hz, 1H, 13-Ha), 2.79 (app. q, J = 5.2 Hz, 1H, 6), 2.47 
(tt, J = 10.2, 3.7 Hz, 1H, 4), 2.32 (dd, J = 13.3, 9.9 Hz, 1H, 13-Hb), 1.97  1.80 (m, 2H, 3-Ha, 
11), 1.78  1.66 (m, 3H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.63  1.55 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.37  0.97 (m, 15H, 
1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10), 0.86 (d, J = 6.9 Hz, 3H, 12). 13C NMR (101 MHz, 
CDCl3)  178.8 (8), 141.5 (14), 129.2 (15), 128.4 (16), 125.9 (17), 64.9 (7), 57.2 (6), 54.6 (4), 
39.7 (11), 39.0 (9), 37.9 (13), 34.5 (3), 34.2 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.3 (2), 25.1 (2), 15.4 
Experimental 
(12). IR (neat, cm1) 2963, 2927, 2854, 1729, 1479, 1454, 1282, 1155, 1033, 700. HRMS m/z 
(ESI) calcd for C22H36N1O2 [M+H]
+ 346.2741, found 346.2743.  
(S)-3-Benzyl-2-(cyclohexylamino)-4-phenylbutyl pivalate (295) 
. 2.5o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.29  7.21 (m, 4H, 14, 14), 7.20 
 7.07 (m, 6H, 15, 15, 16, 16), 4.13 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.6 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.03 (dd, J = 11.1, 5.9 
Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.90  2.78 (m, 2H, 6, 12-Ha), 2.72 (dd, J = 13.7, 6.5 Hz, 1H, 12-Ha), 2.56  
2.45 (m, 2H, 12-Hb, 12-Hb), 2.41 (tt, J = 10.1, 3.6 Hz, 1H, 4), 2.26  2.17 (m, 1H, 11), 1.82  
1.52 (m, 5H, 1-Ha, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.32  1.10 (m, 13H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 5, 10), 
1.07  0.95 (m, 2H, 3-Hb, 3-Hb). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 141.5 (13), 141.2 
(13), 129.1(9) (15), 129.1(7) (15), 128.5 (14), 128.4 (14), 126.0(3) (16), 125.9(6) (16), 64.8 
(7), 54.4 (4), 53.4 (6), 44.5 (11), 38.9 (9), 36.0 (12), 35.8 (12), 34.5 (3), 34.2 (3), 27.4 (10), 
26.2 (1), 25.2 (2), 25.1 (2). IR (neat, cm1) 2928, 2854, 1729, 1453, 1282, 1151, 1031, 749. 
HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C28H40N1O2 [M+H]
+ 422.3054, found 422.3048.  
(2R,3R)-3-(tert-Butoxy)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-4-phenylbutyl pivalate (330n) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2R,3R)-3-(tert-butoxy)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-
butyl pivalate (329n, 32.8 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromobenzoic acid. Purification by silica gel 
flash chromatography (510% EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a colourless 
amorphous solid (330n, 26.3 mg, 0.065 mmol, 65% yield). []
. 18.1o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.29  7.23 (m, 2H, 17), 7.22  7.14 (m, 3H, 16, 18), 4.17 (dd, J = 
10.7, 5.4 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.92 (dd, J = 10.7, 8.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.83  3.76 (m, 1H, 11), 3.09 
Experimental  
(dd, J = 13.4, 7.8 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 2.82  2.76 (m, 1H, 6), 2.69 (dd, J = 13.4, 5.5 Hz, 1H, 14-
Hb), 2.53 (tt, J = 10.2, 3.8 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.89  1.67 (m, 4H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.64  
1.56 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.47  1.01 (m, 24H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 13). 13C NMR 
(101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.4 (8), 140.0 (15), 129.6 (16), 128.4 (17), 126.1 (18), 74.0 (12), 72.8 
(11), 63.8 (7), 54.8 (4), 54.6 (6), 39.0 (9), 38.8 (14), 34.7 (3), 34.1 (3), 28.8 (13), 27.3 (10), 
26.3 (1), 25.3 (2), 25.1 (2). IR (film, cm1) 2973, 2927, 2854, 1731, 1453, 1364, 1282, 1152, 
1085, 744, 699. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C25H42N1O3 [M+H]
+ 404.3159, found 404.3158.  
(2S,3S)-3-Benzyl-2-(cyclohexylamino)pentyl pivalate (330o) 
Synthesised using General Procedure B from (2S,3R)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl 
pivalate (329o, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol) and 2-bromobenzoic acid. Purification by silica gel flash 
chromatography (column 1: 510% EtOAc in hexanes; column 2: 510% Et2O in 
dichloromethane) gave the title compound as a colourless oil (330o, 16.3 mg, 0.045 mmol, 45% 
yield). []
. +0.4o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.30  7.23 (m, 2H, 17), 
7.21  7.13 (m, 3H, 16, 18), 4.15 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.03 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 
1H, 7-Hb), 2.94  2.88 (m, 1H, 6), 2.74 (dd, J = 13.8, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 2.53  2.36 (m, 2H, 
4, 14-Hb), 1.87  1.76 (m, 1H, 3-Ha), 1.76  1.63 (m, 4H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.61  1.54 
(m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.53  1.41 (m, 1H, 12-Ha), 1.34  0.93 (m, 16H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-
Hb, 5, 10, 12-Hb), 0.87 (t, J = 7.3 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (8), 141.8 
(15), 129.2 (16), 128.4 (17), 125.9 (18), 65.2 (7), 54.7 (4), 53.9 (6), 44.3 (11), 39.0 (9), 36.1 
(14), 34.6 (3), 34.2 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.3 (2), 25.1 (2), 22.2 (12), 12.3 (13). IR (film, 
cm1) 2929, 2854, 1729, 1479, 1451, 1282, 1154, 738, 699. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for 
C23H38N1O2 [M+H]
+ 360.2897, found 360.2899.  
Experimental 
Pd-catalyzed Formation of Dibenzoazepinone Product 
8-Bromo-6-(tetrahydro-2H-pyran-4-yl)-6,7-dihydro-5H-dibenzo[c,e]azepin-5-one (347) 
To a 25 mL microwave vial containing a 10 mm magnetic stirrer bar were added Pd(OPiv)2 
(3.1 mg, 0.02 mmol, 10 mol%), AgOAc (33.4 mg, 0.2 mmol, 2 equiv) and aryl iodide 344 (43.4 
mg, 0.15 mmol, 1.5 equiv). Under air, a solution of amine 342 (27.0 mg, 0.1 mmol, 1 equiv) in 
CHCl3 (1 mL) was added via syringe and the vial sealed with a crimp cap with silicone/PTFE 
septum. The vial was placed in an oil bath pre-heated to 80 oC, and the reaction stirred at this 
temperature for 16 h. After cooling to room temperature, the reaction was filtered through a 
short plug of Celite and the filtrate concentrated in vacuo. The crude residue was purified by 
silica gel flash chromatography (1040% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to give the title compound 
as a colourless crystalline solid (347, 24.0 mg, 0.065 mmol, 65% yield). 1H NMR (400 MHz, 
CDCl3)  7.99 (d, J = 7.5 Hz, 1H, 3), 7.61 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 1H, 17), 7.57  7.47 (m, 3H, 4, 14, 
15), 7.43 (d, J = 7.3 Hz, 1H, 5), 7.29 (t, J = 7.8 Hz, 1H, 16), 4.87  4.76 (m, 2H, 7-Ha, 8), 4.16 
 4.05 (m, 2H, 7-Hb, 10-Ha), 3.99 (dd, J = 11.5, 4.5 Hz, 1H, 10-Ha), 3.57 (t, J = 11.0 Hz, 1H, 
10-Hb), 3.48 (t, J = 11.0 Hz, 1H, 10-Hb), 2.23 (qd, J = 11.9, 4.6 Hz, 1H, 9-Ha), 2.10 (qd, J = 
11.9, 4.6 Hz, 1H, 9-Ha), 1.75  1.67 (m, 1H, 9-Hb), 1.50  1.43 (m, 1H, 9-Hb). 13C NMR (101 
MHz, CDCl3)  168.3 (11), 141.3 (1), 138.4 (6), 136.6 (12), 135.1 (13), 132.4 (17), 130.7 (4), 
130.4 (3), 129.7 (16), 129.0 (5), 128.4 (two signals overlapping, 14, 15), 121.6 (2), 67.8 (10), 
67.5 (10), 51.9 (8), 44.9 (7), 31.7 (9), 30.4 (9). IR (neat, cm1) 2964, 2837, 1628, 1442, 1285, 
1143, 1084, 1001, 855, 755. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C19H19Br1N1O2 [M+H]
+ 372.0599, 
found 372.0592.  
Experimental  
6.2.3. Stable PdIV Complexes Derived from Cyclopalladated Amines & Oximes 
Synthesis of Amine-derived Alkyl PdIV Complexes  
Pyridine-ligated palladacycle 332 
A solution of (S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3,3-dimethylbutyl pivalate (284, 283 mg, 1.00 mmol, 1 
equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (337 mg, 1.50 mmol, 1.5 equiv) in chloroform (10 mL) was stirred under 
air in a sealed vial at 50 oC for 6 h. The reaction was cooled to room temperature, passed through 
a pad of Celite and pyridine (161 L, 2.00 mmol, 2 equiv) added. The reaction was concentrated 
in vacuo to give the crude pyridine-ligated palladacycle 332. The material was triturated in 
hexanes and the suspension filtered through Celite (repeated three times). The filtrate was 
concentrated in vacuo and dried under vacuum to afford 332 as a viscous yellow oil (80% yield 
by NMR). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  8.54  8.49 (m, 2H, 16), 7.72 (tt, J = 7.6, 1.6 Hz, 1H, 
18), 7.29  7.24 (m, 2H, 17), 5.42 (d, J = 9.0 Hz, 1H, 5), 4.33 (dd, J = 12.2, 4.2 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 
4.05 (dd, J = 12.2, 6.4 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.71  2.56 (m, 2H, 4, 6), 2.26  2.19 (m, 2H, 3-Ha,b), 
1.95 (s, 3H, 15), 1.91  1.82 (m, 3H, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 13-Ha), 1.81  1.56 (m, 3H, 1-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-
Hb), 1.46 (s, 3H, 12), 1.32 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 1H, 13-Hb), 1.25  1.20 (m, 12H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 
10), 0.94 (s, 3H, 12). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.3 (8), 177.7 (14), 152.3 (16), 137.1 
(18), 124.8 (17), 69.2 (6), 64.9 (7), 62.1 (4), 45.7 (11), 38.8 (9), 38.1 (13), 35.1 (3), 31.1 (3), 
28.2 (12), 27.2 (10), 25.9 (2), 25.7 (2), 25.4 (1), 25.2 (12), 24.4 (15). IR (film, cm1) 2956, 
2929, 2857, 1728, 1603, 1557, 1448, 1364, 1278, 1148, 1033, 758, 696. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd 
for C22H37N2O2Pd1 [MOAc]
+ 467.1884, found 467.1890.  
Experimental 
Amine-derived PdIV complex 352 
332 (0.80 mmol, 1 equiv) was dissolved in dichloromethane (10 mL) and pyridine added 
(161 L, 2.00 mmol, 2.5 equiv). The solution was transferred to a vial containing 2-iodo-1,3-
benzenedicarboxylic acid (351, 350 mg, 1.20 mmol, 1.5 equiv) and AgOAc (200 mg, 1.20 
mmol, 1.5 equiv). The resulting suspension was stirred at room temperature for 16 h. The 
reaction was filtered through a pad of Celite and the filtrate concentrated in vacuo. The residue 
was dissolved in dichloromethane (100 mL) and washed with sat. aq. NaHCO3 (50 mL). The 
organic phase was separated, and the aqueous phase re-extracted with dichloromethane (100 
mL). The combined organics were dried over MgSO4, filtered and concentrated in vacuo to 
give the product as a solution (<5 mL) in residual dichloromethane. The complex was 
precipitated by adding hexanes (50 mL). The precipitate was isolated by decanting the mother 
liquor to afford PdIV complex 352 as an off-white solid (425 mg, 0.673 mmol, 84% yield). 1H 
NMR (600 MHz, CDCl3)  8.77 (d, J = 4.5 Hz, 2H, 19), 7.81 (t, J = 7.2 Hz, 1H, 21), 7.49 (dd, 
J = 7.5, 1.3 Hz, 1H, 16), 7.46  7.37 (m, 3H, 16, 20), 7.19 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 1H, 17), 4.48 (dd, J 
= 12.9, 3.6 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.18 (dd, J = 12.9, 3.4 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.58 (d, J = 6.5 Hz, 1H, 13-
Ha), 3.49 (d, J = 10.3 Hz, 1H, 5), 3.23 (dt, J = 10.4, 3.5 Hz, 1H, 6), 2.89 (d, J = 6.5 Hz, 1H, 13-
Hb), 2.87  2.76 (m, 1H, 4), 2.05  1.97 (m, 1H, 3-Ha), 1.70  1.60 (m, 2H, 2-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.48 
 1.38 (m, 2H, 1-Ha, 2-Ha), 1.25  1.10 (m, 16H, 3-Hb, 10, 12, 12), 1.10  0.94 (m, 2H, 1-Hb, 
2-Hb), 0.61 (qd, J = 12.0, 2.3 Hz, 1H, 3-Hb), 0.45 (qt, J = 13.1, 3.1 Hz, 1H, 2-Hb). 13C NMR 
(101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.1 (8), 177.1 (18), 176.6 (18), 165.1 (14), 148.2 (19), 139.2 (21), 
134.1 (15), 133.9 (15), 133.3 (16), 133.1 (16), 126.3 (17), 126.0 (20), 65.0 (13), 63.0 (6), 61.6 
(7), 57.9 (4), 46.6 (11), 39.0 (9), 32.3 (3), 31.0 (3), 28.1 (12), 27.3 (10), 25.4 (1), 25.3 (2), 
25.1 (2), 22.5 (12). IR (neat, cm1) 2936, 2856, 1728, 1662, 1614, 1569, 1447, 1287, 1148, 
1117, 1068, 1011, 937, 755. Elemental analysis calcd for C30H40N2O6Pd1 C: 57.10 H: 6.39 N: 
4.44, found C: 56.79 H: 6.45 N: 4.45.  
Experimental  
Amine-derived PdIV complex 353 
A solution of (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (297, 283 mg, 1.00 mmol, 
1 equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (337 mg, 1.50 mmol, 1.5 equiv) in chloroform (10 mL) was stirred under 
air in a sealed vial at 50 oC for 6 h. The reaction was cooled to room temperature, passed through 
a Celite plug and pyridine (161 L, 2.00 mmol, 2 equiv) added. The reaction was concentrated 
in vacuo to give the crude pyridine-ligated palladacycle 299. The material was triturated in 
hexane and the suspension filtered through Celite. The filtrate was concentrated in vacuo and 
dried under vacuum to afford 299 as a viscous yellow oil (quantitative yield by NMR; spectral 
data reported previously in the Experimental).  
299 (1.00 mmol, 1 equiv) was dissolved in acetonitrile (10 mL) and pyridine added (161 
L, 2.00 mmol, 2 equiv). The solution was transferred to a vial containing 2-iodo-1,3-
benzenedicarboxylic acid (351, 350 mg, 1.20 mmol, 1.2 equiv) and AgOAc (200 mg, 1.20 
mmol, 1.2 equiv) in acetonitrile (10 mL). The resulting suspension was stirred under air at room 
temperature for 16 h, changing colour from bright yellow to off-white. The reaction was filtered 
through a pad of Celite and the filtrate concentrated in vacuo. The residue was dissolved in 
dichloromethane (200 mL) followed addition of pyridine (0.2 mL) and water (100 mL). The 
organic phase was separated, and the aqueous phase re-extracted twice with dichloromethane 
(100 mL each). The combined organics were dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent 
removed in vacuo to give the crude product as a yellow residue. The complex was precipitated 
by adding Et2O (5 mL) followed by hexanes (50 mL). Separation of the precipitate by decanting 
the mother liquor afforded PdIV complex 353 as an off-white solid (530 mg, 0.840 mmol, 84% 
yield). 1H NMR (600 MHz, CDCl3)  8.70  8.64 (m, 2H, 20), 7.82 (tt, J = 7.7, 1.4 Hz, 1H, 
22), 7.56 (dd, J = 7.5, 1.3 Hz, 1H, 17), 7.47  7.39 (m, 3H, 17, 21), 7.23 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 1H, 
18), 4.51  4.41 (m, 2H, 7-Ha,b), 3.65 (d, J = 6.1 Hz, 1H, 5), 3.42 (dd, J = 12.2, 6.6 Hz, 1H, 14-
Ha), 3.39  3.32 (m, 1H, 6), 3.01 (t, J = 5.8 Hz, 1H, 14-Hb), 2.69  2.56 (m, 2H, 4, 11), 2.16  
2.07 (m, 1H, 3-Ha), 1.74  1.64 (m, 2H, 2-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.57  1.42 (m, 4H, 1-Ha, 2-Ha, 12-
Ha,b), 1.26  1.17 (s, 9H, 10), 1.15  0.99 (m, 5H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 13), 0.97  0.80 (m, 3H, 2-Hb, 
Experimental 
3-Hb, 3-Hb). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  179.1 (8), 177.2 (19), 176.8 (19), 164.3 (15), 
148.2 (20), 139.1 (22), 134.4 (16), 134.2 (16), 133.3 (17), 133.2 (17), 126.4 (18), 126.1 (21), 
63.1 (7), 59.6 (6), 59.2 (4), 56.7 (14), 51.1 (11), 39.0 (9), 33.3 (3), 31.6 (3), 27.4 (10), 25.6 (2), 
25.2(9) (1 or 2), 25.2(8) (1 or 2), 23.2 (12), 12.7 (13). IR (film, cm1) 2934, 2855, 1727, 1658, 
1603, 1568, 1447, 1289, 1144, 1115, 1057, 1013, 753, 699. Elemental analysis calcd for 
C30H40N2O6Pd1 C: 57.10 H: 6.39 N: 4.44, found C: 56.72 H: 6.59 N: 4.14.  
Thermal Decomposition of Alkyl PdIV Complex 352 
(S)-(1-Cyclohexyl-3,3-dimethylazetidin-2-yl)methyl pivalate (286) 
Amine-PdIV complex 352 (31.6 mg, 0.05 mmol) in acetonitrile-d3 (2 mL) was stirred in a sealed 
tube at 50 oC for 20 h. After cooling to room temperature, the reaction was analysed by 1H 
NMR. A single amine product was observed, indicating a selective reductive elimination event 
from the PdIV starting material. Pyridine (20 L, 0.25 mmol, 5 equiv) was added and the 
insoluble PdII product 358 isolated by filtration. The filtrate was concentrated in vacuo, and 
dichloromethane (20 mL) and sat. aq. NaHCO3 (20 mL) added. The organic phase was washed, 
separated, and the aqueous phase was re-extracted with dichloromethane (20 mL). The 
combined organics were dried over MgSO4, filtered and concentrated in vacuo. Purification by 
silica gel flash chromatography (1015% ethyl acetate in hexanes) afforded azetidine product 
as a colourless oil (286, 12.9 mg, 0.045 mmol, 91% yield). []
. 54.3o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.23 (dd, J = 11.2, 4.7 Hz, 1H, 6-Ha), 4.03 (dd, J = 11.2, 9.3 Hz, 
1H, 6-Hb), 3.15 (d, J = 7.0 Hz, 1H, 12-Ha), 3.01 (dd, J = 9.3, 4.7 Hz, 1H, 5), 2.62 (d, J = 7.0 
Hz, 1H, 12-Hb), 2.11  2.01 (m, 1H, 4), 1.91  1.82 (m, 1H, 3-Ha), 1.76  1.64 (m, 3H, 2-Ha, 
2-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.62  1.54 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.29  1.08 (m, 18 H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 9, 11, 11), 
1.08  0.88 (m, 2H, 3-Hb, 3-Hb). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.3 (7), 70.2 (5), 67.1 (4), 
65.1 (6), 63.7 (12), 38.8 (8), 32.6 (10), 31.4 (3), 29.9 (3), 29.1 (11), 27.4 (9), 26.0 (1), 24.8 (2, 
2), 22.5 (11). IR (film, cm1) 2929, 2855, 1732, 1480, 1462, 1368, 1281, 1148, 1033. HRMS 
m/z (ESI) calcd for C17H32N1O2 [M+H]
+ 282.2428, found 282.2428.  
Experimental  
Bis(pyridyl)-PdII By-product 358 
The filtered solid material was triturated in dichloromethane and recrystallized from boiling 
methanol to give the title compound as a colourless crystalline solid (358, 14.6 mg, 0.034 mmol, 
68% yield). IR (film, cm1) 2922, 2750, 1707, 1602, 1448, 1349, 1260, 1135, 1065, 885, 766, 
755, 695. Elemental analysis calcd for C18H14N2O4Pd1 C: 50.43 H: 3.29 N: 6.53, found C: 
50.01 H: 3.21 N: 6.29. Note: DMSO-d6 was the only NMR solvent that 358 had adequate 
solubility in. The 1H NMR spectrum showed broad, unresolved signals, presumably due to the 
reversible displacement of pyridine by DMSO-d6. Hence, NMR data are not reported. Structure 
was confirmed by X-ray crystallography. 
Reaction of Alkyl PdIV Complex 353 with Nucleophiles 
General Procedure C. Alkyl PdIV complex 353 (31.6 mg, 0.05 mmol, 1 equiv) and the 
tetrabutylammonium or sodium salt of the nucleophile (310 equiv) were stirred in acetonitrile 
(210 mL) at room temperature for 16 h. The solvent was then evaporated, followed by the 
addition of dichloromethane (20 mL) and sat. aq. NaHCO3 (10 mL). The organic phase was 
separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and concentrated in vacuo. The crude material was 
analysed by 1H NMR in CDCl3 to determine the relative quantities of  C(sp
3)X coupling 
product, -H elimination (321) and azetidine (363). Reactions were purified by silica gel flash 
chromatography. 
Experimental 
(2S,3S)-3-(Acetoxymethyl)-2-(cyclohexylamino)pentyl pivalate (317) 
Following General Procedure C, complex 353 (0.05 mmol) was reacted with 
tetrabutylammonium acetate (45 mg, 0.15 mmol, 3 equiv) in acetonitrile (2 mL). The title 
compound was isolated by silica gel flash chromatography (1020% Et2O in hexanes) as a 
colourless oil (317, 12.8 mg, 0.037 mmol, 75% yield). The spectral data are presented 
previously in the Experimental section.  
(2S,3S)-3-(Cyclohexylamino)-2-ethyl-4-(pivaloyloxy)butyl benzoate (359) 
Following General Procedure C, complex 353 (0.05 mmol) was reacted with 
tetrabutylammonium benzoate (55 mg, 0.15 mmol, 3 equiv) in acetonitrile (2 mL). The title 
compound was isolated by silica gel flash chromatography (25% Et2O in dichloromethane) as 
a colourless oil (359, 14.0 mg, 0.035 mmol, 69% yield). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  8.04  
8.00 (m, 2H, 17), 7.56 (tt, J = 7.4, 1.3 Hz, 1H, 19), 7.44 (app. t, J = 7.4 Hz, 2H, 18), 4.44  4.35 
(m, 2H, 14-Ha,b), 4.20 (dd, J = 11.2, 5.7 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.05 (dd, J = 11.2, 5.9 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 
3.10 (td, J = 5.7, 4.2 Hz, 1H, 6), 2.50 (tt, J = 10.0, 3.7 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.91  1.64 (m, 5H, 2-Ha, 2-
Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.63  1.51 (m, 2H, 1-Ha, 12-Ha), 1.49  1.37 (m, 1H, 12-Hb), 1.30  0.95 
(m, 18H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 
166.7 (15), 133.0 (19), 130.5 (16), 129.6 (17), 128.6 (18), 65.0 (7), 64.8 (14), 54.5 (4), 54.1 (6), 
42.0 (11), 39.0 (9), 34.5 (3), 34.1 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.2 (1), 25.2 (2), 25.0 (2), 20.3 (12), 12.6 
(13). IR (film, cm1) 2964, 2928, 2853, 1717, 1451, 1271, 1150, 1111, 1027, 909, 731. HRMS 
m/z (ESI) calcd for C24H38N1O4 [M+H]
+ 404.2795, found 404.2815.   
Experimental  
(2S,3S)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-(phenoxymethyl)pentyl pivalate (360) 
Following General Procedure C, complex 353 (0.05 mmol) was reacted with 
tetrabutylammonium phenoxide (51 mg, 0.15 mmol, 3 equiv) in acetonitrile (2 mL). The 
reaction mixture was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (210% Et2O in hexanes) to 
give a 40:60 mixture of 360:321 (14.7 mg, 92% recovery). The NMR data of 360 were identified 
from the product mixture. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.32  7.26 (m, 2H, 17), 6.98  6.89 
(m, 3H, 16, 18), 4.23 (dd, J = 11.3, 5.5 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 4.09  3.96 (m, 3H, 7-Ha,b, 14-Hb), 
3.18  3.11 (m, 1H, 6), 2.51 (tt, J = 10.1, 3.8 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.96  0.87 (m, 26H, 1-Ha,b, 2-Ha,b, 
2-Ha,b, 3-Ha,b, 3-Ha,b, 5, 10, 11, 12-Ha,b, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (8), 159.1 
(15), 129.5 (17), 120.7 (18), 114.7 (16), 67.4 (14), 65.4 (7), 54.7 (4), 54.4 (6), 42.4 (11), 39.0 
(9), 34.5 (3), 34.2 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.3 (2), 25.1 (2), 20.3 (12), 12.6 (13). 
(2S,3S)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-((4-nitrophenoxy)methyl)pentyl pivalate (361) 
Following General Procedure C, complex 353 (0.05 mmol) was reacted with 
tetrabutylammonium p-nitrophenoxide (57 mg, 0.15 mmol, 3 equiv) in acetonitrile (2 mL). The 
title compound was isolated by silica gel flash chromatography (020% Et2O in hexanes) as a 
colourless oil (361, 13.2 mg, 0.031 mmol, 63% yield). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  8.19 (d, 
J = 9.3 Hz, 2H, 17), 6.96 (d, J = 9.3 Hz, 2H, 16), 4.22  4.13 (m, 2H, 7-Ha, 14-Ha), 4.07 (dd, J 
= 9.2, 4.5 Hz, 1H, 14-Hb), 4.01 (dd, J = 11.3, 6.6 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.13 (td, J = 6.0, 4.0 Hz, 1H, 
6), 2.47 (tt, J = 10.2, 3.7 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.92  1.84 (m, 1H, 11), 1.83  1.39 (m, 7H, 1-Ha, 2-Ha, 
Experimental 
2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 12-Ha,b), 1.30  0.84 (m, 17H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 10, 13). 13C 
NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 164.2 (15), 141.6 (18), 126.1 (17), 114.6 (16), 68.4 (14), 
65.0 (7), 54.6 (4), 54.0 (6), 42.3 (11), 39.0 (9), 34.5 (3), 34.2 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.2 (1), 25.2 (2), 
25.0 (2), 20.1 (12), 12.6 (13). IR (film, cm1) 2964, 2928, 2853, 1723, 1593, 1513, 1340, 1260, 
1152, 1111, 1015, 908, 845, 729. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C23H37N2O5 [M+H]
+ 421.2697, 
found 421.2697.  
(2S,3R)-3-(Azidomethyl)-2-(cyclohexylamino)pentyl pivalate (362) 
Following General Procedure C, complex 353 (0.05 mmol) was reacted with sodium azide (33 
mg, 0.50 mmol, 10 equiv) in acetonitrile (10 mL). Note: work-up was conducted using ethyl 
acetate rather than dichloromethane. The title compound was isolated by silica gel flash 
chromatography (5% Et2O in dichloromethane) as a colourless oil (363, 12.7 mg, 0.039 mmol, 
78% yield). 1H NMR (600 MHz, CDCl3)  4.08 (dd, J = 11.2, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.99 (dd, J = 
11.2, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.46 (dd, J = 12.1, 7.2 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 3.35 (dd, J = 12.1, 6.2 Hz, 1H, 
14-Hb), 3.00 (td, J = 6.0, 4.0 Hz, 1H, 6), 2.46 (tt, J = 10.3, 3.6 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.89  1.84 (m, 1H, 
3-Ha), 1.78  1.67 (m, 3H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.62  1.55 (m, 2H, 1-Ha, 11), 1.52  1.44 (m, 
1H, 12-Ha), 1.33  0.90 (m, 18H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 10, 12-Hb, 13), 0.73 (br. s, 
1H, 5). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 64.8 (7), 54.6 (4), 53.8 (6), 52.0 (14), 42.4 
(11), 39.0 (9), 34.6 (3), 34.1 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.2 (1), 25.3 (2), 25.0 (2), 20.5 (12), 12.4 (13). 
IR (film, cm1) 2962, 2927, 2853, 2095, 1727, 1450, 1280, 1148, 1033, 910, 733. HRMS m/z 
(ESI) calcd for C17H33N4O2 [M+H]
+ 325.2598, found 325.2614.  
Experimental  
((2S,3R)-1-Cyclohexyl-3-ethylazetidin-2-yl)methyl pivalate (363) 
Following General Procedure C, complex 353 (0.05 mmol) was reacted with sodium iodide (38 
mg, 0.25 mmol, 5 equiv) in acetonitrile (5 mL). The title compound was isolated by silica gel 
flash chromatography (10% ethyl acetate in hexanes) as a colourless oil (363, 11.0 mg, 0.039 
mmol, 78% yield). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.18 (dd, J = 11.3, 4.8 Hz, 1H, 6-Ha), 4.10 
(dd, J = 11.3, 8.7 Hz, 1H, 6-Hb), 3.38 (td, J = 8.4, 4.8 Hz, 1H, 5), 3.10 (dd, J = 7.5, 2.9 Hz, 1H, 
13-Ha), 2.96 (app. t, J = 7.9 Hz, 1H, 13-Hb), 2.19 (quintet of d, J = 7.9, 2.8 Hz, 1H, 10), 2.07 
(tt, J = 10.7, 3.5 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.90  1.81 (m, 1H, 3-Ha), 1.77  1.62 (m, 5H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 
11-Ha,b), 1.61  1.54 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.28  0.81 (m, 17H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 9, 
12). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.5 (7), 66.4 (4), 64.6 (6), 63.4 (5), 54.9 (13), 38.8 (8), 
33.1 (10), 31.4 (3), 29.9 (3), 27.3 (9), 26.1 (1), 24.8(0) (2), 24.7(9) (2), 22.4 (11), 11.9 (12). 
IR (film, cm1) 2958, 2928, 2854, 1730, 1480, 1368, 1280, 1148, 1034, 980, 733. HRMS m/z 
(ESI) calcd for C17H32N1O2 [M+H]
+ 282.2428, found 282.2442. 
Synthesis of Oxime-derived Alkyl PdIV Complex 
Oxime-derived PdIV complex 366a/b 
A solution of (E)-3,3-dimethylbutan-2-one O-benzyl oxime (364, 61.6 mg, 0.30 mmol, 1 equiv) 
and Pd(OAc)2 (74.1 mg, 0.33 mmol, 1.1 equiv) in chloroform (3 mL) was stirred under air in a 
Experimental 
sealed vial at 80 oC for 16 h. The reaction was cooled to room temperature and passed through 
a pad of Celite. The filtrate was concentrated in vacuo to give the crude dimeric palladacycle 
365 as a brown residue (75:25 mixture of 365:364 by NMR; used directly in next step).  
Crude 365 was dissolved in CD3CN (6 mL) and transferred to a vial containing 2-
iodoisophthalic acid (351, 105 mg, 0.36 mmol, 1.2 equiv) and Ag2CO3 (99 mg, 0.36 mmol, 1.2 
equiv). The resulting suspension was stirred under air at room temperature for 2 h (70% yield 
of 366a by NMR). The reaction was filtered through a pad of Celite and the filtrate concentrated 
in vacuo. The residue was dissolved in dichloromethane (30 mL) and a spatula of 
K2CO3/MgSO4 (1:1) added. After swirling the suspension for ca. 1 min, the reaction was filtered 
and concentrated in vacuo. The resulting yellow residue was diluted with hexanes (30 mL) to 
precipitate the product. Separation of the precipitate by decanting the mother liquor afforded 
alkyl PdIV complex 366b as a pale-yellow solid (91.9 mg, 0.187 mmol, 62% yield). IR (film, 
cm1) 3308 (br., vOH), 2940, 1637, 1614, 1570, 1306, 1156, 1119, 1018, 987, 744, 699. 
Elemental analysis calcd for C21H23N1O6Pd1 C: 51.28 H: 4.71 N: 2.85, found C: 51.55 H: 4.59 
N: 2.78. Note: Elemental analysis of the isolated material indicated that the bound acetonitrile 
had been removed by evaporation (low %N), and that the complex obtained corresponded to 
the monohydrate 366b (associated water observed by IR). Unfortunately, attempts to crystallise 
366b were unsuccessful and therefore the precise configuration of this complex is not known. 
Subsequent reactions using 366b were carried out in coordinating solvent, and/or with an 
added nucleophile, restoring a monomeric octahedral complex in solution. 
Spectral data for 366a generated from dissolving isolated 366b in CD3CN are as 
follows: 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3CN)  7.59  7.54 (m, 2H, 3), 7.49  7.35 (m, 6H, 1, 2, 13, 
14), 5.30 (s, 2H, 5), 3.52 (s, 2H, 10), 1.85 (s, 3H, 7), 1.19 (s, 6H, 9). 13C NMR (101 MHz, 
CD3CN)  183.6 (6), 176.5 (15), 163.5 (11), 136.6 (12), 136.5 (4), 133.1 (13), 130.5 (3), 129.7 
(1), 129.5 (2), 127.6 (14), 77.4 (5), 65.3 (10), 51.8 (8), 26.4 (9), 13.6 (7).  
Experimental  
Reaction of Complex 366 with Nucleophile 369 
Anionic alkyl PdIV complex 370 
To PdIV complex 366b (20.0 mg, 0.041 mmol, 1 equiv) in acetonitrile-d3 (0.7 mL; 366a formed 
in solution) was added tetrabutylammonium p-nitrophenoxide 369 (15.5 mg, 0.041 mmol, 1 
equiv) under air at room temperature. The resulting yellow solution was immediately 
transferred to an NMR tube for analysis. NMR spectra were recorded at 298 K. Quantitative 
conversion to a new species was observed. Based on 1H, 13C, 2D COSY, HSQC, HMBC and 
NOESY NMR experiments and HRMS analysis, the product was identified as the anionic PdIV 
complex 370. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CD3CN)  7.79 (d, J = 9.2 Hz, 2H, 18), 7.45  7.25 (m, 8H, 
1, 2, 3), 6.32 (d, J = 9.2 Hz, 2H, 17), 5.43 (s, 2H, 5), 3.18 (s, 2H, 10), 3.14  3.05 (m, 8H, 20), 
1.98 (s, 3H, 7), 1.67  1.56 (m, 8H, 21), 1.36 (sextet, J = 7.4 Hz, 8H, 22), 1.27 (s, 6H, 9), 0.98 
(t, J = 7.4 Hz, 12H, 23). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CD3CN)  181.2 (6), 178.9 (16), 176.8 (15), 
165.0 (11), 137.1 (4), 136.8 (12), 134.2 (19), 132.2 (13), 130.5 (3), 129.2(2) (1), 129.2(0) (2), 
127.0 (18), 126.5 (14), 120.6 (17), 76.7 (5), 59.2 (1:1:1 t, 1JCN = 2.9 Hz, 20), 57.3 (10), 50.5 
(8), 27.0 (9), 24.2 (21), 20.3 (1:1:1 t, 3JCN = 1.5 Hz, 22), 13.7 (23), 13.5 (7). HRMS m/z (ESI) 
calcd for C27H25N2O8Pd1 [Pd
IV] 611.0646, found 611.0649.  
(E)-3,3-dimethyl-4-(4-nitrophenoxy)butan-2-one O-benzyl oxime (371) 
To a vial containing PdIV complex 366b (4.9 mg, 0.01 mmol, 1 equiv) and tetrabutylammonium 
p-nitrophenoxide 369 (7.6 mg, 0.02 mmol, 2 equiv) were added CD3CN (0.5 mL) and anisole 
Experimental 
(ca. 1 L, internal standard). The solution (containing 1 equiv 370 and 1 equiv 369 which 
instantaneously form) was transferred to a screw-top NMR tube and inserted into a pre-heated 
NMR spectrometer at 50 oC. Monitoring the reaction by 1H NMR, after 6 h, 371 was obtained 
as the sole product in quantitative yield. Note: 371 was isolated by column chromatography (0
10% diethyl ether in hexanes) from combined samples of the kinetic studies (see Appendix II). 
Compound was a colourless oil. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  8.19 (d, J = 9.3 Hz, 2H, 13), 
7.35  7.26 (m, 5H, 1, 2, 3), 6.92 (d, J = 9.3 Hz, 2H, 12), 5.07 (s, 2H, 5), 4.01 (s, 2H, 10), 1.88 
(s, 3H, 7), 1.24 (s, 6H, 9). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  164.4 (11), 160.4 (6), 141.6 (14), 
138.4 (4), 128.4 (2), 128.2 (3), 127.7 (1), 126.0 (13), 114.7 (12), 75.8 (5), 75.2 (10), 41.2 (8), 
23.1 (9), 11.0 (7). IR (film, cm1) 2972, 2929, 2874, 1607, 1593, 1512, 1497, 1341, 1262, 1112, 
1035, 845, 752. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C19H23N2O4 [M+H]
+ 343.1658, found 343.1656.  
Functionalization of Benzylamine-derived Palladacycles  
Synthesis of ortho-functionalized products 387 and 388 
A solution of N-(2-phenylpropan-2-yl)tetrahydro-2H-pyran-4-amine (21.9 mg, 0.10 mmol, 1 
equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (26.9 mg, 0.12 mmol, 1.2 equiv) in CDCl3 (2 mL) was heated at 50 
oC in 
a sealed tube under air for 6 h. After cooling to room temperature, the chloroform was removed 
in vacuo to give the crude palladacycle dimer 384.  
Under a nitrogen atmosphere, pyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid (385, 33.4 mg, 0.20 mmol, 
2 equiv) and dry DMSO (2 mL) were added to crude 384 and the reaction stirred at room 
temperature for 0.5 h. Following this, 1-fluoro-2,4,6-trimethylpyridinium tetrafluoroborate 
(386, 68.1 mg, 0.30 mmol, 3 equiv) was added and the reaction stirred at room temperature for 
Experimental  
3 h. The DMSO was evaporated under a stream of air, and dichloromethane (20 mL) and 
NaHCO3 (10 mL) added. The organic phase was washed, separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered 
and the solvent evaporated. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography 
(10100% ethyl acetate in hexanes then 15% methanol in dichloromethane).  
2-(2-((Tetrahydro-2H-pyran-4-yl)amino)propan-2-yl)phenol (387) 
The title compound was isolated as a brown oil (387, 4.9 mg, 0.021 mmol, 21% yield). 1H 
NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  12.19 (br. s, 1H, 7), 7.15 (t, J = 7.7 Hz, 1H, 5), 7.08 (d, J = 7.7 Hz, 
1H, 3), 6.83  6.74 (m, 2H, 4, 6), 3.92  3.82 (m, 2H, 13-Ha), 3.31 (t, J = 11.6 Hz, 2H, 13-Hb), 
2.81 (tt, J = 11.0, 4.2 Hz, 1H, 11), 1.75  1.39 (m, 11H, 9, 10, 12-Ha,b). 13C NMR (101 MHz, 
CDCl3)  157.7 (1), 130.7 (2), 128.8 (5), 125.6 (3), 119.0 (4), 117.4 (6), 67.0 (13), 57.8 (8), 
49.7 (11), 35.1 (12), 28.9 (9). IR (neat, cm1) 3289, 2961, 2843, 1608, 1584, 1458, 1361, 1250, 
1088, 755. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C14H22N1O2 [M+H]
+ 236.1651, found 236.1660.  
6,6-Dimethyl-3,4,4a,5,6,10b-hexahydro-1H-pyrano[4,3-c]isoquinoline (388) 
The title compound was isolated as a yellow oil (388, 15.2 mg, 0.070 mmol, 70% yield). 1H 
NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.25 (dd, J = 7.7, 1.5 Hz, 1H, 6), 7.20 (app. tt, J = 7.5, 1.0 Hz, 1H, 
5), 7.14 (app. td, J = 7.2, 1.5 Hz, 1H, 4), 7.05 (app. dt, J = 7.5, 1.0 Hz, 1H, 3), 4.57 (dd, J = 
11.0, 4.4 Hz, 1H, 12-Ha), 4.13 (dd, J = 11.7, 4.4 Hz, 1H, 13-Ha), 3.56 (td, J = 11.7, 2.4 Hz, 1H, 
13-Hb), 3.30 (app. t, J = 11.0 Hz, 1H, 12-Hb), 2.82 (td, J = 10.6, 3.8 Hz, 1H, 10), 2.66 (td, J = 
10.4, 4.8 Hz, 1H, 11), 1.86  1.78 (m, 1H, 14-Ha), 1.68 (app. qd, J = 12.2, 4.6 Hz, 1H, 14-Hb), 
1.51 (s, 3H, 8), 1.50 (s, 3H, 8). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  144.2 (2), 133.7 (1), 126.7 (6), 
126.5 (5), 126.0 (4), 124.2 (3), 69.7 (12), 67.7 (13), 54.2 (7), 51.8 (10), 44.1 (11), 33.6 (14), 
32.6 (8), 31.8 (8). IR (neat, cm1) 2962, 2844, 1440, 1362, 1148, 1084, 856, 757, 742. HRMS 
m/z (ESI) calcd for C14H20N1O1 [M+H]
+ 218.1545, found 218.1554.  
Experimental 
6,7-Dihydro-5H-dibenzo[c,e]azepine (409) 
A solution of dibenzylamine (19.2 L, 0.10 mmol, 1 equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (26.9 mg, 0.12 mmol, 
1.2 equiv) in CHCl3 (1 mL) was heated at 60 
oC in a sealed tube under air for 6 h. After cooling 
to room temperature, the chloroform was removed in vacuo to give the crude palladacycle dimer 
Under a nitrogen atmosphere, pyridine-2,6-dicarboxylic acid (385, 33.4 mg, 0.20 mmol, 
2 equiv) and dry DMSO (1 mL) were added to crude 408 and the reaction stirred at room 
temperature for 0.5 h. Following this, 1-fluoro-2,4,6-trimethylpyridinium tetrafluoroborate 
(386, 45.4 mg, 0.20 mmol, 2 equiv) was added and the reaction stirred at room temperature for 
3 h. The DMSO was evaporated under a stream of air and the resulting residue was passed 
through a column of SCX-2 resin as a solution in dichloromethane. The material was purified 
by silica gel flash chromatography (210% methanol in dichloromethane) to give the title 
compound as a yellow oil (409, 8.8 mg, 0.045 mmol, 45% yield). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3) 
 7.55  7.39 (m, 8H), 4.04 (br. s, 1H), 3.76 (s, 4H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  141.2, 
135.1, 129.6, 128.6, 128.4, 128.1, 48.2. Spectral data were in accordance with the literature.273 
References  
7. References  
(1)  Hartwig, J. F. Organotransition Metal Chemistry - From Bonding to Catalysis; 
University Science Books: Sausalito, CA, 2010. 
(2)  Jazzar, R.; Hitce, J.; Renaudat, A.; Sofack-Kreutzer, J.; Baudoin, O. Chem. Eur. J. 
2010, 16, 26542672. 
(3)  Labinger, J. A.; Bercaw, J. E. Nature 2002, 417, 507514. 
(4)  Gensch, T.; Hopkinson, M. N.; Glorius, F.; Wencel-Delord, J. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2016, 
45, 29002936. 
(5)  Lyons, T. W.; Sanford, M. S. Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 11471169. 
(6)  Bergman, R. G. Nature 2007, 446, 391393. 
(7)  Shilov, A. E.; Shulpin, G. B. Chem. Rev. 1997, 97, 28792932. 
(8)  Blanksby, S. J.; Ellison, G. B. Acc. Chem. Res. 2003, 36, 255263. 
(9)  Xue, X.-S.; Ji, P.; Zhou, B.; Cheng, J.-P. Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 86228648. 
(10)  Bordwell, F. G. Acc. Chem. Res. 1988, 21, 456463. 
(11)  Arndtsen, B. A.; Bergman, R. G.; Mobley, T. A.; Peterson, T. H. Acc. Chem. Res. 
1995, 28, 154162. 
(12)  Crabtree, R. H. J. Organomet. Chem. 2004, 689, 40834091. 
(13)  Balcells, D.; Clot, E.; Eisenstein, O. Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 749823. 
(14)  Ess, D. H.; Goddard, W. A.; Periana, R. A. Organometallics 2010, 29, 64596472. 
(15)  Ackermann, L. Chem. Rev. 2011, 111, 13151345. 
(16)  Periana, R. A.; Bhalla, G.; Tenn, W. J.; Young, K. J. H.; Liu, X. Y.; Mironov, O.; 
Jones, C. J.; Ziatdinov, V. R. J. Mol. Catal. A Chem. 220 2004, 220, 725. 
(17)  Carrow, B. P.; Sampson, J.; Wang, L. Isr. J. Chem. 2019, 59, 130. 
(18)  Neufeldt, S. R.; Sanford, M. S. Acc. Chem. Res. 2012, 45, 936946. 
(19)  Kuhl, N.; Hopkinson, M. N.; Wencel-Delord, J.; Glorius, F. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
2012, 51, 1023610254. 
(20)  Hartwig, J. F.; Larsen, M. A. ACS Cent. Sci. 2016, 2, 281292. 
(21)  Wedi, P.; van Gemmeren, M. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 1301613027. 
(22)  Dehand, J.; Pfeffer, M. Coord. Chem. Rev. 1976, 18, 327352. 
(23)  Bruce, M. I. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 1977, 16, 7386. 
(24)  Constable, E. C. Polyhedron 1984, 3, 10371057. 
(25)  Newkome, G. R.; Puckett, W. E.; Gupta, V. K.; Kiefer, G. E. Chem. Rev. 1986, 86, 
451489. 
References 
(26)  Omae, I. Coord. Chem. Rev. 1988, 83, 137167. 
(27)  Evans, D. W.; Baker, G. R.; Newkome, G. R. Coord. Chem. Rev. 1989, 93, 155183. 
(28)  Ryabov, A. D. Chem. Rev. 1990, 90, 403424. 
(29)  Albrecht, M. Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 576623. 
(30)  Zhang, M.; Zhang, Y.; Jie, X.; Zhao, H.; Li, G.; Su, W. Org. Chem. Front. 2014, 1, 
(31)  Engle, K. M.; Mei, T. S.; Wasa, M.; Yu, J.-Q. Acc. Chem. Res. 2012, 45, 788802. 
(32)  Kleiman, J. P.; Dubeck, M. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1963, 85, 15441545. 
(33)  Cope, A. C.; Siekman, R. W. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1965, 87, 32723273. 
(34)  Bennett, M. A.; Milner, D. L. Chem. Commun. (London) 1967, 581582. 
(35)  Keim, W. J. Organomet. Chem. 1968, 14, 179184. 
(36)  Knoth, W. H.; Schunn, R. A. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1969, 91, 24002400. 
(37)  Hartwell, G. E.; Lawrence, R. V.; Smas, M. J. J. Chem. Soc. D 1970, 912912. 
(38)  Constable, A. G.; McDonald, W. S.; Sawkins, L. C.; Shaw, B. L. J. Chem. Soc., Chem. 
Commun. 1978, 10611062. 
(39)  Murai, S.; Kakiuchi, F.; Sekine, S.; Tanaka, Y.; Kamatani, A.; Sonoda, M.; Chatani, N. 
Nature 1993, 366, 529531. 
(40)  Zaitsev, V. G.; Shabashov, D.; Daugulis, O. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 13154
13155. 
(41)  Daugulis, O.; Do, H.-Q.; Shabashov, D. Acc. Chem. Res. 2009, 42, 10741086. 
(42)  Corbet, M.; De Campo, F. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 98969898. 
(43)  Chen, Z.; Wang, B.; Zhang, J.; Yu, W.; Liu, Z.; Zhang, Y. Org. Chem. Front. 2015, 2, 
11071295. 
(44)  Daugulis, O.; Roane, J.; Tran, L. D. Acc. Chem. Res. 2015, 48, 10531064. 
(45)  He, G.; Wang, B.; Nack, W. A.; Chen, G. Acc. Chem. Res. 2016, 49, 635645. 
(46)  Gandeepan, P.; Mller, T.; Zell, D.; Cera, G.; Warratz, S.; Ackermann, L. Chem. Rev. 
2019, 119, 21922452. 
(47)  Rej, S.; Ano, Y.; Chatani, N. Chem. Rev. 2020, 120, 17881887. 
(48)  Yamaguchi, J.; Yamaguchi, A. D.; Itami, K. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2012, 51, 8960
9009. 
(49)  Abrams, D. J.; Provencher, P. A.; Sorensen, E. J. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2018, 47, 8925
8967. 
(50)  Sinha, S. K.; Zanoni, G.; Maiti, D. Asian J. Org. Chem. 2018, 7, 11781192. 
(51)  Baudoin, O. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2011, 40, 49024911. 
References  
(52)  Liu, M.; Yang, P.; Karunananda, M. K.; Wang, Y.; Liu, P.; Engle, K. M. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 2018, 140, 58055813. 
(53)  Maraswami, M.; Loh, T.-P. Synthesis 2019, 51, 10491062. 
(54)  Fernandes, R. A.; Nallasivam, J. L. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2019, 17, 86478672. 
(55)  Ren, Z.; Dong, G. Organometallics 2016, 35, 10571059. 
(56)  Chen, X.; Engle, K. M.; Wang, D.-H.; Yu, J.-Q. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2009, 48, 
50945115. 
(57)  Dastbaravardeh, N.; Christakakou, M.; Haider, M.; Schnrch, M. Synthesis 2014, 46, 
14211439. 
(58)  Qiu, G.; Wu, J. Org. Chem. Front. 2015, 2, 169178. 
(59)  He, J.; Wasa, M.; Chan, K. S. L.; Shao, Q.; Yu, J.-Q. Chem. Rev. 2017, 117, 8754
8786. 
(60)  Baudoin, O. Acc. Chem. Res. 2017, 50, 11141123. 
(61)  Xu, Y.; Dong, G. Chem. Sci. 2018, 9, 14241432. 
(62)  Saint-Denis, T. G.; Zhu, R.-Y.; Chen, G.; Wu, Q.-F.; Yu, J.-Q. Science 2018, 359, 
eaao4798. 
(63)  Chu, J. C. K.; Rovis, T. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 62101. 
(64)  Timsina, Y. N.; Gupton, B. F.; Ellis, K. C. ACS Catal. 2018, 8, 57325776. 
(65)  He, C.; Whitehurst, W. G.; Gaunt, M. J. Chem 2019, 5, 10311058. 
(66)  Palladacycles: Synthesis, Characterization and Applications; Dupont, J., Pfeffer, M., 
Eds.; Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, Germany, 2008. 
(67)  Palladacycles: Catalysis and Beyond; Kapdi, A., Maiti, D., Eds.; Elsevier: Amsterdam, 
2019. 
(68)  Ryabov, A. D. Synthesis 1985, 1985, 233252. 
(69)  Dupont, J.; Consorti, C. S.; Spencer, J. Chem. Rev. 2005, 105, 25272571. 
(70)  Sehnal, P.; Taylor, R. J. K.; Fairlamb, I. J. S. Chem. Rev. 2010, 110, 824889. 
(71)  Dickmu, G. C.; Smoliakova, I. P. Coord. Chem. Rev. 2020, 409, 213203. 
(72)  Topczewski, J. J.; Sanford, M. S. Chem. Sci. 2015, 6, 7076. 
(73)  Ryabov, A. D.; Sakodinskaya, I. K.; Yatsimirsky, A. K. J. Chem. Soc., Dalt. Trans. 
1985, 26292638. 
(74)  Cope, A. C.; Friedrich, E. C. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1968, 90, 909913. 
(75)  Lapointe, D.; Fagnou, K. Chem. Lett. 2010, 39, 11181126. 
(76)  Davies, D. L.; Donald, S. M. A.; Macgregor, S. A. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 
1375413755. 
References 
(77)  Wang, L.; Carrow, B. P. ACS Catal. 2019, 9, 68216836. 
(78)  Lafrance, M.; Gorelsky, S. I.; Fagnou, K. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129, 1457014571. 
(79)  Powers, D. C.; Ritter, T. Nat. Chem. 2009, 1, 302309. 
(80)  Powers, D. C.; Ritter, T. Acc. Chem. Res. 2012, 45, 840850. 
(81)  Powers, D. C.; Lee, E.; Ariafard, A.; Sanford, M. S.; Yates, B. F.; Canty, A. J.; Ritter, 
T. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 1200212009. 
(82)  Powers, I. G.; Uyeda, C. ACS Catal. 2017, 7, 936958. 
(83)  Hartwig, J. F. Inorg. Chem. 2007, 46, 19361947. 
(84)  Lafrance, M.; Rowley, C. N.; Woo, T. K.; Fagnou, K. J. Am. Chem. Soc 2006, 128, 
87548756. 
(85)  Wenkert, E. Acc. Chem. Res. 1968, 1, 7881. 
(86)  Stevens, R. V. Acc. Chem. Res. 1977, 10, 193198. 
(87)  Roughley, S. D.; Jordan, A. M. J. Med. Chem. 2011, 54, 34513479. 
(88)  Cernak, T.; Dykstra, K. D.; Tyagarajan, S.; Vachal, P.; Krska, S. W. Chem. Soc. Rev. 
2016, 45, 546576. 
(89)  Blakemore, D. C.; Castro, L.; Churcher, I.; Rees, D. C.; Thomas, A. W.; Wilson, D. 
M.; Wood, A. Nat. Chem. 2018, 10, 383394. 
(90)  Bostrm, J.; Brown, D. G.; Young, R. J.; Keser, G. M. Nat. Rev. Drug. Discov. 2018, 
17, 709727. 
(91)  Campeau, L.-C.; Parisien, M.; Jean, A.; Fagnou, K. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128, 581
(92)  Bay, K. L.; Yang, Y.-F.; Houk, K. N. J. Organomet. Chem. 2018, 864, 1925. 
(93)  Bhaskararao, B.; Singh, S.; Anand, M.; Verma, P.; Prakash, P.; C, A.; Malakar, S.; 
Schaefer, H. F.; Sunoj, R. B. Chem. Sci. 2020, 11, 208216. 
(94)  Anand, M.; Sunoj, R. B.; Schaefer, H. F. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 55355538. 
(95)  Feng, W.; Wang, T.; Liu, D.; Wang, X.; Dang, Y. ACS Catal. 2019, 9, 66726680. 
(96)  He, G.; Chen, G. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2011, 50, 51925196. 
(97)  Zhang, S.-Y.; He, G.; Nack, W. A.; Zhao, Y.; Li, Q.; Chen, G. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 
135, 21242127. 
(98)  Landge, V. G.; Parveen, A.; Nandakumar, A.; Balaraman, E. Chem. Commun. 2018, 
54, 74837486. 
(99)  He, G.; Zhao, Y.; Zhang, S.; Lu, C.; Chen, G. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 36. 
(100)  Nadres, E. T.; Daugulis, O. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2012, 134, 710. 
(101)  Li, Q.; Zhang, S.-Y.; He, G.; Nack, W. A.; Chen, G. Adv. Synth. Catal. 2014, 356, 
References  
15441548. 
(102)  Hartwig, J. F. Acc. Chem. Res. 1998, 31, 852860. 
(103)  Pendleton, I. M.; Prez-Temprano, M. H.; Sanford, M. S.; Zimmerman, P. M. J. Am. 
Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 60496060. 
(104)  Zhang, S.-Y.; He, G.; Zhao, Y.; Wright, K.; Nack, W. A.; Chen, G. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2012, 134, 73137316. 
(105)  Rodrguez, N.; Romero-Revilla, J. A.; Fernndez-Ibez, M. .; Carretero, J. C. Chem. 
Sci. 2013, 4, 175179. 
(106)  Fan, M.; Ma, D. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 1215212155. 
(107)  Pasunooti, K. K.; Banerjee, B.; Yap, T.; Jiang, Y.; Liu, C.-F. Org. Lett. 2015, 17, 
60946097. 
(108)  Zheng, Y.; Song, W.; Zhu, Y.; Wei, B.; Xuan, L. J. Org. Chem. 2018, 83, 24482454. 
(109)  Biswas, S.; Bheemireddy, N. R.; Bal, M.; Van Steijvoort, B. F.; Maes, B. U. W. J. Org. 
Chem. 2019, 84, 1311213123. 
(110)  Chan, K. S. L.; Wasa, M.; Chu, L.; Laforteza, B. N.; Miura, M.; Yu, J.-Q. Nat. Chem. 
2014, 6, 146150. 
(111)  Cheng, G. J.; Yang, Y. F.; Liu, P.; Chen, P.; Sun, T. Y.; Li, G.; Zhang, X.; Houk, K. 
N.; Yu, J.-Q.; Wu, Y. D. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 894897. 
(112)  Engle, K. M. Pure Appl. Chem. 2016, 88, 119138. 
(113)  Shao, Q.; Wu, Q.-F.; He, J.; Yu, J.-Q. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 53225325. 
(114)  Jiang, H.; He, J.; Liu, T.; Yu, J.-Q. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 20552059. 
(115)  Wang, D.-H.; Hao, X.-S.; Wu, D.-F.; Yu, J.-Q. Org. Lett. 2006, 8, 33873390. 
(116)  Spangler, J. E.; Kobayashi, Y.; Verma, P.; Wang, D.-H.; Yu, J.-Q. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 
2015, 137, 1187611879. 
(117)  Jain, P.; Verma, P.; Xia, G.; Yu, J.-Q. Nat. Chem. 2017, 9, 140144. 
(118)  Huang, Z.; Wang, C.; Dong, G. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 52995303. 
(119)  Gulia, N.; Daugulis, O. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 36303634. 
(120)  Wang, C.; Chen, C.; Zhang, J.; Han, J.; Wang, Q.; Guo, K.; Liu, P.; Guan, M.; Yao, Y.; 
Zhao, Y. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2014, 53, 98849888. 
(121)  Han, J.; Zheng, Y.; Wang, C.; Zhu, Y.; Zeng, R.; Huang, Z.-B.; Zhao, Y. J. Org. Chem. 
2015, 80, 92979306. 
(122)  Han, J.; Zheng, Y.; Wang, C.; Zhu, Y.; Huang, Z.-B.; Zeng, R.; Zhao, Y. J. Org. Chem. 
2016, 81, 56815689. 
(123)  Liu, P.; Han, J.; Chen, C. P.; Shi, D. Q.; Zhao, Y. S. RSC Adv. 2015, 5, 2843028434. 
References 
(124)  Xu, J.-W.; Zhang, Z.-Z.; Rao, W.-H.; Shi, B.-F. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 10750
10753. 
(125)  Topczewski, J. J.; Cabrera, P. J.; Saper, N. I.; Sanford, M. S. Nature 2016, 531, 220
(126)  Cabrera, P. J.; Lee, M.; Sanford, M. S. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 55995606. 
(127)  Zhang, F.; Spring, D. R. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2014, 43, 69066919. 
(128)  Zhao, Q.; Poisson, T.; Pannecoucke, X.; Besset, T. Synthesis 2017, 49, 48084826. 
(129)  Rasheed, O. K.; Sun, B. ChemistrySelect 2018, 3, 56895708. 
(130)  St John-Campbell, S.; Bull, J. A. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2018, 16, 45824595. 
(131)  Bhattacharya, T.; Pimparkar, S.; Maiti, D. RSC Adv. 2018, 8, 1945619464. 
(132)  Niu, B.; Yang, K.; Lawrence, B.; Ge, H. ChemSusChem 2019, 12, 29552969. 
(133)  Gandeepan, P.; Ackermann, L. Chem 2018, 4, 199222. 
(134)  Jun, C.-H.; Lee, H.; Hong, J.-B. J. Org. Chem. 1997, 62, 12001201. 
(135)  Zhang, F.-L.; Hong, K.; Li, T.-J.; Park, H.; Yu, J.-Q. Science 2016, 351, 252256. 
(136)  Xu, Y.; Young, M. C.; Wang, C.; Magness, D. M.; Dong, G. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 
2016, 55, 90849087. 
(137)  Yada, A.; Liao, W.; Sato, Y.; Murakami, M. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 1073
1076. 
(138)  Liu, Y.; Ge, H. Nat. Chem. 2017, 9, 2632. 
(139)  Wu, Y.; Chen, Y. Q.; Liu, T.; Eastgate, M. D.; Yu, J.-Q. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 
1455414557. 
(140)  Wang, P.; Farmer, M. E.; Huo, X.; Jain, P.; Shen, P.-X.; Ishoey, M.; Bradner, J. E.; 
Wisniewski, S. R.; Eastgate, M. D.; Yu, J.-Q. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2016, 138, 9269
9276. 
(141)  Wang, P.; Verma, P.; Xia, G.; Shi, J.; Qiao, J. X.; Tao, S.; Cheng, P. T. W.; Poss, M. 
A.; Farmer, M. E.; Yeung, K.-S.; et al. Nature 2017, 551, 489493. 
(142)  Chen, Y.-Q.; Wang, Z.; Wu, Y.; Wisniewski, S. R.; Qiao, J. X.; Ewing, W. R.; 
Eastgate, M. D.; Yu, J.-Q. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2018, 140, 1788417894. 
(143)  Kapoor, M.; Liu, D.; Young, M. C. J. Am. Chem. Soc 2018, 140, 68186822. 
(144)  Widenhoefer, R. A.; Buchwald, S. L. Organometallics 1996, 15, 35343542. 
(145)  Fuchita, Y.; Hiraki, K.; Matsumoto, Y. J. Organomet. Chem. 1985, 280, C51C53. 
(146)  McNally, A.; Haffemayer, B.; Collins, B. S. L.; Gaunt, M. J. Nature 2014, 510, 129
(147)  Arnek, R.; Zetterberg, K. Organometallics 1987, 6, 12301235. 
References  
(148)  Zakrzewski, J.; Smalley, A. P.; Kabeshov, M. A.; Gaunt, M. J.; Lapkin, A. A. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 2016, 55, 88788883. 
(149)  Smalley, A. P.; Gaunt, M. J. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2015, 137, 1063210641. 
(150)  Smalley, A. P.; Cuthbertson, J. D.; Gaunt, M. J. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2017, 139, 1412
1415. 
(151)  Zhang, J. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2018, 16, 80648071. 
(152)  He, C.; Gaunt, M. J. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2015, 54, 1584015844. 
(153)  He, C.; Gaunt, M. J. Chem. Sci. 2017, 8, 35863592. 
(154)  Calleja, J.; Pla, D.; Gorman, T. W.; Domingo, V.; Haffemayer, B.; Gaunt, M. J. Nat. 
Chem. 2015, 7, 10091016. 
(155)  Willcox, D.; Chappell, B. G. N.; Hogg, K.; Calleja, J.; Smalley, A.; Gaunt, M. J. 
Science 2016, 354, 851857. 
(156)  Cabrera-Pardo, J. R.; Trowbridge, A.; Nappi, M.; Ozaki, K.; Gaunt, M. J. Angew. 
Chem. Int. Ed. 2017, 56, 1195811962. 
(157)  Chen, K.; Wang, D.; Li, Z.-W.; Liu, Z.; Pan, F.; Zhang, Y.-F.; Shi, Z.-J. Org. Chem. 
Front. 2017, 4, 20972101. 
(158)  Yuan, F.; Hou, Z.-L.; Pramanick, P. K.; Yao, B. Org. Lett. 2019, 21, 93819385. 
(159)  Pramanick, P. K.; Zhou, Z.; Hou, Z.-L.; Yao, B. J. Org. Chem. 2019, 84, 56845694. 
(160)  Lin, H.; Pan, X.; Barsamian, A. L.; Kamenecka, T. M.; Bannister, T. D. ACS Catal. 
2019, 9, 48874891. 
(161)  Rodrigalvarez, J.; Nappi, M.; Azuma, H.; Flodn, N. J.; Burns, M. E.; Gaunt, M. J. Nat. 
Chem. 2020, 12, 7681. 
(162)  Hickman, A. J.; Sanford, M. S. Nature 2012, 484, 177185. 
(163)  Zhang, H.; Lei, A. Dalt. Trans. 2011, 40, 87458754. 
(164)  Xu, L.-M.; Li, B.-J.; Yang, Z.; Shi, Z.-J. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2010, 39, 712733. 
(165)  Muiz, K. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2009, 48, 94129423. 
(166)  Canty, A. J. Platin. Met. Rev. 1993, 37, 27. 
(167)  Canty, A. J. Acc. Chem. Res. 1992, 25, 8390. 
(168)  Pope, W. J.; Peachey, S. J. Proc. Chem. Soc. 1907, 23, 8687. 
(169)  Ito, T.; Tsuchiya, H.; Yamamoto, A. Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn. 1977, 50, 13191327. 
(170)  Gillie, A.; Stille, J. K. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1980, 102, 49334941. 
(171)  Byers, P. K.; Canty, A. J.; Skelton, B. W.; White, A. H. J. Chem. Soc., Chem. 
Commun. 1986, 17221724. 
(172)  Byers, P. K.; Canty, A. J.; Skelton, B. W.; White, A. H. J. Chem. Soc., Chem. 
References 
Commun. 1987, 10931095. 
(173)  Byers, P. K.; Canty, A. J.; Skelton, B. W.; White, A. H. Organometallics 1990, 9, 826
(174)  Canty, A. J.; Honeyman, R. T.; Roberts, A. S.; Trail, P. R.; Colton, R.; Skelton, B. W.; 
White, A. H. J. Organomet. Chem. 1994, 471, C8C10. 
(175)  Canty, A. J.; Jin, H.; Roberts, A. S.; Skelton, B. W.; Traill, P. R.; White, A. H. 
Organometallics 1995, 14, 199206. 
(176)  Bayler, A.; Canty, A. J.; Edwards, P. G.; Skelton, B. W.; White, A. H. J. Chem. Soc., 
Dalt. Trans. 2000, 33253330. 
(177)  Cmpora, J.; Palma, P.; del Ro, D.; Carmona, E.; Graiff, C.; Tiripicchio, A. 
Organometallics 2003, 22, 33453347. 
(178)  Vicente, J.; Arcas, A.; Juli-Hernndez, F.; Bautista, D. Chem. Commun. 2010, 46, 
72537255. 
(179)  Byers, P. K.; Canty, A. J.; Crespo, M.; Puddephatt, R. J.; Scott, J. D. Organometallics 
1988, 7, 13631367. 
(180)  Aye, K.-T.; Canty, A. J.; Crespo, M.; Puddephatt, R. J.; Scott, J. D.; Watson, A. A. 
Organometallics 1989, 8, 15181522. 
(181)  Trofimenko, S. Chem. Rev. 1993, 93, 943980. 
(182)  Canty, A. J.; Fritsche, S. D.; Jin, H.; Skelton, B. W.; White, A. H. J. Organomet. 
Chem. 1995, 490, C18C19. 
(183)  Canty, A. J.; Jin, H.; Roberts, A. S.; Skelton, B. W.; White, A. H. Organometallics 
1996, 15, 57135722. 
(184)  Cmpora, J.; Palma, P.; del Ro, D.; Lpez, J. A.; Alvarez, E.; Connelly, N. G. 
Organometallics 2005, 24, 36243628. 
(185)  Camasso, N. M.; Canty, A. J.; Ariafard, A.; Sanford, M. S. Organometallics 2017, 36, 
43824393. 
(186)  Lanci, M. P.; Remy, M. S.; Kaminsky, W.; Mayer, J. M.; Sanford, M. S. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 2009, 131, 1561815620. 
(187)  Khusnutdinova, J. R.; Rath, N. P.; Mirica, L. M. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 7303
7305. 
(188)  Markies, B. A.; Canty, A. J.; Boersma, J.; van Koten, G. Organometallics 1994, 13, 
20532058. 
(189)  Catellani, M. Synlett 2003, 298313. 
(190)  Cheng, H.-G.; Chen, S.; Chen, R.; Zhou, Q. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2019, 58, 5832
References  
5844. 
(191)  Horino, H.; Arai, M.; Inoue, N. Tetrahedron Lett. 1974, 8, 647650. 
(192)  Catellani, M.; Fagnola, M. C. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1994, 33, 24212422. 
(193)  Catellani, M.; Chiusoli, G. P. J. Organomet. Chem. 1988, 346, C27C30. 
(194)  Catellani, M.; Mann, B. E. J. Organomet. Chem. 1990, 390, 251255. 
(195)  Bocelli, G.; Catellani, M.; Ghelli, S. J. Organomet. Chem. 1993, 458, C12C15. 
(196)  Catellani, M.; Frignani, F.; Rangoni, A. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl. 1997, 36, 119
(197)  Canty, A. J.; Jin, H.; Skelton, B. W.; White, A. H. Organometallics 1998, 37, 3975
3981. 
(198)  Canty, A. J.; Denney, M. C.; Skelton, B. W.; White, A. H. Organometallics 2004, 23, 
11221131. 
(199)  Williams, B. S.; Holland, A. W.; Goldberg, K. I. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1999, 121, 252
(200)  Williams, B. S.; Goldberg, K. I. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2001, 123, 25762587. 
(201)  Pawlikowski, A. V.; Getty, A. D.; Goldberg, K. I. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2007, 129, 
1038210393. 
(202)  Racowski, J. M.; Gary, J. B.; Sanford, M. S. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2012, 51, 3414
3417. 
(203)  Grushin, V. V. Chem. Eur. J. 2002, 8, 10061014. 
(204)  Prez-Temprano, M. H.; Racowski, J. M.; Kampf, J. W.; Sanford, M. S. J. Am. Chem. 
Soc. 2014, 136, 40974100. 
(205)  Camasso, N. M.; Prez-Temprano, M. H.; Sanford, M. S. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 
1277112775. 
(206)  Canty, A. J.; Ariafard, A.; Camasso, N. M.; Higgs, A. T.; Yates, B. F.; Sanford, M. S. 
Dalt. Trans. 2017, 46, 37423748. 
(207)  Qu, F.; Khusnutdinova, J. R.; Rath, N. P.; Mirica, L. M. Chem. Commun. 2014, 50, 
30363039. 
(208)  Zhang, M.; Wang, Q.; Peng, Y.; Chen, Z.; Wan, C.; Chen, J.; Zhao, Y.; Zhang, R.; 
Zhang, A.-Q. Chem. Commun. 2019, 55, 1304813065. 
(209)  Cromwell, N. H.; Phillips, B. Chem. Rev. 1979, 79, 331358. 
(210)  Brandi, A.; Cicchi, S.; Cordero, F. M. Chem. Rev. 2008, 108, 39884035. 
(211)  Couty, F.; Evano, G. Synlett 2009, 30533064. 
(212)  Mehra, V.; Lumb, I.; Anand, A.; Kumar, V. RSC Adv. 2017, 7, 4576345783. 
References 
(213)  Buettner, C. S.; Willcox, D.; Chappell, B. G. N.; Gaunt, M. J. Chem. Sci. 2019, 10, 83
(214)  Ye, X.; He, Z.; Ahmed, T.; Weise, K.; Akhmedov, N. G.; Petersen, J. L.; Shi, X. Chem. 
Sci. 2013, 4, 37123716. 
(215)  Zhao, J.; Zhao, X.-J.; Cao, P.; Liu, J.-K.; Wu, B. Org. Lett. 2017, 19, 48804883. 
(216)  Koser, G. F.; Wettach, R. H. J. Org. Chem. 1977, 42, 14761478. 
(217)  Shan, G.; Yang, X.; Zong, Y.; Rao, Y. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2013, 52, 1360613610. 
(218)  Zhdankin, V. V.; Kuehl, C. J.; Bolz, J. T.; Formaneck, M. S.; Simonsen, A. J. 
Tetrahedron Lett. 1994, 35, 73237326. 
(219)  Lai, J. T. Synthesis 1984, 122123. 
(220)  Dellaria, J. F.; Santarsiero, B. D. Tetrahedron Lett. 1988, 29, 60796082. 
(221)  Dellaria, J. F.; Santarsiero, B. D. J. Org. Chem. 1989, 85, 39163926. 
(222)  Williams, R. M.; Im, M.-N. Tetrahedron Lett. 1988, 29, 60756078. 
(223)  Williams, R. M.; Sinclair, P. J.; Zhai, D.; Chen, D. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1988, 110, 1547
1557. 
(224)  Couty, F.; Durrat, F.; Prim, D. Tetrahedron Lett. 2003, 44, 52095212. 
(225)  Durrat, F.; Sanchez, M. V.; Couty, F.; Evano, G.; Marrot, J. Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2008, 
No. 19, 32863297. 
(226)  Nappi, M.; He, C.; Whitehurst, W. G.; Chappell, B. G. N.; Gaunt, M. J. Angew. Chem. 
Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 31783182. 
(227)  Deprez, N. R.; Sanford, M. S. Inorg. Chem. 2007, 46, 19241935. 
(228)  Szab, K. J. J. Mol. Catal. A Chem. 2010, 324, 5663. 
(229)  Mller, P.; Gilabert, D. M. Tetrahedron 1988, 44, 71717175. 
(230)  Zhu, C.; Sun, C.; Wei, Y. Synthesis 2010, 42354241. 
(231)  Murai, K.; Kobayashi, T.; Miyoshi, M.; Fujioka, H. Org. Lett. 2018, 20, 23332337. 
(232)  Senn, H. M.; Ziegler, T. Organometallics 2004, 23, 29802988. 
(233)  Barrios-Landeros, F.; Hartwig, J. F. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 69446945. 
(234)  Vicente, J.; Arcas, A.; Juli-Hernndez, F.; Bautista, D. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2011, 
123, 70287031. 
(235)  Cant, A. A.; Roberts, L.; Greaney, M. F. Chem. Commun. 2010, 46, 86718673. 
(236)  Stridfeldt, E.; Lindstedt, E.; Reitti, M.; Blid, J.; Norrby, P.-O.; Olofsson, B. Chem. Eur. 
J. 2017, 23, 1324913258. 
(237)  Idiris, F. I. M.; Jones, C. R. Org. Biomol. Chem. 2017, 15, 90449056. 
(238)  Cornella, J.; Larrosa, I. Synthesis 2012, 44, 653676. 
References  
(239)  Perry, G. J. P.; Larrosa, I. Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2017, 35173527. 
(240)  Rodrguez, N.; Goossen, L. J. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2011, 40, 50305048. 
(241)  Filatova, E. A.; Gulevskaya, A. V.; Pozharskii, A. F.; Ozeryanskii, V. A. Tetrahedron 
2016, 72, 15471557. 
(242)  Lassalas, P.; Gay, B.; Lasfargeas, C.; James, M. J.; Tran, V.; Vijayendran, K. G.; 
Brunden, K. R.; Kozlowski, M. C.; Thomas, C. J.; Smith, A. B.; et al. J. Med. Chem. 
2016, 59, 31833203. 
(243)  Pron, F.; Fossey, C.; Sopkova-de Oliveira Santos, J.; Cailly, T.; Fabis, F. Chem. Eur. 
J. 2014, 20, 75077513. 
(244)  Dubost, E.; Babin, V.; Benoist, F.; Hbert, A.; Barbey, P.; Chollet, C.; Bouillon, J.-P.; 
Manrique, A.; Pieters, G.; Fabis, F.; et al. Org. Lett. 2018, 20, 63026305. 
(245)  Ran, Y.; Yang, Y.; You, H.; You, J. ACS Catal. 2018, 8, 17961801. 
(246)  Kapoor, M.; Chand-Thakuri, P.; Young, M. C. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2019, 141, 7980
7989. 
(247)  Chand-Thakuri, P.; Landge, V. G.; Kapoor, M.; Young, M. C. J. Org. Chem. 2020, 
https://dx.doi.org/10.1021/acs.joc.0c00542. 
(248)  Shabashov, D.; Daugulis, O. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2010, 132, 39653972. 
(249)  Whitehurst, W. G.; Blackwell, J. H.; Hermann, G. N.; Gaunt, M. J. Angew. Chem. Int. 
Ed. 2019, 58, 90549059. 
(250)  Jung, M. E.; Piizzi, G. Chem. Rev. 2005, 105, 17351766. 
(251)  Lloyd-Jones, G. C.; Slatford, P. A. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2004, 126, 26902691. 
(252)  Bruns, J.; van Gerven, D.; Klner, T.; Wickleder, M. S. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2016, 
55, 81218124. 
(253)  Kolter, M.; Koszinowski, K. Chem. Eur. J. 2016, 22, 1574415750. 
(254)  Blum, O.; Milstein, D. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 1995, 117, 45824594. 
(255)  Meek, S. J.; Pitman, C. L.; Miller, A. J. M. J. Chem. Educ. 2016, 93, 275286. 
(256)  Boller, T. M.; Murphy, J. M.; Hapke, M.; Ishiyama, T.; Miyaura, N.; Hartwig, J. F. J. 
Am. Chem. Soc. 2005, 127, 1426314278. 
(257)  Wojciechowski, K. Eur. J. Org. Chem. 2001, 35873605. 
(258)  Sadana, A. K.; Saini, R. K.; Billups, W. E. Chem. Rev. 2003, 103, 15391602. 
(259)  Didier, D.; Baumann, A. N.; Eisold, M. Tetrahedron Lett. 2018, 59, 39753987. 
(260)  Salvio, R.; Placidi, S.; Sinibaldi, A.; Di Sabato, A.; Buscemi, D. C.; Rossi, A.; 
Antenucci, A.; Malkov, A.; Bella, M. J. Org. Chem. 2019, 84, 73957404. 
(261)  Rocaboy, R.; Dailler, D.; Zellweger, F.; Neuburger, M.; Salom, C.; Clot, E.; Baudoin, 
References 
O. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2018, 57, 1213112135. 
(262)  He, G.; Lu, G.; Guo, Z.; Liu, P.; Chen, G. Nat. Chem. 2016, 8, 11311136. 
(263)  Zhang, J.; Khaskin, E.; Anderson, N. P.; Zavalij, P. Y.; Vedernikov, A. N. Chem. 
Commun. 2008, 36253627. 
(264)  Vedernikov, A. N. Acc. Chem. Res. 2012, 45, 803813. 
(265)  Maleckis, A.; Kampf, J. W.; Sanford, M. S. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2013, 135, 66186625. 
(266)  Hull, K. L.; Lanni, E. L.; Sanford, M. S. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2006, 128, 1404714049. 
(267)  Racowski, J. M.; Ball, N. D.; Sanford, M. S. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2011, 133, 18022
18025. 
(268)  Yamamoto, K.; Li, J.; Garber, J. A. O.; Rolfes, J. D.; Boursalian, G. B.; Borghs, J. C.; 
Genicot, C.; Jacq, J.; van Gastel, M.; Neese, F.; et al. Nature 2018, 554, 511514. 
(269)  Brandt, J. R.; Lee, E.; Boursalian, G. B.; Ritter, T. Chem. Sci. 2014, 5, 169179. 
(270)  Xu, Y.; Yan, G.; Ren, Z.; Dong, G. Nat. Chem. 2015, 7, 829834. 
(271)  Zhuang, Z.; Yu, J.-Q. Nature 2020, 577, 656659. 
(272)  Baker, W. R.; Condon, S. L.; Spanton, S. Tetrahedron Lett. 1992, 33, 15731576. 
(273)  France, S. P.; Aleku, G. A.; Sharma, M.; Mangas-Sanchez, J.; Howard, R. M.; Steflik, 
J.; Kumar, R.; Adams, R. W.; Slabu, I.; Crook, R.; et al. Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. 2017, 
56, 1558915593. 
(274)  Zhou, J.; Fu, G. C. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2003, 125, 1252712530. 
(275)  Rengasamy, R.; Curtis-Long, M. J.; Seo, W. D.; Jeong, S. H.; Jeong, I.-Y.; Park, K. H. 
J. Org. Chem. 2008, 73, 28982901. 
(276)  Kelley, B. T.; Carroll, P.; Joulli, M. M. J. Org. Chem. 2014, 79, 51215133. 
(277)  Karade, N. N.; Tiwari, G. B.; Shinde, S. V.; Gampawar, S. V.; Kondre, J. M. 
Tetrahedron Lett. 2008, 49, 34413443. 
(278)  Jean, M.; Renault, J.; van de Weghe, P.; Asao, N. Tetrahedron Lett. 2010, 51, 378381. 
(279)  Alazet, S.; Preindl, J.; Simonet-Davin, R.; Nicolai, S.; Nanchen, A.; Meyer, T.; Waser, 
J. J. Org. Chem. 2018, 83, 1233412356. 
(280)  Hari, D. P.; Schouwey, L.; Barber, V.; Scopelliti, R.; Fadaei-Tirani, F.; Waser, J. 
Chem. Eur. J. 2019, 25, 95229528. 
(281)  Kang, T.; Kim, Y.; Lee, D.; Wang, Z.; Chang, S. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 2014, 136, 4141
4144. 
(282)  Peng, J.; Chen, C.; Xi, C. Chem. Sci. 2016, 7, 13831387. 
Appendix I 
Appendix I: Miscellaneous Experimental Procedures  
Synthesis of Chiral Morpholinone Substrates  
tert-Butyl (S)-5-benzyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (265b) 
To a solution of L-phenylalaninol (259b, 1.51 g, 10 mmol 1 equiv) and triethylamine (2.4 mL, 
17 mmol, 1.7 equiv) in THF (20 mL) at 0 oC was added ethyl bromoacetate (2.51 g, 15 mmol, 
1.5 equiv) dropwise. The reaction was allowed to warm to room temperature with stirring for 3 
h. The resulting suspension was cooled to 0 oC, filtered and the solids washed with cold THF 
(30 mL). Di-tert-butyl dicarbonate (3.06 g, 14 mmol, 1.4 equiv) was added to the combined 
filtrates and stirred at room temperature overnight. The solvent was removed in vacuo and the 
crude residue dissolved in toluene (50 mL) before washing with sat. aq. NaHCO3 and brine (10 
mL each). The organic phase was dried over MgSO4 and filtered.  
p-Toluenesulfonic acid monohydrate (190 mg, 1 mmol, 0.1 equiv) was added to the 
solution in toluene (diluted to 100 mL total volume) with heating under reflux using Dean-Stark 
apparatus for 6 h. After cooling to room temperature, the reaction mixture was washed with 
water (20 mL) and the organic phase separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated. The 
crude product was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1030% ethyl acetate in 
hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless solid (265b, 2.12 g, 7.28 mmol, 73% yield 
over 2 steps). M.p. 9496 oC; lit.272 9596 oC. []
. 14.9o (c 1.0, CHCl3); lit.
272 []
25.0 
13.7o (c 2.45, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.36  7.28 (m, 2H, 6), 7.28  7.13 (m, 
3H, 5, 7), 4.38  4.07 (m, 5H, 1-Ha, 1-Hb, 2, 8-Ha, 8-Hb), 3.00 (dd, J = 13.3, 3.8 Hz, 1H, 3-Ha), 
2.81 (dd, J = 13.3, 9.7 Hz, 1H, 3-Hb), 1.46 (s, 9H, 12). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  167.3 
(9), 153.4 (10), 136.7 (4), 129.4 (5), 129.0 (6), 127.1 (7), 81.5 (11), 68.1 (1), 52.1 / 50.7 (2), 
44.6 / 43.7 (8), 36.3 / 35.7 (3), 28.4 (12). Note: ppm / ppm denotes rotameric forms giving rise 
to distinct shifts in 13C NMR spectrum. IR (neat, cm1) 2978, 2933, 1759, 1698, 1407, 1381, 
1369, 1344, 1292, 1225, 1167, 1117, 1007, 702. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C16H22N1O4 
[M+H]+ 292.1543, found 292.1546.  
Appendix I 
tert-Butyl (3R,5S)-3-allyl-5-benzyl-3-ethyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (268b) 
To a solution of tert-butyl (S)-5-benzyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (265b, 583 mg, 2 
mmol, 1 equiv) in THF:DME (1:1, 4 mL) at 78 oC was added NaHMDS (2 M in THF, 0.95 
mL, 1.9 mmol, 0.95 equiv) dropwise. After stirring at 78 oC for 0.5 h, neat allyl iodide (504 
mg, 3 mmol, 1.5 equiv) was added dropwise. The reaction was stirred at 78 oC for a further 2 
h before being quenched at 78 oC with sat. aq. NH4Cl (5 mL) and warming to room 
temperature. The reaction mixture was diluted with diethyl ether (50 mL) and the organic phase 
separated. The aqueous phase was re-extracted with diethyl ether (2 x 30 mL) and the combined 
organics dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated.  
The crude material was dissolved in THF:DME (1:1, 4 mL) and cooled once more to 
78 oC. NaHMDS (2 M in THF, 1 mL, 2 mmol, 1 equiv) was added dropwise and the reaction 
stirred at 78 oC for 0.5 h. Neat ethyl iodide (936 mg, 6 mmol, 3 equiv) was added dropwise at 
78 oC. Without removing the cooling bath, the reaction was allowed to warm slowly to room 
temperature overnight. Sat. aq. NH4Cl (5 mL) was added followed by dilution with diethyl ether 
(50 mL). The organic phase was separated and the aqueous phase re-extracted with diethyl ether 
(2 x 30 mL). The combined organics were dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated. The 
crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1030% ethyl acetate in 
hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless oil (268b, 475 mg, 1.32 mmol, 66% yield 
over 2 steps). []
. 25.2o (c 0.5, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.35  7.27 (m, 2H, 
6), 7.27  7.15 (m, 3H, 5, 7), 5.83  5.63 (m, 1H, 14), 5.22  5.05 (m, 2H, 15-Ha, 15-Hb), 4.51 
 4.08 (m, 2H, 1-Ha, 2), 3.99 (d, J = 11.6 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.42  2.93 (m, 2H, 13-Ha, 13-Hb), 
2.87 (dd, J = 13.2, 3.2 Hz, 1H, 3-Ha), 2.68 (app. t, J = 12.5 Hz, 1H, 3-Hb), 2.40  2.07 (m, 2H, 
16-Ha, 16-Hb), 1.57 (s, 9H, 12), 0.95 (app. t, J = 7.6 Hz, 3H, 17). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) 
 170.9 (9), 152.5 (10), 137.6 (4), 134.5 (14), 129.4 (5), 128.9 (6), 127.0 (7), 119.4 (15), 80.8 
(11), 68.2 (8), 65.2 (1), 53.3 (2), 38.4 (13), 37.9 (3), 31.4 (16), 28.7 (12), 9.6 (17). IR (neat, cm
1) 2978, 1746, 1700, 1456, 1368, 1326, 1285, 1271, 1163, 1108, 703. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd 
for C21H30N1O4 [M+H]
+ 360.2169, found 360.2172.  
Appendix I 
(3R,5S)-5-Benzyl-3-ethyl-3-propylmorpholin-2-one (269b) 
A solution of tert-butyl (3R,5S)-3-allyl-5-benzyl-3-ethyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate 
(268b, 419 mg, 1.17 mmol, 1 equiv) in ethanol (10 mL) was subjected to three cycles of 
vacuum/nitrogen backfill. Palladium on activated carbon (Pd/C, 10 wt%, 62 mg, 0.059 mmol, 
5 mol%) was added in one portion, the atmosphere exchanged for hydrogen and the reaction 
stirred at room temperature for 2 h. The reaction was filtered through Celite and concentrated 
in vacuo to give the product as a colourless oil (423 mg, 1.17 mmol, quantitative yield). 
The hydrogenated product (423 mg, 1.17 mmol) was dissolved in dichloromethane (7.7 
mL) and trifluoroacetic acid (1.5 mL) added. The reaction was stirred at room temperature for 
3 h, concentrated in vacuo, basified with sat. aq. NaHCO3 and organics extracted with 
dichloromethane (2 x 50 mL). The crude material was purified by silica gel flash 
chromatography (1020% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless 
oil (269b, 306 mg, 1.17 mmol, quantitative yield). []
. 79.4o (c 1.5, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 
MHz, CDCl3)  7.37  7.30 (m, 2H, 6), 7.30  7.23 (m, 1H, 7), 7.23  7.17 (m, 2H, 5), 4.24 (dd, 
J = 10.4, 3.0 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.05 (app. t, J = 10.4 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.47  3.34 (m, 1H, 2), 2.73 
(dd, J = 13.3, 4.8 Hz, 1H, 3-Ha), 2.63  2.49 (m, 1H, 3-Hb), 1.94  1.81 (m, 1H, 13-Ha), 1.76  
1.66 (m, 1H, 10-Ha), 1.65  1.51 (m, 2H, 11-Ha, 13-Hb), 1.42  1.17 (m, 3H, 10-Hb, 11-Hb, 
15), 0.90 (app. t, J = 7.3 Hz, 3H, 12), 0.67 (app. t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 14). 13C NMR (101 MHz, 
CDCl3)  173.8 (9), 137.0 (4), 129.0(5) (5), 128.9(5) (6), 127.1 (7), 74.7 (1), 63.5 (8), 49.6 (2), 
41.6 (10), 38.3 (3), 31.7 (13), 17.6 (11), 14.4 (12), 7.5 (14). IR (neat, cm1) 3332, 2962, 2874, 
1732, 1456, 1317, 1294, 1198, 1154, 1044, 755, 701. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C16H24NO2 
[M+H]+ 262.1802, found 262.1802.  
Appendix I 
tert-Butyl (R)-2-oxo-5-(((triisopropylsilyl)oxy)methyl)morpholine-4-carboxylate (265c) 
To a solution of (R)-2-amino-3-((triisopropylsilyl)oxy)propan-1-ol (259c, 1.20 g, 4.85 mmol, 1 
equiv; synthesized by Dr. C. He) and triethylamine (1.17 mL, 8.39 mmol, 1.7 equiv) in THF 
(10 mL) at 0 oC was added ethyl bromoacetate (1.20 g, 7.19 mmol, 1.5 equiv) dropwise. The 
reaction was allowed to warm to room temperature with stirring for 3 h. The resulting 
suspension was re-cooled to 0 oC, filtered and the solids washed with cold THF (20 mL). Di-
tert-butyl dicarbonate (1.49 g, 6.83 mmol, 1.4 equiv) was added to the combined filtrates and 
stirred at room temperature overnight. The solvent was removed in vacuo and the crude residue 
dissolved in toluene (50 mL) before washing with sat. aq. NaHCO3 and brine (10 mL each). 
The organic phase was dried over MgSO4 and filtered.  
p-Toluenesulfonic acid monohydrate (92 mg, 0.48 mmol, 0.1 equiv) was added to the 
solution in toluene (diluted to 100 mL total volume) with heating under reflux using Dean
Stark apparatus overnight. After cooling to room temperature, the reaction mixture was washed 
with water (20 mL) and the organic phase separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated. 
The crude product was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (515% ethyl acetate in 
hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless oil (265c, 1.32 g, 3.41 mmol, 70% yield 
over 2 steps). []
. +27.2o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.64 (dd, J = 11.6, 
3.3 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.47  4.34 (d, J = 11.6 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 4.26 (d, J = 18.2 Hz, 1H, 6-Ha), 4.17 
 3.93 (m, 2H, 3-Ha, 6-Hb), 3.88  3.65 (m, 2H, 2, 3-Hb), 1.46 (s, 9H, 10), 1.15  1.00 (m, 21H, 
4, 5). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  167.8 (7), 153.6 (8), 81.5 (9), 67.2 / 66.4 (1), 60.7 (2), 
51.5 / 50.3 (3), 45.3 / 44.1 (6), 28.4 (10), 18.0(4) / 18.0(1) (5), 12.0 (4). Note: ppm / ppm denotes 
rotameric forms giving rise to distinct shifts in 13C NMR spectrum. IR (neat, cm1) 2943, 2867, 
1763, 1702, 1464, 1407, 1369, 1344, 1289, 1246, 1165, 1112, 1058, 1006, 882, 770, 683. 
HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C19H38NO5Si [M+H]
+ 388.2514, found 388.2516.  
Appendix I 
tert-Butyl (3R,5R)-3-allyl-3-ethyl-2-oxo-5-(((triisopropylsilyl)oxy)methyl)morpholine-4-
carboxylate (268c) 
To a solution of tert-butyl (R)-2-oxo-5-(((triisopropylsilyl)oxy)methyl)morpholine-4-
carboxylate (265c, 775 mg, 2 mmol, 1 equiv) in THF:DME (1:1, 4 mL) at 78 oC was added 
NaHMDS (2 M in THF, 0.95 mL, 1.9 mmol, 0.95 equiv) dropwise. After stirring at 78 oC for 
0.5 h, neat allyl iodide (504 mg, 3 mmol, 1.5 equiv) was added dropwise. The reaction was 
stirred at 78 oC for a further 2 h before being quenched at 78 oC with sat. aq. NH4Cl (5 mL) 
and warming to room temperature. The reaction mixture was diluted with diethyl ether (50 mL) 
and the organic phase separated. The aqueous phase was re-extracted with diethyl ether (2 x 30 
mL) and the combined organics dried over MgSO4, filtered and evaporated.  
The crude material was dissolved in THF:DME (1:1, 4 mL) and cooled once more to 
78 oC. NaHMDS (2 M in THF, 1 mL, 2 mmol, 1 equiv) was added dropwise and the reaction 
stirred at 78 oC for 0.5 h. Neat ethyl iodide (936 mg, 6 mmol, 3 equiv) was added dropwise at 
78 oC. Without removing the cooling bath, the reaction was allowed to warm slowly to room 
temperature overnight. Sat. aq. NH4Cl (5 mL) was added followed by dilution with diethyl ether 
(50 mL). The organic phase was separated and the aqueous phase re-extracted with diethyl ether 
(2 x 30 mL). The combined organics were dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent 
evaporated. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (020% ethyl 
acetate in hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless oil (268c, 536 mg, 1.18 mmol, 
59% yield over 2 steps). []
. +20.3o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  5.67  
5.48 (m, 1H, 12), 5.14  4.98 (m, 2H, 13), 4.58 (d, J = 11.4 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.41  3.98 (m, 2H, 
1-Hb, 2), 3.56 (dd, J = 9.5, 5.1 Hz, 1H, 3-Ha), 3.49 (app. t, J = 9.5 Hz, 1H, 3-Hb), 3.33  2.81 
(m, 2H, 11-Ha, 11-Hb), 2.47  2.03 (m, 2H, 14-Ha, 14-Hb), 1.47 (s, 9H, 10), 1.13  1.00 (m, 
21H, 4, 5), 0.94 (app. t, J = 7.6 Hz, 3H, 15). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  171.0 (7), 152.6 
(8), 134.1 (12), 119.3 (13), 80.8 (9), 68.2 (6), 64.5 (1), 60.8 (3), 52.1 (2), 38.7 (11), 31.6 (14), 
28.5 (10), 18.1 / 18.0 (5), 12.0 (4), 9.6 (15). IR (neat, cm1) 2943, 2868, 1747, 1705, 1461, 
1367, 1305, 1196, 1166, 1105, 1013, 882, 811, 771, 687. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for 
C24H46NO5Si [M+H]
+ 456.3140, found 456.3138.  
Appendix I 
(3R,5R)-3-Ethyl-3-propyl-5-(((triisopropylsilyl)oxy)methyl)morpholin-2-one (269c) 
A solution of tert-butyl (3R,5R)-3-allyl-3-ethyl-2-oxo-5-(((triisopropylsilyl)oxy)methyl)-
morpholine-4-carboxylate (268c, 486 mg, 1.07 mmol, 1 equiv) in ethanol (10 mL) was 
subjected to three cycles of vacuum/nitrogen backfill. Palladium on activated carbon (Pd/C, 10 
wt%, 57 mg, 0.054 mmol, 5 mol%) was added in one portion, the atmosphere exchanged for 
hydrogen and the reaction stirred at room temperature for 2 h. The reaction was filtered through 
Celite and concentrated in vacuo to give the hydrogenated product as a colourless oil (488 mg, 
1.07 mmol, quantitative yield).  
The hydrogenated product (488 mg, 1.07 mmol) was dissolved in dichloromethane (7 
mL) and trifluoroacetic acid (1.4 mL) added. The reaction was stirred at room temperature for 
1 h, concentrated in vacuo, basified with sat. aq. NaHCO3 and organics extracted with 
dichloromethane (2 x 50 mL). The crude material was purified by silica gel flash 
chromatography (010% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless oil 
(269c, 250 mg, 0.70 mmol, 65% yield). []
. 11.6o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, 
CDCl3)  4.30 (dd, J = 10.5, 3.4 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.17 (app. t, J = 10.5 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.74 (dd, 
J = 9.8, 4.4 Hz, 1H, 3-Ha), 3.64 (dd, J = 9.8, 5.4 Hz, 1H, 3-Hb), 3.32  3.24 (m, 1H, 2), 2.00  
1.84 (m, 2H, 11-Ha, 13), 1.83 (app. td, J = 12.1, 4.4 Hz, 1H, 8-Ha), 1.71  1.60 (m, 1H, 11-Hb), 
1.60  1.39 (m, 2H, 8-Hb, 9-Ha), 1.36  1.19 (m, 1H, 9-Hb), 1.17  0.99 (m, 21H, 4, 5), 0.96  
0.88 (m, 6H, 10, 12). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  173.8 (7), 72.4 (1), 63.7 (3), 62.7 (6), 50.1 
(2), 41.5 (8), 32.4 (11), 18.1 (5), 17.6 (9), 14.4 (10), 12.0 (4), 8.0 (12). IR (neat, cm1) 3345, 
2960, 2943, 2867, 1735, 1464, 1210, 1167, 1146, 1098, 1069, 882, 787, 682. HRMS m/z (ESI) 
calcd for C19H40N1O3Si1 [M+H]
+ 358.2772, found 358.2774.  
Appendix I 
N-(4-((3S,5R)-5-Ethyl-6-oxo-5-propylmorpholin-3-yl)butyl)-4-methylbenzenesulfonami-
de (269d) 
A solution of tert-butyl (3R,5S)-3-allyl-5-(4-((N-(tert-butoxycarbonyl)-4-methylphenyl)-
sulfonamido)butyl)-3-ethyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (268d, 90 mg, 0.15 mmol, 1 
equiv) in ethanol (5 mL) was subjected to three cycles of vacuum/nitrogen backfill. Palladium 
on activated carbon (Pd/C, 10 wt%, 25 mg, 0.015 mmol, 10 mol%) was added in one portion, 
the atmosphere exchanged for hydrogen and the reaction stirred at room temperature for 2 h. 
The reaction was filtered through Celite and concentrated in vacuo to give the hydrogenated 
product as a colourless oil (91 mg, 0.15 mmol, quantitative yield). 
The hydrogenated product (91 mg, 0.15 mmol) was dissolved in dichloromethane (1 
mL) and trifluoroacetic acid (1 mL) added. The reaction was stirred at room temperature 
overnight, concentrated in vacuo, basified with sat. aq. NaHCO3 and the organics extracted with 
dichloromethane (3 x 20 mL). The crude material was purified by silica gel flash 
chromatography (5080% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless 
oil (269d, 46 mg, 0.12 mmol, 72% yield). []
. 12.4o (c 0.5, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, 
CDCl3)  7.76  7.71 (m, 2H, 9), 7.29 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2H, 10), 5.01  4.92 (m, 1H, 7), 4.17 (dd, 
J = 10.5, 3.2 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 3.88 (app. t, J = 10.6 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.08  2.98 (m, 1H, 2), 2.95 
 2.87 (m, 2H, 6-Ha, 6-Hb), 2.41 (s, 3H, 12), 1.94  1.83 (m, 1H, 18-Ha), 1.76  1.67 (m, 1H, 
15-Ha), 1.67  1.57 (m, 1H, 18-Hb), 1.54  1.35 (m, 5H, 15-Hb, 16-Ha, 5-Ha, 5-Hb, 4-Ha), 1.35 
 1.16 (m, 5H, 16-Hb, 4-Hb, 3-Ha, 3-Hb, 20), 0.92  0.84 (m, 6H, 17, 19). 13C NMR (101 MHz, 
CDCl3)  173.8 (14), 143.6 (11), 137.0 (8), 129.8 (10), 127.2 (9), 75.2 (1), 63.1 (13), 48.3 (2), 
42.9 (6), 41.3 (15), 32.1 (18), 31.3 (3), 29.6 (5), 22.7 (4), 21.6 (12), 17.6 (16), 14.3 (17), 8.0 
(19). IR (neat, cm1) 3278, 2963, 2873, 1723, 1458, 1326, 1213, 1158, 1094, 815, 750, 662. 
HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C20H33N2O4S1 [M+H]
+ 397.2156, found 397.2156.  
Appendix I 
tert-Butyl (3R,5S)-3-((E)-4-ethoxy-4-oxobut-2-en-1-yl)-3-ethyl-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholi-
ne-4-carboxylate (270) 
In a 20 mL vial equipped with magnetic stirrer, Grubbs second generation catalyst (11 mg, 
0.013 mmol, 1.5 mol%) and tert-butyl (3R,5S)-3-allyl-3-ethyl-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-
carboxylate (268a, 241 mg, 0.85 mmol, 1 equiv) were combined, followed by the addition of 
dichloromethane (5 mL) and ethyl acrylate (0.9 mL, 8.5 mmol, 10 equiv). The vial was sealed 
and subjected to three cycles of vacuum/nitrogen backfill. The reaction was heated at 60 oC for 
24 h before being cooled to room temperature, filtered through Celite and concentrated in 
vacuo. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (020% ethyl acetate 
in hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless solid (270, 130 mg, 0.37 mmol, 43% 
yield). M.p. 9295 oC. []
. 78.1o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  6.80  
6.66 (m, 1H, 10), 5.84 (d, J = 15.6 Hz, 1H, 11), 4.52 (dd, J = 11.5, 2.8 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.31 (br. 
s, 1H, 2), 4.14 (q, J = 7.1 Hz, 2H, 13), 4.06 (d, J = 11.3 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.34 (br. s, 1H, 9-Ha), 
3.08 (dd, J = 13.4, 6.6 Hz, 1H, 9-Hb), 2.34  2.16 (m, 2H, 15-Ha, 15-Hb), 1.47 (s, 9H, 8), 1.23 
(t, J = 7.1 Hz, 3H, 14), 1.14 (d, J = 6.9 Hz, 3H, 3), 0.93 (app. t, J = 7.6 Hz, 3H, 16). 13C NMR 
(101 MHz, CDCl3)  170.2 (5), 166.1 (12), 152.7 (6), 144.3 (10), 125.2 (11), 81.2 (7), 70.2 (1), 
67.4 (4), 60.2 (13), 46.9 (2), 37.0 (9), 31.6 (15), 28.5 (8), 17.8 (3), 14.4 (14), 9.4 (16). IR (neat, 
cm1) 2979, 2936, 1740, 1709, 1696, 1371, 1339, 1310, 1261, 1179, 1140, 1100, 1058, 1042, 
963, 767. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C18H30N1O6 [M+H]
+ 356.2068, found 356.2069.   
Ethyl 4-((3R,5S)-3-ethyl-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholin-3-yl)butanoate (269e) 
A solution of tert-butyl (3R,5S)-3-((E)-4-ethoxy-4-oxobut-2-en-1-yl)-3-ethyl-5-methyl-2-
oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (270, 130 mg, 0.37 mmol, 1 equiv) in ethyl acetate (10 mL) was 
subjected to three cycles of vacuum/nitrogen backfill. Palladium on activated carbon (Pd/C, 10 
Appendix I 
wt%, 20 mg, 0.019 mmol, 5 mol%) was added in one portion, the atmosphere exchanged for 
hydrogen and the reaction stirred at room temperature overnight. The reaction was filtered 
through Celite and concentrated to give the hydrogenated product as a colourless oil (128 mg, 
0.36 mmol, 98% yield). 
The hydrogenated product (128 mg, 0.36 mmol) was dissolved in dichloromethane (2.5 
mL) and trifluoroacetic acid (0.47 mL) added. The reaction was stirred at room temperature for 
2 h, concentrated in vacuo, basified with sat. aq. NaHCO3 and the product extracted with 
dichloromethane (2 x 20 mL). The combined organics were dried over MgSO4, filtered and the 
solvent evaporated. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (50% 
ethyl acetate in hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless oil (269e, 83 mg, 0.32 mmol, 
90% yield). []
. 11.4o (c 0.5, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.20 (dd, J = 10.5, 
3.2 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.10 (q, J = 7.2 Hz, 2H, 10), 3.93 (app. t, J = 10.5 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.37  
3.26 (m, 1H, 2), 2.37  2.19 (m, 2H, 8-Ha, 8-Hb), 1.99  1.83 (m, 2H, 7-Ha, 12-Ha), 1.82  1.72 
(m, 1H, 6-Ha), 1.72  1.61 (m, 1H, 12-Hb), 1.61  1.39 (m, 3H, 7-Hb, 6-Hb, 14), 1.23 (t, J = 7.2 
Hz, 3H, 11), 1.05 (d, J = 6.3 Hz, 3H, 3), 0.91 (app. t, J = 7.5 Hz, 3H, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, 
CDCl3)  173.4 (9), 173.2 (5), 76.1 (1), 63.1 (4), 60.4 (10), 43.7 (2), 38.5 (6), 34.3 (8), 32.0 
(12), 19.8 (7), 17.2 (3), 14.3 (11), 8.0 (13). IR (neat, cm1) 3329, 2971, 1732, 1462, 1377, 1318, 
1184, 1095, 1050. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C13H24NO4 [M+H]
+ 258.1700, found 258.1700.  
2-(3-Iodopropyl)isoindoline-1,3-dione 
2-(3-Bromopropyl)isoindoline-1,3-dione (3 g, 11.2 mmol, 1 equiv) and sodium iodide (8.4 g, 
55.8 mmol, 4 equiv) in acetone (25 mL) was heated to reflux and stirred overnight. After cooling 
to room temperature the solvent was removed in vacuo and dichloromethane (50 mL) and 10% 
aq. Na2S2O3 (20 mL) added to the residue. The organic phase was separated, dried over MgSO4, 
filtered and the solvent evaporated to give the title compound as a white powder (3.52 g, 11.2 
mmol, quantitative yield). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.88  7.81 (m, 2H), 7.75  7.68 (m, 
2H), 3.76 (t, J = 6.8 Hz, 2H), 3.16 (t, J = 7.2 Hz, 2H), 2.24 (app. quintet, J = 7.0 Hz, 2H). 13C 
NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  168.4, 134.2, 132.1, 123.5, 38.8, 32.7, 1.3. Spectral data were in 
accordance with the literature.274 
Appendix I 
tert-Butyl (3S,5S)-3-(3-(1,3-dioxoisoindolin-2-yl)propyl)-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-
carboxylate (271) 
To a solution of tert-butyl (S)-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (265a, 280 mg, 1.30 
mmol, 1 equiv) in THF:DME (1:1, 8 mL) at 78 oC was added NaHMDS (2 M in THF, 620 
L, 1.24 mmol, 0.95 equiv) dropwise. After stirring at 78 oC for 0.5 h, 2-(3-
iodopropyl)isoindoline-1,3-dione (1.71 g, 5.43 mmol, 4 equiv) was added in one portion. 
Without removing the cooling bath, the reaction was allowed to warm slowly to room 
temperature overnight. Sat. aq. NH4Cl (5 mL) was added followed by diethyl ether (30 mL). 
The organic phase was separated and the aqueous phase re-extracted with diethyl ether (2 x 20 
mL). The combined organics were dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated. The 
crude product was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1040% ethyl acetate in 
hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless sticky foam (271, 443 mg, 1.10 mmol, 85% 
yield). []
. +43.1o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.86  7.80 (m, 2H, 14), 
7.74  7.68 (m, 2H, 15), 4.52 (dd, J = 11.9, 2.6 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.32 (br. s, 1H, 2), 4.16 (d, J = 
11.9 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 4.13  4.06 (m, 1H, 4), 3.71 (app. t, J = 6.8 Hz, 2H, 11), 1.97 (br. s, 1H, 9-
Ha), 1.89  1.70 (m, 3H, 9-Hb, 10-Ha, 10-Hb), 1.39 (br. s, 9H, 8), 1.24 (d, J = 6.8 Hz, 3H, 3). 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  169.0 (5), 168.4 (12), 153.2 (6), 134.1 (15), 132.1 (13), 123.4 
(14), 81.2 (7), 70.1 (1), 55.9 (2), 46.4 (4), 37.5 (11), 32.2 (9), 28.4 (8), 25.3 (10), 16.7 (2). IR 
(neat, cm1) 2975, 2933, 1782, 1751, 1710, 1694, 1398, 1372, 1280, 1171, 1131, 1065, 1033, 
721. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C21H27N2O6 [M+H]
+ 403.1864, found 403.1864.  
Appendix I 
tert-Butyl (3R,5S)-3-(3-(1,3-dioxoisoindolin-2-yl)propyl)-3-ethyl-5-methyl-2-oxomorpho-
line-4-carboxylate (272) 
To a solution of tert-butyl (3S,5S)-3-(3-(1,3-dioxoisoindolin-2-yl)propyl)-5-methyl-2-
oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (271, 427 mg, 1.06 mmol, 1 equiv) in THF:DME (1:1, 4 mL) at 
78 oC was added NaHMDS (2 M in THF, 530 L, 1.06 mmol, 1 equiv) dropwise. After stirring 
at 78 oC for 0.5 h, neat ethyl iodide (496 mg, 3.18 mmol, 3 equiv) was added dropwise. 
Without removing the cooling bath, the reaction was allowed to warm slowly to room 
temperature overnight. Sat. aq. NH4Cl (5 mL) was added followed by dilution with diethyl ether 
(30 mL). The organic phase was separated and the aqueous phase re-extracted with diethyl ether 
(2 x 20 mL). The combined organics were dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent 
evaporated. The crude product was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1040% ethyl 
acetate in hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless foam (272, 170 mg, 0.39 mmol, 
37% yield). []
. 16.9o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.85  7.79 (m, 2H, 
14), 7.72  7.66 (m, 2H, 15), 4.53 (dd, J = 11.5, 2.8 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 4.37 (br. s, 1H, 2), 4.06 (dd, 
J = 11.5, 1.1 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.77  3.63 (m, 2H, 11-Ha, 11-Hb), 2.52  2.15 (m, 3H, 9-Ha, 9-
Hb, 16-Ha), 2.14  2.03 (m, 1H, 16-Hb), 1.60  1.49 (m, 2H, 10-Ha, 10-Hb), 1.40 (s, 9H, 8), 
1.24 (d, J = 6.9 Hz, 3H, 3), 0.89 (app. t, J = 7.6 Hz, 3H, 17). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  
170.5 (5), 168.5 (12), 153.1 (6), 134.0 (15), 132.3 (13), 123.3 (14), 81.1 (7), 70.0 (1), 67.4 (4), 
46.8 (2), 38.0 (11), 32.0 (br., 9, 16), 28.5 (8), 24.9 (10), 17.8 (3), 9.4 (17). IR (neat, cm1) 2975, 
2937, 1772, 1741, 1712, 1693, 1437, 1397, 1369, 1314, 1170, 1088, 721. HRMS m/z (ESI) 
calcd for C23H31N2O6 [M+H]
+ 431.2177, found 431.2179.  
Appendix I 
2-(3-((3R,5S)-3-Ethyl-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholin-3-yl)propyl)isoindoline-1,3-dione (269f) 
To a solution of tert-butyl (3R,5S)-3-(3-(1,3-dioxoisoindolin-2-yl)propyl)-3-ethyl-5-methyl-2-
oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (272, 150 mg, 0.35 mmol) in dichloromethane (2.3 mL) was 
added trifluoroacetic acid (0.46 mL). The reaction was stirred at room temperature for 2 h, 
concentrated in vacuo, basified with sat. aq. NaHCO3 and the product extracted with 
dichloromethane (2 x 20 mL). The combined organics were dried over MgSO4, filtered and the 
solvent evaporated to give the title compound as a colourless oil (269f, 113 mg, 0.34 mmol, 
97% yield). []
. 4.8o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (500 MHz, CDCl3)  7.86  7.81 (m, 2H, 
11), 7.73  7.68 (m, 2H, 12), 4.18 (dd, J = 10.4, 3.1 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 3.93 (app. t, J = 10.4 Hz, 
1H, 1-Hb), 3.75  3.66 (m, 2H, 8-Ha, 8-Hb), 3.37  3.27 (m, 1H, 2), 2.02  1.90 (m, 2H, 13-Ha, 
7-Ha), 1.90  1.83 (m, 1H, 6-Ha), 1.72  1.62 (m, 2H, 13-Hb, 7-Hb), 1.51  1.43 (m, 1H, 6-Hb), 
1.28 (br. s, 1H, 15), 1.04 (d, J = 6.3 Hz, 3H, 3), 0.91 (app. t, J = 7.5 Hz, 3H, 14). 13C NMR 
(126 MHz, CDCl3)  173.1 (5), 168.5 (9), 134.0 (12), 132.3 (10), 123.4 (11), 76.0 (1), 63.2 (4), 
43.8 (2), 38.2 (8), 36.4 (6), 32.0 (13), 24.0 (7), 17.3 (3), 8.0 (14). IR (neat, cm1) 3335, 2969, 
2935, 1771, 1733, 1707, 1466, 1437, 1397, 1360, 1187, 1149, 1037, 720. HRMS m/z (ESI) 
calcd for C18H23N2O4 [M+H]
+ 331.1652, found 331.1654.  
Methyl (tert-butoxycarbonyl)-L-alaninate 
To a solution of L-alanine methyl ester hydrochloride (7.83 g, 56.1 mmol, 1 equiv) in 
THF:MeOH (4:1, 150 mL) stirring under air at 0 oC was added NaHCO3 (14.14 g, 168.3 mmol, 
3 equiv) followed immediately by di-tert-butyl decarbonate (18.38 g, 84.2 mmol, 1.5 equiv). 
The reaction was warmed to room temperature and stirred for 20 h. Water (100 mL) and diethyl 
ether (200 mL) were added to the reaction and the organic phase separated. The aqueous phase 
was extracted with diethyl ether (2 x 300 mL). The combined organics were washed with sat. 
aq. NaHCO3 (2 x 100 mL) and brine (2 x 100 mL), dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent 
Appendix I 
evaporated. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1020% 
EtOAc in hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless oil (10.94 g, 53.8 mmol, 96%). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  5.03 (br. s, 1H), 4.39  4.24 (m, 1H), 3.74 (s, 3H), 1.44 (s, 9H), 
1.38 (d, J = 7.2 Hz, 3H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  174.0, 155.2, 79.9, 52.4, 49.3, 28.4, 
18.8. Spectral data were in accordance with the literature.275 
tert-Butyl (S)-(3-hydroxy-3-methylbutan-2-yl)carbamate 
To a solution of methyl (tert-butoxycarbonyl)-L-alaninate (10.94 g, 53.8 mmol, 1 equiv) in THF 
(250 mL) at 0 oC was added methylmagnesium iodide (3 M in THF, 100 mL, 301 mmol, 5.6 
equiv). The reaction was warmed to room temperature and stirred overnight. The reaction was 
re-cooled to 0 oC and quenched (caution: exothermic) with sat. aq. NH4Cl (250 mL). The phases 
were separated and the aqueous phase extracted with diethyl ether (3 x 300 mL) and washed 
with brine (2 x 200 mL). The combined organics were dried over MgSO4 and the solvent 
removed in vacuo. The crude product was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1030% 
ethyl acetate in hexanes) to give title compound as a colourless oil (7.55 g, 37.1 mmol, 69% 
yield). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.72 (br. s, 1H), 3.68  3.47 (m, 1H), 2.17 (br. s, 1H), 
1.43 (s, 9H), 1.21 (s, 3H), 1.16 (s, 3H), 1.12 (d, J = 6.8 Hz, 3H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) 
 156.5, 79.5, 73.1, 54.7, 28.5, 27.5, 25.7, 16.3. Spectral data were in accordance with the 
literature.276 
tert-Butyl (S)-2,2,3-trimethyl-6-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate  
To a solution of tert-butyl (S)-(3-hydroxy-3-methylbutan-2-yl)carbamate (890 mg, 4.38 mmol, 
1 equiv) dichloromethane (4 mL) was added trifluoroacetic acid (1 mL) and the reaction stirred 
Appendix I 
at room temperature for 10 h. The solvent was evaporated to give the TFA salt of (S)-3-amino-
2-methylbutan-2-ol as a dark red oil (951 mg, 4.38 mmol, quantitative yield). 
To a solution of (S)-3-amino-2-methylbutan-2-ol TFA salt (951 mg, 4.38 mmol, 1 
equiv) in THF (30 mL) at 0 oC were added triethylamine (1.52 mL, 10.9 mmol, 2.5 equiv) 
followed by ethyl bromoacetate (877 mg, 5.25 mmol, 1.2 equiv). The reaction was stirred at 
room temperature for 16 h. Sat. aq. NH4Cl (10 mL) was added and the aqueous phase extracted 
with diethyl ether (3 x 50 mL), dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated to give 
the crude Boc-protected secondary amine. The crude material was dissolved in toluene (10 mL) 
and di-tert-butyl dicarbonate (1.34 g, 6.12 mmol, 1.4 equiv) added in one portion. The reaction 
was heated at 110 oC for 18 h.  
After cooling to room temperature, p-toluenesulfonic acid monohydrate (84 mg, 0.44 
mmol, 0.1 equiv) was added and the reaction mixture diluted with toluene (50 mL). The solvent 
was distilled off (120 oC, atmospheric pressure) and the remaining residue taken up in diethyl 
ether (50 mL). The solution was washed with water (10 mL) and the organic phase dried over 
MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash 
chromatography (1030% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless 
solid (300 mg, 1.23 mmol, 28% yield over 2 steps). M.p. 7072 oC. []
. +6.2o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.32 (d, J = 19.8 Hz, 1H, 5-Ha), 4.22  3.98 (m, 1H, 3), 3.90 (d, 
J = 19.8 Hz, 1H, 5-Hb), 1.46 (s, 9H, 9), 1.40 (s, 3H, 2), 1.37 (s, 3H, 2), 1.18 (d, J = 6.9 Hz, 3H, 
4). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  166.8 (6), 153.7 (7), 83.2 (1), 81.2 (8), 50.8 (3), 42.3 (5), 
28.4 (9), 27.2 (2), 25.3 (2), 13.1 (4). IR (neat, cm1) 2975, 2933, 1727, 1697, 1394, 1335, 1289, 
1267, 1162, 1113, 1045, 971, 868, 771, 764. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C12H25N2O4 [M+NH4]
261.1809, found 261.1816. 
tert-Butyl (S)-5,5-diethyl-2,2,3-trimethyl-6-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate 
To a solution of tert-butyl (S)-2,2,3-trimethyl-6-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (235 mg, 0.97 
mmol, 1 equiv) and ethyl iodide (753 mg, 4.83 mmol, 5 equiv) in tetrahydrofuran (5 mL) and 
TMEDA (1 mL) at 78 oC was added KHMDS (0.7 M in toluene, 7.25 mL, 5.07 mmol, 5.25 
Appendix I 
equiv) dropwise. The reaction was stirred for 1 h at 78 oC and then at room temperature 
overnight. The reaction was diluted with ethyl acetate (30 mL) and sat. aq. NH4Cl (5 mL) added. 
The organic phase was separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated. The 
crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1020% ethyl acetate in 
hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless solid (259 mg, 0.87 mmol, 90% yield). M.p. 
7680 oC. []
. 22.9o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.27 (q, J = 7.1 Hz, 
1H, 3), 2.56  2.41 (m, 1H, 10-Ha), 2.26  2.08 (m, 3H, 10-Hb, 10-Ha, 10-Hb), 1.54 (s, 3H, 
2), 1.48 (s, 9H, 9), 1.33 (s, 3H, 2), 1.18 (d, J = 7.1 Hz, 3H, 4), 0.93  0.82 (m, 6H, 11, 11). 
13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  171.0 (6), 154.4 (7), 81.8 (1), 81.0 (8), 66.7 (5), 53.3 (3), 32.3 
(10), 28.6 (9), 28.5 (10), 27.5 (2), 27.4 (2), 16.3 (4), 10.4 (11), 10.0 (11). IR (neat, cm1) 
2968, 2880, 1729, 1677, 1457, 1382, 1367, 1324, 1306, 1228, 1166, 1134, 1101, 1045, 1036, 
972, 857, 770. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C16H30N1O4 [M+H]
+ 300.2169, found 300.2174.  
(S)-3,3-Diethyl-5,6,6-trimethylmorpholin-2-one (269g) 
tert-Butyl (S)-5,5-diethyl-2,2,3-tri-methyl-6-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (205 mg, 0.68 
mmol) was dissolved in dichloromethane (4.5 mL) and trifluoroacetic acid (0.9 mL) added. The 
reaction was stirred at room temperature overnight, concentrated in vacuo, sat. aq. NaHCO3 (5 
mL) added and the aqueous phase extracted with dichloromethane. The organics were separated 
and dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent removed in vacuo. The crude material was 
purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1030% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to give the title 
compound as a pale yellow oil (269g, 136 mg, 0.68 mmol, quantitative yield). []
. +7.0o (c 
1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  3.09 (q, J = 6.6 Hz, 1H, 3), 1.94  1.76 (m, 2H, 7-
Ha, 7-Ha), 1.75  1.62 (m, 1H, 7-Hb), 1.53  1.40 (m, 1H, 7-Hb), 1.31 (s, 3H, 2), 1.29 (s, 3H, 
2), 1.19 (br. s, 1H, 9), 1.04 (d, J = 6.6 Hz, 3H, 4), 0.94 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 3H, 8), 0.88 (t, J = 7.5 
Hz, 3H, 8). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  174.5 (6), 86.3 (1), 63.2 (5), 51.5 (3), 30.5 (7), 30.4 
(7), 26.7 (2), 21.1 (2), 17.0 (4), 8.9 (8), 7.6 (8). IR (neat, cm1) 3334, 2976, 2938, 2880, 1714, 
1461, 1374, 1237, 1207, 1192, 1132, 1106, 1088, 974, 808, 732, 707. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd 
for C11H22N1O2 [M+H]
+ 200.1645, found 200.1644.  
Appendix I 
Synthesis of Cyclic Iodine(III) Tosylate Oxidant 
3-Oxo-1-3-benzo[d][1,2]iodaoxol-1(3H)-yl 4-methylbenzenesulfonate (249) 
A suspension of 2-iodobenzoic acid (9.92 g, 40 mmol, 1 equiv) and sodium periodate (8.98 g, 
42 mmol, 1.05 equiv) in 30% aq. AcOH (60 mL) was heated at reflux for 4 h. The reaction was 
diluted with cold water and cooled at room temperature in the dark. The precipitate was filtered 
and the solids washed with ice water and acetone. The product (2-iodosylbenzoic acid) was 
dried under vacuum and used directly (white powder, 9.99 g, 37.8 mmol, 95% yield).  
 To a suspension of 2-iodosylbenzoic acid (3.17 g, 12.0 mmol, 1 equiv) in acetic 
anhydride (6 mL) was added TsOHH2O (4.57 g, 24.0mmol, 2 equiv) portionwise. The reaction 
was stirred in air at room temperature for 2 h before addition of dry diethyl ether (60 mL). The 
precipitate was filtered under nitrogen and the solids washed with dry diethyl ether (3 x 60 mL). 
The product was dried under vacuum overnight to afford the title compound as white powder 
(249, 4.65 g, 11.1 mmol, 93% yield). 1H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6)  8.01 (dd, J = 7.6, 1.1 
Hz, 1H), 7.98  7.92 (m, 1H), 7.84 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 1H), 7.70 (t, J = 7.4 Hz, 1H), 7.49 (d, J = 8.1 
Hz, 2H), 7.13 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2H), 2.29 (s, 3H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, DMSO-d6)  167.8, 145.1, 
138.1, 134.5, 131.5, 131.1, 130.4, 128.2, 126.4, 125.6, 120.5, 20.8. Spectral data were in 
accordance with the literature.277 
Synthesis of Acyclic Amino-diol Substrates Derived from Morpholinones  
(S)-2-Ethyl-2-((1-hydroxypropan-2-yl)amino)butan-1-ol 
To a solution of (S)-3,3-diethyl -5-methylmorpholin-2-one (406 mg, 2.37 mmol, 1 equiv; 
synthesized by Dr. C. He153) in tetrahydrofuran (5 mL) at 0 oC was added LiAlH4 (2.4 M in 
THF, 1.5 mL, 3.56 mmol, 1.5 equiv) dropwise. The reaction was warmed to room temperature 
and stirred overnight. The reaction was re-cooled to 0 oC followed by addition of H2O (150 
Appendix I 
L), 10% aq. NaOH (150 L) then H2O (450 L). The white precipitate was filtered and washed 
with THF. The filtrate was dried over Na2SO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated to give the 
title compound as a colourless oil (415 mg, 2.37 mmol, quantitative yield). []
. +34.8o (c 
1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  3.49 (dd, J = 10.3, 4.3 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 3.36 (d, J = 
11.4 Hz, 1H, 5-Ha), 3.28 (d, J = 11.4 Hz, 1H, 5-Hb), 3.20 (dd, J = 10.3, 8.0 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 2.95 
 2.27 (m, 4H, 2, 8, 9, 10), 1.50  1.37 (m, 1H, 6-Ha), 1.34  1.21 (m, 3H, 6-Hb, 6-Ha, 6-Hb), 
1.02 (d, J = 6.5 Hz, 3H, 3), 0.86  0.78 (m, 6H, 7, 7). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  67.7 (1), 
64.0 (5), 59.0 (4), 47.3 (2), 26.1 (6), 24.8 (6), 20.6 (c), 7.7 (7), 7.3 (7). IR (neat, cm1) 3295 
(br.), 2965, 2934, 2879, 1460, 1378, 1158, 1072, 1051, 930, 889. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for 
C9H22NO2 [M+H]
+ 176.1645, found 176.1643.  
 (S)-2-Ethyl-2-((1-(pivaloyloxy)propan-2-yl)amino)butyl pivalate (276) 
To a solution of (S)-2-ethyl-2-((1-hydroxypropan-2-yl)amino)butan-1-ol (173 mg, 0.99 mmol, 
1 equiv) in dichloromethane (5 mL) at 0 oC were added DMAP (6 mg, 0.05 mmol, 0.05 equiv), 
pivaloyl chloride (286 mg, 2.37 mmol, 2.4 equiv) and triethylamine (344 L, 2.47 mmol, 2.5 
equiv). The reaction was stirred at room temperature overnight, diluted with dichloromethane 
(20 mL) and water (10 mL) added. The organic phase was separated and the aqueous phase re-
extracted with dichloromethane (2 x 20 mL). The combined organic phases were dried over 
MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash 
chromatography (515% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless oil 
(276, 321 mg, 0.93 mmol, 94% yield). []
. 10.4o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, 
CDCl3)  4.00 (dd, J = 10.5, 4.6 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 3.93  3.83 (m, 2H, 5-Ha, 5-Hb), 3.64 (dd, J = 
10.5, 7.9 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.07  2.95 (m, 1H, 2), 1.48  1.31 (m, 4H, 6-Ha, 6-Hb, 6-Ha, 14), 
1.26  1.13 (m, 19H, 6-Hb, 10, 13), 1.06 (d, J = 6.5 Hz, 3H, 3), 0.87  0.79 (m, 6H, 7, 7). 13C 
NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.5 (8 or 11), 178.4 (8 or 11), 70.0 (1), 66.9 (5), 57.6 (4), 45.0 
(2), 39.0 (9 or 12), 38.9 (9 or 12), 27.4 (10, 13), 27.1 (6), 26.1 (6), 21.1 (3), 7.6 (7 or 7), 7.5 
(7 or 7). IR (neat, cm1) 2970, 2876, 1730, 1481, 1461, 1398, 1366, 1283, 1149, 1034, 982, 
770. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C19H38NO4 [M+H]
+ 344.2795, found 344.2798.  
Appendix I 
Authentic Sample of the Acyclic Piv-protected Azetidine Diol (277) 
((S)-2-Ethyl-1-((S)-1-(pivaloyloxy)propan-2-yl)azetidin-2-yl)methyl pivalate 
To a solution of (2S,6S)-6-ethyl-2-methyl-4-oxa-1-azabicyclo[4.2.0]octan-5-one (256a, 56 mg, 
0.33 mmol, 1 equiv; synthesized by Dr. C. He226) in tetrahydrofuran (1 mL) at 0 oC was added 
LiAlH4 (2 M in THF, 0.25 mL, 0.50 mmol, 1.5 equiv) dropwise. The reaction was warmed to 
room temperature and stirred overnight. The reaction was re-cooled to 0 oC followed by 
addition of H2O (25 L), 10% aq. NaOH (25 L) and H2O (75 L). The white precipitate was 
filtered and washed with tetrahydrofuran. The filtrate was dried over Na2SO4, filtered and the 
solvent evaporated to give the diol intermediate as a colourless oil (38 mg, 0.22 mmol, 67% 
yield).  
 The crude diol (38 mg, 0.22 mmol, 1 equiv) was dissolved in dichloromethane (2 mL) 
at 0 oC and DMAP (2.7 mg, 0.022 mmol, 0.1 equiv), pivaloyl chloride (64 mg, 0.53 mmol, 2.4 
equiv) and triethylamine (77 L, 0.55 mmol, 2.5 equiv) added. The reaction was stirred at room 
temperature overnight, diluted with dichloromethane (10 mL) and water (5 mL) added. The 
organic phase was separated and the aqueous phase re-extracted with dichloromethane (2 x 10 
mL). The combined organic phases were dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated. 
The crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (515% ethyl acetate in 
hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless oil (54 mg, 0.16 mmol, 72% yield). []
+0.8o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.22  4.13 (m, 2H, 5-Ha, 5-Hb), 3.99 (dd, 
J = 10.7, 4.1 Hz, 1H, 1-Ha), 3.70 (dd, J = 10.7, 7.5 Hz, 1H, 1-Hb), 3.26  3.12 (m, 2H, 9-Ha, 9-
Hb), 2.96  2.85 (m, 1H, 2), 1.98  1.86 (m, 1H, 8-Ha), 1.77  1.59 (m, 3H, 6-Ha, 6-Hb, 8-Hb), 
1.19 (s, 9H, l or o), 1.17 (s, 9H, 12 or 15), 0.96 (d, J = 6.3 Hz, 3H, 3), 0.84 (app. t, J = 7.5 Hz, 
3H, 7). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.5 (10 or 13), 178.4 (10 or 13), 68.4 (4), 67.5 (1), 
66.6 (5), 52.7 (2), 46.6 (9), 39.0 (11 or 14), 38.9 (11 or 14), 28.0 (6), 27.3(2) (12 or 15), 27.3(0) 
(12 or 15), 23.9 (8), 16.1 (3), 8.2 (7). IR (neat, cm1) 2970, 2874, 1730, 1481, 1461, 1398, 
1367, 1282, 1151, 1035, 983, 770. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C19H36NO4 [M+H]
+ 342.2639, 
found 342.2638.  
Appendix I 
Discovery of Decarboxylative Arylation Reaction 
((2S,3R/S)-1-Cyclohexyl-3-methylazetidin-2-yl)methyl pivalate (285) 
A solution of (S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylbutyl pivalate (283, 81 mg, 0.3 mmol) and 
Pd(OAc)2 (101 mg, 0.45 mmol, 1.5 equiv) in chloroform (3 mL) was stirred overnight at 50 oC 
in a sealed microwave vial under air. The reaction was cooled to room temperature and filtered 
through a plug of Celite. To the filtrate containing palladacycle 292 was added pyridine (50 L, 
0.6 mmol, 2 equiv) and the solution concentrated under reduced pressure to give monomeric 
palladacycle 293. Analysis by 1H NMR indicated quantitative formation to 293 as a 1:1 mixture 
of diastereomers.  
Crude 293 was transferred in 1,2-dichloroethane (4 mL) to a microwave vial containing 3-oxo-
1-3-benzo[d][1,2]iodaoxol-1(3H)-yl 4-methyl-benzenesulfonate (249, 376 mg, 0.9 mmol, 3 
equiv) and AgOAc (150 mg, 0.9 mmol, 3 equiv). The vial was sealed and the reaction stirred at 
60 oC overnight. The reaction was cooled to room temperature and filtered through a plug of 
Celite. The filtrate was diluted with dichloromethane (20 mL) and washed with sat. aq. NaHCO3 
(10 mL). The organic phase was separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent 
evaporated. The yield of the azetidine 285 was determined as 55% from analysis of the 1H NMR 
spectrum. In addition, analysis of the crude mixture by GC-MS and LC-MS analysis indicated 
the formation of mono- and di-arylation products (294 and 295; characterization provided 
previously in the Experimental section). The crude residue was purified by silica gel flash 
chromatography (1060% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to afford the azetidine product as a pale 
yellow oil (285, 18 mg, 0.067 mmol, 22% yield, 1:1 mixture of diastereomers). 1H NMR (400 
Appendix I 
MHz, CDCl3)  4.30  4.11 (m, 3H, 6-Ha, 6*-Ha,b), 4.05 (dd, J = 11.1, 7.2 Hz, 1H, 6-Hb), 3.61 
(app. t, J = 7.1 Hz, 1H, 12-Ha), 3.45  3.34 (m, 1H, 5*), 3.11  3.02 (m, 2H, 12*-Ha,b), 2.99  
2.91 (m, 1H, 5), 2.56  2.41 (m, 2H, 10*, 12-Hb), 2.29 (app. septet, J = 7.3 Hz, 1H, 10), 2.16  
2.01 (m, 2H, 4, 4*), 1.93  1.82 (m, 2H, 3-Ha, 3*-Ha), 1.80  1.66 (m, 6H, 2-Ha, 2*-Ha, 2-Ha, 
2*-Ha, 3-Ha, 3*-Ha), 1.65  1.55 (m, 2H, 1-Ha, 1*-Ha), 1.36  0.90 (m, 34H, 1-Hb, 1*-Hb, 
2-Hb, 2*-Hb, 2-Hb, 2*-Hb, 3-Hb, 3*-Hb, 3-Hb, 3*-Hb, 9, 9*, 11, 11*). 13C NMR (101 MHz, 
CDCl3)  178.3(2) (7/7*), 178.2(8) (7/7*), 69.9 (5), 68.5 (6), 66.6 (4/4*), 66.2 (4/4*), 64.2 (6*), 
63.2 (5*), 57.8 (12), 56.7 (12*), 38.8 (8/8*), 38.7 (8/8*), 31.1 (3/3*), 31.0 (3/3*), 30.3 (10), 
29.8 (3/3*), 29.7 (3/3*), 27.2(3) (9/9*), 27.1(6) (9/9*), 25.9 (two signals overlapping, 1, 1*) 
25.6 (10*), 24.6(3) (2/2*), 24.6(2) (2/2*), 24.5(7) (2/2*), 24.5(2) (2/2*), 18.9 (11), 14.8 
(11*). IR (neat, cm1) 2927, 2854, 1729, 1480, 1368, 1280, 1147, 1033. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd 
for C16H30N1O2 [M+H]
+ 268.2277, found 268.2265.  
Synthesis of Acyclic Piv-protected Amino Alcohol Substrates  
General Procedure D. To a suspension of hydrochloride salt of the 1o amine alkyl ester (1 
equiv) in THF (0.3 M) was added NaHCO3 (1.05 equiv) at room temperature and the reaction 
stirred for 1 h. The reaction was cooled to 0 oC followed by the addition of ketone (1.2 equiv), 
NaBH(OAc)3 (1.3 equiv) and AcOH (1.5 equiv). The reaction was stirred for 24 h at room 
temperature before quenching with 10% aq. NaOH (2 mL per mmol amino ester). After stirring 
for 0.5 h, DCM (10 mL per mmol amino ester) was added. The organic phase was separated 
and the aqueous re-extracted with DCM. The combined organics were washed with brine (2 
mL per mmol amino ester), separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent removed in 
vacuo. The crude 2o amino ester product was used directly in the next step.  
A solution of the 2o amine alkyl ester (1 equiv) in THF (0.5 M) was cooled to 0 oC and 
LiAlH4 (powder, 2 equiv) added portion-wise. The reaction was stirred overnight at room 
Appendix I 
temperature. The reaction was re-cooled to 0 oC before adding water (1 mL per g LiAlH4), 10% 
aq. NaOH (1 mL per g LiAlH4), water (2 mL per g LiAlH4) and Na2SO4 (20 g per g LiAlH4). 
The reaction was stirred for 0.5 h at room temperature, filtered through Celite and the solvent 
removed in vacuo. The crude amino alcohol was used directly in the next step.  
To a solution of amino alcohol (1 equiv) in DCM (0.5 M) at 0 oC were added DMAP 
(0.05 equiv), pivaloyl chloride (1.2 equiv) and triethylamine (1.5 equiv). The reaction was 
warmed to room temperature and stirred overnight. The reaction was diluted with DCM (5 mL 
per mmol amino alcohol) and water (2 mL per mmol amino alcohol) added. The organic phase 
was separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent removed in vacuo. The crude product 
was purified by silica gel flash chromatography.  
(S)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-methylbutyl pivalate (283)  
Synthesised using General Procedure D from L-valine ethyl ester hydrochloride (1.817 g, 10.0 
mmol) and cyclohexanone. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (020% EtOAc in 
hexanes) gave the title compound as a colourless oil (283, 2.485 g, 9.22 mmol, 92% yield over 
3 steps). []
. 11.5o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.08 (dd, J = 11.2, 5.2 
Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.96 (dd, J = 11.2, 5.8 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.64 (app. q, J = 5.4 Hz, 1H, 6), 2.46 (tt, 
J = 10.3 Hz, 3.7 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.91  1.67 (m, 5H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.63  1.54 (m, 
1H, 1-Ha), 1.32  0.74 (m, 21H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12, 12). 13C NMR (101 
MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (8), 65.5 (7), 58.5 (6), 54.9 (4), 39.0 (9), 34.7 (3), 34.2 (3), 30.2 (11), 
27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.3 (2), 25.2 (2), 18.9 (12), 18.7 (12). IR (film, cm1) 2956, 2928, 2853, 
1730, 1480, 1365, 1283, 1154, 1111, 1034. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C16H32N1O2 [M+H]
270.2428, found 270.2427.  
Appendix I 
(S)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3,3-dimethylbutyl pivalate (284) 
Synthesised using General Procedure D from L-tert-leucine methyl ester hydrochloride (5.45 g, 
30.0 mmol) and cyclohexanone. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (020% EtOAc 
in hexanes) gave the title compound as a colourless oil (284, 1.99 g, 7.0 mmol, 23% yield over 
3 steps). []
. 18.5o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.25 (dd, J = 11.5, 4.7 
Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.95 (dd, J = 11.5, 5.5 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.52  2.42 (m, 2H, 4, 6), 1.93  1.84 (m, 
1H, 3-Ha), 1.79  1.66 (m, 3H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.62  1.54 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.32  0.88 (m, 
23H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 10, 12), 0.75 (br. s, 1H, 5). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) 
 178.8 (8), 65.6 (7), 61.7 (6), 55.6 (4), 38.8 (9), 35.0 (3), 34.2 (3), 33.7 (11), 27.3 (10), 27.2 
(12), 26.2 (1), 25.3 (2), 24.9 (2). IR (neat, cm1) 2956, 2927, 2855, 1729, 1479, 1364, 1284, 
1154. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C17H34N1O2 [M+H]
+ 284.2584, found 284.2580.  
(2S,3S)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (297) 
Synthesised using General Procedure D from L-isoleucine methyl ester hydrochloride (3.633 g, 
20.0 mmol) and cyclohexanone. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (020% Et2O 
in dichloromethane) gave the title compound as a colourless oil (297, 3.381 g, 11.9 mmol, 60% 
yield over 3 steps). []
. 1.7o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.12 (dd, J = 
11.2, 4.7 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.91 (dd, J = 11.2, 6.2 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.78  2.70 (m, 1H, 6), 2.45 (tt, 
J = 10.3, 3.7 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.90  1.75 (m, 2H, 3-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.74  1.65 (m, 2H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha), 
1.62  1.44 (m, 3H, 1-Ha, 11, 12-Ha), 1.31  0.95 (m, 16H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 
10, 12-Hb), 0.94  0.85 (m, 6H, 13, 14). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (8), 65.2 (7), 
57.1 (6), 54.5 (4), 39.0 (9), 37.3 (11), 34.5 (3), 34.3 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 26.0 (12), 25.3 (2), 
25.2 (2), 15.0 (14), 12.2 (13). IR (film, cm1) 2961, 2927, 2854, 1730, 1480, 1460, 1365, 1283, 
1154. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C17H34N1O2 [M+H]
+ 284.2584, found 284.2583. 
Appendix I 
(2S,3S)-3-Methyl-2-((1-tosylpiperidin-4-yl)amino)pentyl pivalate (329f) 
Synthesised using General Procedure D from L-isoleucine methyl ester hydrochloride (1.11 g, 
6.09 mmol) and 1-tosylpiperidin-4-one. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (10
30% EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a colourless solid (329f, 704 mg, 1.60 
mmol, 26% yield over 3 steps). M.p. 6569 oC. []
. 1.1o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 
MHz, CDCl3)  7.63 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2H, 4), 7.31 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2H, 3), 4.06 (dd, J = 11.2, 4.6 
Hz, 1H, 11-Ha), 3.86 (dd, J = 11.2, 6.1 Hz, 1H, 11-Hb), 3.65  3.55 (m, 2H, 6-Ha, 6-Ha), 2.67 
 2.61 (m, 1H, 10), 2.53  2.39 (m, 6H, 1, 6-Hb, 6-Hb, 8), 1.92  1.80 (m, 2H, 7-Ha, 7-Ha), 
1.52  1.34 (m, 4H, 7-Hb, 7-Hb, 15, 16-Ha), 1.21  1.04 (m, 10H, 9, 14, 16-Hb), 0.91  0.63 
(m, 7H, 9, 17, 18). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (12), 143.6 (2), 133.3 (5), 129.7 (3), 
127.9 (4), 64.4 (11), 57.1 (10), 51.2 (8), 45.1 (6), 45.0 (6), 38.9 (13), 37.0 (15), 32.6 (7), 32.3 
(7), 27.4 (14), 25.8 (16), 21.6 (1), 14.9 (18), 12.1 (17). IR (film, cm1) 2964, 2932, 2874, 1725, 
1463, 1341, 1284, 1164, 1092, 1048, 932, 726. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C23H39N2O4S1 
[M+H]+ 439.2625, found 439.2615.  
(2S,3S)-2-(Isopropylamino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (329h) 
Synthesised using General Procedure D from L-isoleucine methyl ester hydrochloride (1.817 g, 
10.0 mmol) and acetone. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (020% EtOAc in 
hexanes) gave the title compound as a colourless oil (329h, 2.182 g, 8.96 mmol, 90% yield over 
3 steps). []
. +2.9o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.14 (dd, J = 11.3, 4.7 
Hz, 1H, 5-Ha), 3.93 (dd, J = 11.3, 5.9 Hz, 1H, 5-Hb), 2.87 (septet, J = 6.2 Hz, 1H, 2), 2.74  
2.66 (m, 1H, 4), 1.59  1.44 (m, 2H, 9, 10-Ha), 1.24  1.10 (m, 10H, 8, 10-Hb), 1.06  0.99 (m, 
6H, 1, 1), 0.95  0.85 (m, 6H, 11, 12). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (6), 64.9 (5), 57.5 
(4), 46.4 (2), 39.0 (7), 37.3 (9), 27.4 (8), 26.1 (10), 23.8 (1), 23.5 (1), 15.0 (12), 12.2 (11). IR 
Appendix I 
(film, cm1) 2961, 2931, 2875, 1729, 1480, 1462, 1282, 1151, 1033. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd 
for C14H30N1O2 [M+H]
+ 244.2271, found 244.2272.  
(2R,3R)-3-(tert-Butoxy)-2-(cyclohexylamino)butyl pivalate (329n) 
Synthesised using General Procedure D from O-tert-butyl-L-threonine methyl ester 
hydrochloride (2.257 g, 10.0 mmol) and cyclohexanone. Purification by silica gel flash 
chromatography (1020% EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a colourless oil (329n, 
2.880 g, 8.79 mmol, 88% yield over 3 steps). []
. 9.6o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, 
CDCl3)  4.10  4.01 (m, 2H, 7-Ha,b), 3.72  3.64 (m, 1H, 11), 2.75  2.67 (m, 1H, 6), 2.53  
2.44 (m, 1H, 4), 1.90  1.75 (m, 2H, 3-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.75  1.66 (m, 2H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha), 1.62  1.54 
(m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.41  0.97 (m, 27H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 13, 14). 13C NMR 
(101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 73.6 (12), 67.4 (11), 64.7 (7), 58.4 (6), 55.2 (4), 38.9 (9), 34.6 
(3), 34.0 (3), 28.8 (13), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.2 (2), 25.1 (2), 19.6 (14). IR (film, cm1) 2974, 
2929, 2853, 1731, 1480, 1365, 1283, 1196, 1152, 1110, 1081. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for 
C19H38N1O3 [M+H]
+ 328.2846, found 328.2846.  
(2S,3R)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (329o) 
Synthesised using General Procedure D from L-allo-isoleucine methyl ester hydrochloride 
(3.633 g, 20.0 mmol) and cyclohexanone. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (5
20% Et2O in dichloromethane) gave the title compound as a colourless oil (329o, 2.691 g, 9.49 
mmol, 47% yield over 3 steps). []
. +12.1o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  
4.03 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.97 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.81  2.74 (m, 1H, 
6), 2.51  2.41 (m, 1H, 4), 1.91  1.75 (m, 2H, 3-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.75  1.66 (m, 2H, 2-Ha, 2Ha), 
1.62  1.44 (m, 3H, 1-Ha, 11, 12-Ha), 1.33  0.93 (m, 15H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 10, 
Appendix I 
12-Hb), 0.92  0.86 (m, 6H, 13, 14). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (8), 65.7 (7), 56.8 
(6), 55.0 (4), 38.9 (9), 36.9 (11), 34.8 (3), 34.2 (3), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.8 (12), 25.3 (2), 25.2 
(2), 14.8 (14), 12.4 (13). IR (film, cm1) 2963, 2927, 2854, 1730, 1480, 1460, 1366, 1282, 
1153. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C17H34N1O2 [M+H]
+ 284.2584, found 284.2583.  
2-(Cyclohexylamino)butyl pivalate (331a) 
Synthesised using General Procedure D from methyl 2-aminobutanoate hydrochloride (1.536 
g, 10.0 mmol) and cyclohexanone. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (540% 
EtOAc in hexanes) gave the title compound as a colourless oil (331a, 1.548 g, 6.06 mmol, 61% 
yield over 3 steps). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  4.02 (dd, J = 11.1, 5.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.94 
(dd, J = 11.1, 5.7 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.78 (quintet, J = 5.9 Hz, 1H, 6), 2.48 (tt, J = 10.4, 3.8 Hz, 
1H, 4), 1.91  1.76 (m, 2H, 3-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.75  1.66 (m, 2H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha), 1.62  1.54 (m, 1H, 
1-Ha), 1.52  0.86 (m, 20H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 11-Ha,b, 12). 13C NMR (101 
MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (8), 66.7 (7), 54.7 (4), 54.2 (6), 39.0 (9), 34.5 (3), 34.3 (3), 27.4 (10), 
26.2 (1), 25.6 (11), 25.3 (2), 25.2 (2), 10.4 (12). IR (film, cm1) 2926, 2853, 1728, 1480, 1450, 
1282, 1147, 1034, 770. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C15H30N1O2 [M+H]
+ 256.2271, found 
256.2270.   
(2S,3S)-2-((Cyclohexylmethyl)amino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (331c) 
Synthesised using General Procedure D from L-isoleucine methyl ester hydrochloride (1.817 g, 
10.0 mmol) and cyclohexanecarbaldehyde. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (0
20% Et2O in dichloromethane) gave the title compound as a colourless oil (331c, 1.049 g, 3.53 
mmol, 35% yield over 3 steps). []
. +9.7o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  
4.19 (dd, J = 11.2, 4.2 Hz, 1H, 8-Ha), 3.95 (dd, J = 11.2, 6.7 Hz, 1H, 8-Hb), 2.65  2.59 (m, 1H, 
Appendix I 
7), 2.50  2.39 (m, 2H, 5), 1.82  1.63 (m, 5H, 1-Ha, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.63  1.35 (m, 
3H, 4, 12, 13-Ha), 1.33  1.08 (m, 14H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 6, 11, 13-Hb), 0.98  0.85 (m, 8H, 
3-Hb, 3-Hb, 14, 15). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.6 (9), 64.6 (8), 60.5 (7), 54.7 (5), 38.8 
(10), 38.4 (4), 36.4 (12), 31.5(3) (3), 31.4(9) (3), 27.2 (11), 26.7 (1), 26.1 (2/2), 14.7 (15), 
12.0 (14). IR (film, cm1) 2965, 2923, 2852, 1731, 1480, 1283, 1154, 1033. HRMS m/z (ESI) 
calcd for C18H36N1O2 [M+H]
+ 298.2741, found 298.2740.  
Miscellaneous Amine Substrates for Pd-catalyzed Decarboxylative Arylation 
(2S,3S)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl benzoate (329k) 
Amino alcohol (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexyl-amino)-3-methylpentan-1-ol was synthesised using 
Steps 1 and 2 from General Procedure D from L-isoleucine methyl ester hydrochloride (1.817 g, 
10.0 mmol) and cyclohexanone. The product was isolated as a viscous colourless oil (1.550 g, 
7.78 mmol, 78% yield over 2 steps) and used directly in the next step. 
To a solution of (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentan-1-ol (399 mg, 2.0 mmol, 
1 equiv) in dichloromethane (10 mL) at 0 oC were added DMAP (12 mg, 0.1 mmol, 0.05 equiv), 
benzoyl chloride (337 mg, 2.4 mmol, 1.2 equiv) and triethylamine (0.42 mL, 3.0 mmol, 1.5 
equiv). The reaction was warmed to room temperature and stirred overnight. The reaction was 
diluted with dichloromethane (20 mL) and water (10 mL) added. The organic phase was 
separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent removed in vacuo. The crude product was 
purified by silica gel flash chromatography (510% Et2O in dichloromethane) to give the title 
compound as a colourless oil (329k, 309 mg, 1.02 mmol, 51% yield). []
. 10.8o (c 1.0, 
CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  8.03 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 2H, 10), 7.56 (app. t, J = 7.4 Hz, 
1H, 12), 7.44 (app. t, J = 7.8 Hz, 2H, 11), 4.38 (dd, J = 11.2, 4.8 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 4.22 (dd, J = 
11.2, 6.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.92  2.85 (m, 1H, 6), 2.53 (tt, J = 10.3, 3.7 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.94  1.79 
(m, 2H, 3-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.76  1.66 (m, 2H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha), 1.65  1.52 (m, 3H, 1-Ha 13, 14-Ha), 
1.30  0.99 (m, 7H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 14-Hb), 0.98  0.91 (m, 6H, 15, 16). 13C 
NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  166.8 (8), 133.0 (12), 130.5 (9), 129.7 (10), 128.5 (11), 65.9 (7), 
57.4 (6), 54.8 (4), 37.5 (13), 34.6 (3), 34.3 (3), 26.3 (1), 26.0 (14), 25.3 (2), 25.2 (2), 15.2 
Appendix I 
(16), 12.2 (15). IR (film, cm1) 2928, 2854, 1720, 1451, 1272, 1113, 711. HRMS m/z (ESI) 
calcd for C19H30N1O2 [M+H]
+ 304.2271, found 304.2272.  
N-((2S,3S)-1-Methoxy-3-methylpentan-2-yl)cyclohexanamine (329l) 
To a solution of (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexyl-amino)-3-methylpentan-1-ol (551 mg, 2.76 mmol, 1 
equiv) at room temperature were added benzyl bromide (990 L, 8.29 mmol, 3 equiv) and 
Hnigs base (1.44 mL, 8.29 mmol, 3 equiv). The reaction was stirred at 80 oC for 5 h before 
cooling to room temperature and removing the solvent in vacuo. The crude material was 
purified by silica gel flash chromatography (510% EtOAc in hexanes) to give protected amino 
alcohol (2S,3S)-2-(benzyl(cyclohexyl)amino)-3-methylpentan-1-ol as a pale yellow oil 
(610 mg, 2.11 mmol, 76% yield).  
 A solution of (2S,3S)-2-(benzyl(cyclohexyl)amino)-3-methylpentan-1-ol (289 mg, 1.0 
mmol, 1 equiv) in THF (5 mL) was added dropwise to a suspension of sodium hydride (60 wt%, 
120 mg, 3.0 mmol, 3 equiv) in THF (5 mL) at 0 oC. After stirring for 0.5 h at room temperature, 
methyl iodide (250 L, 4.0 mmol, 4 equiv) was added and the reaction heated at reflux 
overnight. The reaction was cooled to room temperature and water (10 mL) added. The reaction 
was diluted with Et2O (50 mL) and the organic phase separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and 
the solvent removed in vacuo.  
 The crude product was re-dissolved in EtOH (10 mL) under an atmosphere of nitrogen. 
Palladium on carbon (10 wt%, 53 mg, 0.05 mmol, 5 mol%) was added, and the atmosphere 
exchanged for hydrogen (1 atm, balloon). The reaction was stirred at room temperature 
overnight, filtered through Celite and the solvent removed in vacuo. The crude material was 
purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1030% EtOAc in hexanes) to give the title 
compound as a colourless oil (329l, 141 mg, 0.66 mmol, 66% yield over 2 steps). []
. 1.8o 
(c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  3.37 (dd, J = 9.4, 4.4 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.31 (s, 3H, 
8), 3.24 (dd, J = 9.4, 6.6 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.73  2.67 (m, 1H, 6), 2.42 (tt, J = 10.4, 3.8 Hz, 1H, 
4), 1.91  1.79 (m, 2H, 3-Ha, 3-Ha), 1.75  1.66 (m, 2H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha), 1.62  0.95 (m, 10H, 1-
Ha,b, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 9, 10-Ha,b), 0.90 (t, J = 7.3 Hz, 3H, 11), 0.85 (d, J = 6.9 Hz, 
Appendix I 
3H, 12). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  73.4 (7), 59.0 (8), 57.9 (6), 54.3 (4), 36.4 (9), 34.7 
(3), 34.1 (3), 26.3 (1), 26.2 (10), 25.5 (2), 25.4 (2), 14.7 (12), 12.4 (11). IR (film, cm1) 2959, 
2926, 2853, 1449, 1372, 1196, 1111. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C13H28N1O1 [M+H]
214.2165, found 214.2166.  
2-((2S,3S)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl)isoindoline-1,3-dione (329m) 
To a suspension of L-isoleucinamide hydrochloride (1.667g, 10.0 mmol, 1 equiv) in THF (50 
mL) was added NaHCO3 (882 mg, 10.05 mmol, 1.05 equiv) at room temperature and the 
reaction stirred for 1 h. The reaction was cooled to 0 oC followed by addition of cyclohexanone 
(1.178 g, 12.0 mmol, 1.2 equiv), NaBH(OAc)3 (2.755 g, 13.0 mmol, 1.3 equiv) and AcOH (0.86 
mL, 15.0 mmol, 1.5 equiv). The reaction was stirred for 24 h at room temperature before 
quenching with 10% aq. NaOH (30 mL). After stirring for 0.5 h, dichloromethane (200 mL) 
was added. The organic phase was separated, and the aqueous phase re-extracted with 
dichloromethane. The combined organics were washed with brine (30 mL), separated, dried 
over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent removed in vacuo.  
The crude material was re-dissolved in tetrahydrofuran (30 mL) and cooled to 0 oC. 
LiAlH4 (powder, 1.518 g, 40.0 mmol, 4 equiv) was added portionwise and the reaction stirred 
under reflux for 24 h. The reaction was cooled to 0 oC followed by addition of water (1.5 mL), 
10% aq. NaOH (1.5 mL), water (3 mL) and Na2SO4 (30 g). The reaction was stirred for 0.5 h 
at room temperature, filtered through Celite and the solvent removed in vacuo to give (2S,3S)-
N2-cyclohexyl-3-methylpentane-1,2-diamine as a colourless oil (1.842 g, 9.29 mmol, 93% yield 
over 2 steps).  
A solution of (2S,3S)-N2-cyclohexyl-3-methylpentane-1,2-diamine (595 mg, 3.00 mmol, 1 
equiv), phthalic anhydride (444 mg, 3.00 mmol, 1 equiv) and triethylamine (0.84 mL, 6.00 
Appendix I 
mmol, 2 equiv) in toluene (20 mL) was heated under reflux using Dean-Stark apparatus 
overnight. The reaction was cooled to room temperature, concentrated in vacuo, 
dichloromethane added (50 mL) and washed with 10% aq. K2CO3 (20 mL). The organic phase 
was separated and washed with brine (20 mL), dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent 
removed in vacuo. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (10
20% EtOAc in hexanes) to give the title compound as a pale yellow oil (329m, 283 mg, 0.86 
mmol, 29% yield). []
. +39.5o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.87  7.81 
(m, 2H, 10), 7.73  7.68 (m, 2H, 11), 3.66 (dd, J = 13.7, 5.4 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.56 (dd, J = 13.7, 
8.6 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.96  2.89 (m, 1H, 6), 2.35 (tt, J = 10.0, 3.7 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.78  1.70 (m, 1H, 
3-Ha), 1.69  1.43 (m, 6H, 1-Ha, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 12, 13-Ha), 1.37  0.89 (m, 12H, 1-Hb, 2-
Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 13-Hb, 14, 15), 0.85  0.73 (m, 1H, 3-Hb). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) 
 169.0 (8), 134.0 (11), 132.3 (9), 123.3 (10), 57.4 (6), 55.0 (4), 40.1 (7), 37.4 (12), 34.5 (3), 
34.0 (3), 26.2 (1), 25.5 (13), 25.1 (2), 24.9 (2), 14.7 (15), 12.5 (14). IR (film, cm1) 2927, 
2852, 1773, 1712, 1434, 1397, 1062, 724. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C20H29N2O2 [M+H]
329.2224, found 329.2225. 
Methyl cyclohexyl-L-isoleucinate (331b) 
En route to substrate 297, a portion of the intermediate formed after Step 1 of General Procedure 
D was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (010% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to provide 
the title compound (331b). []
. 22.5o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  3.72 
(s, 3H, 8), 3.20 (d, J = 6.1 Hz, 1H, 6), 2.28 (tt, J = 10.1, 3.4 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.90  1.81 (m, 1H, 3-
Ha), 1.77  1.48 (m, 6H, 1-Ha, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 5, 9), 1.33  1.09 (m, 6H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-
Hb, 3-Hb, 10-Ha,b), 1.08  0.96 (m, 1H, 3-Hb), 0.93  0.85 (m, 6H, 11, 12). 13C NMR (101 
MHz, CDCl3)  176.4 (7), 63.0 (6), 55.5 (4), 51.3 (8), 38.6 (9), 34.3 (3), 32.8 (3), 26.1 (1), 25.7 
(10), 25.0 (2), 24.6 (2), 15.5 (12), 11.4 (11). IR (film, cm1) 2926, 2854, 1736, 1450, 1193, 
1172, 1150. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C13H26N1O2 [M+H]
+ 228.1958, found 228.1958.  
Appendix I 
Synthesis of Aryl Halide or Triflate Reagents 
Benzyl 2-iodobenzoate (315) 
To a solution of 2-iodobenzoic acid (12.40 g, 50.0 mmol, 1 equiv) in dichloromethane (30 mL) 
at room temperature were added benzyl alcohol (5.68 g, 52.5 mmol, 1.05 equiv), DCC (11.35 g, 
55.0 mmol, 1.1 equiv) and DMAP (611 mg, 5.0 mmol, 0.1 equiv). The reaction was stirred at 
room temperature overnight before filtering through a pad of Celite and removing the solvent 
in vacuo. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (510% EtOAc 
in hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless oil (315, 12.84 g, 38.0 mmol, 76% yield). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.99 (dd, J = 8.0, 0.7 Hz, 1H), 7.82 (dd, J = 7.8, 1.6 Hz, 1H), 
7.50  7.45 (m, 2H), 7.43  7.32 (m, 4H), 7.15 (td, J = 7.7, 1.6 Hz, 1H), 5.38 (s, 2H). 13C NMR 
(101 MHz, CDCl3)  166.4, 141.5, 135.6, 135.1, 132.8, 131.2, 128.8, 128.7, 128.6, 128.0, 94.3, 
67.5. Spectral data were in accordance with the literature.278  
2-(((Trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl)oxy)benzoic acid (327) 
To a solution of salicylaldehyde (1.221 g, 10 mmol, 1 equiv) and triethylamine (2.8 mL. 20 
mmol, 2 equiv) in dichloromethane (60 mL) at 0 oC was added triflic anhydride (2.5 mL, 15 
mmol, 1.5 equiv) in dichloromethane (10 mL) dropwise. After stirring at 0 oC for 1 h, the 
reaction was diluted with DCM (300 mL) and washed with 1 M aq. HCl, sat. aq. NaHCO3 and 
brine (100 mL each). The organic phase was dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent 
removed in vacuo. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (10% EtOAc in hexanes) 
gave 2-formylphenyl trifluoromethanesulfonate as a pale yellow oil (2.106 g, 8.29 mmol, 83% 
yield).  
Appendix I 
To a solution of 2-formylphenyl trifluoromethanesulfonate (755 mg, 2.97 mmol, 1 
equiv), NaH2PO4 (71 mg, 0.59 mmol, 0.2 equiv) and 30% aq. H2O2 (505 L, 4.46 mmol, 1.5 
equiv) in MeCN (30 mL) / water (3 mL) at 10 oC was added NaClO2 (390 mg, 4.31 mmol, 1.45 
equiv) in water (3 mL). The reaction was stirred at 10 oC for 3 h before adding sat. aq. NaHSO3 
(20 mL). The resulting mixture was poured into water (100 mL), extracted with ethyl acetate 
(300 mL) and the organic phase dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent removed in vacuo. 
Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (1050% ethyl acetate in hexanes, plus drops 
of AcOH) gave the title compound as a colourless solid (327, 600 mg, 2.22 mmol, 75% yield). 
M.p. 114116 oC. 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  10.00 (br. s, 1H, 8), 8.21 (dd, J = 7.8, 1.8 Hz, 
1H, 6), 7.70 (app. td, J = 8.0, 1.8 Hz, 1H, 5), 7.53 (app. td, J = 7.8, 1.1 Hz, 1H, 4), 7.38 (d, J = 
8.2 Hz, 1H, 3). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  168.8 (7), 149.0 (2), 135.4 (4), 133.5 (6), 128.7 
(5), 123.2(9) (3), 123.2(5) (1), 118.9 (q, 1JCF = 321 Hz, 9). 
19F NMR (376 MHz, CDCl3)  
73.2. IR (neat, cm1) 3028, 2871, 1700, 1609, 1492, 1415, 1283, 1269, 1201, 1134, 1076, 884, 
799, 768. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C8H4F3O5S1 [MH]
 268.9737, found 268.9738.  
2-Iodo-N-tosylbenzamide (333) 
To a solution of 2-iodobenzoic acid (4.960, 20.0 mmol, 1 equiv) in dichloromethane (100 mL) 
at 0 oC were added thionyl chloride (1.75 mL, 24.0 mmol, 1.2 equiv) and DMF (93 L, 1.2 
mmol, 0.06 equiv). After stirring for 3 h at room temperature, the solvent was removed in vacuo 
and the residue dissolved in toluene (15 mL) and ethyl acetate (40 mL). p-Toluenesulfonamide 
(3.424 g, 20.0 mmol, 1 equiv), triethylamine (7.0 mL, 50 mmol, 2.5 equiv) and DMAP (122 
mg, 1.0 mmol, 0.05 mmol) were added and the reaction was heated to 60 oC for 1 h. After 
cooling to room temperature, the reaction was quenched with 1 M aq. HCl (25 mL). The organic 
phase was separated and the aqueous phase extracted with EtOAc (2 x 100 mL). The combined 
organics were dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated. The crude material was 
purified by silica gel flash chromatography (2050% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to give the title 
compound as a viscous yellow oil (333, 5.656 g, 14.1 mmol, 70% yield). 1H NMR (400 MHz, 
CDCl3)  8.63 (br. s, 1H), 8.05 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 2H), 7.84 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.45  7.35 (m, 
4H), 7.17  7.12 (m, 1H), 2.47 (s, 3H). 13C NMR (126 MHz, CDCl3)  165.9, 145.5, 140.4, 
Appendix I 
138.7, 135.2, 132.6, 129.7, 129.0, 128.9, 128.4, 91.7, 21.9. Spectral data were in accordance 
with the literature.279 
N-((2-Iodophenyl)sulfonyl)acetamide (337a) 
2-Iodobenzenesulfonyl chloride (1.00 g, 3.31 mmol, 1 equiv) in acetone (5 mL) and aqueous 
ammonia (35% solution, 15 mL) were stirred at room temperature overnight. The volume of 
solvent was reduced by half in vacuo and the precipitate filtered. The solid material was washed 
with water and dried in a vacuum desiccator to give 2-iodobenzenesulfonamide as a colourless 
crystalline solid (937 mg, 3.31 mmol, quantitative yield).  
 2-Iodobenzenesulfonamide (937 mg, 3.31 mmol, 1 equiv) in acetic anhydride (4 mL) 
with added zinc chloride (90 mg, 0.66 mmol, 0.2 equiv) was stirred at room temperature 
overnight. The reaction was diluted with ethyl acetate (100 mL) and water (50 mL) added. The 
organic phase was separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated. The 
material was triturated in dichloromethane then Et2O to give the title compound as a colourless 
solid powder (337a, 992 mg, 3.05 mmol, 92% yield). M.p. 191195 oC. 1H NMR (400 MHz, 
DMSO-d6)  12.45 (s, 1H, 7), 8.17  8.10 (m, 2H, 3, 6), 7.63 (td, J = 7.6, 1.1 Hz, 1H, 5), 7.36 
(td, J = 7.6, 1.5 Hz, 1H, 4), 1.98 (s, 3H, 9). 13C NMR (101 MHz, DMSO-d6)  169.0 (8), 142.8 
(3), 141.6 (1), 134.9 (4), 132.4 (6), 128.9 (5), 93.6 (2) , 23.5 (9). IR (neat, cm1) 3231, 3058, 
1721, 1421, 1334, 1219, 1153, 1017, 947, 864. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C8H9I1N1O3S1 
[M+H]+ 325.9348, found 325.9340. 
N-((2-Iodo-4,5-dimethoxyphenyl)sulfonyl)acetamide (337b) 
2-Iodo-4,5-dimethoxybenzenesulfonyl chloride (662 mg, 1.83 mmol, 1 equiv) in acetone (5 
mL) and aqueous ammonia (35% solution, 10 mL) were stirred at room temperature overnight. 
Appendix I 
The volume of solvent was reduced by half in vacuo and the precipitate filtered. The solid 
material was washed with water and dried in a vacuum desiccator to give 2-iodo-4,5-
dimethoxybenzenesulfonamide as a colourless solid powder (445 mg, 1.30 mmol, 71% yield).  
 2-Iodo-4,5-dimethoxybenzenesulfonamide (445 mg, 1.30 mmol, 1 equiv) in acetic 
anhydride (1.5 mL) with added zinc chloride (35 mg, 0.26 mmol, 0.2 equiv) was stirred at room 
temperature overnight. The reaction was diluted with ethyl acetate (100 mL) and water (50 mL) 
added. The organic phase was separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated. 
The material was triturated in dichloromethane and Et2O to give the title compound as a 
colourless solid powder (337b, 330 mg, 0.86 mmol, 66% yield). M.p. 178182 oC. 1H NMR 
(400 MHz, DMSO-d6)  12.32 (s, 1H, 7), 7.59 (s, 1H, 3), 7.54 (s, 1H, 6), 3.87 (s, 3H, 10), 3.81 
(s, 3H, 11), 1.96 (s, 3H, 9). 13C NMR (101 MHz, DMSO-d6)  168.8 (8), 152.7 (4), 148.3 (5), 
133.4 (1), 124.5 (6), 115.3 (3), 84.1 (2), 56.7 (10), 56.3 (11), 23.5 (9). IR (neat, cm1) 3237, 
3012, 2960, 1722, 1435, 1353, 1262, 1153, 996, 841. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for 
C10H13I1N1O5S1 [M+H]
+ 385.9559, found 385.9575. 
N-((2-Bromophenyl)sulfonyl)acetamide (337c) 
2-Bromobenzenesulfonyl chloride (5.11 g, 20.0 mmol, 1 equiv) in acetone (30 mL) and aqueous 
ammonia (35% solution, 100 mL) were stirred at room temperature overnight. The volume of 
solvent was reduced by half in vacuo and the precipitate filtered. The solid material was washed 
with water and dried in a vacuum desiccator to give 2-bromobenzenesulfonamide as a 
colourless crystalline solid (4.032 mg, 17.1 mmol, 85% yield).  
 Acetyl chloride (785L, 11.0 mmol, 1.1 equiv) in toluene (8 mL) was added to a 
suspension of 2-bromobenzenesulfonamide (2.361 g, 10.0 mmol, 1 equiv), triethylamine (3.5 
mL, 25.0 mmol, 2.5 equiv) and DMAP (12 mg, 0.1 mmol, 0.01 equiv) in ethyl acetate (20 mL) 
at 0 oC. The reaction was stirred at room temperature overnight. Water (20 mL) and ethyl acetate 
(100 mL) were added to the reaction and the aqueous phase separated. The aqueous phase was 
acidified and the product extracted with ethyl acetate (2 x 100 mL). The combined organic 
phases were dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated. The material was triturated 
in dichloromethane and to provide the title compound as a colourless solid powder (337c, 1.267 
Appendix I 
g, 4.56 mmol, 46% yield). M.p. 137139 oC. 1H NMR (400 MHz, acetone-d6)  10.99 (br. s, 
7), 8.26 (dd, J = 7.7, 2.0 Hz, 1H, 6), 7.86 (dd, J = 7.5, 1.4 Hz, 1H, 3), 7.69  7.59 (m, 2H, 4, 5), 
2.10 (s, 3H, 9). 13C NMR (126 MHz, acetone-d6)  168.7 (8), 139.5 (1), 136.1 (3), 135.7 (4), 
133.9 (6), 128.7 (5), 120.3 (2), 23.4 (9). IR (neat, cm1) 3234, 1726, 1425, 1336, 1153, 1030, 
946, 870, 750. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C8H9Br1N1O3S1 [M+H]
+ 277.9487, found 277.9492.  
N-Acetyl-2-iodobenzamide (344) 
To a solution of 2-iodobenzamide (2.470, 10.0 mmol, 1 equiv) in acetic anhydride (5 mL) was 
added concentrated sulfuric acid (50 L, 1 mmol, 0.1 equiv). The reaction was heated in a sealed 
tube for 1 h at 140 oC. The reaction was cooled to room temperature and sat. aq. NaHCO3 (50 
mL) and dichloromethane (100 mL) added. The organic phase was separated, dried over 
MgSO4, filtered and the solvent evaporated. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash 
chromatography (20  40% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to give the title compound as an off-white 
solid powder (344, 1.899 g, 6.57 mmol, 66% yield). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  8.43 (br. s, 
1H), 7.94 (d, J = 8.0 Hz, 1H), 7.48  7.44 (m, 2H), 7.24  7.16 (m, 1H), 2.59 (s, 3H). 13C NMR 
(126 MHz, CDCl3)  172.4, 167.6, 140.3, 140.0, 132.2, 128.3, 128.2, 91.9, 25.3. Spectral data 
were in accordance with the literature.280  
Pd-catalyzed Acyloxylation Reaction with 2-Bromobenzoic acid 
(2S,3S)-3-(Cyclohexylamino)-2-ethyl-4-(pivaloyloxy)butyl 2-bromobenzoate (328-Br) 
To a 25 mL microwave vial containing a 10 mm magnetic stirrer bar were added Pd(OPiv)2 
(6.2 mg, 0.02 mmol, 10 mol%), CsOPiv (93.6 mg, 0.4 mmol, 2 equiv) and 2-bromobenzoic acid 
Appendix I 
(80.4 mg, 0.4 mmol, 2 equiv). Under air, a solution of amine 297 (56.7 mg, 0.2 mmol, 1 equiv) 
in CHCl3 (2 mL) was added via syringe and the vial sealed with a crimp cap with silicone/PTFE 
septum. The vial was placed in an oil bath pre-heated to 80 oC, and the reaction stirred at this 
temperature for 20 h. After cooling to room temperature, the reaction was filtered through a 
short plug of Celite and the filtrate concentrated in vacuo. The crude residue was purified by 
silica gel flash chromatography (510% Et2O in toluene) to give the title compound as a 
colourless oil (328-Br, 12.5 mg, 0.026 mmol, 13% yield). []
. +2.4o (c 1.0, CHCl3). 
NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.77 (dd, J = 7.6, 2.0 Hz, 1H, 21), 7.66 (dd, J = 7.4, 1.3 Hz, 1H, 
18), 7.37 (td, J = 7.6, 1.3 Hz, 1H, 20), 7.32 (td, J = 7.4, 2.0 Hz, 1H, 19), 4.44 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.7 
Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 4.37 (dd, J = 11.1, 4.7 Hz, 1H, 14-Hb), 4.15 (dd, J = 11.3, 5.8 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 
4.03 (dd, J = 11.3, 5.8 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 3.13  3.07 (m, 1H, 6), 2.49 (tt, J = 10.1, 3.6 Hz, 1H, 4), 
1.90  1.64 (m, 5H, 2-Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.63  1.51 (m, 2H, 1-Ha, 12-Ha), 1.47  
0.97 (m, 19H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12-Hb, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3) 
 178.6 (8), 166.4 (15), 134.5 (18), 132.6(2) (19), 132.6(0) (16), 131.4 (21), 127.3 (20), 121.7 
(17), 65.6 (14), 64.9 (7), 54.6 (4), 53.9 (6), 41.9 (11), 39.0 (9), 34.6 (3), 34.1 (3), 27.4 (10), 
26.2 (1), 25.2 (2), 25.0 (2), 20.0 (12), 12.5 (13). IR (neat, cm1) 2964, 2927, 2854, 1729, 1479, 
1287, 1248, 1152, 1030, 745. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C24H37Br1N1O4 [M+H]
+ 482.1900, 
found 482.1894.  
Isolation of Thiophenyl Decarboxylative Arylation Product 
(2S,3R)-2-(Cyclohexylamino)-3-(thiophen-3-ylmethyl)pentyl pivalate (301q) 
A solution of (2S,3S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3-methylpentyl pivalate (297, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol, 
1 equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (33.7 mg, 0.15 mmol, 1.5 equiv) in CHCl3 (1 mL) was stirred in a sealed 
vial at 50 oC for 6 h. The reaction was cooled to room temperature, passed through a Celite plug 
and pyridine (16 L, 0.20 mmol, 2 equiv) added. The reaction was concentrated in vacuo to 
give the crude pyridine-ligated palladacycle (299), which was used directly in the next step.  
Appendix I 
The crude palladacycle 299 was re-dissolved in AcOH (1 mL), followed by addition of 3-
iodothiophene-2-carboxylic acid (50.8 mg, 0.20 mmol, 2 equiv) and AgOAc (16.7 mg, 0.10 
mmol, 1 equiv). The reaction was stirred at 80 oC overnight, passed through a Celite plug and 
concentrated in vacuo. Dichloromethane (20 mL) was added followed by washing with sat. aq. 
NaHCO3 (10 mL). The organic phase was separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent 
evaporated. Purification by silica gel flash chromatography (10% ethyl acetate in hexanes) gave 
title compound as a pale yellow oil (301q, 8.5 mg, 0.023 mmol, 23% yield). 1H NMR (400 
MHz, CDCl3)  7.24 (dd, J = 4.7, 3.0 Hz, 1H, 17), 6.94  6.89 (m, 2H, 16, 18), 4.09 (dd, J = 
11.1, 6.1 Hz, 1H, 7-Ha), 3.97 (dd, J = 11.1, 6.0 Hz, 1H, 7-Hb), 2.92 (td, J = 5.7, 3.5 Hz, 1H, 6), 
2.83 (dd, J = 14.3, 6.9 Hz, 1H, 14-Ha), 2.55  2.41 (m, 2H, 4, 14-Hb), 1.85  1.65 (m, 5H, 2-
Ha, 2-Ha, 3-Ha, 3-Ha, 11), 1.63  1.54 (m, 1H, 1-Ha), 1.47  0.87 (m, 20H, 1-Hb, 2-Hb, 2-
Hb, 3-Hb, 3-Hb, 5, 10, 12-Ha,b, 13). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  178.7 (8), 142.2 (15), 
128.6 (18), 125.4 (17), 120.9 (16), 65.1 (7), 54.4 (4), 54.1 (6), 43.5 (11), 38.9 (9), 34.6 (3), 
34.3 (3), 30.7 (14), 27.4 (10), 26.3 (1), 25.3 (2), 25.1 (2), 22.4 (12), 12.5 (13). IR (neat, cm1) 
2958, 2926, 2852, 1727, 1479, 1282, 1152, 765. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C21H36N1O2S1 
[M+H]+ 366.2467, found 366.2463.  
Reaction of Palladacycle 332 with Aryl Iodide 333 
A solution of (S)-2-(cyclohexylamino)-3,3-dimethylbutyl pivalate (284, 28.3 mg, 0.10 mmol, 1 
equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (33.7 mg, 0.15 mmol, 1.5 equiv) in CHCl3 (1 mL) was stirred in a sealed 
vial at 50 oC for 6 h under air. The reaction was cooled to room temperature, passed through a 
Celite plug and pyridine (16 L, 0.20 mmol, 2 equiv) added. The solvent was removed in vacuo, 
and Et2O (10 mL) added. The resulting suspension was filtered through Celite and the filtrate 
concentrated in vacuo. Hexane (10 mL) was added followed by filtration again through Celite. 
Removal of the solvent and drying under high vacuum gave palladacycle 332 (80% yield by 
NMR; spectral data presented in the Experimental Section).  
 Palladacycle 332 was re-dissolved in dichloromethane (2 mL), followed by addition of 
2-iodo-N-tosylbenzamide (333, 80.2 mg, 0.20 mmol, 2 equiv) and AgOAc (16.7 mg, 0.10 
Appendix I 
mmol, 1 equiv). The reaction was stirred under air at room temperature overnight, passed 
through a Celite plug and concentrated in vacuo. Analysis of the reaction mixture by NMR 
indicated formation of the azetidine product (286, 86% yield against internal standard). Spectral 
data for 286 were presented previously in the Experimental Section.  
Pd-catalyzed Azetidine Formation using N-Acetylbenzenesulfonamide Reagents  
To a 25 mL microwave vial containing a 10 mm magnetic stirrer bar were added Pd(OPiv)2 
(3.1 mg, 0.01 mmol, 10 mol%), AgOAc (33.4 mg, 0.2 mmol, 2 equiv) and aryl halide (0.15 
mmol, 1.5 equiv). Under air, a solution of amine 284 (28.3 mg, 0.1 mmol, 1 equiv) in CHCl3 (1 
mL) was added via syringe and the vial sealed with a crimp cap with silicone/PTFE septum. 
The vial was placed in an oil bath pre-heated to 80 oC, and the reaction stirred at this temperature 
for 20 h. After cooling to room temperature, the reaction was filtered through a short plug of 
Celite and the filtrate concentrated in vacuo. The crude residue was analysed by 1H NMR in 
CDCl3 against an internal standard. The azetidine product (286; spectral data presented in 
Experimental Section) was observed in 25%, 40% and 0% yield using aryl halide 337a, 337b 
and 337c, respectively.  
Synthesis of Benzylamine Substrates  
N-(2-Bromobenzyl)tetrahydro-2H-pyran-4-amine (342) 
To a solution (2-bromophenyl)methanamine (1.861 g, 10.0 mmol, 1 equiv) in dichloromethane 
(30 mL) at 0 oC were added tetrahydro-4H-pyran-4-one (1.101 g, 11.0 mmol, 1.1 equiv), 
NaBH(OAc)3 (3.179 g, 15.0 mmol, 1.5 equiv) and AcOH (0.57 mL, 10.0 mmol, 1 equiv). The 
reaction was stirred for 16 h at room temperature before quenching with 10% aq. NaOH (50 
Appendix I 
mL). After stirring for 0.5 h, dichloromethane (100 mL) was added. The organic phase was 
separated and the aqueous re-extracted with dichloromethane (100 mL). The combined organics 
were washed with brine (50 mL), separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent removed 
in vacuo. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (1050% ethyl 
acetate in hexanes) to give the title compound as a pale yellow oil (342, 2.109 g, 7.81 mmol, 
78%). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.54 (d, J = 7.8 Hz, 1H, 3), 7.40 (d, J = 7.5 Hz, 1H, 6), 
7.28 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 1H, 5), 7.12 (t, J = 7.8 Hz, 1H, 4), 4.01  3.94 (m, 2H, 11-Ha), 3.89 (s, 2H, 
7), 3.40 (t, J = 11.4 Hz, 2H, 11-Hb), 2.72 (tt, J = 10.5, 4.0 Hz, 1H, 9), 1.91  1.82 (m, 2H, 10-
Ha), 1.57  1.41 (m, 3H, 8, 10-Hb). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  139.4 (1), 132.8 (3), 130.3 
(6), 128.6 (4), 127.5 (5), 123.9 (2), 66.7 (11), 53.2 (9), 50.5 (7), 33.7 (10). IR (neat, cm1) 2934, 
2840, 1439, 1362, 1234, 1139, 1088, 1023, 748. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for C12H17Br1N1O1 
[M+H]+ 270.0494, found 270.0499.  
N-(2-Phenylpropan-2-yl)tetrahydro-2H-pyran-4-amine (378) 
To a solution cumylamine (2.88 mL, 20.0 mmol, 1 equiv) in dichloromethane (60 mL) at 0 oC 
were added tetrahydro-4H-pyran-4-one (2.8 mL, 30.0 mmol, 1.5 equiv), NaBH(OAc)3 (6.358 g, 
30.0 mmol, 1.5 equiv) and AcOH (1.8 mL, 30.0 mmol, 1.5 equiv). The reaction was stirred for 
16 h at room temperature before quenching with 10% aq. NaOH (100 mL). After stirring for 
0.5 h, dichloromethane (100 mL) was added. The organic phase was separated and the aqueous 
re-extracted with dichloromethane (200 mL). The combined organics were washed with brine 
(50 mL), separated, dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent removed in vacuo. The crude 
material was purified by silica gel flash chromatography (550% ethyl acetate in hexanes) to 
give the title compound as a colourless solid (378, 1.794 g, 8.18 mmol, 41% yield). 1H NMR 
(400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.49 (d, J = 7.5 Hz, 2H, 3), 7.34 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 2H, 2), 7.24 (t, J = 7.5 Hz, 
1H, 1), 3.87  3.79 (m, 2H, 10-Ha), 3.26 (td, J = 11.7, 2.2 Hz, 2H, 10-Hb), 2.50 (tt, J = 10.6, 
4.1 Hz, 1H, 8), 1.63  1.31 (m, 11H, 6, 7, 9-Ha,b). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  148.8 (4), 
128.1 (2), 126.4 (1), 126.0 (3), 67.3 (10), 56.2 (5), 49.5 (8), 36.6 (9), 30.7 (6). IR (neat, cm1) 
2938, 2843, 1467, 1379, 1236, 1139, 1083, 976, 771, 701. HRMS m/z (ESI) calcd for 
C14H22N1O1 [M+H]
+ 220.1701, found 220.1706.  
Appendix I 
Synthesis of Oxime Substrates 
(E)-3,3-Dimethylbutan-2-one O-benzyl oxime (364) 
Pinacolone oxime (576 mg, 5.00 mmol, 1 equiv), benzyl bromide (0.89 mL, 7.50 mmol, 1.5 
equiv), TBAI (81 mg, 0.25 mmol, 0.05 equiv), NaI (112 mg, 0.75 mmol, 0.15 equiv) and KOH 
(337 mg, 6.00 mmol, 1.2 equiv) in tetrahydrofuran (30 mL) were stirred at room temperature 
for 16 h. The reaction was concentrated in vacuo and ethyl acetate (100 mL) and sat. aq. 
NaHCO3 added (100 mL). The organic phase was washed, separated, dried over MgSO4, 
filtered and the solvent evaporated. The crude material was purified by silica gel flash 
chromatography (05% Et2O in hexanes) to give the title compound as a colourless oil (364, 
682 mg, 3.32 mmol, 66% yield). 1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  7.42  7.26 (m, 5H), 5.10 (s, 
2H), 1.85 (s, 3H), 1.13 (s, 9H). 13C NMR (101 MHz, CDCl3)  163.7, 138.6, 128.2, 128.1, 
127.5, 75.3, 37.1, 27.7, 10.7. Spectral data were in accordance with the literature.281 
(E)-3,3-Dimethylbutan-2-one O-methyl oxime (367) 
A solution of pinacolone (1.002 g, 10.0 mmol, 1 equiv), methoxyamine hydrochloride (1.253 
g, 15.0 mmol, 1.5 equiv) and NaOAc (2.051 g, 25.0 mmol, 2.5 equiv) in water (20 mL) and 
methanol (10 mL) was heated at 80 oC for 5 h. After cooling to room temperature, 
dichloromethane (200 mL) and water (100 mL) were added. The organic phase was separated, 
dried over MgSO4, filtered and the solvent removed under reduce pressure (note: oxime is 
volatile) to give the title compound as a colourless oil (367, 200 mg, 1.55 mmol, 15% yield). 
1H NMR (400 MHz, CDCl3)  3.85 (s, 3H), 1.81 (s, 3H), 1.13 (s, 9H). 
13C NMR (101 MHz, 
CDCl3)  163.5, 61.2, 37.1, 27.8, 10.5. Spectral data were in accordance with the literature.
Appendix I 
Synthesis of Cyclopalladated Oxime Dimer 
Oxime-derived palladacycle dimer 368 
A solution of (E)-3,3-dimethylbutan-2-one O-methyl oxime (367, 77.5 mg, 0.60 mmol, 1.2 
equiv) and Pd(OAc)2 (112 mg, 0.50 mmol, 1 equiv) in chloroform (5 mL) was heated at 80 
under air in a sealed tube for 16 h. After cooling to room temperature, the reaction was filtered 
through Celite and the filtrate concentrated in vacuo. The residue was triturated in hexanes to 
obtain a free-flowing brown powder (368, 108 mg, 0.37 mmol, 73% yield). The complex was 
characterized by X-ray crystallography (see Appendix II). 
Appendix II 
Appendix II: Supplementary Data  
X-ray Crystallography  
tert-Butyl (3R,5S)-3-allyl-3-ethyl-5-methyl-2-oxomorpholine-4-carboxylate (268a). 
Crystals suitable for single crystal X-ray crystallography were grown by slow evaporation from 
a saturated solution of the title compound in ethyl acetate. 
Appendix II 
Crystal Data and Structure Refinement for 268a 
Identification code MG_K3_0045 
Formula C15 H25 N O4 
Formula weight 283.36 
Temperature 180 K 
Diffractometer, wavelength Nonius KappaCCD, 0.71073  
Crystal system, space group Orthorhombic, P 2ac 2ab 
Unit cell dimensions a = 7.8793(3)   = 90 
 b = 9.5453(3)   = 90 
 c = 21.5608(10)   = 90 
Volume, Z 1621.59(11) 3, 4 
Density (calculated) 1.161 Mg/m3 
Absorption coefficient 0.083 mm-1 
F(000) 616 
Crystal colour / morphology Colourless blocks 
Crystal size 0.28 x 0.28 x 0.20 mm3 
 range for data collection 3.549 to 29.477 
Index ranges -8<=h<=10, -11<=k<=12, -29<=l<=29  
Reflns collected / unique 10109 / 3728  
Reflns observed [F>4(F)] 2404 
Absorption correction Multi-scan 
Min. and max. transmission 0.977 and 0.984 
Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters 3728 / 0 / 186 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.031 
Final R indices [F>4(F)] R1 = 0.0510, wR2 = 0.0998 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.0963, wR2 = 0.1160 
Largest diff. peak, hole 0.138, -0.172 e-3 
Mean and maximum shift/error 0.000 and 0.000 
Appendix II 
2-(3-((2S,6S)-2-Methyl-5-oxo-4-oxa-1-azabicyclo[4.2.0]octan-6-yl)propyl)isoindoline-1,3-
dione (273f). Crystals suitable for single crystal X-ray crystallography were grown by slow 
evaporation from a saturated solution of the title compound in ethyl acetate. The crystal 
structure is deposited in the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre CCDC 1537951.  
Appendix II 
Crystal Data and Structure Refinement for 273f 
Identification code MG_B2_0032 
Formula C18 H20 N2 O4 
Formula weight 328.36 
Temperature 180 K 
Diffractometer, wavelength Bruker D8-QUEST PHOTON-100, 1.54178  
Crystal system, space group Monoclinic, P 2yb 
Unit cell dimensions a = 8.7257(2)   = 90 
 b = 7.4065(2)   = 90.4860(10) 
 c = 12.7010(3)   = 90 
Volume, Z 820.80(3) 3, 2 
Density (calculated) 1.329 Mg/m3 
Absorption coefficient 0.778 mm-1 
F(000) 348 
Crystal colour / morphology Colourless blocks 
Crystal size 0.30 x 0.26 x 0.20 mm3 
 range for data collection 3.480 to 69.969 
Index ranges -10<=h<=10, -9<=k<=9, -15<=l<=15 
Reflns collected / unique 10408 / 3070 
Reflns observed [F>4(F)] 2975  
Absorption correction Multi-scan  
Min. and max. transmission 0.6627 and 0.7533 
Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters 3070 / 1 / 218 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.056 
Final R indices [F>4(F)] R1 = 0.0311, wR2 = 0.0787 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.0302, wR2 = 0.0778 
Largest diff. peak, hole 0.158, -0.178 e-3 
Mean and maximum shift/error 0.000 and 0.000 
Appendix II 
Trinuclear palladacycle 298. Crystals suitable for single crystal X-ray crystallography were 
grown by slow evaporation from a saturated solution of the title compound in hexane. The 
crystal structure is deposited in the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre CCDC 1850704. 
Appendix II 
Crystal Data and Structure Refinement for 298 
Identification code MG_B1_0029 
Formula C42 H76 N2 O12 Pd3 
Formula weight 1120.24 
Temperature 180 K 
Diffractometer, wavelength Bruker D8-QUEST PHOTON-100, 1.54178  
Crystal system, space group Monoclinic, P 2yb 
Unit cell dimensions a = 16.8682(5)   = 90 
 b = 10.9641(3)   = 105.339(2) 
 c = 28.1073(8)   = 90 
Volume, Z 5013.1(3) 3, 4 
Density (calculated) 1.484 Mg/m3 
Absorption coefficient 9.050 mm-1 
F(000) 2304 
Crystal colour / morphology Green blocks 
Crystal size 0.120 x 0.120 x 0.080 mm3 
 range for data collection 2.716 to 67.007 
Index ranges -20<=h<=18, -13<=k<=12, -33<=l<=33 
Reflns collected / unique 77299 / 17729 
Reflns observed [F>4(F)] 15391 
Absorption correction Multi-scan  
Min. and max. transmission 0.5400 and 0.7528 
Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters 17729 / 100 / 1069 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.027 
Final R indices [F>4(F)] R1 = 0.0472, wR2 = 0.1033 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.0597, wR2 = 0.1093 
Largest diff. peak, hole 0.690, -0.895 e-3 
Mean and maximum shift/error 0.000 and 0.000 
Appendix II 
(2S,3R)-3-Benzyl-2-(cyclohexylamino)pentyl pivalate hydrochloride salt (301aHCl). 301a 
(72 mg, 0.2 mmol) was dissolved in methanolic HCl (1 M, 3 mL) at 0 oC and the resulting 
mixture stirred at room temperature for 0.5 h. The solvent was removed in vacuo to give the 
hydrochloride salt 301aHCl as a colourless solid (79 mg, 0.2 mmol, quantitative). Crystals 
suitable for single crystal X-ray crystallography were grown by slow evaporation from a 
saturated solution of 301aHCl in MeOH. The crystal structure is deposited in the Cambridge 
Crystallographic Data Centre CCDC 1850703.  
Appendix II 
Crystal Data and Structure Refinement for 301aHCl  
Identification code MG_B1_0033 
Formula C23 H38 Cl N O2 
Formula weight 395.99 
Temperature 180 K 
Diffractometer, wavelength Bruker D8-QUEST PHOTON-100, 1.54178  
Crystal system, space group Orthorhombic, P 2ac 2ab 
Unit cell dimensions a = 8.4516(3)   = 90 
 b = 11.1098(3)   = 90 
 c = 24.9575(8)   = 90 
Volume, Z 2343.40(13) 3, 4 
Density (calculated) 1.122 Mg/m3 
Absorption coefficient 1.556 mm-1 
F(000) 864 
Crystal colour / morphology Colourless plates 
Crystal size 0.250 x 0.120 x 0.040 mm3 
 range for data collection 3.542 to 66.671 
Index ranges -10<=h<=9, -11<=k<=13, -29<=l<=29 
Reflns collected / unique 17448 / 4136 
Reflns observed [F>4(F)] 3425 
Absorption correction Multi-scan  
Min. and max. transmission 0.6042 and 0.7528 
Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters 4136 / 0 / 252 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.037 
Final R indices [F>4(F)] R1 = 0.0506, wR2 = 0.1142 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.0658, wR2 = 0.1224 
Largest diff. peak, hole 0.305, -0.256 e-3 
Mean and maximum shift/error 0.000 and 0.000 
Appendix II 
Bicyclic palladacycle dimer 319. Crystals suitable for single crystal X-ray crystallography 
were grown by slow evaporation from a saturated solution of the title compound in hexane. The 
crystal structure is deposited in the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre CCDC 1858105. 
Appendix II 
Crystal Data and Structure Refinement for 319  
Identification code MG_B1_0042 
Formula C48 H70 N2 O8 Pd2 
Formula weight 1015.86 
Temperature 180 K 
Diffractometer, wavelength Bruker D8-QUEST PHOTON-100, 1.54178  
Crystal system, space group Orthorhombic, P 2ac 2ab 
Unit cell dimensions a = 11.4868(2)   = 90 
 b = 17.2747(4)   = 90 
 c = 24.2881(5)   = 90 
Volume, Z 4819.51(17) 3, 4 
Density (calculated) 1.400 Mg/m3 
Absorption coefficient 6.435 mm-1 
F(000) 2112 
Crystal colour / morphology Yellow blocks 
Crystal size 0.100 x 0.100 x 0.030 mm3 
 range for data collection 3.139 to 66.803 
Index ranges -12<=h<=13, -20<=k<=19, -27<=l<=28 
Reflns collected / unique 30914 / 8513 
Reflns observed [F>4(F)] 7250 
Absorption correction Multi-scan  
Min. and max. transmission 0.6185 and 0.7528 
Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters 8513 / 0 / 549 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.054 
Final R indices [F>4(F)] R1 = 0.0424, wR2 = 0.0734 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.0571, wR2 = 0.0780 
Largest diff. peak, hole 0.428, -0.509 e-3 
Mean and maximum shift/error 0.000 and 0.001 
Appendix II 
8-Bromo-6-(tetrahydro-2H-pyran-4-yl)-6,7-dihydro-5H-dibenzo[c,e]azepin-5-one (347). 
Crystals suitable for single crystal X-ray crystallography were grown by slow evaporation from 
a saturated solution of the title compound in ethyl acetate.  
Appendix II 
Crystal Data and Structure Refinement for 347  
Identification code MG_K1_0005 
Formula C19 H18 Br N O2 
Formula weight 372.25 
Temperature 180 K 
Diffractometer, wavelength Nonius KappaCCD, 0.71073  
Crystal system, space group Monoclinic, -P 2ybc 
Unit cell dimensions a = 9.3078(3)   = 90 
 b = 10.3678(4)   = 101.8543(14) 
 c = 16.7352(7)   = 90 
Volume, Z 1580.53(10) 3, 4 
Density (calculated) 1.564 Mg/m3 
Absorption coefficient 2.610 mm-1 
F(000) 760 
Crystal colour / morphology Colourless blocks 
Crystal size 0.200 x 0.160 x 0.120 mm3 
 range for data collection 3.573 to 25.024 
Index ranges -11<=h<=11, -11<=k<=12, -19<=l<=19 
Reflns collected / unique 8393 / 2781 
Reflns observed [F>4(F)] 1688 
Absorption correction Multi-scan  
Min. and max. transmission 0.610 and 0.736 
Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters 2781 / 0 / 208 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 0.826 
Final R indices [F>4(F)] R1 = 0.0322, wR2 = 0.0570 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.0644, wR2 = 0.0603 
Largest diff. peak, hole 0.340, -0.373 e-3 
Mean and maximum shift/error 0.000 and 0.001 
Appendix II 
Amine-derived PdIV complex 352. Crystals suitable for single crystal X-ray crystallography 
were grown by slow evaporation from a saturated solution of the title compound in 
dichloromethane. The crystal structure is deposited in the Cambridge Crystallographic Data 
Centre CCDC 1991535. 
Appendix II 
Crystal Data and Structure Refinement for 352  
Identification code MG_B1_0054 
Formula C30 H40 N2 O6 Pd 
Formula weight 631.04 
Temperature 180 K 
Diffractometer, wavelength Bruker D8-QUEST PHOTON-100, 1.54178  
Crystal system, space group Monoclinic, P 2yb 
Unit cell dimensions a = 9.6524(3)   = 90 
 b = 9.3271(3)   = 105.943(2) 
 c = 17.0545(5)   = 90 
Volume, Z 1476.34(8) 3, 2 
Density (calculated) 1.420 Mg/m3 
Absorption coefficient 5.431 mm-1 
F(000) 656 
Crystal colour / morphology Colourless blocks 
Crystal size 0.160 x 0.080 x 0.020 mm3 
 range for data collection 2.694 to 66.843 
Index ranges -11<=h<=11, -11<=k<=11, -20<=l<=20 
Reflns collected / unique 16009 / 5187 
Reflns observed [F>4(F)] 4759 
Absorption correction Multi-scan  
Min. and max. transmission 0.5321 and 0.7528 
Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters 5187 / 1 / 357 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.116 
Final R indices [F>4(F)] R1 = 0.0485, wR2 = 0.1048 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.0544, wR2 = 0.1073 
Largest diff. peak, hole 1.492, -1.179 e-3 
Mean and maximum shift/error 0.000 and 0.000 
Appendix II 
Amine-derived PdIV complex 353. Crystals suitable for single crystal X-ray crystallography 
were grown by layer diffusion of hexane into a concentrated solution of the title compound in 
dichloromethane at 20 oC. The crystal structure is deposited in the Cambridge Crystallographic 
Data Centre CCDC 1991533. 
Appendix II 
Crystal Data and Structure Refinement for 353 
Identification code MG_B1_0072 
Formula C31 H42 Cl2 N2 O6 Pd 
Formula weight 715.96 
Temperature 180 K 
Diffractometer, wavelength Bruker D8-QUEST PHOTON-100, 1.54178  
Crystal system, space group Monoclinic, P 2yb 
Unit cell dimensions a = 12.8922(4)   = 90 
 b = 10.0897(4)   = 108.728(2) 
 c = 13.3787(5)   = 90 
Volume, Z 1648.14(10) 3, 2 
Density (calculated) 1.443 Mg/m3 
Absorption coefficient 6.391 mm-1 
F(000) 740 
Crystal colour / morphology Colourless blocks 
Crystal size 0.100 x 0.050 x 0.020 mm3 
 range for data collection 3.488 to 66.728 
Index ranges -15<=h<=15, -11<=k<=12, -15<=l<=15 
Reflns collected / unique 15968 / 5792 
Reflns observed [F>4(F)] 5006 
Absorption correction Multi-scan  
Min. and max. transmission 0.5981 and 0.7528 
Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters 5792 / 1 / 383 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.034 
Final R indices [F>4(F)] R1 = 0.0453, wR2 = 0.1005 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.0601, wR2 = 0.1077 
Largest diff. peak, hole 0.585, -0.457 e-3 
Mean and maximum shift/error 0.000 and 0.001 
Appendix II 
Bis(pyridyl)-PdII complex 358. Crystals suitable for single crystal X-ray crystallography were 
obtained by recrystallization of the title compound from boiling methanol. The crystal structure 
is deposited in the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre CCDC 1991534. 
Appendix II 
Crystal Data and Structure Refinement for 358 
Identification code MG_B1_0074 
Formula C18 H14 N2 O4 Pd 
Formula weight 428.71 
Temperature 180 K 
Diffractometer, wavelength Bruker D8-QUEST PHOTON-100, 1.54178  
Crystal system, space group Triclinic, -P 1 
Unit cell dimensions a = 9.1222(4)   = 104.921(3) 
 b = 9.4681(5)   = 104.897(3) 
 c = 10.7015(6)   = 105.987(3) 
Volume, Z 803.27(7) 3, 2 
Density (calculated) 1.772 Mg/m3 
Absorption coefficient 9.558 mm-1 
F(000) 428 
Crystal colour / morphology Colourless plates 
Crystal size 0.160 x 0.100 x 0.030 mm3 
 range for data collection 4.570 to 66.678 
Index ranges -10<=h<=10, -11<=k<=10, 0<=l<=12 
Reflns collected / unique 12801 / 2770 
Reflns observed [F>4(F)] 2232 
Absorption correction Multi-scan  
Min. and max. transmission 0.354 and 0.753 
Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters 2770 / 0 / 227 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.113 
Final R indices [F>4(F)] R1 = 0.0693, wR2 = 0.1474 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.1030, wR2 = 0.1656 
Largest diff. peak, hole 1.123, -1.431 e-3 
Mean and maximum shift/error 0.000 and 0.000 
Appendix II 
Oxime-derived PdIV complex 366c. A sample of 366b (ca. 10 mg) was dissolved in acetone 
(10 mL) with several drops of pyridine added (366b immediately converts to a pyridine-ligated 
PdIV complex, 366c). Slow evaporation of the solution at room temperature in air afforded 
crystals that were suitable for analysis by single crystal X-ray crystallography. The crystal 
structure is deposited in the Cambridge Crystallographic Data Centre CCDC 1991532.  
Appendix II 
Crystal Data and Structure Refinement for 366c 
Identification code MG_B1_0068 
Formula C26 H26 N2 O5 Pd 
Formula weight 552.89 
Temperature 180 K 
Diffractometer, wavelength Bruker D8-QUEST PHOTON-100, 1.54178  
Crystal system, space group Monoclinic, -P 2yn 
Unit cell dimensions a = 15.8133(4)   = 90 
 b = 8.2009(2)   = 98.653(2) 
 c = 18.7485(5)   = 90 
Volume, Z 2403.69(11) 3, 4 
Density (calculated) 1.528 Mg/m3 
Absorption coefficient 6.560 mm-1 
F(000) 1128 
Crystal colour / morphology Yellow blocks 
Crystal size 0.130 x 0.080 x 0.080 mm3 
 range for data collection 3.413 to 66.748 
Index ranges -18<=h<=18, 0<=k<=9, 0<=l<=22 
Reflns collected / unique 4453 / 4453 
Reflns observed [F>4(F)] 3509 
Absorption correction Multi-scan  
Min. and max. transmission 0.544 and 0.753 
Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters 4453 / 0 / 311 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.066 
Final R indices [F>4(F)] R1 = 0.0657, wR2 = 0.1287 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.0984, wR2 = 0.1483 
Largest diff. peak, hole 0.852, -0.932 e-3 
Mean and maximum shift/error 0.000 and 0.001 
Appendix II 
Oxime-derived palladacycle dimer 368. Crystals suitable for single crystal X-ray 
crystallography were grown by slow evaporation from a saturated solution of the title 
compound in hexane. 
Appendix II 
Crystal Data and Structure Refinement for 368 
Identification code MG_B1_0066 
Formula C18 H34 N2 O6 Pd2 
Formula weight 587.27 
Temperature 180 K 
Diffractometer, wavelength Bruker D8-QUEST PHOTON-100, 1.54178  
Crystal system, space group Monoclinic, -P 2yn 
Unit cell dimensions a = 9.8120(2)   = 90 
 b = 17.3087(5)   = 98.8520(10) 
 c = 14.2761(4)   = 90 
Volume, Z 2395.67(11) 3, 4 
Density (calculated) 1.628 Mg/m3 
Absorption coefficient 12.391 mm-1 
F(000) 1184 
Crystal colour / morphology Colourless blocks 
Crystal size 0.080 x 0.080 x 0.060 mm3 
 range for data collection 4.043 to 67.353 
Index ranges -11<=h<=11, -20<=k<=20, -17<=l<=17 
Reflns collected / unique 20108 / 4274 
Reflns observed [F>4(F)] 3550 
Absorption correction Multi-scan  
Min. and max. transmission 0.5338 and 0.7528 
Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters 4274 / 0 / 263 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 1.082 
Final R indices [F>4(F)] R1 = 0.0310, wR2 = 0.0591 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.0436, wR2 = 0.0626 
Largest diff. peak, hole 0.646, -0.439 e-3 
Mean and maximum shift/error 0.000 and 0.001 
Appendix II 
6,6-Dimethyl-3,4,4a,5,6,10b-hexahydro-1H-pyrano[4,3-c]isoquinoline (388). Crystals 
suitable for single crystal X-ray crystallography were grown by slow evaporation from a 
saturated solution of the title compound in methanol. 
Appendix II 
Crystal Data and Structure Refinement for 388 
Identification code MG_K1_0007 
Formula C14 H21 N O2 
Formula weight 235.32 
Temperature 180 K 
Diffractometer, wavelength Nonius KappaCCD, 0.71073  
Crystal system, space group Monoclinic, -P 2ybc 
Unit cell dimensions a = 12.4051(3)   = 90 
 b = 6.3095(2)   = 90.450(2) 
 c = 16.6652(5)   = 90 
Volume, Z 1304.34(7) 3, 4 
Density (calculated) 1.198 Mg/m3 
Absorption coefficient 0.079 mm-1 
F(000) 512 
Crystal colour / morphology Colourless blocks 
Crystal size 0.220 x 0.220 x 0.120 mm3 
 range for data collection 3.623 to 27.499 
Index ranges -16<=h<=16, -8<=k<=8, -21<=l<=21 
Reflns collected / unique 13109 / 2962 
Reflns observed [F>4(F)] 1651 
Absorption correction Multi-scan  
Min. and max. transmission 0.871 and 0.993 
Refinement method Full-matrix least-squares on F2 
Data / restraints / parameters 2962 / 0 / 168 
Goodness-of-fit on F2 0.864 
Final R indices [F>4(F)] R1 = 0.0383, wR2 = 0.0886 
R indices (all data) R1 = 0.0771, wR2 = 0.0945 
Largest diff. peak, hole 0.130, -0.180 e-3 
Mean and maximum shift/error 0.000 and 0.000 
Appendix II 
2D NMR Data for Palladium Complexes 
Pyridine-ligated palladacycle 299 
1H1H NOESY NMR spectrum (298 K, mixing time = 0.6 s) 
14-Hb 
14-Ha 
Appendix II 
Pyridine-ligated 7-membered ring palladacycle 300 
1H13C HMBC NMR spectrum 
14-Hb 
Appendix II 
1H1H NOESY NMR spectrum (298 K, mixing time = 0.6 s) 
14-Ha 
Appendix II 
Pyridine-ligated palladacycle with 2-bromobenzoate ligand (305) 
1H13C HMBC NMR spectrum 
21 22 
Appendix II 
Amine-derived PdIV complex 353 
1H1H NOESY NMR spectrum (298 K, mixing time = 0.6 s) 
Zoom-in: NOESY cross-peaks associated with pyridine ortho protons (H20): 
Appendix II 
Anionic alkyl PdIV complex 370 
1H1H NOESY NMR spectrum (298 K, mixing time = 0.6 s) 
Zoom-in: NOESY cross-peaks associated with oxime benzylic protons (H5): 
Appendix II 
1H1H EXSY NMR spectrum: A solution of phenoxide-ligated oxime-PdIV complex 370 (0.04 
M) with 1 equivalent of added (unbound) tetrabutylammonium p-nitrophenoxide 369 (0.04 M) 
in acetonitrile-d3 was analysed by 2D EXSY NMR spectroscopy (NOESY protocol, T = 298 
K, mixing time = 0.6 s). Over the course of the NMR experiment, <1% conversion of PdIV 
complex 370 (by reductive elimination) took place. 
Note: red diamonds = bound phenoxide; black diamonds = unbound phenoxide. 
Appendix II 
Data for Kinetic Studies  
Kinetics of Thermal Decomposition of 352 (with Added Pyridine) 
To a solution of PdIV complex 352 (6.3 mg, 0.01 mmol, 1 equiv) in CD3CN (0.5 mL) were 
added pyridine (x equiv) and 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane (1 L, internal standard). The solution 
was transferred to a screw-top NMR tube and inserted into a pre-heated NMR spectrometer at 
50 oC. 1H NMR spectra were recorded at fixed time intervals. The disappearance of 352 was 
monitored by integrating peaks in the region 4.604.20 ppm (RCH2OPiv), relative to the 
internal standard. The reactions were monitored for a period of greater than three half-lives. 
286 was obtained as the sole amine product in all cases and was obtained in >90% yield by the 
final time point. Plots of concentration versus time showed first order kinetic behaviour. To 
obtain rate constants, decay of 352 was fitted by non-linear least squares analysis to f(t) = I0 * 
exp(-kt) + C (error estimation by weighted fit, 95% confidence level). Concentration-time plots 
with fitted curves are shown for each experiment (black circles = experimental data; red line = 
calculated trendline). The kinetic data are summarised in Table S-1.  
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
time (s)
1: x = 0 equiv 
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) + C 
Offset, C = 0.000410 M 
Calculated I0 = 0.02008 M 
Calculated k = 0.0003166 s-1 
R-square = 0.9997 
Appendix II 
Table S-1. Rate of reductive elimination from 352: varying equivalents of pyridine.  
Entry pyridine (x, equiv) kobs (s
1 0 0.0003166 
2 5 0.0003142 
3 10 0.0003173 
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
time (s)
2: x = 5 equiv
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
time (s)
3: x = 10 equiv
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) 
Calculated I0 = 0.02038 M 
Calculated k = 0.0003142 s-1 
R-square = 0.9990 
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) 
Calculated I0 = 0.02020 M 
Calculated k = 0.0003173 s-1 
R-square = 0.9992 
Appendix II 
Kinetics of Thermal Decomposition of 370 in CD3CN 
To a vial containing PdIV complex 366b (4.9 mg, 0.01 mmol, 1 equiv) and tetrabutylammonium 
p-nitrophenoxide 369 (x equiv) were added CD3CN (0.5 mL) and anisole (ca. 1 L, internal 
standard). The solution was transferred to a screw-top NMR tube and inserted into a pre-heated 
NMR spectrometer at the specified temperature (T oC). 1H NMR spectra were recorded at fixed 
time intervals. The disappearance of 370 and the formation of 371 were monitored by 
integrating peaks at 5.46 ppm and 4.09 ppm, respectively, relative to the internal standard. The 
reactions were monitored for a period of greater than three half-lives. 371 was obtained as the 
sole product in all cases and in >90% yield by the final time point. Plots of concentration versus 
time showed first order kinetic behaviour. To obtain rate constants, decay of 370 was fitted by 
non-linear least squares analysis to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) + C (error estimation by weighted fit, 
95% confidence level). Concentration-time plots with fitted curves are shown for each 
experiment (black circles = experimental data; red line = calculated trendline). The kinetic data 
are summarised in Table S-2.  
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000
time (s)
1A: T = 50 oC, x = 2 equiv
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) + C 
Offset, C = 0.0000948 M 
Calculated I0 = 0.01995 M 
Calculated k = 0.0002850 s-1 
R-square = 1 
Appendix II 
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
time (s)
1B: T = 50 oC, x = 2 equiv
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
time (s)
2: T = 50 oC, x = 4 equiv
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000
time (s)
3: T = 50 oC, x = 6 equiv
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) + C 
Offset, C = 0.0000568 M 
Calculated I0 = 0.02012 M 
Calculated k = 0.0002810 s-1 
R-square = 0.9999 
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) + C 
Offset, C = 0.0000354 M 
Calculated I0 = 0.02028 M 
Calculated k = 0.0002942 s-1 
R-square = 1 
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) 
Calculated I0 = 0.02014 M 
Calculated k = 0.0002966 s-1 
R-square = 0.9999 
Appendix II 
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000
time (s)
4: T = 50 oC, x = 8 equiv
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
time (s)
5A: T = 40 oC, x = 2 equiv
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 5000 10000 15000 20000 25000 30000
time (s)
5B: T = 40 oC, x = 2 equiv
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) + C 
Offset, C = 0.000234 M 
Calculated I0 = 0.01991 M 
Calculated k = 0.00008242 s-1 
R-square = 0.9999 
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) 
Calculated I0 = 0.01995 M 
Calculated k = 0.0003044 s-1 
R-square = 0.9998 
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) + C 
Offset, C = 0.000210 M 
Calculated I0 = 0.02002 M 
Calculated k = 0.00008276 s-1 
R-square = 0.9999 
Appendix II 
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 5000 10000 15000 20000
time (s)
6A: T = 45 oC, x = 2 equiv
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 5000 10000 15000 20000
time (s)
6B: T = 45 oC, x = 2 equiv
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
time (s)
7A: T = 55 oC, x = 2 equiv
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) + C 
Offset, C = 0.0000838 M  
Calculated I0 = 0.01992 M 
Calculated k = 0.0001538 s-1 
R-square = 0.9999 
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) 
Calculated I0 = 0.02018 M 
Calculated k = 0.0005052 s-1 
R-square = 0.9999 
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) + C 
Offset, C = 0.0000954 M  
Calculated I0 = 0.01997 M 
Calculated k = 0.0001540 s-1 
R-square = 0.9999 
Appendix II 
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000
time (s)
7B: T = 55 oC, x = 2 equiv
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
time (s)
8A: T = 60 oC, x = 2 equiv
0.000
0.005
0.010
0.015
0.020
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500
time (s)
8B: T = 60 oC, x = 2 equiv
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) + C 
Offset, C = 0.0000422 M 
Calculated I0 = 0.01991 M 
Calculated k = 0.0005049 s-1 
R-square = 0.9999 
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) + C 
Offset, C = 0.0000336 M 
Calculated I0 = 0.02070 M 
Calculated k = 0.0009249 s-1 
R-square = 1 
Fitted to f(t) = I0 * exp(-kt) 
Calculated I0 = 0.02026 M 
Calculated k = 0.0009291 s-1 
R-square = 1 
Appendix II 
Table S-2. Rate of decay of PdIV complex 370: varying T and nucleophile 369 equivalency. 
Entry Temperature (T, oC) 369 (x, equiv) kobs (s
1A 50 2 0.0002850 
1B 50 2 0.0002810 
2 50 4 0.0002942 
3 50 6 0.0002966 
4 50 8 0.0003044 
5A 40 2 0.00008276 
5B 40 2 0.00008242 
6A 45 2 0.0001538 
6B 45 2 0.0001540 
7A 55 2 0.0005052 
7B 55 2 0.0005049 
8A 60 2 0.0009249 
8B 60 2 0.0009291 
Temperature Dependence and Determination of Activation Parameters 
Reactions employing 2 equivalents of tetrabutylammonium p-nitrophenoxide 369 at 4060 oC 
(5 oC intervals) were run in duplicate (Entries 1 & 58, Table S-2). The average kobs values 
were calculated, and a plot of ln(kobs/T) versus 1/T generated (Table S-3).  
Table S-3. Temperature dependence of reaction rate.  
T (oC) T (K) Mean kobs (s
-1) 1/T (K-1) ln(kobs/T) 
40 313.2 0.00008259 0.003193 15.15 
45 318.2 0.0001539 0.003143 14.54 
50 323.2 0.0002830 0.003094 13.95 
55 328.2 0.00050505 0.003047 13.38 
60 333.2 0.0009270 0.003001 12.79 
Appendix II 
Slope = 12250.67954 (91.92440092)  
y-Intercept = 23.95939579 (0.282603919) 
R2 = 0.9998.  
Calculated activation parameters:  
H = (slope) * R = +24.3  0.2 kcal mol-1 
S = R * [y-intercept  ln(kb/h)] = +0.4  0.6 cal K
-1 mol-1  
Kinetics of Thermal Decomposition of 370 in CDCl3 
To a vial containing PdIV complex 366b (4.9 mg, 0.01 mmol 1 equiv) and tetrabutylammonium 
p-nitrophenoxide 369 (7.6 mg, 0.02 mmol, 2 equiv) were added CDCl3 (1 mL), anisole (ca. 1 
L, internal standard) and pyridine (0, 1, or 3 equiv). The solution was transferred to a screw-
top NMR tube and inserted into a pre-heated NMR spectrometer (50 oC). 1H NMR spectra were 
recorded at fixed time intervals over 8000 s. The formation of 371 was monitored by integrating 
the peak at 4.01 ppm relative to the internal standard. Plots of concentration versus time showed 
that increasing equivalency of pyridine reduces the rate of reductive elimination (see Section 
4.2.3. Figure 11). 
-15.5
-15.0
-14.5
-14.0
-13.5
-13.0
-12.5
0.00295 0.003 0.00305 0.0031 0.00315 0.0032 0.00325
1/T (K-1)
Appendix II 
Derivation of Rate Law for CO Reductive Elimination from 370 
 =
[]
= 2[][] 
[]
= 1[]  1[][]  2[][]  0   (- . )  
[] =
1[]
(1 + 2)[]
  =
12[][]
(1 + 2)[]
12[]
(1 + 2)
Assuming that k1 >> k2, then: 
 =
12[]
= 2[] 
Appendix III 
Appendix III: 1H, 13C and 19F NMR Spectra  
Synthesized Compounds from the Experimental Section 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Synthesized (Novel) Compounds from Appendix I 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix III 
Appendix IV 
Appendix IV: Published Work 
Appendix IV 
Appendix IV 
Appendix IV 
Appendix IV 
Appendix IV 
Appendix IV 
Appendix IV 
Appendix IV 
Appendix IV 
Appendix IV 
