Dementia and Intersectionality: Exploring the experiences of older people with dementia and their significant others
 Dementia and Intersectionality: Exploring the 
experiences of older people with dementia and 
their significant others 
WENDY HULKO  
UNIVERSITY OF STIRLING 
Department of Applied Social Science 
Thesis submitted for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy 
November 2004 
Declaration 
I declare that none of the work contained within this thesis has been submitted 
for any other degree at any other university.  The contents found herein have 
been composed by the candidate, Wendy Hulko. 
Acknowledgements 
This enormous piece of work is the intellectual property of one person whose 
mind, body, and soul shared space with this thesis for three years.  Many 
people contributed to both the process and the outcome, however, and I would 
like to acknowledge the roles they played in getting me through to the 
endwith my smile and whimsical attitude intact. 
First of all, there are my significant others  the family members and close 
friends who have given me so much unconditional love, respect, and support 
throughout my life, who kept me going with their unwavering faith in my ability 
to do this thing, and who knew when to leave me alone and when to step in.  
My parents Alan and Sandy Hulko, sisters Shelley and Alanna Hulko, and uncle 
Lee Hulko; close friends Yvette Scrivener, Kimi Webber, Robin Irwin, Heidi 
Staseson, Michol Hoffman, Suzanne Scher, and Marsha Griffith; and the others 
who reminded me that that which does not kill you makes you stronger 
(Nietzsche).  A special thank you to my dear friends Max Todd and Nancy Gioia 
for sharing food, laughter, stories, and the joy of babies on so many occasions, 
usually at a moments notice. 
Next, I would like to thank my supervisors: Sue Tester and Jim Valentine, for 
the wise words, confidence in my abilities, enthusiasm about my work, 
intellectual stimulation, academic rigour, sound advice, and gentle manner.  
Thank you as well to Cherry Rowlings for input during the first year of my PhD. 
Two special women who started out as social workers and became strong 
advocates for people with dementia and leaders in the dementia field  one in 
Ontario and the other internationally  influenced my decision to do a PhD and 
to do it at Stirling, and have inspired me tremendously; for that, I would like to 
acknowledge my dementia gurus: Mary Marshall and Mary Ann Chang.  I also 
would like to thank Judy Globerman for being a wonderful mentor and an 
excellent reference (funding, PhD programs, academic positions); and Stephen 
Katz for sharing his brilliant insights and challenging me to think harder. 
A special acknowledgement is owed to Shari Brotman  fellow feminist 
gerontologist, anti-oppression social worker, grounded theorist, mutual 
admiration society member, and dear friend  for collaborating, challenging, 
validating, encouraging, innovating, role modelling, weeping, and laughing. 
I would like to thank everyone affiliated with the University of Stirling who was a 
supportive colleague during my time there, particularly other researchers 
(students and fellows) in the Department of Applied Social Science, and Alison 
Giles in Information Services who rescued my thesis at a critical juncture when I 
thought all my work had been lost.  A big thank you goes out to my office mates 
for all the intellectual stimulation, emotional support (to the best of their British 
abilities), social interaction, and fond memories of Scotland - Ailsa Cook, 
Jacqueline Davidson, Louise McCabe, Jane Robertson, Paul Rigby, Rhoda 
McRae, and Nicola Illingworth.  Thanks especially to Ailsa, Jane, Louise, and 
Jacqueline for all the constructive criticism and validation of my ideas.   
A thesis cannot be initiated nor completed without adequate financial support 
and I was very fortunate to receive good funding throughout my doctoral studies 
from the following sources:  Department of Applied Social Science for my 
departmental studentship and funding for field research (travel and office 
expenses) and attendance at conferences; the Overseas Research Student 
Award scheme for assistance with tuition fees; the University of Stirling Alumni 
Project Fund for field research expenses (interpretation and photography); and 
Alan and Sandy Hulko for help with the costs of living (trips across the pond, 
vacations, line of credit payments, new laptop), and all that social capital. 
The Alzheimer Society of Ontario sponsored this thesis through gifts-in-kind 
such as office space and materials for the duration of the field research and 
collaborating on the focus groups and feedback sessions; I would like to thank 
Samantha McDonald in particular for her contributions.  The Alzheimer Society 
of Peterborough and Area supported this research as well and for that I am 
grateful to the entire organization and to Sandy May especially.  Although the 
other recruiting site cannot be named, I am very appreciative of the hospital in 
Toronto and the staff of the program for their involvement in this research, 
especially for approving grounded theory, process consent, and photography. 
The penultimate thank you goes to my finish line saviours: Jane Birkbeck and 
Suzanne Scher for proofreading, editing, motivating, and keeping me focused 
on the small steps and the big picture; and my new friends in Kamloops who 
provided healthy distractions and good company, especially Josette for trail-
running with me during the crunch time.   
This thesis would not have happened without this phenomenon called dementia 
and all the people who are living with it.  I offer a heart-felt thank you and a 
pledge to keep advocating on behalf of people with dementia to: Grandpa 
Emery who introduced me to Alzheimer Disease at an age when I was unable 
to comprehend what was happening to him; all the people with dementia with 
whom I have worked over the years in British Columbia and Ontario, especially 
Medora who was the absolute best companion on night shift rounds; and, lastly 
and certainly most importantly, my research participants that you will be meet 
as Jim Heather, Joe Brown, Bosse Knudsen, Ester Hernandez, Angela 
Huggins, Julianna Molnar, Gus Holden, and Nancy Matheson.  Thank you all 
for sharing your experiences and opening your lives to the memory girl. 
Abstract 
The aim of this thesis is to demonstrate that new and varied views of dementia 
surface when the concept of intersectionality is applied to dementia research; 
and that these perspectives pose challenges to our assumptions about what it 
is like to have dementia.  Grounded theory research from a feminist and anti-
oppression perspective was undertaken to explore the question of the 
relationships between older peoples experiences of dementia and the 
intersections of gender, class, race, and ethnicity.  During nine months of field 
research in Canada, interviews, participant observation, photography, and 
focus groups were undertaken with eight older people with dementia and their 
significant others.  The participants ranged from multiply marginalized to 
multiply privileged on the basis of their race, ethnicity, gender, and class.  The 
grounded theory arising from this research explains the complex nature of the 
relationships between the subjective experiences of older people living with 
dementia and the intersections of ethnicity, race, class, and gender.  I argue 
that there is a connection between social location and lived experiences of 
dementia; and that these relationships can be observed across and within the 
categories of experiencing, othering, and theorising.  Experiencing captures the 
diversity of older peoples experiences of dementia, which range from not a big 
deal to a nuisance to hellish:  these views are associated with social location, 
with the multiply privileged older people holding the most negative views of 
dementia and the multiply marginalized older people dismissing the significance 
of dementia.  Othering refers to the marginalisation to which people with 
dementia are subject: it is shown to be a marked feature of life with dementia 
and to be connected to social location, with the multiply privileged people being 
othered more often as a result of their dementia status; the more marginalised 
participants demonstrating resilience (as an acquired characteristic); and all 
being subject to both othering practices and enabling behaviours enacted by 
members of their social worlds, such as their significant others.  The theorising 
category refers to people with dementia being active meaning makers who 
theorise about dementia:  the outcome of this intellectual activity is shown to be 
related to social location, with the most privileged participants being the only 
ones to view dementia as a brain disease; and all others making strategic use 
of the normal aging theory to avoid marginalisation due to dementia.  The result 
of the theorising done by older people with dementia is a dialectical theory of 
dementia that positions dementia as a bio-psycho-social phenomenon, disrupts 
the false dichotomy between normal and pathological, and integrates emic and 
etic perspectives on dementia. 
Table of Contents 
2.4.2 Questions of normalcy and critiques of the biomedicalisation of 
2.4.3 Dementia as a psycho-neurological condition: the inclusion of the 
mind 40 
2.4.4 Dementia as a disability and the connection to mental health and 
illness 42 
2.4.5 The influence of sociology: dementia as a social construction ... 45 
3.2.1 Definitions of identity and oppression and their interconnections 56 
3.2.3 The articulation of subjectivities and oppression as a matrix of 
4.1.3 What these stories tell us about identities - problematised and 
5.3.2 Interviews and participant observation with people with dementia
5.3.3 Feedback sessions and focus groups with significant others ... 130 
List of Figures and Tables  
Figure 10 Ester Hernandez being fed by Filipina day program staff member242 
Figure 13 Ester Hernandez being assessed by daughter and Paula (HSW) 243 
Chapter - 1 Introduction 
1.1 Context and relevance to the field 
Aging in general and dementia in particular never have been particularly 
electrifying research topics, despite their frequent appearance in the media, 
around the water cooler, and at our kitchen tables.  A shift towards increased 
support and interest in research on aging and health is occurring, however, due 
largely to the changing demographics of Western populations and a growing 
awareness of aging related issues on the part of the baby boomer cohort.  
Dementia is coming into its own as a legitimate field of inquiry and we are finally 
moving away from a lengthy preoccupation with the perspectives of caregivers 
and service providers, most of whom have viewed people with dementia as a 
homogeneous group of victims and sufferers.  We  are moving towards a new 
culture of dementia care (Kitwood & Benson, 1995), one that is being created 
dynamically through an explosion of interest in putting the person before the 
disease (Kitwood, 1997a), hearing the voices of people with dementia 
(Goldsmith, 1996), and placing dementia in a socio-cultural context (Downs, 
2000).  This thesis is located within this tradition of creative, respectful, and 
holistic dementia research and care. 
Nearly twenty years ago, and a decade before Kitwoods revolutionary ideas 
about personhood and person-centred care (Kitwood, 1997a) impacted on 
the dementia field and sparked the aforementioned movement, the Kings Fund 
(1986) released a report about living well into old age.  Included in this report 
were five principles of good practice in dementia care: 
1. People with dementia have the same human value as anyone 
else irrespective of their degree of disability or dependence. 
2. People with dementia have the same varied human needs as 
anyone else. 
3. People with dementia have the same rights as other citizens. 
4. Every person with dementia is an individual. 
5. People with dementia have the right to forms of support which 
dont exploit family and friends. 
That these principles appear contemporaneous is an indication of the rather 
slow progress towards achieving full citizenship rights for people with dementia 
(Innes, 2002) and the need for continued emphasis on the socio-cultural 
context of dementia (Downs, 2000). 
Dementia has infected the public consciousness to such an extent that it is one 
of the most feared conditions of modern time (Bond, 1992; Fox, 1989; 
Robertson, 1990).  Dementia has become a dominant modern cultural image of 
becoming elderly (Pilgrim & Rogers, 1993: 73), in spite of the fact that 
depression is actually more prevalent in later life than dementia (ibid).  These 
fears have been fuelled by apocalyptic demography (Robertson, 1990), in a 
strange twist on the social justice strategy of making personal troubles public 
issues (Wright Mills, 2000).  Apocalyptic demography has been used to 
transform the personal problem of cognitive impairment into the public issue of 
Alzheimers disease; substantial public resources have been allocated to 
fighting this epidemic (Fox, 1989; Adelman, 1995); and the costs have been 
attributed to the individuals with Alzheimers disease themselves (Taylor & 
Sloan, 2000; Tranmer & Coyte, 2003).  This has occurred in the classic victim-
blaming tradition of health promotion approaches to disease, although often not 
explicitly stated.  For example, Tranmer & Coyte (2003) found that patterns of 
health care use (hospitalizations, physician services, home care services, long-
term care, and prescription medications) for older people with dementia are 
comparable to older people in general, yet total health care costs are higher for 
dementia due to the increased use of services amongst this group. 
This thesis contributes not only to efforts at placing the person before the 
disease and hearing the voices of people with dementia, but also to those that 
address the socio-cultural context of dementia.  As noted earlier, the diversity of 
people with dementia has been neglected in much of the literature to date; and 
innovations in other fields regarding identity and difference have not been 
systematically applied to dementia.  In an effort to draw on this parallel 
knowledge, this thesis focuses on dementia and intersectionality; and in the 
process, brings a sociological concept into the dementia lexicon (Hulko, 2004). 
This theoretical concept requires an explanation and the one I offer is drawn 
from earlier publications (Hulko, 2002; 2004). 
Although intersectionality may be associated primarily with sociology in its 
current use, there is a long history of critical theorists, practitioners, and 
educators talking intersectionality across several disciplines.  
Intersectionality/interlocking oppressions as a theoretical concept and level of 
analysis resides in a decidedly critical terrain that seems not to be marked by 
disciplinary boundaries and positioning, rather by a shared sense of the 
emancipatory potential of theory that is derived from lived experiences (Sartre, 
1957) and subjugated knowledges (Foucault, 1994a), very much in the tradition 
of critical social theory (Agger, 1998). 
The introduction of this way of thinking about identity and difference is attributed 
to critical legal theorists (Crenshaw Williams, 1994; 1989; Delgado, 1995; 
Delgado & Stefancic, 2001), although it surfaced in broader feminist and anti-
racist writings of the same period (Andersen & Hill Collins, 1995; Bannerji, 
1995a; Bishop, 1994; hooks, 2000a).  Since then it has been adopted by social 
work (Carniol, 2000; Dominelli, 1997; Millar, 1998; Mullaly, 1997; 2002; Oliver, 
1996; Thompson, 2001) and has made incursions into critical gerontology 
(Calasanti & Slevin, 2001; Dressel, Minkler & Yen, 1997; Estes, 2001; Holstein 
& Minkler, 2003; McMullin, 2000; Minkler, 1996; Vincent, 1995).  Hill Collins 
(1995) made the following distinction between the micro-sociological concept of 
intersectionality and the macro-sociological concept of interlocking oppressions: 
First, the notion of interlocking oppressions refers to the macro level 
connections linking systems of oppression such as race, class, and 
gender.  This is the model describing the social structures that create 
social positions.  Second, the notion of intersectionality describes 
micro level processes - namely, how each individual and group 
occupies a social position with interlocking structures of oppression 
described by the metaphor of intersectionality1.  Together they shape 
oppression (as cited in Dressel, Minkler & Yen, 1997: 583-584). 
Intersectionality is used to point to the ways in which multiple and complex 
identity categories such as gender, race2 , ethnicity, class, age, disability, 
sexual orientation, and faith/religion interact to shape individual life 
experiences.  We cannot compartmentalise people and investigate, for 
1 The actual metaphor is that of a traffic intersection: busy with roads, cars, and people all 
coming together in one place.  This is rarely acknowledged in the literature, however, and it 
seems to be taken for granted that people will make this connection immediately and easily 
when it is said that intersectionality is a metaphor. 
2 Placing race in quotation marks and using the term racialised people (Fanon, 1963) is meant 
to signal to the reader that: I view race as a socially constructed category (Haney Lpez, 1995); 
I believe that people are subject to differential amounts of privilege and oppression based on 
their perceived racial group membership; and I agree that race should not be conflated with 
ethnicity (Oommen, 1994), nor should it be omitted from sociological analysis altogether, as 
long as there exists a system of oppression called racism, one that is enacted through everyday 
practices (Essed, 1991). 
example, how either race or class contributes to individual experiences of a 
particular social phenomenon, as we are all racialised and classed and interact 
with the world as holistic beings (Lorde, 2001). This thesis on dementia and 
intersectionality treats interlocking oppressions as the structural framework that 
shapes and constrains the identities and the experiences of people with 
dementia as they try to make meaning of their lives as intersectional beings. 
The application of this analytical lens to dementia represents a progression 
from the preoccupation with the self/person that has characterised much 
dementia theorising and research since the groundbreaking work of Kitwood 
(1990) and Sabat and Harr (1992).  It moves towards the concept of identities 
- as intersecting, fluid and problematised - and attempts to excavate and accord 
central importance to subjugated knowledges (Foucault, 1994a) regarding 
identities and lived experiences of dementia.  Emergent interest in identity 
follows a decade of heavy criticism of the predominance of biomedicine in the 
field of dementia (Binney & Swan, 1991; Bond, 1992; Downs, 2000; Fox, 1989; 
Gubrium, 1986; Harding & Palfrey, 1997; Herskovits, 1995; Holstein, 2000; 
Lyman, 1989; Robertson, 1990).  Social scientists and others have been 
arguing for alternative approaches to dementia that focus on the person, not 
only the disease/disability, and many have contested the belief that dementia is 
an organic condition, seeing it instead as a social construction (Gubrium, 1986; 
Harding & Palfrey, 1997).  Although there is this aforementioned trend in 
dementia concerned with personhood (Kitwood, 1990; 1993; 1995; 1997a; 
1997d; Kitwood & Benson; Kitwood & Bredin, 1992) and selves (Sabat, 1998; 
2000; 2001; Sabat & Harr, 1992), this has not been approached with an 
understanding of identities as multiple and intersecting.  
In this tradition that I refer to as the search for the self, identity is used 
interchangeably with selves and person and is constructed as both universal, 
in that we all are presumed to have one, and particular, in that we each are 
seen to have a unique, personalised one.  The way in which identity categories 
interact with one another and the broader socio-cultural context of dementia is 
essentially ignored in these largely psychologically oriented approaches to 
understanding dementia.  Such approaches do, however, represent a 
progression from bio-medical models that saw pathology as central and 
excluded both psychological and socio-cultural factors.  As I have argued 
previously (Hulko, 2002), if one ascribes to the belief that dementia is a 
disability (Gwilliam & Gilliard, 1996; Kitwood, 1995; Marshall, 1998), it is 
relatively easy to see that dementia represents an intersectional state of being, 
residing most often at the intersection of age and disability, as prevalence 
increases with age.  Add gender, race, ethnicity, and class and the picture no 
longer lends itself to individualistic theories that appear to view people as 
homogeneous beings apart from their biology and/or psychology.  To date, 
there has been a paucity of theorising and research in the dementia field on 
how older people with dementia conceptualise their experiences in general, let 
alone in relation to intersectionality (Hulko, 2002). 
Prior to embarking on this research, I found indications in the literature that 
people with dementia may think of themselves as intersectional beings (Hulko, 
2002); and noted growing acceptance of the need to address the socio-cultural 
context of dementia (Downs, 2000).  While observing that the heterogeneity of 
people with dementia had been overlooked by dementia researchers, Downs 
(2000) argued that:  
there is a clear need for comparative and intra-cultural research on 
dementia with implications for policy developments in dementia 
care[and] a pressing need to learn about the role of socio-cultural 
factors in the experience and response to dementia (p 373).  
This thesis is a partial answer to this call and includes clear policy and practice 
implications that arise from placing dementia in a socio-cultural context and 
hearing the voices of diverse people with dementia. 
1.2 Starting point and theoretical perspectives 
When I entered the dementia field ten years ago, research on subjective 
experiences of dementia was in its infancy and there was only a handful of 
people working in this area, most of whom were met with scepticism and 
incredulity.  These early pioneers laid the foundation for the numerous 
explorations of the subjective realm of dementia underway in the UK and North 
America today.  As my thesis is located within this body of scholarship, I owe a 
debt of gratitude to these intellectual ancestors whose innovative work has 
enabled my own. 
As noted, explorations of the subjective realm of dementia are fairly recent 
(Braudy Harris, 2002; Downs, 1997; Proctor, 2001; Wilkinson, 2002b; Woods, 
2001), despite researchers having highlighted this gap in our collective 
understanding of dementia well over a decade ago (Cotrell & Schulz, 1993; 
Froggatt, 1988; Lyman, 1989).  Moreover, this body of research is incomplete, 
as minimal attention has been paid to the influence of identity categories such 
as age, class, gender, race and ethnicity on the experiential realm of dementia 
(Disman, 1991; Downs, 2000; Hulko, 2002;).  Three actions are required to 
move the dementia field beyond the narrow conceptions of personhood that 
have been claiming space alongside biomedical views of dementia, and for 
which credit is due to Kitwood and his colleagues striving towards a new 
culture of dementia care (Kitwood, 1990; 1997a; Kitwood & Benson, 1995; 
Kitwood & Bredin, 1992).  First, we must expand the epistemological and 
ontological bases of dementia research; second, we should embrace lessons 
from parallel knowledge traditions; and third, we need to develop theory 
grounded in the voices of people experiencing this phenomenon (Hulko, 2004).  
This thesis represents one attempt to implement such an action plan and is the 
result of: over ten years of policy, practice, and research experience in the 
fields of aging and health; a gerontological interest in dementia; a sociological 
concentration on intersectionality; a social work concern with anti-oppression 
theory and practice; and a feminist orientation to understanding the social 
world.  The development and coalescence of these theoretical perspectives is 
explained further in the following section, through an accounting of my own 
starting point and dementia history. 
Immediately after completing my first degree in Sociology and Spanish, I spent 
the summer interviewing older people in long-term care facilities and writing 
their biographies for a life history project.  This was my first exposure to older 
people as a social group and these interactions were so enriching that I went on 
to train as a nursing assistant.  After completing a resident care attendant 
Seeking a role that would allow me to move beyond bed-and-body work and 
intervene at a structural level, I chose the social work profession.  In addition to 
specializing in gerontology, I became more interested in anti-oppression theory 
and practice and indirect practice (policy and research) during the course of 
my graduate education in social work.  After accumulating more practice 
wisdom and experience through working as a hospital social worker, a research 
assistant on an Alzheimers intervention project, and a policy advisor for a 
provincial government dementia strategy, I decided I was ready to channel my 
knowledge, skills, and values into doctoral level research.  In this way, I 
believed I could bring together my substantive interest in aging and health, 
feminist and anti-oppression theoretical perspective, and that ever-present 
sociological imagination.  These are some of the experiences and theoretical 
perspectives that informed the design and implementation of this thesis on 
dementia and intersectionality. 
1.3 Research question and aims  
Having outlined the context and relevance to the field, and my starting point and 
theoretical perspective, I will now provide a summary of the research question 
and aims that guided the empirical research upon which this thesis is based.  
The research was designed to answer the following question: 
What are the relationships between older peoples experiences of 
dementia and the intersections of race, ethnicity, class, and 
gender?3 
I constructed this research question after a thorough review of the literature 
(see Chapters 2-4).  This review confirmed the existence of a huge gap in our 
collective knowledge about dementia and intersectionality  both together and 
separately; and suggested the appropriateness of qualitative research in 
general and grounded theory in particular for creating new knowledge in this 
area.  As this was exploratory research and there were no clear hypotheses to 
be tested, and in line with the grounded theory tradition, I wrote one open-
ended research question, rather than a series of questions or hypotheses.  The 
aims of the research were to: 
1. Explore older peoples experiences of living with a cognitive 
impairment, taking account of race, ethnicity, class, gender and their 
intersections and the dynamics of privilege and oppression; 
2. Develop a theory of older peoples experiences of dementia and 
intersectionality, grounded in the voices and (inter)actions of older people 
with dementia themselves; 
3 These identity constructs are listed in no particular order and may appear in different 
combinations throughout the thesis.  Further, I am not privileging race by placing it first in the 
research question, nor am I minimizing gender by placing it last. 
3. Critically reflect on the research process, particularly the roles and 
effects on the researcher, the researched and the emerging theory, and 
the applicability and effectiveness of anti-oppressive/emancipatory 
research methods. 
The first aim refers to the exploratory nature of the research and the 
substantive focus of the thesis, the second to the intended outcome of the 
research, and the final aim addresses the process by which research is/should 
be conducted.  All of these aims were met, as will be demonstrated in the 
chapters that follow and argued in the conclusion to this thesis.  In sum, I 
discovered real complexity to the relationships between older peoples 
experiences of dementia and the intersections of class, gender, race, and 
ethnicity.  I encapsulate these relationships in the three categories of my 
grounded theory  experiencing, othering, and theorising.  The first category 
(Experiencing) is discussed in chapter six, the second (Othering) in chapter 8, 
and the third (Theorising) in chapter nine.  
1.4 Structure of the thesis 
Over the course of this thesis, I will present a grounded theory of dementia and 
intersectionality - the culmination of my efforts to explore the subjective 
experiences of older people with dementia from an intersectional perspective.  
After this introduction, the next three chapters represent a critical review of 
literature relating to the theoretical and substantive foci of this thesis.  Chapter 
two details the evolution of theories on aging and the rise of the critical 
gerontology tradition, paying particular attention to theories about inequalities in 
later life and interlocking oppressions as an analytical framework, prior to 
reviewing dementia theorising and the limitations of this body of work.  The next 
chapter examines identity and social location, addressing the dynamics of 
privilege and oppression in general and looking at how they operate within the 
specific context of dementia.  Chapter four offers insights into the meanings of 
health, illness and disability cross-culturally, plus a critical assessment of 
published accounts of subjective experiences of dementia from an 
intersectional perspective.  After this appraisal of theoretical and empirical work 
in the areas of dementia and intersectionality, the thesis moves into a 
discussion of the original research from which the grounded theory was 
derived. 
Chapter five presents the methodology and research methods, together with 
insights gained from this grounded theory research experience, paying special 
attention to the challenges of combining grounded theory with anti-oppression 
research strategies and of operationalising the concept of intersectionality.  
Chapter six serves as a bridge between the methodology and research 
methods and the detailed discussion of the categories and properties of the 
grounded theory that emerged from this investigation and introduces the reader 
to the research participants themselves and to the process of engagement. 
Chapter seven attends to the first category of the grounded theory  
experiencing dementia - and lays the foundation for the arguments that are built 
over the remaining chapters of the thesis.  In this chapter the focus is on the 
ways in which older people with dementia live through this experience and the 
connections to their social location.  Chapter eight, on othering dementia, 
extends the analysis to describe the impact of dementia on the social worlds of 
older people with dementia, and vice versa.  The emphasis in this chapter is on 
the ways in which people with dementia are othered on the basis of their 
dementia status, how and why this marginalization process occurs, and its 
variation by social location.  The penultimate chapter concentrates on the 
theoretical work undertaken by older people with dementia and its relationship 
to the ageing enterprise (Estes, 1979) and builds towards an articulation of a 
theory of dementia and intersectionality.  In this chapter, older people with 
dementia are shown to be active meaning makers, drawing upon and altering 
established theories of dementia and employing varied strategies to mediate 
their experiences of dementia, based on their social locations. 
The categories of the grounded theory  experiencing, othering, and theorising 
 and their properties, as explained over the course of the thesis, are 
summarized in the concluding chapter.  The thesis ends with implications for 
policy, practice, and research that have arisen from this theory of the 
relationships between the experiences of older people with dementia and the 
intersections of race, ethnicity, class, and gender - a theory that challenges 
prevailing assumptions about life with memory problems and the nature of 
dementia itself. 
Chapter - 2 Theories of Ageing and Dementia 
2.1 Introduction 
The aim of this chapter is to critically review literature on theories of ageing and 
dementia, with particular attention to inequalities in later life and dementia 
theorising.  This review provides a foundation for the grounded theory to be 
presented in this thesis.  The initial section gives an overview of theorising 
about ageing and older people, highlighting the most prominent of these 
theories, and locating this thesis within the critical gerontology tradition.  The 
main features of critical gerontology are presented before moving on to a 
detailed review of theories on inequalities in later life.  The next section covers 
theories of dementia and their limitations.  Finally, the conclusion summarizes 
the insights into dementia and intersectionality that can be garnered from this 
critical review of the literature on theories of aging and dementia. 
2.2 Theorising about aging and older people 
Theories of ageing evolved from early individualistic theories based on order 
views of society, towards more structurally focused theories located within a 
conflict perspective (Bengston, Burgess & Parrott, 1997).  The focus of 
theorising about aging and older people can be said to have shifted outwards 
from the individual to the wider society and then come to rest on the individual 
within society.  Theorising about older people and the aging process largely has 
been the work of the aging enterprise (Estes, 1979), and not of older people 
themselves (Gubrium & Wallace, 1990).  Older people have not been 
encouraged to make meaning of their experiences of getting older and being 
old, nor have their attempts at doing so been acknowledged by the ageing 
enterprise.  It has been argued successfully, however, that there are 
remarkable parallels between the intellectual products of the ageing enterprise 
and those of older people themselves (Auger & Tedford-Little, 2002; Gubrium & 
Wallace, 1990).  I will return to this finding in chapter 9 when presenting data 
that substantiates these arguments and expands this critique to include older 
people with dementia. 
The first and second generation theories of ageing included disengagement, 
activity, exchange, modernization, socio-environmentalism, age stratification, 
and continuity (Bengston et al, 1997).  I will describe a few of these theories to 
show the increasing sophistication of theorising about aging and how the focus 
has expanded outwards from the individual to their social environment to 
societal structures (Katz, 1996).  Disengagement theory (Cumming & Henry, 
1961) argued that older people all go through a process of gradual 
disengagement from society in preparation for death and that older people 
choose to exclude themselves, and are expected to do so, as this contributes to 
the functioning of society.  A criticism of this theory of aging is that it condones 
a policy of indifference (Bond et al, 1993: 32) and ignores structural influences 
on the lives of older people.  Associated with disengagement theory, as it too 
focused on the individual actor, is activity theory (Havighurst et al, 1963; Riley 
et al, 1968).  This theory proposed that successful aging requires the denial of 
the onset of old age, and efforts to maintain relationships and networks or to 
replace them with new ones.  Activity theory has been critiqued for being 
idealistic. 
Moving outward from the individual, socio-environmentalism (Gubrium, 1997; 
1986) saw meaning as being derived through social interaction, and behavior 
as learned through interactions between individuals and other members of their 
social worlds, very much in the tradition of symbolic interactionism (Blumer, 
1962; Goffman, 1959; Mead, 1967; Schutz, 1967).  Older peoples responses to 
the aging process were thought to be shaped through the socio-cultural 
environment in which they found themselves and social life was said to arise 
from society itself, not from external structures per se.  The limitations of these 
more traditional theories led to the development of the critical gerontology 
tradition - the focus of the next section. 
2.2.1 Critical gerontology 
Three strands of intellectual thought came together to form critical gerontology: 
(1) political economy perspectives; (2) the humanities with its focus on the 
moral economy; and (3) biographical and narrative approaches (Phillipson, 
1998: 13).  Critical gerontology has its roots in critical social theory which is 
concerned with seeking not only to understand the world, but also to transform 
it (Agger, 1998); and can be seen as a reaction to traditional gerontological 
theorising about aging and older people (Bengston et al, 1997; Estes, Biggs & 
Phillipson, 2003; Holstein & Minkler, 2003; Katz, 1996; Phillipson, 1998).  Katz 
(1996: 4) summarized the work of critical gerontology as: admonishing 
gerontology for its narrow scientificity; advocating closer ties to the humanities; 
endorsing reflexive methodologies; historicising ideological attributes of old age; 
promoting radical political engagement; and resignifying the aging process as 
heterogeneous and indeterminate.  Underpinning the critical gerontology 
tradition is the recognition that old age is socially constructed; and that 
structural inequalities differentially shape experiences of later life (Phillipson, 
1998). 
The political economy of ageing perspective and structured dependency theory 
(Minkler & Estes 1991; Phillipson, 1982; Townsend, 1981; Walker, 1981; 
Wilson, 1997) are examples of work that falls within the critical gerontology 
tradition.  The political economy of aging perspective is concerned with the 
interrelationships between the economy, society, and polity and how this 
impacts on resource distribution and the lives of older people.  Political 
economy of aging has been critiqued for its class emphasis, yet is thought to be 
flexible enough to incorporate gender, race, and ethnicity.  Structured 
dependency refers to the dependent position in which older people, or more 
accurately pensioners, are placed in order to meet the needs of a capitalist 
society.  Thus, retirement is an important institution for moving people out of the 
labor market so that others can move in and is responsible for the creation of a 
dependent class of people  pensioners or retirees.  The next section focuses 
on other theories that fall within the critical gerontology tradition and that 
address the extent to which inequalities in later life are treated as non-existent 
or persistent; and additive or interactive. 
2.3 Inequalities in later life  
There has been much attention paid to inequalities faced by sub-groups of 
people in later life, for example, older women and older minority ethnic and 
racialised people (Blakemore & Boneham, 1994; Brotman, 1998; Calasanti & 
Slevin, 2001; Dressel et al, 1997; Havens & Chappell, 1983; Markides, 1989; 
Marshall & Rowlings, 1998; Norman, 1985; Vincent, 1995; Zarb & Oliver, 1993), 
particularly in the United States (Calasanti & Slevin, 2001; Crystal & Shea, 
1990; Davis et al, 1990; Dowd & Bengston, 1978; Dressel, 1991; Dressel et al, 
1997; Ferraro & Farmer, 1996; Gonyea, 1994; Hammond, 1995; Hardy & 
Hazelrigg, 1995; Johnson Jackson, 1997; Liska Belgrave et al, 1993; Markides, 
1989; Minkler, 1996; National Urban League, 1964; OGrady-LeShane, 1990; 
Stone, 1997; Wilson-Ford, 1990).  Theoretical work in this area has 
emphasised the qualitative experiences of older people who endure 
oppression, while empirical research has focused on documenting 
quantitatively whether and to what extent older people are disadvantaged by 
virtue of their age, gender, race/ethnicity, and/or social class.  The outcome 
variables most frequently used are rates of poverty, physical and mental health 
conditions, and discrimination in health, community support and housing 
services. 
This section of the thesis addresses inequalities in later life through an overview 
of the social and economic determinants of health and an analysis of several 
theories that have been used to explain inequalities in later life: cumulative 
disadvantage/advantage, selective survival, ageing as leveller, culture as 
resource, and the feminisation of poverty.  This is followed by a critical analysis 
of theories and empirical research on multiple jeopardies and interlocking 
oppressions, and ends with implications for research on dementia and 
intersectionality. 
2.3.1 Social and economic determinants of health  
There is a substantial literature base on the role that social and economic 
factors play in producing health inequalities and this has been used to support 
calls for a radical restructuring of existing power relations (Townson, 1999).  In 
the UK, a working group on inequalities in health released the Black report in 
1980 (Whitehead, Townsend, Davidson & Davidson, 1980).  This early initiative 
was followed by several others, the most recent being the release of Tackling 
Health Inequalities: A programme for action (Secretary of State for Heath, 
2003), which includes a commitment to address the underlying determinants of 
health. 
The Canadian government first acknowledged the influence of socio-economic 
factors on health in the Lalonde report (Lalonde, 1974).  Although this green 
paper was not thought to be terribly groundbreaking at the time, its legacy has 
been profound and lasting, largely due to its introduction of the concept of 
health field, comprised of human biology, environment, lifestyle, and health 
care organization (Federal, Provincial, Territorial Advisory Committee on 
Population Health, 1999; McKay, 2000).  The report (Lalonde, 1974) signalled 
the beginning of the adoption of a health promotion focus on the part of Health 
Canada, with social factors being recognized as determinants of health and 
responsibility being placed upon individuals to reduce their self-imposed risks; 
as well as the start of the alarmist discourse about the perils of an aging 
population (Gee, 2000; Katz, 1992; Robertson, 1990).  The impact of this report 
may not have been anything more than theoretical, however, as the attempt to 
raise investment in social dimensions of health equal to medical science have 
yet to materialize (McKay, 2000: 24). 
A more recent Canadian government report confirmed that health status is 
directly related to economic status (Federal, Provincial, Territorial Advisory 
Committee on Population Health, 1999: 39) and lists the five key influences as: 
1. Income (and income distribution) 
2. Education and literacy 
3. Employment and unemployment 
4. Working conditions 
5. Factors in the social environment 
(Federal, Provincial, Territorial Advisory Committee on Population 
Health, 1999: 39)  
Research on the social and economic determinants of health, located within the 
aforementioned ideology of population health, has not been very attentive to 
aging and older people.  However, the literature on inequalities in later life 
implicitly, if not explicitly, employs this conceptual framework (Markides, 1989), 
and therefore, an understanding of this approach to health is key to this thesis 
on dementia and intersectionality. 
The World Health Organization (2002) defined the determinants of health in 
older people as those economic, social, behavioural, personal, environmental, 
and systemic factors which singly or conjointly may predict the nature and 
quality of an individuals ageing experience; and referred to gender and culture 
as crosscutting determinants which influence all the other factors.  Social 
factors in this model included social support, opportunities for education and 
lifelong learning, peace, and protection from violence and abuse (p 28), while 
economic factors included income, work and social protection (p 30).  A link 
between the social and economic determinants of health and the critical 
gerontology literature is provided by a report written for the Canadian Centre for 
Policy Alternatives (Chernomas, 1999) that invalidates the attribution of blame 
imbedded in apocalyptic demography (Robertson, 1990).  A review of changes 
in patterns of disease over the 20th century supports the argument that disease 
is largely a socio-economic phenomenon and not a natural-individual one 
(Chernomas (1999: i) and clearly makes the connection between the 
transformation of labour under capitalism and the rise of chronic diseases.  With 
this knowledge, it is possible to dismantle the popular belief that chronic 
disease is caused by an ageing society and that blame therefore should rest 
with individuals who live long enough to develop disease (Minkler, 1996).  
Chernomas (1999) prescription for the treatment of contemporary health 
concerns was to link these to concerns about the quality of our air, water, food, 
and work and the need for equality of income and wealth, as expressed by the 
environmental, nutrition, and anti-poverty movements.  This need to link to 
parallel work or to take a holistic, interdisciplinary approach has been 
paramount throughout this thesis on dementia and intersectionality. 
2.3.2 Theories on inequalities in later life 
Several theories have been developed to explain either the continuation or the 
discontinuation of inequalities in later life: cumulative advantage/disadvantage, 
ageing as leveller, selective survival, and culture as resource.  These will be 
reviewed in this section, along with a related theoretical concept the 
feminisation of poverty, which refers to the predominance of women among the 
ranks of the poor in all age cohorts.  Often these theories of inequalities in later 
life are juxtaposed against one another, for example, double jeopardy and 
ageing as leveller (Blakemore, 1989), although they do not always contradict 
one another (Liska Belgrave et al, 1993) and there is evidence to support both 
theories (Blakemore, 1989; Liska Belgrave et al, 1993).  The distinction 
between these two theories is that double jeopardy selects race/ethnicity as the 
explanatory variable, while ageing as leveller focuses on age in explaining 
inequalities in later life. 
2.3.2.1 Cumulative advantage/disadvantage  
The cumulative advantage/disadvantage (CAD) theory posits that both the 
disadvantages and the advantages held by various social groups compound 
with age, as in the adage the rich become richer and the poor become poorer 
(Crystal & Shea, 1990; Dannefer, 2003).  Several studies have tested this 
hypothesis in various ways with differing results (Johnson & Wolinsky, 1994; 
Mellor & Milyo, 2001; Shea et al, 1996; Thorslund & Lundberg, 1994) and the 
focus often has been on health status.  Although the robustness of the link 
between income inequality and health has been challenged (Mellor & Milyo, 
2001), it is commonly accepted that there is a correlation between income and 
health, with health status increasing with higher income levels (Townson, 1999; 
Victor, 1991).  Studies that demonstrate inequalities in health by social class for 
both men and women (Thorslund & Lundberg, 1994) refute the ageing as 
leveller hypothesis that posits that inequalities on the basis of race or class are 
less pronounced among older people than they were earlier in the life course4. 
4 I do not support the ageing as leveler hypothesis and did not draw upon it in this research.  
The popular image of the impoverished and socially isolated senior evolved out 
of early studies of poverty among older people.  Hellebrandts (1980) mini-
research project was a reaction to this stereotype; and involved asking 110 
people within her circle of friends, colleagues, and fellow residents in a multi-
level care facility to write to her about their subjective reactions to aging (p 
404).  The author described her sample as: 
advantaged, old but of sound mind, well-educated, and with sufficient 
economic resources to live independently in a manner of their own 
choosing (Hellebrandt, 1980: 404). 
Not surprisingly, the aforementioned stereotype was not applicable to the 101 
respondents, 89% of whom were women: who did not feel old; accepted the 
limitations of ageing; engaged in physical and social activities; eschewed 
reminiscence; discussed death and dying freely; valued their independence; 
feared mental deterioration; and did not report any financial concerns.  The 
conclusion that the negative stereotype of the aged vanishes when the old are 
educated, affluent, and healthy (p 404) highlights the importance of socio-
economic factors in later life.  The findings have implications for dementia care, 
as the popular therapeutic activity of reminiscence (Murphy, 2002) might not be 
well received by these people5; for understanding experiences of dementia 
among the affluent, as cognitive impairment is a condition that is feared and 
threatens cherished independence for this group (Alzheimer Society of Canada, 
2003; see section 7.3.3); and for representing the disadvantaged, as the 
findings could reinforce the stereotype that, unlike their privileged peers, poor 
and uneducated older people are unreflective, inarticulate, and inactive. 
5 Although this group of people professed to eschew reminiscence, some or all might actually 
enjoy this activity once they developed dementia.   
2.3.2.2 Selective survival  
An influential American treatise on aging and health (Markides, 1989) put forth 
the view that high early mortality rates among some ethnic/racial groups leave 
robust members to survive into old age - the selective survival thesis - and, 
therefore, group membership should not be used to predict mortality and health 
in later life (Markides, 1989b: 18).  The shorter life expectancy for particular 
social groups, combined with the fact that some people apparently are able to 
escape their fate and live to a ripe old age, led the author to this ascription of 
robustness.  This theory could just as easily apply to older people in general, 
however.  While social class, health, and age are noted to change over time, 
social class is thought to be strongly related to age, gender and marital status 
(Longino et al, 1989).  The authors found a strong association between social 
class and gender with the richest quartile being that in which the predominance 
of men is most pronounced, although they acknowledge that the data on class 
available to analyse was limited, thus their conclusions may not hold with more 
detailed data.  The reasons for the association between class, aging and health 
are said to be: stress due to poverty, decreased coping resources, poor access 
to health care, and health practices and behaviours associated with poor health 
(Longino et al, 1989: 15).  In terms of gender, aging and health, the evidence 
has been summarised thus:  
womens lives before the finish line of death are more filled with 
sickness and disability, a price paid for the greater tendency to 
acquire non-fatal chronic problems and for longer life; men cross that 
line sooner, having suffered fewer years of trouble while alive 
(Verbrugge, 1989: 68). 
Hence, policymakers are advised to: 
pay as much attention to living as to dying - to moms grimace [due 
to arthritis] a she opens a car door and Dads empty chair [due to 
death] (ibid: 70). 
2.3.2.3 Inequalities as persistent   
The belief that inequalities observable in pre-retirement cohorts persist into later 
life has been substantiated by several authors (Ferraro & Farmer, 1996; 
Minkler, 1996; Victor, 1991). For example, an American study (Ferraro & 
Farmer, 1996) sought to test the double jeopardy, aging as leveller, and 
persistent health inequality theories among a sample of older Black and white 
Americans and the results refuted the ageing as leveller theory; and found the 
greatest support for the persistence of health inequalities over the life course.  
Closely related to the idea of inequalities being persistent is the feminisation of 
poverty theory that originated in a 1978 article by Pierce (as cited in Gonyea, 
1994), who observed that an increasing number of poor people at the time were 
women.  Later authors noted that this was not a new phenomenon and, since 
the coining of the term, there have been a number of studies demonstrating that 
women are poorer than men at all stages of the life course (Brotman, 1998; 
Chappell & Havens, 1980; Davis et al, 1990; Dressel, 1991; Gonyea, 1994; 
OGrady-LeShane, 1990; Stone, 1997; Wilson-Ford, 1990) and that older 
minority ethnic and racialised women and older unattached women experience 
impoverishment at particularly high rates (Brotman, 1998).  This has been 
shown to be related mainly to marital status (OGrady-LeShane, 1990) as the 
transition from married to widowed drastically reduces an older womans 
income (McDonald, 1997), to higher rates of widowhood, living alone, and 
institutionalisation among older women (Stone, 1997) and to social policies 
related to old age security (OGrady-LeShane, 1990; Stone, 1997).  Not all 
authors invoke the double jeopardy theory when writing of older womens 
poverty (Brotman, 1998; OGrady-LeShane, 1990; Wilson-Ford, 1991), with 
some employing the theory of cumulative disadvantage to explain findings that 
Black older women are the most impoverished group in society for example 
(Johnson Jackson, 1997; Wilson-Ford, 1990). These studies serve to counter 
the recently created image of the advantaged, active elder that has largely 
replaced the earlier stereotype of the indigent, detached elder.  This image 
resulted in a new myth that ignores class, gender and racial differences among 
older people; its alternative - the feminisation of poverty construct - has its own 
theoretical limitations for elucidating the dynamics of disadvantage in later life 
(Gonyea, 1994).  There have been several critiques of the feminisation of 
poverty literature for its disregard of the race effects on poverty in later life, 
accompanied by calls for a more complex analysis (Dressel, 1991; Gonyea, 
1994), one that recognises that older Black men are more impoverished than 
older white women, for example (Dressel, 1991).  Stone (1997) acknowledged 
early on the need to look at the racial gap in poverty among older people, which 
was later taken up in research on triple jeopardy (Chappell & Penning, 2001).  
A study by Rank and Hirschl (1999) demonstrated that factors other than 
gender do indeed contribute to poverty in later life as the likelihood of an older 
American ever experiencing a year below the poverty line increases 
substantially when one is Black, unmarried, and/or has less than 12 years of 
education.  In addition, 40% of all older Americans are projected to spend a 
year living below the poverty line at some point between the ages of 60 and 90 
years. 
Dressel (1991) expanded this critique of the feminisation of poverty to include 
the double and triple jeopardy theories that have been so popular in the 
gerontological literature since the 1960s.  The versions of these theories that 
include in their analysis minority ethnic and racialised women are termed add 
and stir approaches as racial-ethnic womens experiences are forced into the 
model rather than being utilised to refine or critique the model itself (Dressel, 
1991: 247).  Indeed, it has been argued that both the advantaged elder and 
the feminisation of poverty further relegate sub-groups of older people to the 
margins of society.  The way forward, therefore rests in taking a life span 
approach with an integrated analysis of race, class, gender and age (Gonyea, 
1994). 
2.3.2.4 Multiple jeopardies 
The term double jeopardy originates in legal theory and has been adopted by 
social scientists seeking to highlight differential experiences of inequality and 
discrimination in later life.  This started with the National Urban League in 1964 
(as cited in Dressel et al, 1997) that drew attention to the double disadvantage 
of older African Americans due to their age and race.  One definition of double 
jeopardy is falling into two or more social categories, which increase the risk of 
having some poor outcome (Hammond, 1995:5-6).  This conceptualisation has 
been expanded to triple jeopardy to refer to older minority ethnic and racialised 
women (Chappell & Penning, 2001) and quadruple or multiple jeopardy to 
encompass the additional burden facing disabled or lesbian/gay/bisexual older 
people (Ward, 2000; Zarb & Oliver, 1993).  A number of authors have applied 
this language to dementia, hypothesising that dementia results in an additional 
jeopardy (Allan, 2000; Anderson & Brownlie, 1997; Bowes & Wilkinson, 2002b; 
Innes, 2003; Marshall & Rowlings, 1998; Wilkinson, 2002b).  This additive 
model has been critiqued for the way in which theorists refer to layers of 
oppression or jeopardies being built one on top of another and resulting in 
quantitatively different (more negative) experiences for the older person in 
question (Dressel, 1991).  In addition to questioning its robustness as a theory 
(Simic, 1993), critics have accused the multiple jeopardies approach of creating 
a deficit thinking mentality that is highly disempowering to minority ethnic and 
racialised communities and overlooks their strengths in favour of showcasing 
disadvantage (Minkler, 1996). 
In a twist on the triple jeopardy concept that conflates social location with 
service outcomes, Norman (1985) claimed, in an oft-cited quote, that older 
immigrants who are long time settlers in the UK are: 
not merely in double jeopardy by reason of age and 
discrimination...but in triple jeopardy, at risk because they are old, 
because of the physical conditions and hostility under which they 
have to live, and because services are not accessible to them (p 1, 
emphasis in original). 
Although Norman (1985) did not refer to the North American literature on 
double/triple/multiple jeopardy that had been accumulating (Chappell & Havens, 
1980; Dowd & Bengston, 1978; Havens & Chappell, 1983; National Urban 
League, 1964; Penning, 1983; Posner, 1980) and conceptualised triple 
jeopardy differently than these earlier authors, her work has been treated in the 
UK as being representative of this theoretical tradition.  It is frequently cited as 
the author did demonstrate that older Jewish, Irish, Afro-Caribbean, Asian, 
European, Cypriot and Chinese long-time immigrants to the UK are subject to 
service shortcomings in several areas, including housing, health care and 
community services.  Much later, immigration status in itself was noted as 
meriting inclusion in multiple jeopardy theories (Berdes & Zych, 2000).  While 
UK survey research (Silveira & Ebrahim, 1998) found support for the multiple 
jeopardy theory among Bengalis and Somalis in London, studies of 
double/triple/multiple jeopardies have had inconsistent results (Liska Belgrave 
et al, 1993).  For example, an early finding on double jeopardy is that older 
Blacks are doubly disadvantaged in terms of income and physical health, but 
not in mental health (Jackson et al, 1982, as cited in Blakemore & Boneham, 
1994).  Yet, in an article specifically on double jeopardy and mental health, 
Rodeheaver and Datan (1988) claimed that:  
those who are already vulnerable in the social system and in the 
mental health system - the poor, minorities, and women - remain so 
in old age, where they face double and triple jeopardy (648). 
This point was reiterated by Rodin and Ickovics (1990) who noted that ageing 
women will experience a double jeopardy and that the greatest attention should 
be paid to particular sub-groups of women: minorities, the handicapped, and 
poor women (p 1029). 
Alzheimer Disease is said to create two particular problems for older women 
(Rodeheaver & Datan, 1988; Rodin & Ickovics, 1990): (1) more of them have 
the disease than do older men; and (2) women who do not have the disease, 
yet have other treatable problems with symptoms that mirror those of 
Alzheimers disease, are often overlooked by health practitioners who believe 
that senility is part of normal ageing.  The conclusion reached by Rodeheaver 
and Datan (1988) is that: 
growing old and needing mental health services may indeed be risky 
business for women (p 652);   
and clinicians need to be more sensitive to social and economic factors, such 
as role changes and poverty, and to view older persons as resources and as 
resilient (Minkler, 1996). 
2.3.2.5 Culture as resource  
Another author sought to demonstrate that culture is a resource (Simic, 1993), 
claiming that the double jeopardy theory neglects the benefits provided to older 
people through ethnic group membership, such as adaptive strategies, positive 
self-image, and insurance, and citing the involvement of older people in 
activities, roles and rituals as evidence of the strength of this argument.  This is 
an important point - ethnic and racial group membership may result in benefits 
as well as disadvantages.  However, it discounts the fact that structural 
disadvantage differentially affects minority ethnic and racialised older people 
and that communities provide their members with resources in the face of 
inequitable, oppressive and systemically patterned social conditions (see 
resilience discussion in chapter 8). 
Liska Belgrave et al (1993) in their study of double jeopardy, ageing as leveller 
and cultural resource theories of aging argued that double jeopardy and culture 
as resource are both important factors and called for a two-pronged research 
strategy that (1) undertakes longitudinal prospective research to determine 
subgroups experiencing the greatest inequities and why this is occurring and 
(2) in-depth qualitative research on how people actually experience being in 
double jeopardy and what role their culture plays in this.  Further support for 
linking objective and subjective data on disadvantage is provided by Johnson 
(1994) who concludes that economic well-being is as much a subjective 
phenomenon as an objective reality (p 26).  The following description of an 
interviewee indicates how discontent may be attributed to physical or mental 
health conditions, rather than located in the socio-economic circumstances of 
an individuals life:  
tearful and distraught during the interview, complaining repetitiously 
about her poverty, emotions her niece traced to her being in an early 
stage of Alzheimers Disease (Johnson, 1994: 24).  
Exploring the subjective dimension of disadvantage and privilege through 
problematising race, ethnicity, class, gender, and their intersections is the 
focus of this research on dementia and intersectionality and links to these 
proposed future research directions (Liska Belgrave et al, 1993).  Hardy and 
Hazelrigg (1995) found support for the additive theory of oppression in terms of 
gender and race/ethnicity6, and not for the interaction of race/ethnicity and 
gender in terms of producing supplemental disadvantage to that of the two 
forms added together.  The results of their analysis may provide a basis for 
solidarity among older women (Hardy & Hazelrigg, 1995), which has been 
threatened in an era of identity politics and post-modern sensibilities. 
2.3.2.6 Interlocking oppressions 
Several critical gerontologists note the importance of looking at forms of 
oppression as interacting with one another in complex ways and rooted in 
processes of domination and subordination; and viewing marginalised peoples 
6 Race and ethnicity are often conflated in the literature, despite thoughtful critiques of this 
practice (Oommen, 1994).  When the terms race and ethnicity appear as race/ethnicity in this 
thesis, it should be read as an indication that the cited authors have conflated these terms, not 
of support for this practice. 
as having strengths, and as actively resisting oppression (Browne, 1995; 
Blakemore, 1989; Dressel, 1991; Ginn & Arber, 1995; Gonyea, 1994; Holstein 
& Minkler, 2003; Levy, 1988; McMullin, 2000; Minkler, 1996; Victor, 1991; 
Vincent, 1995).  In order to move towards an integrated theory of class, age, 
gender, and ethnicity/race, McMullin (2000) argues that class, age, gender, and 
ethnicity/race need to be seen as categories of social relations and as 
interlocking sets of power relations.  Calasanti (1996) and Calasanti and Slevin 
(2001) expand the critique of additive approaches to oppression by engaging 
with privilege, as well as oppression, noting that privilege on one axis does not 
cancel out oppression on another (1996: 149) and that social life is relational.  
In calling for research that problematises power, Calasanti (1996) states that:  
because privileged groups have long served as the norm, 
researchers often forget that their experiences are shaped by the 
same power dynamics as those who have been oppressed (p 155). 
Although dementia is not addressed in their book on inequality and aging, when 
Calasanti and Slevin (2001) argue for reclaiming the word old and imbuing it 
with positive connotations so that old people can be old, in all its diversity (p 
203), one wonders if this means that old people should accept dementia or 
other physical and mental health conditions. 
In reference to the health needs of poor and racial/ethnic minority women, 
Zambrana (1988) also calls for an integrative model that takes into 
consideration the interaction of race, gender and class, the influence of 
historical, cultural and socio-economic factors, and the heterogeneity within 
racial/ethnic groups.  The author refers to poor women and women of colour as 
the most disadvantaged sectors of the population (p 137) and proposes a 
research agenda for minority health needs that includes a focus on poor and 
racial/ethnic minority women and aging, noting in particular the subjective 
meaning and quality of aging among different cohorts of poor and racial/ethnic 
women and the relevance of their educational and work backgrounds.  Further 
support for an integrated analysis is found in the work of Blakemore and 
Boneham (Blakemore 1989; 1997; Blakemore & Boneham, 1994) who 
endorsed the concept of ethclass, first used by Gordon (1964, as cited in 
Blakemore & Boneham, 1994) to denote the intertwined nature of ethnicity and 
class.  Blakemore and Boneham (1994: 15) argued that focusing on racism 
alone may lead to a passive victim picture and that social class, employment, 
age, period of immigration, locality and neighbourhood are important factors in 
an integrated analysis.  In an earlier work, Blakemore (1989) argued that it is 
misleading to think of variables operating as discrete influences (p 173), as the 
picture is more complex; and cautioned against automatically assuming that 
older minority ethnic and racialised people are worse off than their white 
majority ethnic peers. 
Interlocking oppressions was a theme in Vincents (1995) book in which he 
attempted to introduce a holistic life course theory of inequality, referring to 
processes of exploitation and hegemony as underpinning various forms of 
inequality.  Additive and reductionist approaches were rejected in favour of an 
integrative analysis that sees inequalities as intersecting and as structuring life 
course opportunities and people as cohesive units, not divided into strands of 
identity (p 189).  This perspective was articulated by Levy (1988), albeit in a 
less complex fashion:  
both age and sex emerge as powerful systems of ranking and 
discourse, but neither can be understood fully without reference to 
each other...thus it makes little sense to view the properties of 
gender and aging as separate domains (p 485). 
Zarb and Oliver (1993), in their report on aging with a disability referred to the 
additive approach as serving to atomise, distort and marginalize (p 16) 
experiences and called for connections between aging with a disability and 
other forms of oppression, such as sexism, racism, ageism, and classism.  
Sayce (2000), in putting forth the view that the disability inclusion model is the 
way forward for people with mental health problems to be treated as citizens, 
noted the models acknowledgement of difference or complex triple or 
quadruple-barrelled identities (p 131) and its focus on simultaneous 
discrimination, rather than multiple jeopardies.  This approach was seen to be 
particularly appropriate as:  
most disabled people are working class men, women, gays and 
lesbians, older people and people of Irish, Jewish and many other 
ethnic origins (Sayce, 2000: 131). 
It is these very groups of people that by and large have been left out of 
research on subjective experiences of dementia and thus are of concern to this 
thesis on dementia and intersectionality.  With an understanding of theories 
about inequalities in later life and the need for an intersectional analysis, we 
now move on to an analysis of theories on dementia and their limitations. 
2.4 Dementia theorising 
Several ontological theories regarding dementia have been put forward, yet 
phenomenological perspectives remain a major, acknowledged gap in the 
literature.  Given this lack of experiential theories, the focus here will be on 
theories that address the nature of dementia.  It is argued, however, that in 
order to begin to understand dementia, we need to ask the people who are 
labelled as such about their experiences and then generate theory from these 
answers, rather than imposing a meta-theory on observed /described 
phenomena.  Current theories on dementia may be loosely classified as: (1) 
dementia as a brain disease, (2) dementia as a normal part of the ageing 
process, (3) dementia as a psycho-neurological condition, (4) dementia as a 
disability, and (6) dementia as a social construction. 
Table 1- Various Approaches to Understanding Dementia7 
Approach 
Beliefs 
Practice 
Selected authors 
Bio-medical 
(brain disease) 
Dementia is a 
pathological brain 
disease that results in 
particular symptoms and 
behavioural problems 
that follow a certain 
course over a defined 
period of time 
Treatment focuses 
on early diagnosis, 
drug trials and 
therapies, symptom 
management, and 
individual 
adaptation, including 
preparation for the 
inevitable decline   
Dilmann, 2000; 
Jacques & 
Jackson, 2000; 
Khachaturian, 
2000; Leibing, 
2002; Shenk, 2001 
Normal aging 
The brain loses strength 
and function over time, 
therefore dementia, or 
rather senility, is not a 
disease, but part of the 
natural aging process  
Acceptance & care 
in community until 
institutionalization 
necessary 
(warehousing, bed- 
and-body work)  
Holstein, 2000;  
Huppert, Brayne & 
OConnor, 1994; 
Shenk, 2001  
Gubrium, 1997 
Psycho-
neurological 
condition  
Dementia represents the 
interaction of the brain 
(pathology, development, 
and activity) and the 
social-psychology of the 
individual 
Person-centred care 
that focuses on the 
person living with 
the disease and 
strives to limit ill-
being and maximize 
well-being in 
dementia care 
Cheston & Bender, 
1999; Kitwood, 
1990; 1993; 
1997a; Kitwood & 
Bredin, 1992; 
Sabat 2002; Sabat 
& Harr, 1992  
Social model of 
Cognitive impairment is 
Bartlett, 2000; Focus on social and 
7 Chart developed for guest lecture at McMaster Summer Institute on Gerontology, June 2003. 
disability made a disabling 
condition by a society 
that is not inclusive and  
doesnt design dementia-
friendly policies, services, 
and buildings 
environmental 
context and 
changing  disabling 
environments; 
advocacy; alliances 
with other groups   
Crow, 1996; 
Gwilliam & Gilliard, 
1996; Kitwood, 
1995; Marshall, 
1998; Oliver, 1996; 
Pool 2000   
Social 
constructionism
Dementia is a socially 
constructed phenomenon 
whereby certain people 
and their actions are 
labelled as deviant and 
they are thereby subject 
to social exclusion 
Efforts at reducing 
the stigma 
associated with 
dementia and 
promoting 
citizenship rights of 
those affected    
Bond, 1992; Fox, 
1989; Gubrium 
1986; Harding & 
Palfrey, 1997; 
Lyman, 1989; 
Robertson, 1990; 
Vittoria, 1999   
This proliferation in the number of theories, or alternative conceptualisations of 
this phenomenon we call dementia, is closely related to dissatisfaction with the 
ability of the medical model to adequately account for the variability and 
diversity of symptoms and behaviours found in people with dementia.  The 
arbitrary manner in which dementia was classified as a brain disease assists us 
in understanding the dissatisfaction with this model as an explanatory theory 
and will be briefly reviewed below. 
2.4.1 Dementia as a brain disease 
The medical model sees dementia as a brain disease and has been the 
dominant paradigm in this field since Kraepelin named an amalgam of 
symptoms and associated behaviours Alzheimer Disease (AD) in 1910 and 
classified it as a distinct subset of senile dementia (Cheston & Bender, 1999; 
Dillmann, 2000; Fox, 1989; Gubrium, 1986; Herskovits, 1995; Holstein, 2000; 
1998; Leibing 2001; Robertson, 1990).  This naming served to differentiate AD 
from senile dementia, a decision which Alois Alzheimer himself disputed at the 
time as he believed that what he had witnessed clinically was not the result of a 
distinct disease process, but rather a variant of senile dementia.  A related 
debate, which predated this declaration of AD, was whether any distinction 
could be made between senile dementia and normal ageing.  These scientific 
deliberations fell largely dormant until the early 1970s when AD was 
rediscovered by medicine and psychiatry and agreement was reached to treat 
AD as an organic condition that is both related to and distinct from senile 
dementia (Fox, 1989).  This led to the reintroduction of the general category of 
dementia in the fourth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM-IV) in 1994.  As Cheston and Bender (1999) stated, this:  
re-creation of Alzheimers disease...has served to place people with 
Alzheimers disease within a constricting explanatory framework in 
which they tend to be perceived as diseased brains rather than as 
social beings with active mental lives (p 44).  
There is undeniably an association between dementia and ageing in that 
incidence and prevalence increase with age.  However, this does not support 
the belief that dementia is a normal part of the ageing process.  Contemporary 
theorists view dementia as a pathological condition that primarily strikes 
individuals at random.  In this sense, the brain disease theory is akin to the 
personal tragedy theory heavily criticised in disability studies (Bond & Corner, 
2001; Crow, 1996; Hughes & Patterson, 1997; Morris, 1991; 1996; Oliver, 1990; 
1996; Shakespeare, 1996; Tragaskis, 2002) which sees disability (dementia) as 
a tragic quirk of fate that leaves the affected individual subject to the pity of 
others.  The resulting societal responses focus on assisting the individual to 
adapt, rather than fundamentally altering social structures to accord disabled 
people full citizenship rights.  The discovery of a pathological brain represents 
just such a personal tragedy in the world of biomedicine, a tragedy that 
medicine is driven to avert through the discovery of a cure. 
2.4.2 Questions of normalcy and critiques of the biomedicalisation 
of dementia 
Ageing is not a condition, but rather a process.  Although various conditions 
may attach themselves to older people as they age, it is questionable whether 
the process of ageing itself can be said to cause a condition such as dementia.  
There are compelling arguments that ageing has been turned into a condition 
through a process of medicalisation (Estes & Binney, 1991; Robertson, 1990), 
and the same process has been said to have solidified the location of dementia 
under the gaze (Foucault, 1994b) where it is then subject to regulation by the 
medical profession (Bond, 1992; Lyman, 1989; Robertson, 1990).  As Dillmann 
(2000) concludes, dementia can be thought of as:  
a subset of the changes identified by the usage of the concept of 
aging [and] this subset is the result of a normative decision to 
evaluate a particular area of the range as abnormal (p 151). 
This process of ascribing phenomena with a designation of normal or abnormal 
certainly applies to dementia, just as it has operated in the past for madness 
and senility (Foucault, 1965).  Indeed, the determination of whether dementia 
and other conditions that connect brain and behaviour exist as facts or whether 
we have created them relies on an understanding of the creation of the Other  
and the designation of behaviour as normal or abnormal. 
Early treatises on the creation of the Other in relation to ideas of normalcy may 
have been concerned with ostensibly different subject matter, for example 
madness (Foucault, 1965), stigma (Goffman, 1963) and deviance (Becker, 
1963), yet the common thread is the identification of a condition or situation that 
has been problematised by society and that subsequently results in 
discrimination of those who are classified as Others, in this case people with 
dementia.  The term senility has been reclaimed as a rejection of the medical 
classification of dementia, which is thought to be concerned only with the 
pathological (Cohen, 1998).  The use of the word senility is a political act 
meant to signal a concentration on the physiology, political economy and social 
relations that structure loss and decay of the body and its voice (Cohen, 1998; 
Traphagan, 2000).  The term, however, cannot escape its contested past in 
which it was equated with the ageing process and as a result senility was seen 
to be an expected part of the ageing experience.  The degree to which 
dementia and senility are believed to be qualitatively different conditions is still 
under debate and although we may think now that the former term represents 
an advance in medical thinking and social awareness, it may just be a surface 
appeasement.  That is to say, the response to dementia has not improved in 
terms of removing the stigma and engaging with the other in a meaningful way.  
The political economy of social relations of domination and difference has not 
been structurally altered by adoption of the clinical term dementia.  Poverty, 
marginalisation, and social exclusion are seen as non-medical issues and 
through their omission from under the gaze, the ageing process is effectively 
depoliticised (Robertson, 1990).  Once we deconstruct the use of the words and 
the conditions they describe, we may come to the conclusion as stated above 
that it is all about the social construction of the other and if that is the case, then 
society is necessarily implicated.  And as Sayce (2000) states in referring to 
mental illness in general:  
purely genetic explanations let society off the hook (p 92). 
2.4.3 Dementia as a psycho-neurological condition: the inclusion of 
the mind 
Given the concerns with the reductionist, and quite possibly unscientific brain 
disease theory, it is no surprise that a move to a theory that took into account 
individuality and personality characteristics was embraced by those concerned 
more with the care than the cure of people with dementia.  Kitwoods concept of 
personhood (Kitwood, 1990; 1993; 1995; 1997a; 1997d; Kitwood and Bredin, 
1992;) and Sabat and Harrs corresponding focus on selfhood (Sabat, 1998; 
2000; 2001; Sabat & Harr, 1992) was readily embraced and people eagerly 
adopted what they saw as a social-psychological approach, not the integrative 
theory that Kitwood proposed (Pool, 2000) that sees dementia as the 
interaction of both neurological and social-psychological domains.  Factoring in 
the mind, Kitwood and Bredin (1992) argued, allows for the possibility of 
observing re-mentia, an idea that was soon supported by empirical research 
(Sixsmith et al, 1993).  Kitwood did not disavow the influence of pathology, 
rather he added another component - the social-psychological - and asked that 
we view dementia first as a disability and then as an illness (Kitwood, 1995; 
1997a).  This call has been taken up by others in the dementia field (Bartlett, 
2000; Gwilliam & Gilliard, 1996; Marshall, 1998; Pool, 2000).  Kitwood 
expanded the notion of what constitutes dementia and developed a method of 
assessing both well- and ill-being in dementia and an approach to care based 
on this synthesis of social-psychology and neurology (Kitwood, 1997a; Kitwood 
& Bredin, 1992; Pool, 2000).  At the same time, Sabat and Harr (1992) and 
Sabat (1998; 2000; 2001) were busy accumulating proof of the existence of 
selves in people with dementia, selves that seemed to persist well into the 
disease process and whose maintenance was shown to be dependent on the 
actions of others in their environment. 
Personhood as defined by Kitwood (1993; 1997a; 1997d) refers to a standing or 
status that is conferred on an individual by others in the context of a 
relationship.  The uniqueness of persons can be appreciated through acquiring 
personal knowledge and demonstrating empathy, two qualities that when 
combined are thought to be able to produce miracles in dementia care 
(Kitwood, 1997c: 39).  Dementia is said to emerge in a social context (Kitwood 
& Bredin, 1992: 275) and Sabat and Harr acknowledged that social 
constructionist theory (Sabat 2000; 2001; Sabat & Harr, 1992) forms the 
backdrop for their research on selfhood.  However, neither Kitwoods nor Sabat 
and Harrs work truly enters into the social realm.  It stays not only at the level 
of the individual, but at the basic psychology of the individual, leaving little room 
for an articulation of the role and influence of intersecting identities based on 
class, gender, race and ethnicity.  Another limitation of this theory is that it is 
not grounded in experiences of people with dementia; people with dementia 
were not asked how they would explain dementia (Harding & Palfrey, 1997).  
Although he did not apply this critique to his own theory of dementia, Kitwood 
did call attention to the fact that research subjects have not been asked what it 
is like to experience dementia? (1997b: 11) and certainly endorsed this as a 
direction for future research (Kitwood 1997a; 1997b).  
The personhood/selfhood concept and the accompanying theory of the 
interaction of brain (pathology, development, activity) and psychology is 
important to this research on dementia and intersectionality as it expands on 
the bio-medical notion of dementia as solely a brain disease, it champions the 
importance of understanding the person behind the disease and in doing so, 
lays the groundwork for further explorations of the nature of identity and the 
socio-cultural context of dementia.  Dementia can be seen to challenge our 
notions of normalcy (Kitwood, 1997b) and encourage us to better understand 
what it means to be a person (Kitwood, 1997a; 1997c).  I argue that our next 
step should be to explore what it means to be a person with multiple and 
intersecting identities, a person of a certain race, ethnicity, class and gender, 
an exploration that would take us into the sociological realm of understanding 
dementia.  Kitwood (1997a) intimated this direction in his conclusion that the 
paradigm he espoused:  
brings into focus the uniqueness of each person, respect for what 
they have accomplished and compassionate to what they have 
endured (p 135). 
The question of endurance in the face of discrimination is central to the 
following theory which views dementia as a disability and which is in essence a 
sociological theory. 
2.4.4 Dementia as a disability and the connection to mental health 
and illness 
Disability theorists and activists have not addressed dementia or mental ill 
health specifically, however it is becoming increasingly common in dementia 
and in mental health and illness to turn to the social model of disability 
championed by Oliver (1990; 1996) as a more adequate paradigm for 
understanding cognitive impairment (Bartlett, 2000; Gwilliam & Gilliard, 1996; 
Kitwood, 1995; Marshall, 1998; Pool, 2000; Sayce, 2000).  The attractiveness 
of the social model of disability is that it does not see impairments as 
problematic; rather it postulates that society has problematised impairment.  
Society is seen to disable people in the way that people with impairments are 
unnecessarily isolated and excluded from full participation in society (Oliver, 
1996); society has not shifted attitudes and adapted environments to 
accommodate those who differ from the norm (Phair & Good, 1995).  This is a 
move completely away from brain disease theory into the realm of the social, 
towards a political economy of disabilities.  However, Oliver sees a clear 
distinction between theories and models and does not refer to the product of his 
thinking as a theory.  He calls it a model since he believes models aid in 
understanding (Oliver, 1996) and do not seek to explain as theories do.  There 
are differing opinions as to what distinguishes a theory (McMullin, 2000).  This 
semantic distinction has not been as critical in dementia, and so this model has 
been adopted as an explanatory theory - a theory of how dementia should be 
viewed, not how it is caused.  Naming dementia as a disability moved dementia 
theorising to a focus on society, away from the brain, or the brain and behaviour 
combined.  The realm of the social leads us to questions as to how society 
shapes and constrains the experiences of people with dementia through our 
conceptualisation of this disease/illness/disability and the interaction of relations 
of domination.  It is this question that Oliver (1990) poses in his suggestion that 
the way forward on a theoretical level for disabilities is the creation of social 
oppression theory, developed by disabled people, and in this way grounding the 
theory in the experiences of people living with impairments, who are 
consequently disabled by society.  Oliver (1996) further highlights the need for 
an analysis that sees oppressions as intersecting and acknowledges that the 
social model of disability does not address this issue.  The imperative for the 
future is that theory be derived from the experiences of the people under study, 
a need that was identified earlier in relation to future dementia research.  Initial 
indications are that it is natural for people to talk in the language of 
intersectionality, as the following quote demonstrates:   
As a black disabled woman, I cannot compartmentalize or separate 
aspects of my identity in this way.  The collective experience of my 
race, disability and gender shape and inform my life (Hill, 1994, as 
quoted in Oliver, 1996).   
The concern expressed in the quote of the dangers in and futility of sectioning 
off parts of oneself is at the heart of an intersectional analysis.  Aligning 
dementia with disability places cognitive impairment in a socio-political context 
and moves towards an understanding of the status of being disabled as an 
outcome of relations of subordination and privilege. 
An analysis of intersecting oppressions is central to Sayces (2000) 
investigation into the discrimination and social exclusion of people with mental 
health problems and how to overcome this state of affairs.  Her finding that 
people with mental health problems, referred to as users/survivors, are socially 
excluded, and that this intersects with other forms of discrimination, is based on 
extensive research with users/survivors, mental health professionals, policy 
makers, disability activists, advocates and lawyers in the US and the UK.  She 
concludes that the disability inclusion model (based on the social model of 
disability) is the most likely model to lead to social inclusion and full citizenship 
rights as it places users/survivors as a minority group in society, it is inclusive of 
differences within the group in terms of decisions about whether to receive 
treatment or not, it acknowledges intersecting identities and it builds alliances 
with other groups to address simultaneous discrimination.  Her rationale for 
focusing on oppression/ discrimination, rather than stigma for example is that 
the latter stays at the level of the individual and the former points to patterned 
or systemic exclusion from social and economic life (Sayce 2000).  The 
adoption of the disability model by users/survivors, being people who are 
socially excluded due to mental health problems, lends further credence to its 
applicability to dementia. 
2.4.5 The influence of sociology: dementia as a social construction 
Sociologists have been criticised for not engaging with the needs and concerns 
of older people with mental health problems (Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999).  
Indeed Sayce (2000) identifies older people with mental health problems as 
those among the unheard voices that we need to actively seek out and 
suggests that mental health groups should build alliances with older peoples 
groups in order to increase their strength as social movements.  Although there 
is little evidence of sociological theorising on dementia specifically, sociological 
theories have been applied to the study of dementia (Bond, 2001; Bond & 
Corner, 2001; Bond, Corner & Graham, 2004; MacRae, 1999) and this link has 
not always been recognised.  The impact of work that has applied a sociological 
perspective to dementia has been profound in terms of our understanding of the 
social construction of Alzheimers disease (Gubrium, 1986; Harding & Palfrey, 
1997) and the purpose it has served for the Alzheimers Enterprise (Binney & 
Swan, 1991), the biomedicalisation of dementia (Bond, 1992; Lyman, 1989; 
Robertson, 1990) and the emphasis on lived experiences of dementia (Bond 
1992; Bond & Corner, 2001; Braudy Harris, 2002; Froggatt, 1988; Keady, 1996; 
Lyman, 1989;1998; Robertson, 1990; Vittoria, 1998; Wilkinson, 2002b).  
Dementia as a subject matter seems to have:  
fallen through the cracks between social gerontology and medical 
gerontology, with neither specialty paying much attention to the 
social forces that affect the conceptualization and experience of the 
disease (Lyman, 1989: 599). 
This in turn has led to a lack of social theories of dementia. 
In line with the question of normalcy addressed earlier in relation to the brain 
disease theory and the biomedicalisation of dementia, social constructionists 
view normalcy as a socially negotiated designation (Harding & Palfrey, 1997; 
Pilgrim & Rogers, 1999) based on social constructions of unwanted or deviant 
behaviour.  This theorising is derivative of Szaszs 1961 thesis The Myth of 
Mental Illness (Szasz, 1994) and Berger and Luckmanns (1966) seminal work 
The Social Construction of Reality in which they stated that:  
questions of psychological status cannot be decided without 
recognizing the reality-definitions that are taken for granted in the 
social situation of the individual...psychological status is relative to 
the social definitions of reality in general and is itself socially defined 
(p 196).   
Rather than biology or physiology, it is society that is seen to create mental 
illness through its definition of normative behaviour.  The resulting label of 
abnormal is applied differentially and it has a variable effect on those to whom it 
is applied based on factors such as their race, ethnicity, class, gender and age 
(Cohen, 1995).  Harding and Palfrey (1997) question to what extent dementia is 
a label applied to people who resist oppression through an assertion of their 
individuality and their independence.  Pilgrim and Rogers (1999) claimed that:  
it is the roles and context of peoples situations that influence the 
type and rate of mental distress (p 40).   
Referring to the social construction of senility in particular, Traphagan (2000) 
states that it is a:  
matter of human identities as they change and are negotiated 
between and among people over their lives (p 186) 
 and stresses that this social construction is not universal, it is culturally 
mediated.  For this reason, anthropologists, such as Traphagan (2000) and 
Cohen (1998), refer to senility as culturally, rather than socially, constructed.  
Viewing dementia as a social construction is helpful in that it speaks to the 
political economy of dementia - the interaction of the political, the economic and 
the social structures (section 2.2.1), and their impact on human experience.  It 
runs the risk, however, of negating the very real experience of disorientation, 
memory loss, diminished judgement, and other symptoms endured by people 
with dementia.  Further, it does not adequately explain the role of intersecting 
identities, nor does it place people in a socio-cultural context that differentially 
supports or disables them based on where they lie on the multiple axes of 
privilege and oppression.  For older people with dementia who are experiencing 
the intersectionality of age and disability, without even factoring in other 
dimensions of their identities, there is a need for theory that is grounded in their 
lived experiences and that further develops our understanding of the 
intersecting nature of oppression. 
2.5 Implications for future theoretical developments 
Three themes ran through the above review of dementia theories:  (1) prior 
theorising on dementia has not been based on the lived experiences and 
viewpoints of people with dementia themselves; (2) dementia theories have 
failed to account for the socio-cultural context of people with dementia, the 
intersectional nature of identities, and the interaction between these realms; 
and (3) future sociological theorising on dementia and intersectionality needs to 
be grounded in an analysis of the structure and function of privilege and 
oppression in order to adequately account for the experiences of people who 
are simultaneously oppressed on the basis of multiple and intersecting identity 
categories (Hulko, 2002). 
The first section of this chapter, on theorising about aging and older people, 
argued that the critical gerontology tradition represents a more holistic and 
politically engaged approach to aging studies and emphasised the importance 
of seeing older people as theorisers and determining their views about aging 
and being old.  With respect to inequalities in later life, there are several 
implications for this thesis arising from this critical engagement with the 
literature.   
As noted, the concept of multiple jeopardies was suggested to be applicable to 
dementia by several authors (Allan, 2000; Anderson & Brownlie, 1997; Innes, 
2003; Marshall & Rowlings, 1998; Rodeheaver & Datan, 1988; Wilkinson, 
2002b) who claimed that people with dementia are subject to an additional layer 
of jeopardy.  This hypothesis has not been systematically tested, to my 
knowledge, to see whether it holds up either quantitatively or qualitatively.  
Moreover, the approach that treats oppressions as interlocking has not been 
operationalised to date in dementia research apart from an analysis of 
dementia theorising and the subjective experiences of people with dementia 
that I undertook and which had some promising results (Appendix A).  The 
concept of interlocking oppressions is attractive on a personal level, as it seems 
to fit with our subjective experiences of what is it to be a person inhabiting 
complex social locations or multiply situated in terms of identity categories.  On 
a theoretical and political level, it leads us away from fruitless attempts to find 
the ultimate oppression to which all others can be reduced. 
A key concern arising from the literature on intersectionality/interlocking 
oppressions is that it is a difficult concept to operationalise (see chapter 5) and 
thus, there is a lack of empirical research to substantiate all the theorising and 
personal reflections.  It poses a challenge to both quantitative and qualitative 
researchers - a challenge that has been answered by the former group (Hardy 
& Hazelrigg, 1995), but apparently not by the latter.  I would argue that it may 
be easier to try to prove statistically whether interaction effects exist in data on 
inequalities in later life than to figure out how to ask questions or observe 
behaviour in a way that teases out the nature and extent of oppression and 
privilege and their interplay in the daily lives of older people.  We have a 
formula and prescribed techniques to apply to the first concern, while the 
second one defies formulaic solutions.  Possible questions like tell me about 
your self?, how do you identify as a person?, what role do gender, race, 
ethnicity and class play in your life? seem vague, tiresome or difficult.  There 
are no easy questions though with a complex subject matter such as this.  First, 
it calls for creativity and the willingness to take chances with the design of 
interview guides and the use of research methods, as well as reflexivity in the 
field to be able to follow leads and weave together threads of meaning.  
Second, it requires us to ask about privilege as well as oppression and to look 
for acts of resistance, rather than assuming capitulation (see chapter 5). 
From this critical review of literature on theories of aging and dementia, we 
move on to another set of theories that relate more to the substantive focus of 
this thesis.  The next chapter examines the dynamics of privilege and 
oppression in general and specifically in the context of health, illness and 
disability, with the implications for dementia being evident throughout and 
summarized at the end. 
Chapter - 3 The Dynamics of Privilege and 
Oppression 
3.1 Locating (my)self  
Researching and writing this chapter required a blurring of any remaining lines 
of distinction between the personal and the professional.  Identity and 
oppression are not simply words in an academic text, they are concepts that 
hold real, complex, and often disputed meanings in our daily lives.  It is difficult 
to comprehend what these meanings may be and the dialectical relationship 
between the personal and the political from solely a structural level analysis.  
Consequently, it has been recognised by feminist and anti-racist scholars that 
researchers and practitioners should engage in explorations of the subjective 
realm of oppression in order to better understand the personal impact of 
structural relations of domination (Alway, 1995; Mama, 1995a; Millar, 1998; 
Moraga, 2001; Smiley, 1993; Smith, 1987), to get at the lived experiences of 
relations of ruling (Smith, 1987).  A lack of attention to personal experiences 
was an early criticism levelled at the social model of disability by feminist 
disabled women (Crow, 1996; Morris, 1991; 1996) and attention to this 
subjective arena has been promoted as a way forward in understanding 
disability oppression (Marks, 1999; Shakespeare, 1996).  Towards this end of 
linking the personal and the political and situating this paper in the context of 
everyday dialectics of oppression and power (Charlton, 1998), I wrote a story of 
the collision of my professional and personal lives, following the example set by 
June Jordan in Report from the Bahamas (2001) in which she highlights the 
intersections of race, class, and gender as they operate on her vacation.     
I am a holder of multiple privileges by virtue of my race, ethnicity, class, and 
able-bodied ness and feel that it is my responsibility to remain cognisant of that 
fact in interactions with others and to seek to transform oppressive practices.  
Using my privilege in what I hoped to be an instructive manner, if not 
emancipatory, I turned my subjective gaze to the multi-racial and multi-ethnic 
household that was my home for eight months during the first year of my 
doctoral studies.  In this externally constituted flat, the dynamics of gender, 
race, ethnicity, and class shaped the everyday interactions between the seven 
occupants.  The most blatant example arose four months into our cohabitation 
when one flatmate disclosed to me that another flatmate had made prejudicial 
comments about Blacks and Indians.  He proceeded to describe his feelings 
about an Asian woman from Hong Kong placing herself higher (closer to 
whiteness) in the racial hierarchy than himself, a British Pakistani man.  He 
recalled a lifetime of being viewed as a foreigner, although he is native born, 
and was angered that a real foreigner to this land, who shares his visible 
minority status, could evoke those not so dormant feelings of being the other.  
This was followed by the retelling of an incident in which another Asian woman 
flatmate who was from Taiwan had expressed that yellow is better than brown 
because it is closer to white.  He did not, however, reject this racialised ranking 
of status, rather he questioned their relative positioning in this hierarchy, 
indicating that he should be placed higher by virtue of being born in Britain. 
In describing her reaction to hearing the term rainbow women being used by a 
group of non-white women to identify themselves, a feminist author wrote:  
This colour hierarchy...falls back, even if unconsciously, on the 
hegemonic common sense of social culture and politics of slavery 
and apartheid.  What colour are you, it asks: are you black, white, 
yellow or brown? (Bannerji, 2001: 544).  
Upon hearing the above story from my flatmate, I thought where am I - on a 
plantation? as this type of thinking was, in my mind, text-bound and historically 
situated.  Upon relating this story to my mother, she exclaimed but theyre 
educated people and her comment reminded me of the prevalent belief that 
education erases prejudice, or at least makes one more discrete about it.  
However, this belief does not stand up to empirical testing, as noted by a 
cursory look at several atrocities perpetrated over the last century alone, the 
Holocaust being the most extreme and horrific example of well-educated people 
enacting their prejudices (Essed, 1991). 
In terms of distinctions between prejudice, discrimination and racism, the 
dynamics of ethnicity and race in my flat evidenced prejudice, defined as:  
A negative attitude toward a person or a group based upon a social 
comparison process in which the individuals own group is taken as 
the positive point of reference (Jones, 1972).  
Instances of racial and ethnic prejudice seem to stand in sharper relief than 
gender and class which operate in ways that are more difficult to pinpoint, as 
they are more amorphous, yet no less prevalent.  Further, it is difficult to 
untangle these dynamics, as race, ethnicity, class and gender are necessarily 
entangled (Andersen & Hill Collins, 2001b; Anthias, 1992; Bannerji, 1995b; 
Bhavnani, 2001; Brah, 2001; Brah & Phoenix, 2004; Crenshaw Williams, 1994; 
hooks, 2000).  At the start of our co-habitation, the Asian women aligned 
themselves with the males in the flat and were careful not to counter them if 
there was another person in the room, and stayed silent if another female was 
being disparaged.  Although in the earlier example one of these women saw 
herself as superior to one of the men based on her belief in the racialised 
hierarchy, in most instances she and her compatriot placed themselves in a 
subordinate position and acceded to the gender power held by the men. 
Class may be evident in lifestyle discussions, yet when all are inhabiting the 
ambiguous status of students, it is easier to pass (Goffman, 1963) as one of 
the group and avoid unmasking ones inferior, or perhaps superior, status.  As 
is the norm in capitalist societies, there seemed to be a relentless compulsion 
to spend and the ease with which one can do so was taken as evidence of 
class privilege.  In my flat, there appeared to be a process of positioning at work 
based on ownership of goods such as televisions, laptops, and stereos and 
plans to travel to places such as London, Paris, and Amsterdam.  Once 
acquired, possessions were seldom shared.  This jockeying carried over to 
academic matters, such as number of books read or words written, with 
seemingly no awareness of structural constraints that could affect scholarly 
output.  Similarly, the type of food purchased (frozen versus fresh, name brand 
versus generic) was more an indicator of economic security than one of taste.  
Such was the nature of class relations in my flat.  Although the most shocking in 
its blatancy, racial and ethnic prejudice was not the only relation of domination 
operating in my flat: class and gender were implicated as well and could not be 
easily teased apart.  A more detailed analysis of this household could reveal 
some clues as to the nature of intersecting oppressions, as the actors seemed 
to be conscious of the dynamics of oppression though not that of privilege. 
3.2 The everyday articulations of identity and oppression 
My intention with this story was to situate this review of the literature on identity 
and oppression; having done so, I now move on to an analysis of this largely 
theoretical body of literature.  After addressing definitions of these two concepts 
as they appear in the literature, I take a brief look at terms that have arisen from 
cultural studies in attempts to make sense of identity and difference, then 
review the notion of subjectivity, along with articulations of identity as fluid, 
multiple and contingent and oppression as a matrix of domination, and end with 
an indication of the applicability to dementia studies and potential ways forward.  
This section on identity and oppression draws on a largely theoretical body of 
literature, with attention paid to how these concepts have been conceptualised 
in the literature, the notion of subjectivities, articulations of identity as fluid, 
multiple and contingent, and oppression as a matrix of domination. 
Intersectionality and its corollary interlocking oppressions were discussed in 
Chapter 1, therefore I will only highlight a few points here before proceeding to 
definitions of identity and oppression.  These concepts are rooted in Freires 
(2001) depiction of oppression as a structure of domination in which all humans 
participate, both as oppressors and as the oppressed.  In the 30 years since the 
first publication of Freires seminal text on oppression, terms like multiple, 
simultaneous, interdependent and interlocking have been affixed to the root 
word oppressions in an attempt to broaden the theory to include systems of 
inequality other than class and to do so in a way that consciously avoids the 
add and stir approach (Dressel, 1991). This is more fully articulated in later 
feminist and anti-racist writings that use, for example, a matrix of 
domination/social oppression (Adams, Bell & Griffin, 1997; Hill Collins, 2000 as 
cited in Andersen & Hill Collins, 2001b), a polyhedron (Williams, 1992), a flower 
of power (Lee, 1985 as cited in Bishop, 1994), an intersectional model 
(Wineman, 1984, as cited in Mullaly, 2002), or a birdcage (Frye, 2001) to 
represent multiple and intersecting axes of oppression and privilege.  Freire 
himself was engaged in this linking work, as noted in the introduction to the 
30th anniversary edition of Pedagogy of the Oppressed:  
Freires later works make it clear that what is important is to 
approach the analysis of oppression through a convergent 
theoretical framework where the object of oppression is cut across 
by such factors as race, class, gender, culture, language and 
ethnicity (Macedo, 2001:15). 
3.2.1 Definitions of identity and oppression and their 
interconnections 
Identity is sometimes understood to refer to ones outer self as opposed to 
ones inner self or subjectivity.  Deaux (2001: 1) suggested that identity is 
sometimes used to refer to a sense of integration of the self, in which different 
aspects come together in a unified whole which points to the multifaceted 
nature of identity or identities.  The author elaborates in this definition by 
introducing the concept of intersectionality, which she refers to as:  
the condition in which a person simultaneously belongs to two or 
more social categories or social statuses and the unique 
consequences that result from that combination (Deaux, 2001:1). 
This definition of intersectionality is problematic in that it implies that this 
simultaneous belonging is not universally experienced.  The function of identity 
is said to be to give us a location in the world and present the link between us 
and the society in which we live (Woodward, 1997a: 1).  Our identities are 
formed from a multiplicity of sources - from nationality, ethnicity, social class, 
community, gender, sexuality (ibid) and these may conflict with one another 
and cause fragmented identities. 
One taxonomy of social identities included these characteristics: relationships, 
vocation/avocation, political affiliation, stigma, and ethnicity/religion (Deaux, 
2001; 2000).  The present study of dementia and intersectionality does not fit 
this typology very well, as I am concerned with two of the categories (ethnicity 
and stigma), as well as race, class, and gender, which do not appear in the 
list.  This is the first indication of the notable difference in the literature between 
social psychological and sociological approaches to identity.  Strauss (1997) set 
out in 1959 to overcome the crippling dichotomy of social structure versus 
social interaction (p 2) by showing how personal identity is meshed with group 
identity, which itself rests upon an historical past (pp 175), and in doing so, 
introduced a sociological view of identity.  In fact, he hints at the importance of 
an intersectional analysis in commenting that the changing significance of 
others over the course of ones life is related to age, race, nationality, social 
class, social status, and sex; and notes that in order to take these factors into 
account, a sociological model is needed (Strauss, 1997).  It should be noted, 
however, that Marx pointed out the futility of separating the individual from the 
social some time ago (Bannerji, 1995b). 
A sociological approach to identity is taken by Jenkins, who notes that power 
and politics are central to questions of identity (1996: 24) and refers to the 
study of identity as the best device...for bringing together public issues and 
private troubles and encouraging us to use one to make sense of the other (p 
3).  This sentiment is (consciously) evocative of C. Wright Mills (2000) and is 
shared by feminist and anti-racist approaches to the study of identity (Bannerji, 
2001; 1995b; Bhavnani, 2001; Brah, 2001; Woodward, 1997b).  Jenkins 
stresses the importance of seeing identity as a process, one of being or 
becoming, and rejects efforts to distinguish between selfhood and personhood - 
a preoccupation of prominent dementia scholars (Kitwood, 1990; 1995; 
1997a;b;c; Kitwood & Bredin, 1992; Sabat, 1998; 2000; 2001; Sabat & Harr, 
1992) - as he sees the internal and the external...[as] inextricably entangled 
(pp 31) for each of us and thereby implicating one another.  The typology of 
social identities developed by Barth (1983, as cited in Jenkins, 1996) - ethnicity, 
religion, history/descent, occupation and class, settlement and lifestyle, gender 
- shares features with the model presented above, while giving prominence to 
gender and class.  It is thought to be flexible enough to accommodate further 
universes of discourse such as kinship and age (Jenkins, 1996: 101).  One 
salient feature of the Deaux model is that it includes stigma, an important 
identity category for an investigation of older people with dementia (MacRae, 
1999; McColgan, Valentine & Downs, 2000).  Although these authors have 
developed models of social identities, little attention has been paid in this field 
to intersectionality or multiple identification (Woodward, 1997a).  In studies that 
look at the impact of crossed group membership on inter-group relations (Crisp 
& Hewstone, 2000), the power and politics thought to be so central to identity 
inquiries (Bannerji, 1995b; Jenkins, 1996; Shakespeare, 1996) do not make 
much of an appearance and the results do not indicate what life is like for 
people who tick more than one box.  
Although his treatise on identity is oft-cited, Giddens (1991) does not really tell 
us much about identity construction and maintenance in high-modernity except 
that self-identity becomes a reflexively organised endeavour... [that] takes 
place in the context of multiple choice as filtered through abstract systems (pp 
5).  Capacity for self-reflexivity is not universal, however, as was demonstrated 
by the inability of the men in Whiteheads (2001) study to articulate the meaning 
and impact of their gender on their careers.  Moreover, the diversity of lifestyle 
options said to exist for people engaged in these identity projects (Giddens, 
1991) does not appear to match the reality of life for many people, especially 
poor people, many of whom are older people as well.  Marx highlighted the way 
in which structural constraints impinge on individual choice some time ago in 
claiming that people create their own histories but not under conditions of their 
own choosing (1979, as cited in Bannerji, 1995a), an idea that has such 
currency today that its originator is often unacknowledged (Gilroy, 1997).  
Kaufman (1981) describes a similar approach to Giddens (1991) of identity 
construction and reconstruction arising from her life history study of older 
people.  The participants constructed themes to give meaning and coherence to 
their life experiences and integrated these themes into the ongoing formation of 
their identities.  These themes were thought to assist in adaptation to changing 
surroundings, ordering experiences, and communicating with others.  While 
important to understanding processes of identity formation, neither of the 
aforementioned works seek to link the personal and the political.  Giddens 
takes a structural and historically contingent approach to identity - the macro 
view - and Kaufman takes a phenomenological approach - the micro view - and 
in doing so, neither achieve Strauss (1997) goal of overcoming the great 
divide.   
Phenomenology has been critiqued for neglecting the social-structural and 
economic factors that lie behind prejudices (Barber, 2001) and which need to 
be considered in order to understand manifestations of oppression, and indeed 
resistance to oppression, at the individual level.  Williams (1996) notes that 
disability researchers who focus solely on interaction and the negotiation of 
identity run the risk of being:  
sucked into a bottomless pit of phenomenological analysis where the 
structures which underpin or destroy identity are lost from sight (pp 
195).   
A similar myopia in the form of class reductionism can be the outcome of 
studies of oppression that look at social structures alone or together with 
groups of people as the unit of analysis (Abberley, 1987; Charlton, 1998; 
Ferguson, 2000).  Analyses of oppression which treat class as foundational are 
rejected by those who see identity categories such as gender and race as 
cutting across class divisions (Andersen & Hill Collins, 2001a; Bannerji, 2001; 
1995a; Brah, 2001; Brittan & Maynard, 1984; hooks, 2000b; Woodward, 
1997b). 
3.2.2 Cultural Studies: hybridities and diasporas 
Empirical data is lacking to substantiate theories of identity and difference 
developed by Cultural Studies (Williams, 1992) and can be taken as further 
support for the need to talk to real people about their experiences and to 
generate grounded theory.  Through the archaeology of knowledge (Foucault, 
1994b) in Cultural Studies, the word Diaspora has been discovered and imbued 
with renewed theoretical significance (Gilroy, 1997; Hall, 1997).  Gilroy (1997) 
refers to Diasporas as relational networks developed as a result of the 
scatterings of people through war, genocide, famine, poverty, enslavement, 
political repression, with the inevitable opening of their culture to new 
influences and pressures (pp 304) and a shared need to remember the 
reasons for their dispersal and the process by which it occurred.  Diaspora first 
surfaced in relation to Jewish people who were forced to scatter as a result of 
the pogroms in Eastern Europe.  The historical connotation and the specificity 
of this term are in danger of being erased or neglected with the promotion of 
this concept as applicable to any and all scatterings of people.  Diasporas are 
said to give rise to hybridized identities and as such point to new 
understandings of self, sameness and solidarity, and situate questions of 
identity in the realm of indeterminacy, contingency and conflict (Gilroy, 1997).   
Hybridity is a controversial concept as well in that it implies acceptance of the 
ideology of racism, which purports that there are pure races or pre-hybrid 
peoples. 
Both the concept of Diaspora and that of hybridity could conceivably be applied 
to people with dementia who are cast out of the land of the living into an 
indeterminate third space (Rutherford & Bhabha, 1990).  Given the 
aforementioned concerns with both of these concepts, I would not advocate for 
the adoption of either of these terms in dementia studies.  This could be the 
theoretical argument behind the application of the concept of liminality to people 
with dementia (Cohen, 2000; Davis, 1989; McColgan, 2001), however, pointing 
as it does to that space in-between or to the border-land (Anzaldua, 2001). 
3.2.3 The articulation of subjectivities and oppression as a matrix of 
domination  
There are two approaches to the study of identity/subjectivity, with one 
approach seeing identity as fixed and transhistorical (essentialism), and the 
other treating identity as fluid and contingent (Woodward, 1997b); it is the 
latter approach to identity that this study employs.  Subjectivity has replaced 
identity as the focus of investigation for several feminist and anti-racist scholars 
(Mama, 1995a; Sudbury, 2001) as it denotes status as a subject, signifies the 
coming to voice of oppressed peoples (hooks, 1990 as cited in Smiley, 1993) 
and indicates the relational nature of a sense of self experienced in a social 
context (Woodward, 1997b).  At the same time, subjectivity is used 
interchangeably with identity, with the latter being seen to have a political 
meaning (Bannerji, 1995b), viz:  
identity, in the sense of historical and social subjectivity and agency, 
is produced from and susceptible to divergent political-cultural 
notions of difference (ibid: 26).   
Subjectivity implies a rejection of the artificial separation of psychological and 
social worlds (Mama, 1995a) and is seen to be fluid, dynamic and contingent.  
Thus defined, subjectivity allows for the possibility of actors having and using 
agency and opens the door to analysing resistance to oppression.  The 
concepts of positionality and movement are drawn on to assist with the bridging 
of the socio-historical and the intra-psychic required by Mamas (1995a) theory 
of Black womens subjectivity.  Burman (1994) also advocates the use of the 
concept of positionality, which she sees as:  
attending to the process of constructing identifications, with identities 
thereby rendered as textual productions rather than as some 
personal attributes or references to events (pp 156).   
These meanings and uses of positionality were picked up on and the term was 
imbued with its own theoretical significance in Anthias (2001) work on 
translocational positionality.  This can be seen as the latest concept to be 
offered up in the ongoing efforts to distance critical theorising from identity 
politics and its essentialism, as was evident behind the adoption of the term 
subjectivity (Mama, 1995a).  In Anthias (2001) use of the term, positionality 
relates to the space at the intersection of structure and agency (Anthias, 2001: 
635) and translocational:  
references the complex nature of positionality faced by those who 
are at the interplay of a range of locations and dislocations in relation 
to gender, ethnicity, national belonging, class and racialization (pp 
634).  
Although the origin of the current use of the term oppression has been noted 
already, some more notes on its meaning and use are in order.  The term 
oppression has been used by several authors who have infused it with their 
own interpretations (Adams et al, 1997; Andersen & Hill Collins, 2001a; Bishop, 
1994; Brittan & Maynard, 1984; Carniol, 2000; Essed, 1991; Freire, 2001; Frye, 
2001; hooks, 2000a; Mullaly, 2002; Young, 1990) and whose work has 
influenced my own understanding and use of this dynamic and relational 
concept (Mullaly, 2002: 27).  Essentially, oppression is a condition in which a 
particular social group is exploited or constrained for the benefit of another 
social group, whose members may not be conscious of the privilege and 
culpability they own.  Frye (2001) called attention to the root of the word 
oppression  press - and describes this action using words such as mould, 
immobilise, reduce (p 49) and the metaphor of a birdcage.  Oppression is 
enacted through everyday practices (Essed, 1991; Smith, 1987), and supported 
by institutional and ideological regimes. Oppression, whether based on race, 
class, gender, ethnicity, age, disability, sexual orientation, religion, language, 
can be seen to be operating at the individual, cultural and institutional levels 
(Jones, 1972).  Young (1990) referred to the five faces of oppression - 
exploitation, marginalisation, powerlessness, cultural imperialism, and violence 
 as the forms that oppression takes or the ways that is enacted in the social 
world.  hooks (2000a) summed up the effect of these practices of domination in 
her succinct statement that being oppressed means the absence of choices (p 
5), while Lorde (2001) noted that systematized oppression creates surplus 
groups of people: Black and Third World people, working class people, older 
people and women (p 177). 
Oppressions interact with one another and are supported by the same practices 
of domination, which calls for macroscopic vision (Frye, 2001: 52) in this 
counter hegemonic work of uprooting oppression.  Indeed Jones (1972) 
suggested a telescope metaphor for looking at the individual, cultural and 
institutional levels at which oppression operates.   At the individual level we 
cannot pluck out some aspect of oneself as this eclipses and denies other 
parts of self (Lorde, 2001: 182).  Indeed, oppression involves a dialectical 
relationship between the oppressor and the oppressed (Bishop, 1994; Freire, 
2001), positions which are often held simultaneously, as we are all differentially 
located, and locate ourselves in different ways, along multiple axes of 
oppression and privilege.  In our common struggle against oppression, hooks 
(2000) argued that we need to understand, address and incorporate 
experiences of people on the margins who suffer sexist oppression and other 
forms of oppression (p 163).  These articulations of the dynamics of oppression 
that arise from feminist and anti-racist activists and scholars underpin my 
theoretical and methodological approach to this research. 
Despite the proliferation in writing about subjectivity and oppression, there have 
been few empirical studies to date that look at the construction and 
maintenance of subjectivities in the context of relations of domination and 
subordination (Jenkins, 2002).  Few notable exceptions exist and include 
Mamas (1995a) grounded theory study of Black womens subjectivity, in which 
the latter was found to be dynamic, multiple and historically and socially 
produced (p 163) and transcend[ing] dualism because it conceptualises the 
individual and the social as being produced simultaneously (p 133).  The 
psychological and the social-historical form a dialectic and their interaction 
creates subjectivities, a view akin to that put forth by Jenkins (2002) in a talk on 
the importance of both the concept of difference and that of similarity in the 
study of identity, during which discussion ensued as to the difficulties of 
translating these theoretical concepts into questions to ask respondents for 
empirical research.  Another example of empirical research on subjectivity and 
intersectionality is that of Petersen (2000) who found support for the hypothesis 
that African American womens identity development is marked by continuity of 
self-definition, while Caucasian women relinquish their identities under pressure 
from the constraints of their culture.   
Another promising direction is embodied in research that looks beyond 
oppressive structures and their manifestations in everyday life towards 
indications of resilience and oppositional strategising.  In reviewing the impact 
on Aboriginal communities in Canada of ongoing processes of colonisation, 
sedentarisation, bureaucratic surveillance, and technocratic control, Kirmayer et 
al (2000) pointed to a connection between cultural discontinuity and oppression 
and high rates of indicators of mental distress.  Similarly, Blandford and 
Chappell (1990) found that lower levels of well being among native elders than 
among non-native older people are caused by the effects of their worse health 
and disadvantaged social circumstances, not by virtue of being native.  
Kirmayer et al (2000) stressed the importance of looking beyond individuals, 
towards the degree of local control and cultural continuity of the community, to 
gain a sense of the impact of mediating mechanisms on mental health and find 
ways to eliminate oppression.  Sonn and Fisher (1998) sought to apply the 
concepts of resilience and community competence to oppressed groups in their 
study of coloured [sic] South Africans in activity settings in Australia.  Their 
study reinforces the importance of looking at the cultural level in Jones (1972) 
schema in order to connect lived experiences of oppression and the political, 
economic and social structures underpinning it (Sonn & Fisher, 1998).  Sudbury 
(2001) looked to mediating structures as well to understand oppression and 
identity construction and found that identifying with the signifier Black was an 
oppositional strategy used by multi-racial women in Britain, with the author 
concluding that an intersectional approach is critical if collective identity 
analyses are to avoid unidimensional analyses of identity formation (pp 45).   
In addition to finding resilience and oppositional strategising at the cultural level, 
there is evidence that individuals employ techniques to resist oppression, for 
example passing (Goffman, 1963) among lesbians and gay men (Kanuha, 
(1999).  Further, the process of passing is not based on a rejection of 
stigmatized identity, but situationally employed to resist social oppression 
(Kanuha, 1999: 1).  These acts should be seen as resistance strategies, rather 
than indications of internalised oppression or false consciousness (Freire, 
2001), which occurs when the oppressed begin to take on board the 
oppressors negative valuation of the social group to which they belong.  A 
study (Watson, 2002) found that disabled people do not identify themselves as 
disabled, yet this should not be interpreted as internalised oppression or false 
consciousness, but rather as efforts to challenge the idea of normality and 
refuse to be categorised on the basis of bodily difference (Watson, 2002: 525).   
It has been argued as well that the oppressed possess double consciousness 
(Du Bois, 1953) or epistemic privilege (Whitehead, 2001) owing to their lived 
experience (Sartre, 1957) of oppression.  This theory posits that the oppressed 
are acutely conscious of the dynamics of oppression and privilege, and of their 
own relative positioning, and that this affords them double vision - an 
awareness of the privilege of their oppressors and the way that efforts to 
sustain that privilege result in their own oppression. 
3.3 Meanings of health, illness, and disability 
Mental ill health is thought to be a universal phenomenon, yet definitions of 
mental ill and well being appear to be culturally relative.  What may be 
considered abnormal behaviour in one social context may not be in another 
(Castillo, 1998; Yeo & Gallagher-Thompson, 1996).  Further, some forms of 
mental disorder that are common in one society may not exist in others at all, 
as in the case of anorexia nervosa which is rarely seen outside western nations 
(Dawkins, 1996; Kleinman, 1988b).  Finally, various people within one society 
or cultural group may define abnormalcy differently than the dominant 
biomedical paradigm, and indeed from one another.  The defining of behaviour 
as either abnormal or normal and differing conceptions of health, illness and 
disability are applicable to the study of dementia and intersectionality for 
several reasons.  As noted previously, the theme of striving for normalcy is 
notable in the accounts of the experiences of people with dementia which  
indicates its predominance as a theme in their lives.  The status of normal is 
not readily accorded to people who are marginalised due to their ethnicity, 
race, class, age and/or gender, however, and is even less likely to be applied 
to a person with dementia, regardless of their pre-morbid identity.  Once 
labelled demented, people with dementia embark on a defined moral career 
(Goffman, 1961); this label represents a culturally sanctioned stamp of 
disapproval that sets in motion a new or renewed attempt to achieve normalcy. 
This section addresses the issue of meaning making while living with illness, 
either mental or physical, and the influence of socio-cultural factors.  The 
concept of illness narratives (Kleinman, 1988b) is important to this field, as 
evidenced by its popularity in this largely anthropological literature, as are 
definitions of health.  Illness is commonly seen to be the subjective experience 
of symptoms and disability and is contrasted with disease, a biomedical 
classification that may or may not accord with the patients feelings and 
experiences (Emami et al, 2000; Kleinman, 1988a).  Conceptualising illness as 
a subjective experience shifts our focus, away from the disease-ridden patient 
to the person who is sick (Conrad & Kern, 1981).  Kleinmans (1980) early work 
on explanatory models of illness led to a widespread understanding that 
individuals and communities have differing belief systems that they draw on in 
order to make sense of their illness experiences.  The notion of explanatory 
models has been contested in research with people newly experiencing mental 
health problems in a rural community in northern Wales (Williams & Healy, 
2001), with the authors suggesting that exploratory maps is a more accurate 
term for the meaning making process their participants engaged in.  Exploratory 
maps capture the fluidity of this process of adopting flexible, multiple, and 
sometimes conflicting definitions (Williams & Healy, 2001).  
Kleinman expanded upon his initial conceptualisation of explanatory models of 
illness in his 1988 oft-cited study of illness narratives (Kleinman, 1988b), in 
which he stressed the importance of eliciting subjective accounts of illness 
experiences and suggested how clinicians can do this in their encounters with 
patients.  Illness narratives are essentially the stories that people tell of being ill.  
Research has demonstrated how these narratives are embedded in their socio-
historical contexts and involve the active creation and recreation of meaning 
(Bury 2001; Frank, 2000; Hyden, 1997).  The act of telling, and the intended 
3.3.1 The relationship between meanings of illness and coping 
Several studies on meanings of illness have sought to test the hypothesis that 
patients view illness as having one of the following eight meanings: challenge; 
enemy; punishment; weakness; relief; strategy; loss; and value; and that these 
meanings have associated coping strategies that are either positive or negative 
(Lupowski, 1970, as cited in Luker, Beaver, Leinster & Owens, 1996; Schssler, 
1992).  Results have indicated that illness concepts are interrelated and 
interconnected with each other (Schssler, 1992: 428); that both type and 
severity of disease are related to illness concepts, and that coping strategies 
can be correlated with illness meanings (Luker et al, 1996; Schssler, 1992). 
While challenge has been the most popular concept (Luker et al, 1996; 
Schssler, 1992), the validity and usefulness of these illness concepts has 
been questioned (Luker et al, 1996).  These studies do not give us a fulsome 
picture of the subjective illness experience, and for this reason more in-depth 
qualitative research, primarily ethnographic and phenomenological, has been 
undertaken in this area (Abrums, 2000; Aidoo & Harpham, 2001; Emami et al, 
2000; Ezzy, 2000; Fox, Levkoff & Hinton, 1999; Hedelin & Strandmark, 2001; 
Hinton & Levkoff, 1999; Mathews, Lannin & Mitchell, 1994; Migliore, 2001; 
Nygrd & Borell, 1998; Saris, 1995). 
3.3.2 Culture and illness - mental and physical 
There is an extensive literature supporting the belief that definitions of and 
responses to illness, whether physical or mental, are influenced by culture 
(Aderbigbe & Pandurangi, 1995; Dassori, Miller & Saldana, 1995; Desjarlais, 
1992; Emami et al, 2000; Fox et al, 1999; Kirmayer & Young, 1998; Kleinman, 
1980; 1988a; 1988b; Mechanic, 1968; Migliore, 2001; Patel, 1995; Patel et al, 
1995a; 1995b; Pollack & Aponte, 2001; Pollitt, 1996; Weiss et al, 1995; White, 
1992; Zborowski, 1981).  In the case of dementia, it has been observed in older 
people in almost all populations and nearly all studies have found the most 
important causes to be Alzheimers disease and cerebrovascular dementia 
(White, 1992).  Despite the purported universality of this phenomenon, some 
researchers feel that dementia is basically a Western diagnostic category 
(Pollitt, 1996: 2) and highlight the difficulties in determining its existence and 
meanings cross-culturally with the use of western tools and techniques. The 
distinction between emic and etic approaches to crosscultural psychiatric 
research (Patel, 1995a) corroborates this problematic in dementia research.  
The etic approach assumes that mental illness is universally similar and thus 
classification and measurement systems will apply globally, despite their 
western origin, while the emic approach:  
evaluates phenomena from within a culture and its context, aiming to 
understand its significance and relationship with other intra-cultural 
elements (Patel et al, 1995a: 486).   
The process by which the dementia label is assigned to an individual and the 
creation of meaning in living with this particular illness is certainly influenced by 
socio-cultural and other factors, such as the diagnostic process and tools.  
Little crosscultural research on the meaning of dementia has been undertaken 
to date (Forbat, 2003; Smith, 1996), however knowledge gained from research 
into cultural definitions of mental health and chronic disease more generally 
may be transferable to dementia.  For example, themes of coming to terms with 
the diagnosis, the importance of personal metaphors, and dealing with the 
medical model (Pollack & Aponte, 2001) that arose in research with younger 
ethnically diverse in-patients with bi-polar disorder in the United States may be 
applicable to dementia.  Several authors have noted that people with dementia 
make extensive use of metaphors in their communications (Crisp, 1995; Killick 
& Allan, 2001) and the predominance of the medical model in dementia is well 
established (Binney & Swan, 1991; Bond, 1992; 2004; Fox, 1989; Harding & 
Palfrey, 1997; Herskovits, 1995; Holstein, 2000; Lyman, 1989; Robertson, 
1990).  The fact that the authors (Pollack & Aponte, 2001) discovered more 
similarities than differences when they analysed the responses by ethnic group 
membership supports the importance of looking at other identity factors that 
affect ones social location.  Finally, the finding of support for Kleinmans 
(1988a) belief that telling ones story has therapeutic value (Pollack & Aponte, 
2001) links to favourable reactions by people with dementia to reminiscence 
programs (Murphy, 2002). 
3.3.3 Spiritual/religious explanations of illness 
The use of spiritual/religious explanations in illness narratives as observed 
above has been noted in several studies (Abrums, 2000; Fox et al, 1999; 
Goodman, 2001; Mathews et al, 1994; Patel, Musura, Butau, Maramba, & 
Fuyane, 1995).  In an ethnographic study of the meanings of illness for poor 
and working class African American women (Abrums, 2000), the researcher 
found a connection between church members belief systems and their 
meanings of health.  The power these women felt over their own health and the 
health care system was driven by their belief that since doctors are only the 
instruments of Gods will, they could remain in control and usurp the power of 
doctors through placing their faith in God (Abrums, 2000).  Participant 
observation in a small Baptist missionary church solved anticipated access 
problems and meeting with these women in a site where they held more power 
than in a clinic or hospital enabled the collection of their life histories and 
observation of their socio-cultural context.  In another study involving the illness 
narratives of Haredi male patients and their rabbis in Israel (Goodman, 2001), a 
connection between religious explanations and power is seen, however it did 
not favour the patients.  Patients seeking to avoid a stigmatising label of mental 
illness by attributing their experiences to supernatural forces had their voices 
silenced by their rabbis as they were seen to challenge established social 
orders and threaten the power of the rabbis to define experience (Goodman, 
2001). 
In a study of the illness narratives of ten caregivers of older African Americans 
with dementia (Fox et al, 1999), the authors sought to problematise the 
common depiction of African American caregivers as more religious than white 
caregivers and as drawing on prayer and the church for assistance.  The 
findings showed that faith and the role of the church were rarely mentioned in 
the illness narratives of this sample of caregivers and that, when asked, the 
participants reported that the church was not an important source of support to 
them as caregivers (Fox et al, 1999).  It appears that the influence and role of 
religious/spiritual beliefs and their interplay with power is not yet clear and thus 
warrants further investigation (see section 7.3.4).  Although this was not 
addressed specifically through this research, I thought it could arise in the data, 
owing to Dreidger and Chappells (1987: 46) claim that religion is a significant 
factor in any research on older people in Canada. 
3.3.4 Folk narratives, power and discrimination 
The application of the label folk narrative appears to be related to the degree 
to which the account diverges from biomedical conceptions of disease and 
integrates religious/spiritual explanations of illness.  Several studies have 
problematised folk or lay narratives and endeavoured to situate them within 
structures of power and domination (Abrums, 2000; Goodman, 2001; Saris, 
1995) to contextualise meaning making in illness.  Both the study by Abrums 
(2000) and the one by Goodman (2001) highlight the role and influence of 
power in not only the creation of meaning but in the legitimisation of meaning.  
In his analysis of the illness narrative of an Irish man with schizophrenia,   Saris 
(1995) proposes that:  
a narrative of a chronic condition is not simply a story of personal 
experience [but] rather, deeply embedded within various institutional 
structures that influence its production as a story (1995: 39).  
Hinton and Levkoff (1999) conducted a qualitative study into illness narratives 
and ethnic identity with African-American, Chinese-American, Irish-American 
and Latino caregivers in the United States and found that caregivers drew on 
both biomedical and cultural understandings of dementia in their creation of 
stories and that while these stories did differ across and within ethnic groups, all 
evidenced moral concerns.  In the same study (Fox et al, 1999), it was found 
that African-American narratives offered a view into the individual impact of 
large-scale social forces like racism and class oppression and demonstrated a 
connection between these forces and meaning making regarding family 
members dementia. 
Phenomenological studies demonstrate an intensive interest in interpreting 
individual experiences of illness within particular social contexts, yet tend to 
ignore social structures and relations of domination and subordination and 
rarely problematise identity concepts such as gender, age, class, ethnicity 
and/or race.  The studies mentioned above are notable exceptions and 
demonstrate the importance of an approach that explicitly looks at power and 
discrimination and seeks to make evident oppressive practices so as to 
facilitate their dismantling.  The role and influence of ones standpoint in 
shaping all or parts of the research process such as question formulation, data 
collection, analysis and presentation of findings is highlighted by Saris (1995) 
as he comments on how the study that he undertook could have provided 
support for bio-medical understandings of mental disorders had it been 
approached from a different perspective. 
3.4 Applicability to dementia and future directions 
From the few empirical studies of identity and oppression reviewed in the first 
section of this chapter, there appears to be support for the concept of 
intersectionality, a view of subjectivity as fluid, multiple and contingent and 
oppressed people as active agents, resisting oppression.  Although the results 
of these studies are grounded in the voices and experiences of oppressed 
persons, the participants were mostly politically engaged and well educated 
people (Mama, 1995a; Sudbury, 2001).  This was not the case in this study of 
dementia and intersectionality, as not only is self-organising and advocacy a 
recent phenomenon among people with dementia (Friedell & Bryden, 2002; 
McKillop, 2002; Robinson, 2002) but there also is a higher incidence of 
dementia in people with lower education levels (Lindsay, Laurin, Verreault, 
Hbert, Helliwell, Hill et al, 2001) and I worked with people with varying levels of 
education and political fluency.   
Cohen (2000) in the United States and McGolgan (2001) in Scotland both used 
the term liminality to describe the curious positionality of people with dementia, 
whom Cohen (2000: 1) claimed are standing at an increasingly critical margin 
between two kinds of life.  His articulation of a life-on-the-border (ibid) 
existence for people with dementia is reminiscent of feminist theorising 
(Anzaldua, 2001; hooks, 2000) and evokes the sentiment of the concept of 
Diasporas that was (re)discovered and imbued with additional theoretical 
significance by Cultural Studies scholars (Gilroy, 1997; Hall, 1997).  As noted, 
this concept of liminality was used in dementia prior to Cohen (2000) and 
McGolgan (2001) by Davis (1989) in his personal account of Alzheimers 
Disease, in which he refers to himself as being partly there. 
Perhaps the way forward is indicated by a Scottish study that found evidence of 
the dialectical nature of power and oppression, while providing an account of 
life on the margins (Smith, 1993), in this case people living in the Borders 
community of rural Scotland.  Smith concluded her analysis of a marginalised 
communitys annual week-long festival with the observation that:  
oppressors can also be oppressed and the marginal also 
marginalise, to the extent that it is no longer possible or appropriate 
to think of the dominant group or culture, or to oppose the core to 
the periphery (1993: 304).   
This is the approach that Jenkins (2002) advocated for the study of identity, 
although he termed it the simultaneity of difference and sameness.  This 
review of the literature on identity and oppression, while it may not have 
enriched dementia scholarship specifically, points to the importance of social 
location, and the need for awareness of our relative positions on the multiple 
axes of oppression and privilege.  Observations of the everyday dialectics of 
power and oppression (Charlton, 1998; Essed, 1991; Smith, 1987), such as I 
non-purposively undertook in my student flat, can breathe life into these 
dynamic and relational concepts. 
Through a review of the literature on health, illness and disability cross-
culturally, it has been shown that conceptions of illness show similarities and 
differences across and within cultures.  Explanatory models of Illness as 
conceived by Kleinman (1980) and later reconceptualised as exploratory maps 
by Williams and Healy (2001), the concept of illness narratives in its original 
form (Kleinman, 1988a), and definitions of health that are holistic and 
incorporate the concepts of balance, continuity, agency, and confirmation have 
been shown to be important to the study of meanings of health, illness and 
disability for older people.  An explicit gender analysis is lacking in much of the 
literature reviewed, despite the fact that several of the studies looked either at 
women (Abrums, 2000; Hedelin & Strandmark, 2001; Luker et al, 1996) or at 
men (Goodman, 2001; Saris, 1995) in isolation.  The idea that meanings of 
health, illness and disability vary by gender group membership, in spite of 
shared cultural affiliations, is clearly missing in these studies which essentially 
treat gender as a variable and nothing more (Calasanti & Slevin, 2001).  
Several themes that are evident in the literature have been reviewed: the 
relationship between meanings of illness and coping; culture and illness (mental 
and physical); spiritual/religious explanations of illness; folk narratives, power 
and discrimination; and the limitations of phenomenology.   
It appears that illness narratives should be critically analysed with an eye to 
both the temporal and the socio-cultural context in which the teller lives and in 
which the tale is told.  Further, in order to elucidate the impact of interlocking 
oppressions on individual experiences of illness, it is important to begin from a 
critical social science perspective and to employ a methodology that seeks to 
link individual (micro) and community (meso) experiences to social structures 
(macro).  Through doing so, the connection may be made between subjective 
meaning making in illness and social forces that may support or impede the 
lives of people with dementia. 
Chapter - 4 Subjective Experiences of Dementia 
4.1 Experiences of dementia 
The movement to hear the voices of people with dementia started with a few 
pioneers who called attention to the overemphasis in dementia research on 
caregiver coping, stress, and burden and the need to examine what people with 
dementia experience themselves (Cotrell & Schulz, 1993; Cotrell & Lein, 1993; 
Froggatt, 1988; Lyman, 1989; Robertson, 1990).  This probably was not a 
revelation for a number of people working directly with individuals with dementia 
who had come to realise experientially that:  
perhaps the PDWADs [persons diagnosed with Alzheimers disease] 
themselves...have something to tell us about what it means to be 
human in the face of such dissolution, if we but ask and listen 
(Robertson, 1990: 436). 
Nevertheless, a movement was born that sought to understand the subjective 
experiences of people with dementia, through eliciting their perspectives and 
observing their social interactions.  Resulting research has covered biomedical 
concerns of diagnosis, symptoms and treatment; the psychological arena of 
cognitive change and its impact on performance, affective states, loss and 
coping mechanisms; anthropological investigations into cross-cultural 
definitions of and attitudes towards dementia; and sociological questions about 
the nature of being in the world and the influence of structural factors and 
institutions such as work, the family, the state and the ageing enterprise 
(Estes, 1979).  These sociological questions are perhaps the least researched, 
as addressing the psycho-social needs of people with dementia and their 
caregivers has taken precedence for social workers and others who might have 
been inclined to explore these larger issues. 
These pioneering researchers acknowledged that their proposed line of inquiry 
would be fraught with difficulties, primarily in terms of methodology (see 
Chapter 5).  In addition, the assumption that people with dementia are not 
reliable historians or credible witnesses, even about/to their own lives, was 
omnipresent (Wilkinson, 2002b).  This was part of the culture of dementia care 
at the time and thus was accepted as the norm, until Kitwood and Benson 
(1995) enumerated the limitations of this approach and described an alternative 
vision.  This focus on the impossibility of research with people with dementia 
rather than on or about them flowed from the judgement that we cannot learn 
anything from people with dementia because they are unable to phrase their 
answers in a way that we can understand and/or that would be considered 
legitimate by the research community.  This dismissal was inconsistent with 
growing evidence to support the refutation of similar arguments that had been 
applied to almost every oppressed and disempowered group in society 
(Proctor, 2001), examples being people with disabilities and children.  A direct 
link seems to be made between cognition and validity in a demonstration of 
what has been aptly termed cognitive superiority (Shepphard, 1991, as cited in 
Harding & Palfrey, 1997: 42).  Although used by Shepphard (1991) to refer to 
the exclusive control of experts over the diagnosing (defining) of dementia, 
cognitive superiority translates to the belief that if someones cognitive 
capacities are impaired, anything they tell us should be viewed as suspect.  
Moreover, emotional responses are not seen to carry as much weight as 
cognitive responses, if any at all, which greatly impacts upon people who 
communicate primarily through non-verbal means, such as those with 
advanced dementia.  This attitude of cognitive superiority effectively means that 
a person with dementia does not have the power or authority to define his/her 
own experience.  Maybe the unspoken problem is that asking people with 
dementia about their experiences might lead us to question and potentially re-
evaluate our definitions of normalcy and abnormality and leave us with an 
uncomfortable doubt in our own cognitive superiority.  It is within this context 
that we can understand this move to hear the voices of people with dementia 
and the composition of the group of individuals we have heard from to date. 
4.1.1 Knowledge sources 
The literature I reviewed took the form of personal accounts (Boden, 1998; 
Davis, 1989; Friel McGowin, 1993; Henderson, 1998; Rose, 1996), narratives 
produced with the involvement of a supportive other (Killick & Cordonnier, 2000; 
Living Archive Project, 2001; McKinlay, 1998; Snyder, 1999; Zabbia Howes, 
1996), qualitative research studies (Chatterji, 1998; Cheston, 1996; Cohen, 
1998; Cotrell and Lein, 1993; Froggatt, 1988; Gillies, 2001; Keady et al, 1995; 
Labarge, VonDras & Wingbermuehle, 1998; Leibing, 1997; Lyman, 1998; Mills, 
1997; Phinney, 1998; Proctor, 2001; Sabat, 2001; Sinason, 1992; Snyder, 
2001; Sutton, 1994; Vittoria, 1998) and stories posted on Web sites or available 
in hard copy for the purpose of raising public awareness (Alzheimer Society of 
Toronto, 2000; Ashley, 2001; Booth, 2001; Pauline & Mica, 1996; Shelia, 2000).  
Past research into subjective experiences of dementia has employed various 
methodological approaches, such as ethnographies, case studies, clinical 
observations, participant observations, focus groups, and semi-structured and 
structured interviews; has taken the person with dementia and/or their 
caregivers/family members as the primary subject(s); and has occurred in a 
number of different field settings, for example, care facilities, homes of people 
with dementia, neighbourhoods, hospitals, and adult day programs. 
At the start of doctoral studies, I conducted a critical review of this body of 
literature (personal accounts, narratives produced with the involvement of a 
supportive other, qualitative research studies, and stories posted on internet 
sites), the results of which are to be found in Appendix A.  I looked at who was 
telling these stories of dementia, what these stories told us, whose voices were 
still silent/silenced, and how untold experiences might differ. 
4.1.2 Who is telling these stories of dementia 
Although there has been exponential growth in work of this nature and thus 
many sources now exist, some troubling generalisations can be made 
regarding the voices that we are hearing: younger people in their forties to 
sixties who are well-educated, white, married, professionals, with strong 
religious or ideological beliefs and supportive families, who would be classified 
as early stage8 in terms of their disease progression.  These are 
generalisations and as such will not be applicable to all sources cited nor to all 
narratives produced by or with the involvement of individuals with dementia.  
The explanatory purpose of grouping this set of characteristics is to evoke a 
8 Downs (1997), in a cogent review of the emerging trend in dementia research of looking at the 
person with the disease, notes that the emphasis has been on people in the early stages of 
dementia. 
sense of the dominant voices that have captured the public consciousness and 
thus have come to speak for a marginalised group of people with varied 
experiences as a whole and intersecting identities as individuals.  A promising 
exception is the book by Snyder called Speaking Our Minds: Personal 
Reflections from Individuals with Alzheimers (1999).  For her exploration of the 
subjective experience of Alzheimers disease, Snyder had deliberately chosen 
people of different ages, ethnicities, and educational and professional 
backgrounds (1999: viii) and these biographical details came through in the 
narratives.   
this is a recurrent theme in many of the personal accounts published to date.   
4.1.3 What these stories tell us about identities - problematised and 
intersecting 
It is apparent, however, that the seven people whose lives were showcased in 
the book were not asked in the taped, in-home interviews, whether and in what 
way these controlled-for identity constructs shaped their experiences of 
dementia.  The influence of strong religious and/or ideological beliefs was 
evident in all but one of the narratives and may be a consequence of the 
authors decision to pursue this specific line of questioning (Snyder, 1999: viii).  
The role of religious beliefs will be returned to in a later section of this paper, a
I looked at Snyders (1999) collection of experiences of dementia in depth for 
two reasons: (1) it was groundbreaking in that the author set out to hear voices 
of people with dementia, diversified her sample in terms of age, ethnicity, 
educational and professional background, and published the results in a format 
that was accessible to the public; and (2) the narratives indicated the influence 
of gender, age, and class on the interviewees experiences of dementia despite 
the authors inattention to this - she did not ask about this according to her 
notes (Snyder, 1999: viii) and did not analyse its appearance in the narratives 
either in this journalistic tale or in an academic piece based on the same 
research (Snyder, 2001).  Given Snyders noted attention to identity constructs 
in the selection of her sample, it is logical to presume that these accounts have 
the most likelihood of furthering our understanding of dementia and 
intersectionality.  As the excerpts indicate, gender, age and class may be 
important to these individuals in terms of how they make meaning out of their 
experiences of dementia.  Moreover, ethnicity may factor in as well, although its 
role and influence were invisible in the narratives presented in the book.  The 
information given does not give us a complete picture, but it does raise the 
possibility that identity categories do shape individual experiences of dementia 
in an intersecting fashion.  There are indications in the words of Snyders 
(1999) interviewees that they may conceptualise their experiences in terms of 
identity categories, age being the most pronounced, with gender and class 
evident as well, and in an intertwined fashion.  Specific examples arising from 
sis can be found in Appendix A. 
4.1.3.1 Religion 
this detailed analy
The first published personal account of living with dementia was written by an 
American evangelical priest named Robert Davis (1989) and could be said to 
have shaped the way that subsequent true stories of dementia have been 
framed and interpreted.  For example, Davis use of the word journey to 
describe his experience of dementia was repeated in several accounts that 
followed (Crisp, 1995; Friel McGowin, 1993; MacKinlay, 1998;); it figured 
prominently in the title - Each Persons Journey is Unique - of an article in which 
a number of these insiders tales of dementia were reviewed (Laurenhue, 
2001); and Keady et al (1995) found from their in-home interviews with six 
people in the early stages of dementia that this was an apt description of the 
experience, adding that it was a journey largely into the unknown.  A related 
theme of spiritual redemption and acceptance of Gods will is echoed in many 
of the stories of dementia that followed Davis account (Bailey & Darling, 2001; 
Brennan, 1995; Cheston, 1996; Friel McGowin, 1993; Living Archive Project, 
2001; MacKinlay, 1998; Phinney, 1998; Snyder, 1999; Zabbia Howes, 1996) 
although none of these views of people with dementia demonstrated quite the 
same degree of fervency as Davis (1989).  Examples from this analysis can be 
found in Appendix A. 
4.1.3.1 Whose voices are still silent/silenced?  
I found through this review that we have not heard from traditionally 
marginalised groups of people such as minority ethnic and racialised people, 
lesbians/gays/ bisexuals, poor people, and uneducated people (Hulko, 2002).  
The influence of race and ethnicity on subjective experiences of dementia is a 
relatively unexplored domain (Bowes & Wilkinson, 2002b) although interest in 
race and ethnicity has been growing in the areas of risk and prevalence, 
assessment, service provision and care giving (Anderson & Brownlie, 1997; 
Innes, 2003; Patel et al, 1998; Yeo & Gallagher-Thompson, 1996).  Snyder 
(1999) identified ethnicity as one of the bases upon which she diversified her 
sample; however, it seems that she used ethnicity as a polite word for race9.  
We were given hints through the authors narrative about the racial 
background of two of the respondents in a way that asked the reader to 
integrate their assumptions into the text and no clues were given as to the 
ethnicity of the five other people with dementia that were profiled, leaving us to 
assume that they were all white and not members of any ethnic minority groups 
(see Appendix A).  The other research studies covered in this review reported 
on factors such as gender, age, diagnosis, marital and family status, past 
occupation, and sometimes faith in terms of the composition of the samples.  
The lack of information on race, ethnicity, sexual orientation, and abilities leads 
one to assume firstly, that the participants were all white able-bodied 
heterosexuals from the majority ethnic community and secondly, that this 
information was not relevant for understanding subjective experiences.  Further, 
if the information was given at all, it was reported in a descriptive fashion; these 
identity constructs were not seen as worthy of investigation either holistically or 
separately.  We will not know whether and in what way an individuals unique 
and intersecting identity shapes their experience of dementia until we include 
these sorts of questions in our research design and ask them directly of the 
people whose lives we are studying. 
4.1.4 How experiences might differ  striving for normalcy  
Another theme that ran through the literature and that was relevant to this 
research on dementia and intersectionality was that of striving to be normal, 
normal usually taken to mean pre-morbid or without dementia.  Comparing 
9 See Oommen (1994) for an insightful critique of the practice of conflating race and ethnicity. 
oneself to others in terms of normalcy and striving for normal status was 
prevalent in personal accounts of living with dementia and could reflect 
motivations for publicising ones private troubles - yes to make it a public issue 
(Wright Mills, 2001), but also to normalise the experience, to hold onto the 
status of oneself as a normal human being.  Normal, but different - this 
sentiment echoes the voices of disability and mental health activists (Morris, 
1991; 1996; Oliver, 1990; 1996; Sayce, 2000).  This theme of striving for 
normalcy is important to dementia and intersectionality for the simple reason 
that for marginalised peoples - older people, women, ethnic and racial 
minorities, poor people, lesbians/gays/bisexuals, disabled people, people with 
mental health problems - striving for normalcy is the stuff of daily life.  It is 
extraordinary for most oppressed people to be seen and treated as normal, to 
have a powerful voice, to be part of the dominant discourse, to be seen to have 
legitimate knowledge claims.  Further, some marginalised people reject societal 
definitions of normalcy or embrace their so-called abnormality as something of 
which they are proud, disabled activists being the prime example of this.  With 
this understanding of the variability of definitions of normal and the connection 
to experiences of marginalization, the importance of locating this type of 
research within an analytical framework of intersectionality/interlocking 
oppressions and of making links across experiences of oppression should be 
clear. 
4.2  Identity factors and dementia 
I identified class, gender, race, and ethnicity as the specific identity constructs 
to focus on in this thesis and as I was interested in the interactions, I did not 
intend to separate these for analysis.  However, I found two things in reviewing 
the literature on subjective experiences of dementia that prevented me from 
presenting the findings in an intersecting way.  First, it was difficult to locate 
relevant work on race and ethnicity and second, gender and class seemed to 
be intertwined with one another especially.  This section will present definitions 
of these terms (see Appendix B) and the findings of this review. 
4.2.1 Race and ethnicity  
Dementia Research Collaborative Working Group (2000) highlighted the 
There is a recognised gap in our knowledge of the relationship between race 
and/or ethnicity and dementia, yet little research has been undertaken to close 
this gap, and that which has does not add to our understanding of the lived 
experiences of people with dementia.  Research in this area has been primarily 
concerned with:  risk, incidence and prevalence of dementia by racial groups; 
challenges in diagnosis and assessment in a multi-cultural context; provision of 
services to minority ethnic and racial people with dementia and their 
caregivers; care giving amongst minority ethnic and racial groups; and the 
meanings of dementia for different racial/ethnic groups.  Several reviews have 
been written (Anderson & Brownlie, 1997; Daker-White, Beattie, Gilliard & 
Means, 2002; Herbert, 2001; Smith, 1996; Yeo & Gallagher-Thompson, 1996.) 
detailing the state of knowledge in this area and pointing to the need for further 
research.  In addition, there have been calls to address the ethnic/racial 
dimensions of dementia within reviews of the socio-cultural context and 
subjective meanings of dementia (Downs, 2000; Disman, 1991; UBC Dementia 
Research Collaborative Working Group, 2000).  For example, the UBC 
neglect in research of the wider socio-environmental and cultural matrix (p 11) 
and exclusion of people who do not speak one of the official languages in large 
scale epidemiological studies such as the Canadian Study of Health and Aging.   
, 2002).  The issue of 
terminology is addressed in depth in chapters 5 and 6. 
4.2.2 Class and gender 
(dys)function; mental health, class, and gender; gendered identities and roles; 
Another issue that has been addressed in this body of literature is terminology 
and the difficulty in using Western concepts such as dementia, which do not 
exist in many languages (Bowes & Wilkinson, 2002; 2004; Forbat, 2003; Innes, 
2003; Yeo & Gallagher-Thompson, 1996).  The term memory problems is 
thought to be a workable alternative (Bowes & Wilkinson, 2002; Forbat, 2003; 
Gillies, 2000), as it might carry more significance for minority ethnic and non-
native English speakers than the term dementia and might avoid some of the 
stigma associated with madness, which it the closest translation of dementia in 
several South Asian languages (Bowes & Wilkinson
The aim of this section of the thesis is to critically review literature that pertains 
to dementia, gender, and class.  I had expected to find a large volume of work 
pertaining to this topic, yet found this to be a relatively under-researched area, 
with insights being offered by the parallel literature.  Further, I had anticipated 
finding more sources on gender and dementia than on class and dementia and 
was wrong about this, as the large number of studies on education and 
cognitive impairment fall within the area of class and dementia.  What follows is 
a short review of dementia, class, and gender; education and cognitive 
and dementia and related issues of sexual orientation, rurality and literacy.  I 
will start with a few definitions, prior to delving into the aforementioned review.   
Class is understood and operationalised in several different ways, more often 
than not as occupation, education, income, wealth/assets, or a combination of 
these variables.  Less common is the approach proposed by E.P. Thompson 
(1968) in his classic treatise on the English working class of basing class on a 
subjective evaluation of ones location in the social world.  Bourdieus concept 
of social capital is important to understanding social class as well as it points to 
the networks and cultural resources that members of the middle and upper 
classes benefit from whether they retain their status or slip down a few notches.  
This research drew on both Thompsons notion of class and Bourdieus concept 
of social capital (Bourdieu, 1986) in that the social class of participants was 
determined by taking into consideration each of the participants self-positioning 
as well as my knowledge of their educational and employment backgrounds, 
current income and assets, and social networks.  This assessment was 
complicated by factors such as presentation of self (Goffman, 1959), 
disorientation to time and place, as well as the fact that nowadays it is 
fashionable to talk about race or gender; the uncool subject is class (hooks, 
2000b: vii).   
Perhaps it is because class is an aggregative collectivity and thought to be a 
fluid concept (Oommen, 1994), particularly for all those who fervently believe in 
the American dream, that it appears to defy discussion and elucidation.  While 
class is said to intersect with race, ethnicity and gender and the (class) 
divisions between the rich and the poor can be seen to be racialised and 
gendered, rarely are these socio-cultural factors interrogated conjointly in a way 
that illuminates the social structures that underpin privilege and oppression and 
that does not fall prey to class reductionism (Bannerji, 1995b).  Undeniably, 
class is still often kept separate from race (hooks, 2000b: 8) and is not 
interrogated as holistically as gender or ethnicity or race (Ahmad, 1993).  
Although most epidemiological studies of dementia have not looked explicitly at 
social class, there is a UK exception in a survey that grouped respondents by 
British social class categories (based on occupation).  The authors (Lindesay et 
al, 1989 as cited in Cheston & Bender, 1999) found a correlation between 
prevalence of dementia and social class membership with upper classes (I/II) at 
0%, the middle classes (III non-manual and III manual) at 1.3% and 4% 
respectively and the lower classes (IV/V) at 7.3%.  This apparent correlation 
between dementia and social class will be addressed in more detail in the 
following section and in relation to the findings presented in chapter 7. 
As has been noted, the socio-cultural context of dementia has been largely 
neglected in dementia research to date (Downs, 2000), with the exception of 
epidemiological studies that document risk, incidence and prevalence by 
variables such as race/ethnicity, education, gender and age.  The tendency to 
view older people as a homogeneous group results in a lack of attention to 
factors such as age, gender, class and ethnicity that are widely acknowledged 
to differentiate people below the age of 65 years (Victor, 1991).  This trend is 
even more pronounced in the field of dementia where the need to acknowledge 
that people living with dementia are indeed people was, and is still, paramount 
(Kitwood, 1990; 1997; Kitwood & Bredin, 1990).  The belief in the passivity of 
people with dementia unfortunately is still apparent in dementia care and 
research today (Wilkinson, 2002b).  
In a qualitative exploratory study, Proctor (2001) looked at gender and power in 
relation to the service experiences of four older women with dementia in a day 
hospital. As mentioned previously, this study was unique in its focus on gender 
and dementia, specifically power dynamics, and in the application of this 
emphasis to the research process itself: the method of data analysis employed 
was developed specifically to uncover the voices and experiences of 
disempowered individuals (Brown & Gilligan, 1992, as cited in Proctor, 2001).  
The main themes arising from the interviews related to relationships and power 
- power in the research relationship and power in othering relationships, mainly 
with health care professionals.  The author followed the tradition in feminist 
research of focusing on women, although many researchers now believe that a 
gender analysis necessitates looking at both parties in the binary: women and 
men (Calasanti & Slevin, 2001). 
Although it is the role of gender that is under investigation in Proctors (2001) 
study, the influence of class can be found in the words of the older women as 
well.  This intertwining of gender and class is evident in Leibings (1997) study 
of the illness narratives (Kleinman, 1988a) of 52 caregivers of Alzheimer 
patients.  Respondents believed that, in addition to genetic factors, the ill 
persons biography and personality played a role in their current status as 
Alzheimer patients: stress, loss and a hard life were thought to bring on the 
disease.  The findings indicate that the social context is important to subjective 
explanations of dementia and that the caregivers responses could be 
perceived as a wider societal way of coping in a world which does not seem to 
have space for everybody (Leibing, 1997: 236).  It is possible that gender 
played a role with adherence to strict gender roles being observed in the 
sample - the women were mostly housewives and the men were primarily in the 
military - and the women with dementia more likely to be described as happy 
personality types.  The role and influence of gender is not clear however, as 
the explanations as to cause of the disease did not vary by gender. 
Cohen (1995) found differences in perceptions and explanations of behavioural 
and personality changes in old age by the gender and class of the older person 
in question, but not by the respondent, although this was not the case for all 
conceptualisations of aberrant behaviour.  This ethnographic research was 
undertaken in Banaras, a city in India with a high concentration of older people 
and pronounced stratification by social class.  Cohen (1995) found that old 
voices in Banaras are heard primarily as extremes of power or abjection and:  
to be listened to effectively, one must ensure that ones voice is 
heard as powerful and not abject; yet for women, powerful voices 
risk becoming curses (p 323).   
The disease label functioned to isolate the body of the old person and deny her 
subjectivity (Cohen, 1995: 331), rather than to improve familial relations and 
maintain the older persons role in the family (ibid). 
Several studies have documented the higher prevalence of dementia among 
women than among men (White, 1992) and have pointed out that women and 
men are disproportionately represented within sub-types of dementia (CSHA 
Working Group, 1994).  An analysis of prospective data from the second phase 
of the Canadian Study of Health and Aging (Lindsay et al, 2001) revealed, 
however, that gender was not a risk factor for dementia as had been previously 
discovered through the analysis of retrospective data gathered in the first phase 
of the study (CSHA Working Group, 1994).  An Irish study (Swanwick, Coen, 
Maguire, Kirby, Walsh, ONeill et al, 1999) found an association between the 
gender of patients and the duration of symptoms, with women having a longer 
duration of symptoms at presentation.  Although the authors did not come to 
this conclusion, it may be that adherence to stereotyped gender roles resulted 
in the earlier recognition of mens cognitive impairment (Cottrell & Lein, 1993).  
For example, dementia may interfere with performance of work roles for men 
while women who perform traditionally female roles such as homemaking may 
find their cognitive impairments are less noticeable or easier to mask.  Women 
may also normalise the experience more than men as something to be 
expected of dotty old women and for which nothing can be done, so theres no 
sense complaining about it.  Referring to the tendency of older women to 
endure more problems and disabilities at home on their own than men, Hughes 
and Mtezuka (1992) suggested that:  
after a lifetime of socially-constructed dependency of all forms, older 
women themselves have low expectations and easily accept the 
consequences of disability...They may have also learned that they 
have to simply get on and make the best of things (p 226).   
This concept of resilience and its relationship to experiences of dementia will be 
addressed in detail in chapters 7 and 8. 
Regardless of who is at more risk for dementia, there are still more women than 
men living with dementia owing to the longer life expectancy of women which 
has resulted in the feminisation of the elderly (Ginn & Arber, 1995).  Allan 
(2000) suggested that the stigma of dementia, combined with the double 
jeopardy suffered by older women (p 448) and the marginalisation of their 
experiences are all reasons for the lack of focus on women living with 
dementia. 
Several theories have been put forth to explain the connection between 
education and cognitive function: (1) brain reserve capacity, built through a rich 
environment in ones early years; (2) mental stimulation throughout the life 
course, with education leading to more mentally stimulating occupations that 
preserve cognitive function; and (3) a false association due to differential test-
taking abilities or cultural biases in the assessment procedures (Cagney & 
Lauderdale, 2002). All three theories have been supported in dementia 
research to date (Cagney & Lauderdale, 2002; Gatz, Svedberg, Pedersen, 
Mortimer, Berg & Johansson, 2001; Turrell, Lynch, Kaplan, Everson, Helkala, 
Kauhanen et al, 2002).  The third theory is associated with the heavy criticisms 
of the Mini Mental State Examination (Folstein, Folstein & McHugh, 1975) and 
its use as a screening tool (Yeo & Gallagher, 1996), as it has been shown to 
result in false positives for people with advanced age, limited education, 
illiteracy and lower socio-economic status (Jagger, Clarke, Anderson & 
Battcock, 1992; Keefover, Rankin, Keyl, Wells, Martin & Shaw, 1996).  Efforts 
are underway to develop assessment tools that take factors such as literacy, 
education, language and ethnicity into consideration (Yeo & Gallagher-
Thompson, 1996).  
A great deal of literature has accumulated on gender, class and mental health 
since Cheslers (1989) groundbreaking work on women and madness was 
published in 1972 and since Browne and Harris (1978) identified the social 
origins of depression in 1978.  Browne and Harris (1978) developed a causal 
model of vulnerability factors and provoking agents and found working class 
women with children to be those women most at risk for depression.  The 
authors dispelled the notion that origin is destiny and showed that social factors 
are important in influencing the onset and course of depression. Social 
causation and social construction are the main arguments put forth by feminist 
researchers (Busfield, 1996) for the differential rates of mental disorder in men 
and women.  There is now an emphasis on mens and womens madness and 
badness and a recognition that while the mental health system is 
harmful/oppressive to both men and women, there are important distinctions in 
terms of labelling and treatment of mental disorder by class, race, ethnicity, 
sexual orientation, and age as well (Busfield, 1996; Prior, 1999).  Evidence 
shows that not only are men overtaking women in terms of rates of mental 
disorder, but they also number higher in terms of those in mental health 
institutions in the UK (Prior & Hayes, 2001).  The change in rates of mental 
disorder can be linked to the social construction argument as substance abuse 
and personality disorders, which men are more likely to experience than 
women, are now included in classifications of mental disorder and thus more 
mentally disordered men are captured in the official statistics.  There are now 
two main sub-populations in mental health facilities in the UK: women over 
retirement age and men of working age (Prior & Hayes, 2001) and this has 
important implications for the design and delivery of services. 
Gender tends to be thought of as a fixed socio-demographic variable that does 
not change throughout time and/or space for any one individual.  In actual fact, 
gender may be more fluid than class - the supposedly dynamic construct - as it 
has been stated that gender relations can not be assumed to be static over the 
life course (Ginn & Arber, 1995).  Gender has been said to vary spatially, 
temporally and longitudinally, yet somehow older men seem to lose their 
gender and there is little research on older mens lives (Thompson, 1994).  The 
fluidity of masculinities is acknowledged, with authors noting that they change 
over time, over space, and, not least, during the lives of men themselves 
(Whitehead & Barrett, 2001: 8). 
Indeed, researchers have begun to look at gender relations and gender roles in 
chronic illness/disability and in later life to ascertain the extent to which gender 
is fixed or transmutable (Charmaz, 1997; Girdham, 2002; Wilson, 1995).  
Girdham (2002) and Wilson (1995) both found that gender roles had become 
less distinct and had mellowed (Girdham, 2002: 8) with disability and old age 
with the result that stereotypical gender roles are altered and reduced (Wilson, 
1995: 113).  Women were seen to have more choices as to how to express 
their identities as women and greater role flexibility in advanced old age than 
men (Girdham, 2002; Wilson, 1995).  Both men and women did however 
experience constraints on changes in their gender roles, owing to ill health and 
family interference, as well as the persistence of societal constraints on gender 
roles (Wilson, 1995).  Ginn and Arber (1995) put forth the idea that ageing is 
potentially liberating for women and men with regards to gender roles and the 
studies cited above appear to provide some support for this view.   
One of the findings of Charmazs (1997) research on the identity dilemmas of 
chronically ill men was that the men devoted much effort to the preservation of 
self in order to maintain continuity, and women generally showed more 
resilience and resourcefulness than men in preserving aspects of self (p 51), 
except for those women with cognitive impairments [emphasis mine].  Men 
benefited from the identity maintenance work that their wives did on their 
behalf, yet women were not similarly aided, as they were less likely to have a 
spouse than the men (Charmaz, 1997).  This has implications for older people 
with dementia who are more likely to be women, and by virtue of their age, 
more likely to be unmarried (Brotman, 1998).  Who will shore up the identities of 
older women with dementia if this is what is wanted and will those who want to 
change their identities be allowed to?  Research by Perry and OConnor (2002) 
indicated preliminary support for the idea of gendered strategies for preserving 
the personhood of a spouse with dementia, which the authors noted warrants 
further research.  As well, Barer (1994) stressed that:  
male roles throughout life place a premium on competency, activity, 
productivity, independence, and self-reliance, all characteristics that 
are difficult to sustain with the increased disability that occurs in late-
late life (p 30-31).   
As it is thought that men and women are likely to differ in their adaptation to 
continuities and discontinuities (Charmaz, 1997), it is likely that gender 
differences may exist in responses to dementia by the person who has it and 
the person charged with their identity maintenance or structuring and 
destructuring the course of illness (Gubrium, 1987). 
Calasanti and Slevin (2001) suggested that a gender lens is needed in 
gerontology to uncover the process by which men and women are gendered 
and the manner in which gender functions as a societal organising principle.  
This gender lens would focus on the intersections of old age with gender and 
other factors such as race, ethnicity, class, and sexual orientation and the 
resulting disadvantages and advantages experienced by older people, their 
strengths, and their acts of resistance.  The themes of resistance and 
conformity has arisen in life history interviews with older women (Ingrisch, 
1995) and make clear the links between the micro level of older womens 
experiences and the macro level of the social structures that shape and 
constrain those experiences (Bernard & Meade, 1993).  Older womens agency 
is highlighted in Mathews (1979) study of the social worlds of old women in 
which the women were clearly shown to employ strategies to avoid the label of 
old woman in order to preserve their self-identities. We have a lot to learn from 
older people about their self-identities, as indicated by Mathews (1979) 
commentary:  
...death and the dying process are not seen as the end of the self, 
but as situations requiring careful planning to maintain the person 
that the old woman sees herself to be (p 149, emphasis added). 
A sociology of masculinity (Whitehead & Barrett, 2001) emerged to critically 
address the other half of the gender binary that was overlooked by feminist 
researchers more interested in uncovering the voices and experiences of 
women.  This conscious neglect may have bolstered the reified status of man 
who grew to become the invisible gendered subject (Whitehead, 2001).  
Sociologists of masculinity believe that it is important for men to recognise that, 
like women, they too have a gender and to see it as shaping their experiences, 
as it does for women.  While Whitehead (2001) highlights the importance of 
interrogating dominance as well as subordination - asking what is it like to be a 
man - the male education managers in his study were unable to answer a 
seemingly simple question about how their subjective perception of their own 
gendered identity.  They had never reflected on themselves as men and thus 
any critical understanding of themselves as men was beyond them (p 362).  
This was in marked contrast to the women interviewed, therefore, Whitehead 
(2001) concluded that the findings support the belief that womens 
marginalisation does provide epistemic privilege informed by strong reflexivity 
(p 363), an argument made by Calasanti (1996), with respect to the vantage-
point of the oppressed (Du Bois, 1953). 
4.2.3 Other identity factors - sexual orientation, rurality, literacy 
There are several other aspects of a persons identity or social location that 
have not been investigated in any depth in dementia research.  A few are 
related to gender and class: sexual orientation, rurality, and literacy.  The first of 
these neglected dimensions upon which older people also differ is overlooked 
in dementia care where the views and experiences of lesbians and gay men 
are largely unrecognised (Ward, 2000: 24). 
An exploratory study (Ward, 2000) found that many of the older lesbian and gay 
respondents felt isolated and vulnerable (p 25) and were fearful of accessing 
mainstream services where they might encounter homophobia and/or have to 
hide an important component of their self-identity.  Making explicit the 
connection between sexual orientation and self-identity, one man described his 
fears thus its just the thought of losing me really (Ward, 2000: 24), a quote 
reminiscent of the words of people with dementia thinking ahead to the future 
(Keady, Nolan & Gilliard, 1995). 
Another issue that does not seem to have been adequately addressed is 
geography, in terms of rural and urban differences.  This is a particularly salient 
issue for Canada (Havens, 2002) with its numerous rural and remote/isolated 
communities.  Further, Keefover et al (1996) found that certain types of 
dementia may be more common in rural areas; care giving may be more 
demanding for rural families; and current screening tools may misclassify rural 
people as having dementia.  The authors explained the latter point by virtue of 
the greater number of people with limited education, illiteracy, and lower socio-
economic status in rural communities - all factors that have been shown to 
affect performance on widely used screening tools (Keefover et al, 1996).  
Literacy, as distinct from educational attainment, is another important domain 
for investigation, as Baker et al (2000) found that functional health literacy was 
negatively associated with age and cognitive function, as measured by the 
MMSE (Folstein et al, 1995). 
4.3 Conclusions  
As has been argued, most of the literature that address race, ethnicity, and 
dementia is not relevant to this thesis as there has been very little attention paid 
to the subjective experiences of minority ethnic and racialised people with 
dementia.  There has been ample attention paid to socio-economic status in 
research on dementia and there are indications that class might be the 
unspoken, yet most salient, variable in dementia research.  In addition, the work 
of the broader field of social and economic determinants of health may 
eventually cross over to directly impact on dementia research.   
Gender relations may be an extremely important variable as well, in terms of 
how people experience dementia in relation to their life long gendered patterns 
of behaviour, and the support that is available to either maintain or alter their 
gender roles in later life, and in the context of dementia.  In the absence of 
knowledge of the individual and his/her unique background and identity, 
dementia care has tended to reproduce gendered patterns of behaviour through 
stereotypically gendered activities (Hulko, 1997).  Person-centred care, with its 
call for maintenance of personhood and continuity of identity (Kitwood, 1997a) 
may lock older people, especially older women, into rigid gender roles, which 
may be contrary to their wishes at that stage in life.  Approaching age 65 years 
at the time, Sarton (1997) wrote that in old age we have greater freedom than 
ever before to be our true selves (p 231) and observed that her friends seem 
to become more and more themselves, rather than less so (p 230) as they 
grow older.  She herself looked forward to this growing into another dimension 
(Sarton, 1997).  The challenge is to ascertain how people with dementia feel 
about their gendered and classed identities and their gendered and classed 
relations with others, without structuring their experiences based on the 
expectations, assumptions or wishes of others with more agency and power. 
Through a review of the literature on subjective experiences of dementia, and 
dementia and race, ethnicity, class, and gender, it has been shown that 
identity as a concept has not been addressed to any great extent.  Moreover, 
an understanding of how people are simultaneously situated and describe their 
experiences in terms of their intersecting identities has not been evident in the 
work to date.  This gap in the literature exists for three reasons:  (1) the 
dominant voices telling their stories of dementia have not included, by and 
large, marginalised people - ethnic and racial minorities, older people, 
lesbians/gays/ bisexuals, disabled people, poor people, uneducated or 
minimally educated people  who may conceptualise their experiences 
differently than mainstream voices; (2) when identity constructs i.e. gender, age 
and class have been referenced, they usually have not been problematised or 
seen as salient concepts in furthering our understanding of experiences of 
dementia; and (3) the striving for normalcy theme in the dominant discourse 
does not leave space for those who were likely concerned about their full 
human rights before/apart from their diagnosis of dementia, those who were 
striving already, as well as those who reject societal definitions of normalcy.  As 
a starting point, future dementia theorising and research needs to move beyond 
a limited focus on the self/person, towards an awareness and investigation of 
identity.  The next step would be to build in an understanding of 
intersectionality/interlocking oppressions  meaning an analysis of how we are 
all differentially located on axes of both oppression and privilege and how this is 
determined by where we are situated and situate ourselves in terms of our own 
intersecting identities.  Only then will we have the possibility of unearthing the 
subjugated knowledges that lie buried under the dominant dementia discourse - 
le savoir des gens (Foucault, 1994a: 41) - that should serve as our guide to and 
through this realm of human experience. 
Chapter - 5 Exploring Dementia: Methodology and 
research methods 
5.1 Purpose and aims of the research 
As has been intimated, the purpose of this research was to further 
gerontological and sociological understandings of lived experiences of 
dementia in later life, particularly the influence of social location on this life 
process.  As a feminist, critical gerontologist, and anti-oppression social worker, 
I had an expressly political purpose in undertaking this research and have 
attempted to account for this by writing myself into the story as much as 
possible.  Such reflexivity is a key component of feminist research (DeVault, 
1990;1999; Kirby & McKenna, 1989; Lather, 1991; Letherby, 2002; 2003; Opie, 
1992; Ramazanoglu, 1992; Smith, 1987; Wasserfall, 1997), arising from an 
awareness that researchers influence the research process whether or not they 
openly acknowledge it; and to believe otherwise is both nave and inconsistent 
with feminist theory.  Indeed, we who do empirical research in the name of 
emancipatory politics must discover ways to connect our research methodology 
to our theoretical concerns and political commitments (Lather, 1991: 172).  The 
argument that methodology is a political issue (Young & Ackerman, 2001: 187) 
is an oft-heard refrain from disability researchers (Swain et al, 2004) and as 
such, efforts to make disability research more inclusive or participatory have 
informed this project as well (Hubbard, Downs & Tester, 2003; Stalker, Gilliard 
& Downs, 1999). 
Reflexivity can be seen to be a response to traditional (positivist) research that 
promotes the denial of ones subjectivity; aims for neutrality and objectivity; and 
sees research as an a-political endeavour (De Vault, 1999; Kirby & McKenna, 
1989; Letherby, 2003).  The rationale for a reflexive approach to knowledge 
creation in feminist research is summarised thus: 
All researchers should be explicit about the politics of their research, 
as it is more logical to accept our subjectivity, our emotions and our 
socially grounded positions than to assume that some of us can rise 
above them (Ramazanoglu, 1992: 211). 
Sociologists have long called attention to the politics of research, the situated-
ness of knowledge, and the need for reflexivity on the part of researchers 
(Becker, 1966; Manning, 1967; Schutz, 1967).  Becker (1966) argued that 
the question is not whether we should take sides, since we inevitably will, but 
rather whose side we are on (p 239); and offered this advice: 
We take sides as our personal and political commitments dictate, 
use our theoretical and technical resources to avoid the distortions 
that might introduce into our work, limit our conclusions carefully, 
recognize the hierarchy of credibility for what it is, and field as best 
we can the accusations and doubts that will surely be our fate 
(Becker, 1966: 247). 
Having an awareness of the politics of research and the situated-ness of 
knowledge, and wanting to be honest with myself and my research participants, 
I adopted a reflexive approach to knowledge creation and determined to take 
the side of my research participants as much as possible. 
5.2 Research design  
As this was an exploratory study in an area in which there had been little prior 
research (Hulko, 2002), I decided that the research question would be best 
answered through the use of grounded theory methodology.  This approach 
allows the researcher to go beyond a description of the phenomenon under 
study, towards an explanation of the phenomenon (Hulko, 1998).  Grounded 
theory was discovered by two sociologists  Barney Glaser and Anselm 
Strauss  conducting research on dying and death and reflects their training in 
quantitative methods at Columbia (Glaser) and symbolic interactionism at the 
Chicago school (Strauss).  In the 35 years since the publication of their seminal 
text (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), the authors opinions on the approach have 
diverged in a way that underscores the difference in their sociological origins 
and in their training in research methods. 
Two researchers have become nearly as synonymous with grounded theory as 
its originators: Juliet Corbin and Kathy Charmaz.  Corbin, a nurse researcher, 
collaborated with Strauss on several methodology texts in the 1990s (Strauss & 
Corbin, 1990; 1994; 1998) and Charmaz, a sociologist, has carved out her own 
niche as a constructivist grounded theorist (Charmaz, 1983; 1990; 2000; 2002), 
while also publishing in her substantive area of chronic illness (Charmaz, 
1991;1997).  Grounded theory has been widely used in health research, 
particularly in nursing (Baker, Wuest & Stern, 1992; Chenitz & Swanson, 1986; 
Johnson, Long & White, 2001; Keady, 1999; Melia, 1997; Wimpenny & Gass, 
2000) and appears to accord well with the principles of social work practice 
(Gilgun, 1994).  
I explored alternate methodologies and considered combining cross-national 
comparative social research (CSR)  Scotland or the UK and Canada - with 
grounded theory, yet ultimately rejected this approach for theoretical and 
methodological reasons 10.    Once I made this decision, carrying out the field 
research in Ontario, Canada, rather than in Scotland or the UK, made more 
sense, as I was more familiar with the health care system in Canada than in the 
UK, there is greater ethnic and racial diversity in Toronto than in Glasgow or 
London, and I had an established network of contacts in Ontario to assist with 
access.  For all these reasons, I returned to Canada and spent 11 months 
undertaking field research in Toronto and Peterborough, Ontario. 
5.2.1 Grounded theory  from conception to completion 
My understanding of grounded theory arises from research training for a 
Masters of Social Work degree and the application of grounded theory methods 
to the design of my MSW thesis (Hulko, 1998).  Since that time, I have read a 
great deal of the literature on grounded theory and have engaged in 
discussions and debates with other researchers and postgraduate students 
about what grounded theory is and what it is not.  Rarely have we entertained 
the question of what it should be and this is something that I wanted to explore 
through this research.  While reflecting upon the tensions and congruencies 
(Wuest, 1995) between grounded theory and other forms of meaning making 
such as feminist/emancipatory research, I found Charmazs (2000) reframing of 
the grounded theory debate and efforts at (re)visioning grounded theory to be 
10 In assessing the goodness of fit between these two methodologies, I focused on the extent to 
which CSR would add strength to the grounded theory and whether it would complement or 
detract from the primary methodology.  Trying to make the study cross-national resulted in the 
need to simplify or somehow make it more manageable, however, and led to the decision to 
limit the sample to older women, leaving out older men.  After much reflection, I decided not to 
do a cross-national study for theoretical and methodological reasons, including a weak rationale 
for CSR; the time intensive and complex nature of grounded theory on its own; CSR as a 
secondary methodology affecting the primary focus of the study; doubling of access issues, 
which were expected to be problematic; lengthening of time to completion due to the need to 
learn two systems, develop two sets of contacts, and compare two separate grounded theory 
studies; and the realisation that removing one country, rather than one gender, would achieve 
reduced complexity and better congruency with the research topic. 
helpful.  Through clearly distinguishing between objectivist and constructivist 
approaches to grounded theory and asserting the importance of the latter for 
sociological inquiry, Charmaz (2000) skilfully raised these deliberations to the 
level of future possibilities, while remaining committed to the basic strategies of 
grounded theory.  The distinction between objectivism and constructivism rests 
largely on the answers to questions of ontology - what is the nature of reality; 
epistemology  what is the relationship between those involved in the 
knowledge creation process; and methodology  how should knowledge be 
created (Guba & Lincoln, 1994).  Constructivists view reality as socially 
constructed and research as a subjective enterprise in which the researchers 
role in knowledge creation needs to be written into the text, through a process 
of working the hyphens (Fine, 1994).  At the time of designing this research, I 
felt most closely aligned with Charmaz (2002; 2000) who espoused 
constructivist grounded theory and Wuest (1995) who advocated for feminist 
grounded theory, both of whom do not diverge from the basic strategies of 
grounded theory.  After completing the research, my allegiance still resides with 
feminist and constructivist grounded theory. 
Regardless of where on the continuum from Glaser to Strauss and Corbin one 
locates oneself as a grounded theorist, a number of basic strategies should be 
followed by all claiming to do grounded theory research.  These are listed by 
Charmaz (2000: 510-511) as: 
 simultaneous collection and analysis of data 
 two step data coding process 
 comparative methods 
 memo writing to construct conceptual analyses 
 sampling to refine emerging theoretical ideas 
 integration of the theoretical framework 
Most grounded theory methodologists seem to agree on these core 
constituents and on the outcomes of grounded theory - core variables, basic 
social processes, and integrated theory (Lowe, 1996).  The sequencing of the 
steps or strategies appears to be up for debate, however, which could be due in 
part to different interpretations of the function of theoretical sampling - whether 
it is to develop or to verify theory (Charmaz, 2000; Glaser & Strauss, 1967).  
Strauss made the critical point that many people have mistakenly thought of 
grounded theory as simply a form of inductive inquiry, although all three 
aspects of inquiry (induction, deduction and verification) are absolutely 
essential (1987: 12).  Strauss further noted that not everyone will be skilled at 
all three, or even two, of these modes of inquiry and that all of these analytic 
skills can be developed (p 13) through doing grounded theory research. 
Through undertaking grounded theory research and critically reflecting on my 
experiences throughout, I hope to add to debates about the future form(s) this 
methodology may take and to avoid one of the main causes of impoverishment 
of sociological monographs [which is] that their authors have not written simply 
as a human being (Bell & Newby, 1977:14).  The approach that I took to 
grounded theory, as detailed in this thesis, can be used as an exemplar for 
other researchers hoping to steer their way clear of ongoing debates, and 
willing to take on the more interesting challenge of defining what grounded 
theory can and should be. 
5.2.2 A note on literature reviews in grounded theory 
The original text (Glaser & Strauss, 1967) did suggest that knowledge of the 
literature does not need to be attained in advance of data collection.  The 
admonitions against doing this, and the warnings about its deleterious effects, 
came later, however, and are to be found primarily in Glasers work (Glaser, 
1978; 1992; 2001; Lowe, 1996), although Charmaz did concur with this view in 
her early writings (1983; 1990).  Glaser contended that grounded theory 
researchers should not review the literature in their substantive area prior to 
embarking on data collection as he believed that this leads to the adoption of 
concepts that force theory development, rather than allowing theory to emerge 
from the data (Glaser, 1978; 1992; 2001; Lowe, 1996).  At the same time, 
grounded theorists were advised to treat their prior knowledge and experiences 
as data, to be drawn on in theory development as appropriate (Baker et al, 
1992; Glaser, 1978; Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Strauss, 1987; Strauss & Corbin, 
1998).  As Charmaz (2000: 510) asserted, this suggestion did not mean that 
Glaser, Strauss, and Corbin aligned themselves with constructivism, which 
assumes the relativism of multiple social realities, recognizes mutual 
creation of knowledge by the viewer and the viewed, and aims 
toward interpretive understanding of subjects meanings.  
Constructivism is consistent with research from the margins, a form of anti-
oppressive/emancipatory research that also requires intersubjectivity and 
critical reflection on the social context (Kirby & McKenna, 1989: 129). 
Several authors have argued convincingly that we all carry certain concepts in 
our heads and that these concepts influence our interpretations of the events 
that we observe and the stories that we hear (Kirby & McKenna, 1989; 
McCracken, 1988; Potts & Brown, 2002).  In light of this awareness, the 
researcher is advised to explore and set down on paper his/her conceptual 
baggage (Kirby & McKenna, 1989) and to remain continuously aware of its 
potential to influence the research process.  This may be facilitated by doing a 
thorough cultural review (McCracken, 1988) at the outset and by keeping a 
reflexive journal (Kirby & McKenna, 1989) in which thoughts about and 
reactions to the research process are recorded on a continual basis.  These 
suggestions are congruent with the grounded theory strategy of memoing, 
which was defined by Glaser (Lowe, 1996) as any ideational production that 
comes to mind while coding, collecting and analyzing. 
Orona (1997: 178) remarked about her experience doing grounded theory that 
the only mandate was to write whatever was emerging from the data without 
concern for linear or orderly thinking.  The aforementioned strategies do, 
however, go beyond memoing.  A cultural review and the recording of 
conceptual baggage should be done much earlier than memoing, i.e., during 
the questioning or problem formulation stage, and then be reflected upon 
throughout the research process (Kirby & McKenna, 1989; McCracken, 1988). 
Contrary to the dire predictions of some grounded theorists (Glaser, 1978; 
1992; 2001; Lowe, 1996), I did not believe that the literature review that I 
completed prior to designing this research was going to lead me to force a set 
of concepts onto the data that I was to gather on older peoples experiences of 
dementia and the intersections of race, ethnicity, class and gender.  Rather, I 
felt that it had confirmed the appropriateness of grounded theory for 
researching this question, in that I was no closer to arriving at a theory that 
adequately captured this phenomenon, despite having read broadly in my 
substantive field and in parallel fields.  This suggested to me that if a researcher 
is able to locate enough relevant information from the extant literature to be 
able to formulate a working hypothesis prior to data collection, then grounded 
theory is not the best method to use in seeking to answer the question.  That 
said, I did acquire more concepts than I started out with and acknowledged that 
any number of these might prove significant in developing theory on older 
peoples experiences of dementia and the intersections of race, ethnicity, class 
and gender. 
5.2.3 Operationalising Intersectionality  
Undertaking a PhD on dementia and intersectionality and choosing to do 
grounded theory research from a feminist/anti-oppression perspective required 
me to grapple with the operationalisation of intersectionality, which meant 
figuring out what this theoretical concept could look like in research practice.  
My concerted efforts to apply an intersectional perspective led me to question 
everything about the research, from the overall design, to the composition of 
the sample, to tools such as conversation aids, to dissemination strategies.  I 
documented all of this in my reflexive journal and had the opportunity to share 
these challenges and my attempts to address them with other researchers 
through conference presentations in the UK and Canada.  I have detailed some 
of these challenges and my attempts to overcome them elsewhere (Hulko, 
2004a; Appendix C).  The methodological challenges associated with 
operationalising intersectionality that I highlighted were: configuring the sample, 
translating sociological concepts, describing the project, designing interview 
questions, and being reflective and reflexive (Hulko, 2004).  In chapter 9, I will 
discuss some of my conclusions with respect to the utility of the concept of 
intersectionality.  At this juncture, I would like to state that it is possible to 
operationalise intersectionality, it takes a great deal of creativity and vigilance, 
and, if done in earnest, the process and the outcomes of research are radically 
different.                    
5.2.4 Sensitising concepts 
Between October 2001 and August 2002, as I worked on a thorough review of 
the literature for this research, I consciously wrote myself into the story, thereby 
acknowledging my subjectivity as the researcher (Fine, Weis, Weseen & Wong, 
2000) as well as introducing the theoretical framework and conceptual baggage 
that I brought to this research.  In supervision sessions, it was agreed that my 
efforts at critical self-reflection and locating myself in the research process were 
important to this research and that I should continue to do this.  My awareness 
of the mass of concepts that I had stored in my head grew as I thought about 
my research methods and how to distil all that reading and writing into a short 
summary of the literature.  In addition, I had started to reflect on the perhaps 
contradictory positions espoused by representatives of the epistemological and 
methodological traditions guiding my work  feminism and grounded theory - 
and on how this accorded with my own process to date which had included a 
thorough literature review and the aforementioned efforts at critical self-
reflection and locating myself in the research process.  I decided that it was 
time to make a record of this and sat down to write up a list of my own 
conceptual baggage - those concepts in my head that might be significant to 
this research.  After 15-20 minutes of brain storming and then an equivalent 
period of reflection and more writing, I generated a list of 76 concepts 
(individual words or pairs/groups of concepts), which is attached as Appendix 
I included this list of concepts in the research proposal and attached it to this 
thesis as documentation of the conceptual baggage that, from my vantage point 
at the time, I thought might prove relevant to the process in which I was 
engaging.  This process can be seen as one of: questioning; designing and re-
designing; seeking, listening, learning; making meaning; posing 
conclusions/questions; and taking more action (Potts & Brown, 2002).  This 
inventory was partial, and I intended to add to it as the research progressed; 
however, I stopped documenting concepts per se and chose to use my reflexive 
journal to record ideas generated by the research, in the form of theoretical 
memos.   
To engage in this reflexive process is to acknowledge ones subjectivity as the 
researcher (Burgess, 1984; DeVault, 1999; Fine, 1994) and to refute the idea 
that the objectivity that reputedly comes from not reading the literature in ones 
subject area is possible and desirable.  I do not believe that disobeying this 
injunction made me any more likely to impose a theory on my data rather than 
facilitating its emergence.  Unlike a trend noted in the literature in which 
researchers claim to have used a grounded theory approach when it seems to 
be little more than inductive analysis (Glaser, 2001; Strauss & Corbin, 1994), I 
used all of the strategies of grounded theory, and infused them with feminist 
and anti-oppression sensibilities.  As Wuest (1995) notes, grounded theory as a 
methodology is well suited to feminist research in that it recognises multiple 
realities and the influence of structural conditions and views theory as a 
process.  Wuest (1995: 129) lists three principles underlying feminist research: 
1. knowledge produced by the research should be useful for the 
participants 
2. the research method should not be oppressive 
3. the research method should be reflexive   
As has been expressed in earlier sections of this chapter, these three principles 
underpin this thesis and were captured in the third aim of the research: to 
critically reflect on the research process, particularly the applicability and 
effectiveness of anti-oppressive research methods.  Grounded theory is said to 
require a cast of multiple, diverse characters in order to enrich the theory under 
development (Charmaz, 2000; Strauss & Corbin, 1994; Wuest, 1995) and, as 
such, aligned well with the aims of this research as well.  
After the thorough literature review and accounting of relevant sensitising 
concepts described above, I felt ready to jump from the literature into the 
empirical world of research; thus, I had reached the transitional phase referred 
to by Glaser (2001) in the following way: 
Thus Wendy takes on the literature as something to discount as 
conjecture with a desire to change it, redirect it, modify it, and correct 
it.  In essence it is time to ground it by a Grounded Theory (p 37). 
5.3 Research methods  
Grounded theory researchers frequently use a range of data collection methods 
(Charmaz, 2000; Dick, 2002; Glaser, 2001; Strauss & Corbin, 1994) in order to 
explore the research question from different angles and to triangulate the data 
that arises (Erlandson, Harris, Skipper & Allen, 1993; Lincoln & Guba, 1985; 
Lather, 1991).  Employing various data collection methods also helps to 
ameliorate problems that may arise with people who have diminished cognitive 
or communicative abilities (Rowles & Reinharz, 1988), particularly on a topic 
that might be difficult to discuss, regardless of ones cognitive capacity.  Also, it 
addresses the researchers desire to afford participants different means and 
opportunities to express themselves (Ikels, Keith & Fry, 1988).  This latter goal 
accords well with politically engaged research for which multiple methods and a 
commitment to engaging with differences, especially between the researcher 
and the researched, are essential (Fine et al, 2000).  The methods that I 
selected for this research were interviews, participant observation, and 
photography with persons with dementia, together with focus groups with their 
significant others11.   
Being committed to the social work principle of starting where the client is at, 
which Gilgun (1994) suggests is reflected in grounded theory methods, the 
primary focus of this research was people with dementia and their unique and 
varied experiences.  I began data collection with the interviews and 
observations, therefore, and planned to move on to the focus groups with 
significant others once a theory had emerged from the data and been verified 
through theoretical sampling.  Having gathered more data than anticipated from 
talking with older people with dementia themselves, and observing them 
interacting with their significant others, and feeling the pressure of time, I 
decided to forego focus groups and to give feedback jointly rather than 
11 Based on the work of Mead (1967) and other symbolic interactionists, I used significant 
others to refer to members of their community whom my interviewees identified as playing a 
significant role in their lives, i.e. spouses, adult children, friends, neighbours; and did not use 
this designation for service providers.  
individually.  More details of the specific methods will be offered below, 
following a brief review of key methodological issues in past dementia research. 
5.3.1 Methodological issues in dementia research 
Methodological issues raised in research that treats people with dementia as 
subjects, not objects, have centred on: informed consent and the role of proxy 
decision makers (Allan, 2001; Bartlett & Martin, 2002; Bowes & Wilkinson, 
2002b; Cheston, Bender & Byatt, 2000; Clarke & Keady, 2002; Dewing, 2002; 
Downs, 1997; Feinberg & Whitlach, 2001; Froggatt, 1988; Hubbard, Cook, 
Tester & Downs, 2002; Innes, 2001; Reid, Ryan & Enderby, 2001; Wilkinson, 
2002b); the morality/ethics of research that may adversely affect mood and 
functioning (Cotrell & Schulz, 1993; Froggatt, 1988; Keady et al, 1995); the 
need to corroborate information and/or triangulate data (Barnett, 2000; Cotrell & 
Schulz, 1993; Froggatt, 1988; Innes, 2001; Phinney, 1998;); the degree to 
which emancipatory or participatory research is possible (Hubbard et al, 2003;  
Goldsmith, 1996; Living Archive Project, 2001; Nolan, Ryan, Enderby & Reid, 
2002; Proctor, 2001; Ray, 2000; Reid, 2003; Stalker et al, 1999; Wilkinson, 
2002b); the involvement of the caregiver or spouse (Cheston et al, 2000; Cotrell 
& Schulz, 1993; Forbat, 2003; Froggatt, 1988; Phinney,1998; Snyder, 2001); 
the need for a pre-interview meeting, multiple interviews, and post-interview 
follow-up (Clarke & Keady, 2002; Hubbard et al, 2003; Living Archive Project, 
2001; Phinney, 1998; Proctor, 2001; Snyder, 2001); the extent to which 
understanding of and respect for culture is taken into consideration (Bowes & 
Wilkinson, 2002; Chater, 1996; Forbat, 2003; Ray, 2001; UBC Dementia 
Research Collaborative Working Group, 2000); effects of the disease itself such 
as distractibility, difficulty recollecting facts, problems in communication and 
fears or suspicions of strangers (Barnett, 2000; Bowes & Wilkinson, 2002; 
Cheston et al, 2000; Clarke & Keady, 2002; Cotrell & Schulz, 1993; Froggatt, 
1988; Goldsmith, 1996; Innes, 2001; Keady et al, 1995; Proctor, 2001; Snyder, 
2001; Wilkinson, 2002a); gaining access and getting past the gatekeepers 
(Bartlett & Martin, 2002; Bowes & Wilkinson, 2002; Cotrell & Schulz, 1993; 
Froggatt, 1988); the importance of having researchers who are trained in 
dementia care (Froggatt, 1988; Hubbard et al, 2003; Keady et al, 1995); and 
difficulties in obtaining funding for research of this nature (Bowes & Wilkinson, 
2002b; Froggatt, 1988). 
Several of the above mentioned authors, and others, have suggested ways in 
which we may learn about the experiences of people with dementia.  First of all, 
a repertoire of strategies is advised (Hubbard et al, 2003) and then specific 
techniques are suggested such as: (1) personal accounts; (2) interviews and 
group work; (3) listening in everyday life; (4) observing behaviour; (5) consulting 
people who have had dementia-like illnesses, i.e. depression and meningitis; 
(6) poetry; and (7) role play (Kitwood, 1997a: 73-79).  Although Kitwood 
undertook very little empirical research himself, his list of strategies is frequently 
cited in the dementia literature.  I made use of several of these techniques, 
including the first one for my analysis of published accounts of dementia (Hulko, 
2002) and the next three in the empirical research.  Cheston et al (2000) 
created a list for service related research questions: (1) questionnaires and 
structured interviews; (2) semi-structured interviews; (3) observation; (4) 
These lists of research methods have a history of extensive use in the social 
sciences, which may be one reason for Bond and Corners (2001) claim that 
there are not unique methodological issues in dementia research.  Several of 
these forms of knowledge creation have been used in dementia research and 
the results that have been made available to the public form a solid basis for 
further explorations of the subjective realm of dementia.  Themes identified in a 
1997 review of the emergence of the person in dementia research - (1) the 
individuals sense of self; (2) the persons rights; and (3) attention to the 
perspectives of people with dementia (Downs, 1997) - are evident still in 
literature published in the intervening years, though citizenship rights have not 
been accorded sufficient attention to date (Innes, 2002).  The aforementioned 
strategies and themes are all pieces of work that I consciously built upon in this 
research on dementia and intersectionality.  My own experience in dementia 
research and care and the growing literature on how to do research with people 
with dementia, informed the research design, described in detail in the sections 
that follow. 
5.3.2 Interviews and participant observation with people with 
dementia   
Through reviewing the recommendations arising from past research using an 
interview format with people with dementia, it appeared to me that interviews 
should: 
 Be short, flexible, conversational in nature and occur more 
than once; 
 Include time for (re)introduction to the researcher and the 
research, (re)negotiating consent, and orientation to the topic; 
 Take place in a setting that is comfortable for the participant, 
preferably their home or a setting that is connected to the 
questions being asked; 
 Happen during the best part of the day for the participant and 
at a time of their choosing; 
 Be conducted by someone with training in dementia 
care/knowledge of dementia; 
 Occur in the native language/language most commonly 
spoken by the participant, through the use of an interpreter if 
needed; and 
 Be audio-taped, if agreed, and supplemented by notes on 
nonverbal communication, mood, and the interview process.   
Taking these suggestions into consideration, I planned a series of three short 
(20-30 minutes) interviews with each of the people with dementia involved in 
the research, interspersed with two participant observation sessions per 
person, lasting roughly two hours per session.  The sequencing of the schedule 
was such:    
Interview 1 Observation 1 Interview 2 Observation 2 Interview 3  
While I did complete the entire sequence with each of the eight participants, I 
had to alter the timeframes, as the interviews all lasted between 40 and 90 
minutes, more in line with interviews with older people generally (Wenger, 
2002).  The interviews were structured around the individuals self-identity and 
social location and his/her experiences of living with cognitive impairment; and I 
created a new interview guide each time I met with a participant (see initial 
interview guide in Appendix E).  At the second or third interview, I asked 
participants to show me a photo or object that might assist in answering the 
research question (the more accessible version) - how does who you are as a 
person shape living with memory problems, and to describe the meaning that it 
held for them.  My thinking was informed by Wenger (2002: 271), who noted 
that: the homes of older people tend to give clues as to their earlier lives; 
questions about photographs or objects can provide a good starting point for 
discussion; and taking photographs of artefacts may provide useful data.  My 
design was further influenced by visual sociologists and their recognition that 
the power of the photo lies in its ability to unlock the subjectivity of those who 
see the image differently from the researcher (Harper, 2000: 729). 
I was aware that a therapeutic benefit could result from this activity as well, as it 
is thought that older people derive pleasure from sharing photographs or 
objects (Rowles & Reinharz, 1988).  Photographs and objects have the 
potential to trigger painful memories and to increase awareness of losses due 
to dementia, however, and this was something that I encountered in the course 
of the research.  For example, some of the participants did not recognise 
themselves or were unable to recall the names of the people or events depicted 
in the photos.  Pleasure was far more commonly expressed than pain, however, 
especially when the participants were discussing people and events from the 
past. 
The observation sessions took place in a setting or at an event that held 
significance for the person with dementia; and this was negotiated with the 
participants and their significant others in some cases, at the end of the first 
and second interviews.  During these sessions, as a participant-observer, I 
interacted with those present as appropriate: engaging in informal interviewing 
(Chenitz, 1986), taking photographs as permitted, and making brief notations 
on my observations and reflections.  After leaving the scene, I expanded upon 
my notes and wrote them up in full for coding as soon as possible after the 
event.  I hoped that these observation sessions might provide additional, and 
possibly conflicting, information to that garnered through the interviews 
(Hubbard et al, 2003; Lambert & McKevitt, 2002) and that they would allow me 
the opportunity to record non-verbal communication and interactions with others 
which have been shown to be meaningful and purposive for people with 
dementia (Hubbard et al, 2002; Seman, 2002).  Participant observation helps to 
balance what people say with what they actually do (Ikels et al, 1988: 283) and 
to situate an interviewees statements and the circumstances of the interview 
as far as possible in the broader contexts of that persons life (McKevitt & 
Lambert, 2002: 211).  The former comment relates to the fact that much of what 
social researchers are interested in studying is not of interest to our participants 
or is something of which they are not conscious themselves (Ikels et al, 1988: 
283).  Thus, using participant observation in this study, provided another means 
to assess the influence and interaction of gender, class, race and ethnicity on 
the participants experiences of dementia, which was not easily articulated in an 
interview.   
It was only through combining methods in this way that the second category of 
the grounded theory emerged  othering dementia.  Had I relied on interviews 
alone, I would not have witnessed the othering to which people with dementia 
are subject and been able to explore the impact of this with the participants in 
follow up interviews.  As well, the interspersing of the interviews and the 
observation sessions allowed me to think through my observations and then 
ask more focused questions in the subsequent interviews, consistent with 
grounded theory strategies (Charmaz, 2002).  Indeed grounded theorists are 
advised to use multiple sequential interviews [as they] form a stronger basis for 
creating a nuanced understanding of social processes (Charmaz, 2002: 682). 
5.3.2.1 A note on tools  
The primary tool in interview and observation research is the researcher 
her/himself (Charmaz, 2002; Wenger, 2002) and all that s/he brings to the 
research  knowledge, skills, experience, values, and biases.  I did not make 
use of any psychometric tools, as the degree of cognitive impairment, as 
measured by these instruments, was not an important factor in this study.  An 
official diagnosis of dementia was not important either, although most 
participants, if not all, had been given a diagnosis due to the nature of the 
recruiting sites.  In lieu of a demographic face sheet, I constructed diagrams for 
each participant depicting where I thought they resided on multiple axes of 
oppression and privilege, based on information from the gatekeepers and 
significant others and my sociological imagination (Wright Mills, 2000).  In doing 
this, I was drawing on a tool from anti-oppression workshops that is used to 
graphically illustrate an individuals social location: multiple axes of oppression 
and privilege are drawn in a form reminiscent of the spokes of a wheel and 
each is labelled with a different identity construct such as age, gender, class, 
sexual orientation, race, ethnicity, religion, (dis)ability, language, and health 
status (Appendix F).  The centre of the circle represents privilege and the 
outside represents oppression/marginalisation (hooks, 2000a).  The task is to 
situate oneself on each of these axes in relation to the margin and the centre 
and, through doing so, to become (more) conscious of the degree of privilege 
and oppression that one owns and which makes the everyday world 
problematic (Smith, 1987).  As I felt that this exercise might be too cognitively 
and emotionally challenging for people with dementia to engage in, I used their 
words and actions to inform my own constructions (Appendix F). 
The interview questions were designed to evoke subjective reflections on living 
with cognitive impairment as a person of a particular race, ethnicity, gender, 
and class and made use of conversation aids, such as varied images of older 
people (see Figure 1) and third person questioning (Dewing, 2002).  Although I 
began with an initial interview guide (Appendix E), these questions were 
altered, discarded, and replaced on an ongoing basis to meet the analytical 
requirements of the grounded theory research, such as refining and verifying 
the evolving conceptual categories (Appendix G).  Ascertaining the meaning 
behind the words and actions of people with dementia can be challenging and 
requires active listening and creative, non-linear thinking skills (Goldsmith, 
1996; Hubbard et al, 2003; Killick & Allan, 2001).  Participants may speak in 
metaphors and string together words in a form that has been termed word 
salad, as the words appear to be jumbled together and it is difficult to discern 
the thread of meaning.  As Woods (1997: 12) stressed:  
it is all too easy to discount the words and behaviour of the person 
with dementia as being random and unpurposeful, but a difficult 
endeavour to identify reliably the fragments of meaning and affect 
that undoubtedly remain. 
To do this properly, an interviewer needs to be flexible enough to piece the 
words together, to pick out the thread, and to probe for the meaning contained 
within.  In this regard, De Vaults (1990) suggestions for capturing the unique 
features of womens talk are highly applicable to dementia research, i.e. 
listening more carefully and recording more than words.  This style of 
interviewing necessitates a dialogue, rather than a rigid question and answer 
format, and is consistent with a relationship-centred approach to dementia care 
(Nolan et al, 2002; Zgola, 1999), a reflexive approach to research (Charmaz, 
2000; Fine et al, 2000), and active interviewing strategies (Holstein & Gubrium, 
1995).    
This research is also located within a newer research tradition known as visual 
sociology (Prosser & Schwartz, 1998), which dates back to Beckers (1974) 
innovative article linking photography and sociology.  Although Prosser and 
Schwartz (1998) note that little has been written regarding the role photographs 
can play in the research process (p 115), it is felt that there is a goodness of fit 
between grounded theory and visual methods, particularly with respect to 
enabling the comparison of emic and etic perspectives and the iterative process 
of data collection and analysis used by both research methods (Prosser & 
Schwartz, 1998).  In addition to generating photographs throughout the 
research, I used a form of visual sociology known as photo elicitation 
(Alexander, 2001; Becker, 1974; Harper, 2000).  Visual materials such as 
photographs taken at the observation sessions, the images of older people that 
I brought to the initial interviews, and artefacts in the participants homes, were 
used as tools for the elicitation of information about the topic at hand.  The 
visual data created was of people with dementia interacting in their social 
worlds, and of any significant objects that were shared with me.  Being new to 
visual sociology, I followed the advice of my intellectual ancestors and aimed to 
photograph with sociological consciousness (Becker, 1974).  Although the 
photographs of the research participants and their social worlds were not 
systematically coded, they were used to help build theory (Harper, 2000), as 
exemplified by the emergence of the second category of othering dementia.   
The two primary purposes of the photographs were: to facilitate data collection; 
and to represent the research in publications and presentations, according to 
the wishes of the participants.  Such use illustrates and brings life to the text 
(Wenger, 2002) and helps to make visible an invisible population (Fine et al, 
2000), consistent with moves to make dementia research more inclusive 
(Dewing, 2002; Nolan et al, 2002; Stalker et al, 1999; Wilkinson, 2002a).  
Wenger (2002: 272) encouraged such efforts, as most of the older people that 
[she] and [her] colleagues have photographed have been happy, even 
delighted, to have their likenesses used to illustrate [their] work.  A caution was 
issued as well for researchers to employ sensitivity in using photographs of 
recognizable people to illustrate dependency, impairment, and other less 
positive aspects of old age (Wenger, 2002: 272).   
Most of the photographs that I took counter the familiar images of people with 
dementia that depict them as frail and incompetent (Hulko, 2004b; see 
Appendix H).  I acknowledge that this is a controversial area and for that 
reason, approached this with caution, treating as primary the wishes of the 
participants, and assessing carefully their comprehension of the implications of 
consenting to public exposure of their images.  In addition, my aim was to 
counterbalance the negative images of people with dementia that currently exist 
with images of active older people with dementia who are integrated into the 
social fabric of their communities.  The words of people with dementia who are 
involved in research and who are speaking out about their experiences are 
instructive in weighing the risks and benefits of publicising the words and/or 
images of people with dementia (McKillop, 2002; Robinson, 2002; Young, 
2001).  For example, one research participant by the name of Sue Sweeney, 
replied, to a request to use her quote, that she wanted her full name attached to 
her words, so that the audience would know that a real person is saying these 
things and feeling these things (as quoted in Seman, 2002: 139).  This implies 
to me that the option of being made visible needs to be offered to people with 
dementia, with sensitivity, rather than protecting them from what we perceive to 
be a danger by not asking the question.  The older people with dementia with 
whom I worked were very interested in the photographs and did not object to 
my taking or using them, with the exception of a few photographs of two of the 
women which they felt portrayed them as haggard or would not make sense to 
others (see chapter 7).    
The images of older people that I used for photo elicitation did not work in the 
manner I envisaged them, however, and I stopped using my deck of image 
cards after the fourth initial interview.  First of all, the participants were less 
cognitively impaired than people with dementia with whom I had worked in the 
past and were able to engage with the photos on a deeper level, asking 
questions about who the people were, were the photos had been taken, what 
was going on, etc.  Second, the responses to the images were very interesting 
and provided me with insights into processes of identification and 
differentiation, however, it was really tangential to the main focus of the 
research.  To illustrate these points, I have included four different reactions to 
the same photo of an older white woman grocery shopping; the first is from a 
multiply privileged participant, the second from an in-between participant, the 
third from a multiply marginalised participant, and the last one from an in-
between participant. 
Figure 1 Health Canada photo of older white women grocery shopping 
Jim Heather:   Uhhard life I would think  Shes looks weary, tired, 
shes well enough, good coat.  Um [pause] probably 
doesnt have anyone to love her or look after her or  
The baskets sort of got fair bit in it for uh person of her 
Joe Brown: and heres old mama, I like, I like that picture.  Oh, I 
like this picture, she looks happy man.  She one of 
those happy-go-lucky ladies boy, oh yeah, oh yeah.  Oh 
happy about life, with what shes doing, shes shopping. 
Ester Hernandez:  [in Tagalog] I dont knowI dont know, maybe 
somebody, sometimes a person who is poor [gesturing 
with hands someone walking]with like newspaper for 
example, and they stealing, and take it. 
Bosse Knudsen:  Ohh, shes an old oneYeah  Well, the wes-, the 
way she dresses andthat looks like an old that, a 
young person would not dress like that. 
These very different responses to the same picture demonstrate how our social 
location and our values and beliefs can influence what we see in a photo and 
the value we place on the person so depicted.  Used in this way, photo 
elicitation can be a very useful tool for soliciting views of people that are both 
different than and similar to the respondent.  This was not the main focus of this 
project, however, and seeing as dialogue was not as much as a challenge as 
anticipated, I felt it prudent to abandon the use of the deck of image cards.  
5.3.3 Feedback sessions and focus groups with significant others  
As mentioned previously, the focus groups were intended to happen at the end 
of the process, so as not to bias the data collected from older people with 
dementia and the emergent theory, and to elicit feedback on research findings 
obtained through the interviews and observations conducted earlier in the 
research (Cronin, 2001; Morgan, 1988).  Focus groups can allow the 
researcher to draw out contradictory opinions from members of the same 
profession or field (Smith, 1996) and this was an important factor, as I 
suspected that the significant others might have differing opinions about 
dementia and the importance of social location based on their own experiences 
and personal identities.  Although I carefully planned the focus groups, I did not 
use this method of data collection, as I felt that (1) it would not add to the 
overall research question; (2) there was insufficient time; and (3) not enough 
participants could attend with the more marginalised ones being less able to be 
present.  I did hold two feedback sessions with the participants and their 
significant others, one in Toronto and one in Peterborough, and paired these 
with focus groups conducted by the Alzheimer Society of Ontario (ASO) on how 
best to involve people with dementia and their caregivers in decision-making 
processes.  As several of the significant others were disappointed that I would 
not be holding focus groups as part of my research, and I was keen to address 
the so what? factor, this opportunity for people with dementia and their 
5.3.4 Data analysis procedures 
Data collection and analysis occurred simultaneously, as prescribed by 
grounded theory methodology (Charmaz, 1983; 1990; 2000; 2002; Chenitz & 
Swanson, 1986; Dick, 2002; Glaser, 1978; 1992; 2001; Glaser & Strauss, 1967; 
Lowe, 1996; Strauss, 1987; Strauss & Corbin, 1990; 1994; 1998).  My intention 
was to transcribe the data immediately after collecting it and to perform both 
open/initial and selective/focused coding on the data prior to the next interview 
or observation session.  I did not do the second stage of coding, however, for 
reasons to be addressed in section 5.6.  Charmaz (2002: 684) details 
components of the coding process as: 
 Studying the data prior to checking with the literature 
 Doing line by line coding 
 Using active terms to describe what is happening in the data 
 Following leads from the open coding in further data gathering 
Focused coding involves sorting through the initial codes and distilling them 
down into categories that represent recurrent themes across the data, taking 
account of cause, conditions, context, actions, and consequences of the 
phenomenon under study (Glaser, 2001; Lonkila, 1995).  This is supplemented 
by memo writing which prompts [the grounded theorist] to raise their codes to 
conceptual categories (Charmaz, 2002: 687) and which can occur at any point.  
Theoretical sampling is then undertaken to fill out the conceptual categories 
and discover variation, as the grounded theorist works towards theoretical 
saturation and an integrated theory. 
All of the data was stored and organised in a project file in QSR NUD*IST Vivo 
(N*Vivo), as I had been told this software would facilitate the analytic process, 
particularly coding and memoing (Richards, 2000).  N*Vivo enabled linking to 
the non-text based data that I collected such as photographs and other visual 
images.  It is also more suited to grounded theory than other software 
packages, as it supports a bottom up approach and has functions such as 
modelling, linking concepts and data, and embedding notes and memos 
(Richards, 2000).  Computer-assisted data analysis has proven popular for 
researchers using grounded theory (Lonkila, 1995).  Whilst computers are not 
recommended by Glaser (2001)12, the utility of software such as NUD.IST (the 
precursor to N*Vivo), for grounded theory has been demonstrated (Lonkila, 
1995).  My concerns about software packages such as N*Vivo and the way that 
they support the conflation of coding with analysis will be addressed in section 
5.3.5 Sampling decisions 
Theoretical sampling is the type of purposive sampling that is associated with 
grounded theory research (Charmaz, 2000; 1997; 1990; Dick, 2002; Glaser & 
Strauss, 1967; Glaser, 1978; Lowe, 1996; Strauss, 1987; Strauss & Corbin, 
1998), yet it is not undertaken at the outset of the data collection process.  
Initial data collection is driven largely by theoretical sensitivity (Glaser, 1978), 
12 This injunction against computers is consistent with Glasers rather rigid approach to the 
interpretation and use of grounded theory (see Glaser, 1993; 2001; 2002). 
by an awareness of different sites in which one might reasonably expect the 
phenomenon under investigation to be encountered.  Only when the researcher 
has constructed a conceptual basis, derived from the data, that can guide 
sampling decisions, does s/he engage in theoretical sampling.  At this stage of 
data collection, the researchers aim becomes the selection of sites and 
participants that will lead to further development and eventual refinement of the 
emergent theory.  My thinking about sampling at the beginning stage was 
guided by theoretical sensitivity (Glaser, 1978), and an awareness of the most 
fruitful places for locating older people with dementia  in hospitals, memory 
clinics, care facilities or doctors offices, through the local Alzheimer Society or 
another community agency, at adult day programs or community centres13. 
In choosing sites from which to recruit research participants, I took into 
consideration the reality that a diverse group of older people with dementia may 
be difficult to locate, along with my preference for a social setting, so as to limit 
the influence of bio-medical conceptions of dementia and maximise 
opportunities for the expression of various world views.  In addition, I was 
13 I initially thought that locating a sample of older people with dementia that would be diverse 
in terms of ethnicity, race, gender and class would be extremely challenging in the 
Peterborough area and only slightly problematic in Toronto.  This was based on my assumption 
that the contrasting ethnic and racial composition and ruralurban distribution of the populations 
of the two areas provided an indicator of the client base of the Alzheimer Society and other 
community services for older people.  I was surprised, therefore, to discover from my early 
conversations that the Alzheimer Society of Peterborough (ASP) was very optimistic and 
enthusiastic about my research, especially about locating participants through their office and 
their community contacts, while the Alzheimer Society of Toronto (AST) was less forthcoming 
with support.  Granted, there are higher percentages of older people in Peterborough County 
(18%) and the adjacent area of Kawartha Lakes (19%) than in Toronto (13.6%) according to 
demographic profiles (Statistics Canada, 2002a; 2002b; 2002c), which means that a larger 
potential client base, as a percentage of the overall population, exists in Peterborough than in 
Toronto.  However, as AST is situated in one of the most ethnically and racially diverse cities in 
the world (James, 2002) and has its own ethno-racial access committee, one might reasonably 
expect this society to be able to facilitate access to an ethnically and racially diverse group of 
older people with dementia more readily than could their counterparts in a smaller city. 
conscious of the need to have a large pool of potential participants as my 
question required a sample that is diverse in terms of race, ethnicity, class and 
gender.  In order to meet these objectives, I felt that I would have to draw 
people from a health or social service, and then ensure that the interviews and 
observations took place in social settings removed from the service/health 
context, yet meaningful to the person with dementia in question.  The recruiting 
sites for the Peterborough area were the Alzheimer Society and a local 
geriatrician; and for Toronto, a community health service for older people based 
in an acute care hospital.  The site in Toronto required the approval of its 
research and ethics board, which I received after four months of negotiation. 
The actual participants themselves, as a group, represented various social 
locations, rather than different mathematical configurations of the variables of 
race, ethnicity, class, and gender.  I had played with different algebraic 
formulas in an effort to devise a diverse sample and considered using Ragins 
(1994) truth table method of quantifying data when researching diversity.  I was 
able to reject this process of essentialising people with its ostensible goal of 
simplifying complexity/diversity once I came upon an alternate method that was 
more in line with my research aims and still resulted in a sufficiently diverse 
sample.  My approach called for the selection of people who lie at different 
points on the axes of oppression and privilege, based on their race, ethnicity, 
class, and gender.  In this way, similar/shared social locations, ranging from 
multiply privileged to multiply oppressed, rather than individual characteristics, 
form the basis upon which the sample is stratified.  Although I was aware that 
gatekeepers   
those individuals in an organisation who have the power to grant or 
withhold access to people or situations for the purposes of research 
(Burgess, 1984: 48)  
might interpret this research as being solely about minority ethnic and racialised 
people (the other), I felt that the inclusion of privileged people was equally 
important in seeking to understand the dynamics of privilege and oppression 
(Calasanti & Slevin, 2001; Lee, 1993).  Regarding my status as a white, Anglo-
Saxon, middle class, able-bodied, younger woman, I did not attempt to hide my 
difference in relation to the participants.  I demonstrated my 
legitimacy/credentials in order to gain access to research participants and to 
build rapport, through my initial flyer for gatekeepers (see Appendix I).  In each 
interaction, however, I tried to make use of my alienness to the socio-cultural 
context and the phenomenon of dementia, rather than attempting to minimise 
any social distance between the participants, and myself, which would be to 
deny my privilege.  There were exceptions, however, as I found myself 
referencing indicators of upper middle class status and drawing on my social 
capital (Bourdieu, 1986) with the multiply privileged participants, perhaps in an 
effort to minimise social distance.  This was unexpected to me and led to some 
critical self-reflection, during which I was able to situate my behaviour in the 
context of challenges of interviewing elites, which are particularly salient when 
transformation is a goal (Kezar, 2003).  More often, I tried to make use of my 
alien-ness to the participants socio-cultural context, rather than attempting to fit 
in, which led to problems of a different nature (see chapter 7).  This latter 
approach accords with that of the stranger in naturalistic inquiry (Gutmann, 
1988) and calls for making use of difference and turning it into the fulcrum of 
the interview itself (ibid, p 307). 
As my sampling requirements were determined on an ongoing basis by the 
simultaneous process of collecting and analysing data, it was impossible to 
delineate at the outset the characteristics and size of the sample.  However, in 
order to anticipate the logistical requirements of research, such as time and 
cost, I planned for a certain sample size, with the understanding that this 
number might be higher or lower than the final figure.  The estimated 
characteristics of my sample of older people with dementia were:  
o 12 people in total belonging to varied racial, ethnic, class, and gender 
groups 
o 4 multiply privileged, 4 multiply oppressed, 4 in between on the axes of 
oppression and privilege 
o 6 in Toronto and 6 in the Peterborough area.  
Although I was aware that locating people that met the above criteria might be 
difficult, I believe it is important to attempt to do so and then to reflect on and 
document both the process and the outcomes.  As Lee (1993) cautioned, 
researchers may use access issues to mask their reluctance to get out there 
and face the problems in the field.  Giving in to the anxieties caused by complex 
research and opting for an easy to locate sample would be inconsistent with a 
reflexive and anti-oppressive approach to research. 
I recruited participants on an ongoing basis, which meant the gatekeepers 
delivered information leaflets (Appendix J) to potential participants after we had 
determined which of their clients met my theoretical sampling criteria at that 
point in time.  The final sample had the following characteristics14: 
14 The difficulties encountered and the sample limitations are addressed in section 5.5.  
o 8 people in total  belonging to varied racial, ethnic, and class groups 
o 5 women and 3 men 
o 3 multiply privileged, 2 multiply oppressed, and 3 in between on the 
axes of oppression and privilege 
o 5 in Toronto and 3 in the Peterborough area 
After gatekeepers made contact with potential participants and gave them the 
information leaflets, I met with the older person with dementia and their 
significant other in most cases, and we went over both the information leaflet 
and the consent form (Appendix K).  The next section addresses in more detail 
some of the ethical aspects of the research that have been hinted at thus far.       
5.4 Ethical considerations 
There has been much concern expressed about the ethical aspects of research 
with people with dementia (Allan, 2001; Bartlett & Martin, 2002; Bowes & 
Wilkinson, 2002; Cheston et al, 2000; Dewing, 2002; Downs, 1997; Feinberg et 
al, 2001; Froggatt, 1988; Hubbard et al, 2002a; Innes, 2001; Reid et al, 2001; 
Wilkinson, 2002a), yet most of this work focuses solely on the consent process.  
Certain ethical and methodological lessons can be drawn from research with 
other vulnerable groups, such as disabled people (Davis, 2000; Kitchin, 2000; 
Stone & Priestly, 1996), people with learning disabilities (Booth, 1998; Stalker, 
1998), older people (Rowles & Reinharz, 1988; Sankar & Gubrium, 1994; 
Wenger, 2002), and women (DeVault, 1999; Mama, 1995b; Smith, 1987).  For 
example, warnings about research with lonely people, articulated with respect 
to people with learning disabilities, are certainly applicable to people with 
dementia, as they too may choose the researcher as a way out of their 
loneliness (Booth, 1998: 133). 
In the case of dementia, loneliness may be brought on or exacerbated by the 
malignant social psychology evident in dementia care (Kitwood, 1997).  As the 
researcher, it was my responsibility to anticipate potential reactions to my 
presence and think about how I would respond to the terms of engagement 
that might be proposed by the researched (Stalker, 1998).  I needed to pay 
particular attention to the impact of the research on my participants, particularly 
any strong emotions or painful memories that might be stirred up by the 
questioning, or merely by my presence in their lives.  Planning for withdrawal 
from the lives of research participants, regardless of the extent of my 
involvement or my view of its (in)significance was another important 
consideration (Booth, 1998), as was thinking about how the findings, in this 
case the grounded theory, might be interpreted and used by different parties 
(Brannen, 1988). 
This research was guided by the ethical guidelines of the Alzheimer Society of 
Canada (1995), the British Sociological Association (2002), the Canadian 
Sociology and Anthropology Association (1994), and those expressed in the 
Tri-Council policy statement (Medical Research Council of Canada et al, 1998).  
These guidelines refer to participation and respect for wishes; informed consent 
and proxy consent; ongoing communication and negotiation and balancing of 
risks and benefits.  The acknowledgement of the right of people with dementia 
to participate in research, regardless of the stage of their disease (Alzheimer 
Society of Canada, 1995; Medical Research Council et al, 1998) is likely a 
response to the criticism of past dementia research for its neglect of people with 
dementia and their subjective experiences (Braudy Harris, 2002; Cotrell & 
Schulz, 1993; Downs, 1997; Froggatt, 1988; Gillies, 2000; Goldsmith, 1996; 
Kitwood, 1997; Lyman, 1989; Proctor, 2001; Wilkinson, 2002a; Woods, 1997; 
2001).  This is distinct from research with other vulnerable groups for whom 
ethical guidelines assure the right not to be studied (Canadian Sociology and 
Anthropology Association, 1994); of course, this right does apply to people with 
dementia as well.   
Other ethical issues that are standard and that I guaranteed for all participants 
were the right to privacy, confidentiality and anonymity.  These protections do 
not, however, absolve the researcher from the responsibility of reporting abuse 
or neglect if s/he becomes aware of its occurrence (Canadian Sociology and 
Anthropology Association, 1994), which is not inconceivable in research with 
older people with dementia.  When discussing their rights with the research 
participants, I addressed the limits of confidentiality, noting that should I be 
made aware of abuse, neglect or threats to safety, I would discuss my 
intentions with the person being harmed prior to acting.  In terms of anonymity, 
this was guaranteed for any publications or presentations arising from the 
research, with the understanding that this could be compromised with the 
publication of photographs.  At the initial meeting, I asked participants for 
permission to use their images, as captured in the photographs that I took, for 
inclusion in publications and presentations on the research.  At the end of the 
research, I went over each photo and encouraged participants to identify any 
photographs that they would not like me to use, as well as their favourite image 
of themselves.  I asked the participants to select their own pseudonyms at the 
introductory meeting and used these names in all records, in lieu of codes, at 
times failing to remember the participants real name.  With the exceptions 
noted, the views that people expressed, the stories that they told and the 
actions that I observed, have been kept confidential, including from those who 
are also involved in the research, for example from the significant others and 
gatekeepers in the case of the people with dementia and from the people with 
dementia and gatekeepers in the case of the significant others.  Finally, all of 
the audio-tapes are to be destroyed following award of the PhD and all other 
data to be stored in a secure location for at least seven years. 
The importance of attention to power differentials in the relationship between 
the researcher and the researched is a prominent theme in other fields (British 
Sociological Association, 2002; DeVault, 1999; Oakley, 1999), yet has not been 
well conceptualised in the dementia literature to date and thus, empirical data is 
scarce (Hubbard et al, 2002a; Living Archive Project, 2001; Proctor, 2001; 
Wilkinson, 2002a).  There is, however, some notable work happening in the 
United Kingdom (Stalker et al, 1999; Wilkinson, 2002a) to make dementia 
research more inclusive and participatory.  For example, Proctor (2001) 
attempted to shift the power imbalance in her research on older women with 
dementia through the use of a reflexive analytic strategy and returning to the 
women for their comments on her analyses and permission to use their stories.  
The Living Archive Project (2001) is also exceptional in that the three women 
and one man living with dementia who were individually interviewed were 
shown how to switch off the tape-recorder; the transcripts were brought back to 
them for their approval and content editing if desired; no other editing of the 
words was undertaken; and the only copy of each tape was given to each 
participant at the end. 
I applied some of these methods of reducing power differentials between the 
researcher and the researched to this research, such as participant 
validation/member checking, sharing control of the equipment, and refraining 
from cleaning up the quotes of people with dementia.  As involvement in and 
commitment to the research are said to be requirements for respondent 
validation to be a meaningful process for the participants (Bloor, 1978), I was 
interested in how this technique could be adapted for research with people with 
dementia in a way that served a purpose beyond easing the anti-oppressive 
researchers conscience.  Fine et al (2000) suggested that we can facilitate 
voice though the use of long narratives, underplaying hegemonic voices, and 
creating room for counter hegemonic narratives.  For this research, this meant 
using quotes from people with dementia, although it might have seemed to be 
no more than word salad at times; giving more narrative space to the multiply 
oppressed people with dementia than to the multiply privileged; and stressing 
the voices of the people with dementia over those of their significant others and 
the literature.  I did not do as well with the second injunction as with the other 
two as it was necessary to present data from the more privileged people in 
sufficient quantity to demonstrate the contrasts with the perspectives of the 
more marginalized people.  
The complexities of eliciting informed consent from people with dementia have 
been dealt with extensively in the literature (Allan, 2001; Bartlett & Martin, 2002; 
Bowes & Wilkinson, 2002; Cheston et al, 2000; Clarke & Keady, 2002; Dewing, 
2002; Downs, 1997; Feinberg et al, 2001; Froggatt, 1988; Hubbard et al, 2002a; 
Innes, 2001; Reid et al, 2001; Wilkinson, 2002b).  The traditional consent 
process in dementia research has been disempowering for people with 
dementia in that they are usually left out of what has been seen to be a one-off 
event (Dewing, 2002; Hubbard et al, 2002a). The equation of a dementia 
diagnosis with incapacity has meant that family members or next of kin, who 
are not necessarily legal substitute decision makers, are routinely asked to 
sign proxy consent forms, without anyone assessing the persons capacity to 
consent or ascertaining their views on the research.  To make this process 
more meaningful for people with dementia and perhaps more ethically sound, I 
engaged in ongoing negotiated or process consent (Allan, 2001; Dewing, 2002; 
Hubbard et al, 2002a; Reid et al, 2001).  In doing so, I was following a 
burgeoning tradition in dementia research that appeared to be consistent with 
both anti-oppressive research and the relevant legislation on informed consent 
and substitute decisions (Province of Ontario, 1992; 1996).  This approach is 
supported by the ethical guidelines of the Canadian Sociology and 
Anthropology Association (1994), the Alzheimer Society of Canada (1995) and 
the British Sociological Association (2002), although not explicitly stated.   
Standard protocol on informed consent was followed, including the 
requirements that consent be given voluntarily, without coercion or influence; 
participants be informed of their right to withdraw from the study at any time, 
without any adverse consequences, especially in terms of services from the 
host agency; capacity to consent be determined by the ability to understand the 
nature of the research, the consequences of participating, and any alternative 
options; the consent process be documented and signed consent forms only 
used if they are not culturally inappropriate and do not pose social risks to the 
participants; and information be provided in accessible language on what the 
research is about, why it is being done, who is doing it, who is funding it and 
how it is to be disseminated and used (see Appendix K) . 
The additional elements of negotiated consent included the following: 
 the person with dementia was approached first about 
participating in the research, when possible, and prior to the 
significant other when not    
 a substitute decision maker was approached, and their 
consent sought, only if the person with dementia was 
incapable of providing informed consent at the time 
 proxy consent from a substitute decision maker did not 
preclude me from also seeking assent from the person with 
dementia 
 securing consent/assent was not a one-off event, as 
consent/assent was (re)negotiated on a continual basis with 
the person with dementia 
 determination of willingness to participate took into 
consideration both verbal and nonverbal communication, 
regardless of the person with dementias consent to 
participate in the research 
 props were used in seeking consent/assent, including the tape 
recorder, microphone, and both cameras, as well as a photo 
of an older person being interviewed  
As this research drew on parallel knowledge traditions and crossed disciplinary 
boundaries, I realized that the findings were likely to have implications for 
several fields of study - dementia, ageing, disability, gender, ethnicity/race - and 
disciplines as varied as sociology, gerontology, anthropology, social work, 
cultural studies, and community health.  When designing the study, I thought 
that the implications could be for any level of scholarly activity (theory, 
research, policy, practice), but felt the emphasis could be on theory, given the 
nature of the study.  As the potential audience is wide and the research-policy-
practice interface important to me, both as a knowledge producer and 
consumer of research, I thought carefully about ways to disseminating the 
findings that balance ethical concerns and action research goals (Bryden-Miller 
et al, 2003). The latter requires publishing in multiple genres (DeVault, 1999; 
Fine et al, 2000), so as to reach the broad audience of people who may benefit 
from having the information (Kirby & McKenna, 1989).  Towards this end, thus 
far I have presented my findings at local, national, and international 
conferences in the areas of dementia, social work, sociology and gerontology; 
published two book chapters and one photo-essay; shared the findings with 
research participants at feedback sessions in Toronto and Peterborough and 
with service providers at an in-service at the Toronto recruiting site; and 
developed an accessible hand-out on the key findings (Appendix O).  Some 
dementia researchers might question the purpose and utility of sharing results 
with participants as the nature of their cognitive impairment may preclude any 
understanding of what is presented to them. Yet, as Elaine Robinson (2002: 
106) wrote of her experience taking part in research: 
it would be very disheartening for us to spend our time taking part in 
interviews or providing written material only to find that we never 
hear from those conducting the research. 
5.5 Rigour, trustworthiness and limitations  
To ensure rigour in qualitative research, there are two goals that Mays and 
Pope (1995: 110) suggest researchers should strive towards:  
1. an account of method and data that can stand independently so that 
another trained researcher could analyse the same data in the same way 
and come to basically the same conclusions 
2. a plausible and coherent explanation of the phenomenon under 
scrutiny.   
While I was aware of the possible incongruency of the first goal with a reflexive 
approach to research and a view of knowledge as situated (Mama, 1995b), I 
believed these goals were broad enough to adopt them for this research.  To 
assess the rigour and trustworthiness of my research, I employed the criteria 
established by Glaser and Strauss (Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Glaser, 1978; 
2001; Lowe, 1996; Strauss, 1987) to evaluate grounded theory: fit, workability, 
relevance, and modifiability.  
In addition, I used several of the techniques that Lincoln and Guba (1985) 
proposed qualitative researchers use to establish the trustworthiness - the 
credibility, transferability, dependability, and confirmability  of their research.  
Of their suggestions, the methods I used were: persistent observation in the 
form of purposeful, assertive investigation (Erlandson et al, 1993: 161); 
triangulation though interviews, participant observation, and photography with 
people with dementia, feedback sessions and focus groups with people with 
dementia and their significant others, and making use of the literature; 
referential adequacy with current and historical photographs of people, 
settings/events, and significant objects; peer debriefing through discussion of 
the research process and emergent categories with supervisors and fellow 
researchers in dementia/ageing; member checking in sharing working 
hypotheses and observations with the participants during the subsequent 
interviews and inviting their responses and giving written and oral summaries of 
the findings at the feedback session at the end of the research; reflexive journal 
in which I recorded my thoughts throughout the research process; purposive 
sampling for selection of all participants, consistent with theoretical sampling in 
grounded theory; and an audit trail through entry of all documents created since 
start of research in N*VIVO project file. 
As noted earlier, I initially estimated that the final sample would be comprised of 
12 older people with dementia, four of whom would be multiply marginalized, 
four in-between multiply marginalized and multiply privileged, and four multiply 
privileged, on the basis of their relative positioning along axes of privilege and 
oppression labelled race, ethnicity, class, and gender.  I realized within a few 
months of being in the field, that my sample would be smaller for two reasons: 
(1) I would not need 12 people to reach theoretical saturation, as long as the 
sample was diversified along the lines previously mentioned; and (2) I would 
not have enough time to complete the entire interview and observation cycle 
with 12 participants, as every step was taking two to three times longer than 
estimated, primarily because the interviews were running between 40 and 90 
minutes in length, rather than the 20 to 30 minutes recommended in the 
dementia literature.  As a result of these two factors, I decreased the estimated 
sample to 9 or 10 people, and would have reached this number had I been able 
to find another man willing to participate who was not multiply privileged15.  I 
15 As the recruiting sites in Toronto and in Peterborough were having difficulty coming up with 
potential participants who met my inclusion criteria in this last phase of data collection, I tried to 
draw on other community contacts, including a social worker for the Tamil community and a 
nurse practitioner with a seniors wellness clinic at another acute care hospital, both of whom 
were members of the Alzheimer Society of Torontos Ethno-Racial Access Committee.  
Unfortunately, they did not send me any referrals, despite repeated requests; this lack of 
response may have been a result of the SARS outbreak that was overwhelming all health care 
workers in Toronto that summer.  SARS had increased the workloads of the gatekeepers at my 
Toronto recruiting site, which prevented them from being able to help me, as much as they 
would have liked.  For these reasons, I agreed to a friends suggestion that I meet with his 
uncle, who appeared to meet the criteria for the in-between category - former chief petty officer 
in the Canadian military (middle class), White, Francophone from Quebec (minority ethnic), and 
a gay man (in the closet at the facility he was living in and with most members of his family).  
My hesitation related to the fact that this man was living in a long term care facility; he was not 
affiliated with either of the recruiting sites, his nephew was not sure whether he would be willing 
or able to talk to me, due to his cognitive impairment and his guarded nature; and I knew that I 
would have to do a lot of boundary maintenance work with his nephew.  After weighing all these 
was not able to secure the participation of a ninth older person with dementia 
who was a man and was either multiply marginalized or in-between multiply 
marginalized and multiply privileged.  For this reason, I can not say for sure 
whether the findings with respect to gender differences, detailed in section 6.5, 
relate to being a man or being a multiply privileged man, for example.  
I have detailed the methodology and research methods used for this grounded 
theory study in the preceding sections of this chapter and will review their 
efficacy and suitability for this research and implications for future research in 
chapter 10.  At this point in the thesis, I will provide more information about the 
actual process by which the categories16 were derived from the data, before 
proceeding to discuss their properties17 in the analysis chapters that follow. The 
three categories that emerged from the data are experiencing, othering, and 
theorising and the process by which these categories were extracted is detailed 
below. 
factors, I went to see this older man with dementia on my own and spent some time talking with 
him in his room at the facility.  Although he had greeted me in a pleasant manner and showed a 
degree of interest in the study, his receptivity quickly waned and he lay down to sleep; I decided 
it was time to leave and told him that I would come back another time, to which he nodded 
assent.  After a few more weeks of fruitless attempts to find another appropriate candidate, I 
tried to meet with this gentleman again, this time in the presence of his nephew.  Due to the 
SARS outbreak and infection control procedures, we both could not enter the facility, so were 
forced to hold our discussion sitting in a row on a bench in front of the building.  The potential 
participant declined to join the study, citing his hearing impairment as the reason for his 
discomfort; I suspected, however, that his concerns were more related to the possibility of 
probing personal questions and potential exposure of his sexual orientation, together with a lack 
of identification with and trust of a non-gay male researcher (see Lee, 2003). 
16 I have decided to use categories, in line with grounded theory terminology.  While I 
recognize the bounded nature of this term and that this is an example of the more technocratic 
elements of grounded theory, I wanted to acknowledge that this was a grounded theory study 
from conception through completion, not one that drew on grounded theory strategies.  While 
themes may be more preferable for its fluidity and recognisability, it pertains to qualitative data 
analysis more generally, rather than grounded theory specifically.  
17 Properties is a grounded theory term that refers to the descriptive features of the categories.  
As discussed in section 5.1.2, the data collection and analysis process in 
grounded theory is marked by its simultaneity; it is a back and forth process, 
with the analysis driving data collection, once the initial data has been gathered.  
The recommended data analysis procedure for grounded theory involves 
preparing the data18; reading segments of the data closely and repeatedly and 
asking questions of the data; forming two levels of codes  first concepts and 
later categories - through this close engagement with the data; making 
comparisons between and within cases; writing memos and diagramming 
relationships throughout the analytical process; and sorting the memos to form 
a theoretical framework.  While my own analytical process did make use of all 
of these techniques, I did not follow a rigid, linear pattern.  I struggled with the 
two step coding process, in particular line by line coding, as it seemed to result 
in a loss of vision; the basic social process in question was apt to slip out of 
sight while I was diligently breaking the data into tiny segments, applying a label 
to each of these parts of the whole, putting it all back together in a different 
shape, and calling the end product a category.  Despite these reservations, I 
persevered and, as a result of analyzing all the interview and observation data 
for the first four participants plus data from the first interview with the fifth 
participant, developed the following working hypotheses on April 10, 2003: 
Social location does make a difference in terms of perspectives on 
memory problems (whether one problematises it or not) and thus 
how one adapts to it. 
How much privilege and/or disadvantage one has had affects how 
others respond to them with the more privileged folks being othered 
more often and more marginalized folks being treated 'normally' 
more often. 
18 This may include listening to and/or transcribing some or all interview tapes, if one chooses to 
audiotape interviews rather than simply taking notes or memorizing significant details, writing up 
field notes from observations and interviews, and scanning or uploading photographs and other 
visual data, after they have been developed or photocopied.      
Self-identity is either the same or different in later life (as when 
younger) and it seems to be gendered (women=same; 
men=different) but not related to class or race/ethnicity so far.  This 
is expressed as either/or, not both/and. 
After further analysis and completion of the first interview with the 6th 
participant, I refined these hypotheses on April 15, 2003, discarding the third 
one in the process as it was not central to the study.  On May 1, after 
interviewing the seventh participant for the first time and doing an observation 
session with the sixth participant, I made further revisions to my working 
hypotheses and added a definition of dementia as a bio-psycho-social 
phenomenon; these changes can be seen in the theoretical memo attached as 
Appendix L. 
5.6 Emergent categories 
The three categories I developed  experiencing, othering, and theorising - are 
all verbs and, as such, unintentionally conform to Charmazs (2000) 
recommendation that grounded theorists use action words in their coding 
schemes.  I had difficulty with this prescription at the outset of my analysis as I 
was struggling with knowing what was and was not relevant in the data and 
how to organize it, as with any grounded theory research, let alone which word 
forms would be most appropriate.  It was only at the start of the writing-up 
phase of the research (Autumn 2003) that I came to understand the reasoning 
behind action words for codes in grounded theory: they indicate movement as 
opposed to rigidity; and help to illuminate the basic social processes underlying 
the phenomenon in question - a goal of grounded theory research (Glaser & 
Strauss, 1967; Charmaz, 2000).  This knowledge came after a lengthy and 
difficult process of reconciling my research methods with grounded theory 
dogma, particularly the more technocratic elements (Strauss & Corbin, 1998) 
that I felt constrained my thinking.  Wuest (1995) indicated the potential for this 
intra-psychic conflict in her discussion of the tensions and congruencies 
between grounded theory and other forms of meaning making, such as feminist 
research; and some feminist researchers feel that this can not be overcome 
(Letherby, 2003).  This reconciliation process required that I first embrace the 
accompanying anxiety, and next locate an inhabitable space between 
conforming to the basic principles of grounded theory and diverging from it for 
justifiable reasons  in this case, to make the research process a more 
empowering and less oppressive experience for the participants.  Despite my 
critical approach to grounded theory and hence rejection of some of its tenets, 
other researchers perceived me to be a purist when I questioned their use of 
the label grounded theory to describe research that did not appear to me to 
conform to the basic principles of this methodology. The most common 
example of the latter point is the adoption of the constant comparative method 
of data analysis in the absence of any other GT strategies, such as theoretical 
sampling and memo-writing. 
5.7 Conclusions 
This chapter has outlined the methodology and research methods employed in 
this research.  I have shown how feminist theoretical perspectives and anti-
oppressive methods can be applied to grounded theory research in order to 
make the research experience more meaningful for participants and 
researchers alike.  I demonstrated the applicability and effectiveness of 
particular techniques such as process consent, photo elicitation, sampling by 
social location, member checking, and dialogical interviews.  In the next 
chapter, I will begin to explain some of the outcomes of this more inclusive 
method of research.      
Chapter - 6 Engaging with the Dementia Subject  
6.1 Introduction 
This short chapter serves as a bridge between the previous chapter in which 
the methodology and research methods were detailed and the following three 
analysis chapters that explicate the properties of the categories of the grounded 
theory.  In the sections that follow, I will discuss the concept of social location 
as it has been used in this research, introduce the research participants, and 
present data that relates to the process of engaging with older people with 
dementia and with the topic of dementia itself. 
To introduce each of the research participants, I had intended to include short 
biographies accompanied by an emblematic photo and their self-selected 
pseudonym.  I decided against the biographies as I felt I could not make this an 
inclusive process that allowed for self-representation and control over the 
outcome, which would be a written portrayal of a life story.  I could not figure out 
how to write something other than a social work case profile without returning to 
the participants for more information and confirmation of the results and had not 
built this into the research design.  In retrospect, I should have asked the 
participants to write a one page biography with the assistance of their 
significant others, which I could have included in the thesis.  This is something 
that I will do in future research projects.   
In lieu of the biographies, I have attached the attributes table that I created in 
N*VIVO (Appendix M); this serves as a reference for the analysis chapters in 
which the participants are referred to only by their pseudonyms.  Appendix F 
contains the social location diagrams that I created for each participant and 
Appendix N includes the emblematic photos for each participant.  The 
photographs I have included either were selected by the person in question as 
their favourite or chosen by me, if the participant did not express a strong 
feeling about any of the photos; in the latter case, the images are ones that I felt 
were particularly emblematic and that I have used in past presentations on the 
research.  In the next section, I will explain my approach to social location and 
its determination for each of the research participants, taking into consideration 
the variability of social location, based on context, phase of the life course, and 
other factors. 
6.2 Social location 
As detailed in chapter 3, social location refers to the relative amount of privilege 
and oppression that people possess on the basis of their race, ethnicity, class, 
gender, as well as other identity constructs that were not the focus of this 
investigation, such as sexual orientation, age, and (dis)ability.  I am using social 
location interchangeably with intersectionality in the analysis chapters of this 
thesis, as the former was an easier term to use during the course of the 
research; and I now believe that intersectionality is a metaphorical state of 
being that exists only in the consciousness of theorists and therefore can be no 
more than an analytical lens through which a researcher views the social world.  
The determination of the social location of each of the potential and actual 
research participants19 is unapologetically subjective, as this was a sociological 
19 In trying to construct my theoretical sample from the sampling frame (gatekeeper referrals of 
patients meeting the inclusion criteria), I used the socio-demographic information given to me to 
draw diagrams for each potential participant; plotted them each along a continuum; and then 
designation based on the participants membership in particular social groups, 
such as lower income people, men, Anglo Canadians, and Black people.  In this 
way, social location is similar to oppression in that it describes an externally 
imposed situation arising from the patterned attribution of positive and negative 
qualities to perceived social identities, with an understanding of power, and 
particularly the power to define others as invalid (Hughes, 2002; Zola, 1982), 
being integral to this theoretical concept.  The word oppression is often misused 
as referring to an individual perception of having been personally 
disadvantaged or wronged in some way, irrespective of social group 
membership (Tester, 2003); such usage indicates a disregard for the 
sophistication of theories about the dynamics of oppression and privilege.   
While this thesis demonstrates that social location is connected to older 
peoples experiences of dementia, it is important to note at the outset that social 
location itself is context dependent - this is not a static or fixed  category.  Two 
concepts developed by sociologists to indicate the fluidity of identity  
translocational positionality (Anthias, 2001; see section 3.2.3) and 
denationalized citizenship (Sassen, 2003)  may be of relevance to this 
discussion of the context contingent nature of social location.   
Though Sassen (2003), like Anthias (2001), is concerned with bridging structure 
and agency, her work relates more to the political economy of citizenship and 
rights than to those who are at the interplay (Anthias, 2001: 634) or the 
intersectional being referred to in this thesis; her work asks us to consider     
based my decisions about which people to approach on this graphical information.  These 
diagrams are attached as Appendix 6. 
to what extent citizenship, even though highly formalized, might 
actually be less finished as an institution than its formal 
representation indicates (pp 5-6). 
Signs of such a termination of rights and responsibilities based on nation-state 
membership  denationalized citizenship - can be found           
by tracing what are at this time micro-transformations in the 
institution of citizenship on the inside of the national statetracing 
where we see continuities and changes in the formal bundle of rights 
at the heart of the institution and when the changes represent a 
movement towards post-national and/or denationalized features of 
citizenship (pp 21).  
Both of these concepts point to the variability of social location, whether based 
on notions of citizenship and national belonging (Sassen, 2003), or on more 
transcendent identity constructs such as gender, ethnicity, class and 
racialisation (Anthias, 2001).  This context contingency applies more generally 
to the Other and those who inhabit this category in various temporal-spatial 
localities.  Reimer Kirkham (2003: 775) found in her study of inter-group health 
care relations that the construction of who is the other and who belongs is thus 
not stable but shifts across place and time.  To further support this argument 
about the context dependent nature of social location, I will give three 
examples: the first deals with ascriptions of racial group membership and the 
connection to class; the second is about the variability of privilege due to 
ethnicity; and the last focuses on class and its interrelationship with age.   
Processes of racialisation vary in different locales, so that a person may hold 
privileges due to their perceived whiteness in one setting and experience 
discrimination as a black person in another.  Angela Huggins explained how 
different racial statuses were ascribed to her, depending upon whether she 
happened to be in the West Indies, where she was born and lived until the age 
of 14 years, or in Canada, her home for over 50 years20: 
Angela Huggins: Well, I, I accept the fact that, that Canadians do look at 
me as a Black person. 
Wendy: Yeah? 
Angela Huggins:  Yeah.  So I, I 
Wendy: But you dont see yourself like that? 
Angela Huggins: I, I dont classify myself as Black.  I, I have four different 
races in my blood, I mean, how can it be 
Wendy: How can you single out one? [laughs] 
Angela Huggins: Exactly  And in, in the islands, we dont discriminate 
like that.  We have a class thing 
Later in the same interview, I returned to this point for further clarification:   
Wendy: So in Canada youre considered Black as youre 
saying.   
Angela Huggins: Yeah. 
Wendy: What would you be considered in, in Trinidad-? 
Angela Huggins: White. 
Wendy: [speaking at the same time]-in the West Indies?  Yeah. 
Angela Huggins: [laughs] Its, its funny isnt it? 
Wendy: Yeah, its interesting.  Hmm. 
Angela Huggins: And I could not go out with a Black man in Trinidad.  I, I 
would be disowned. 
As we can see from Angela Huggins experiences in Trinidad and in Canada, 
race is indeed context dependent and interrelated with class, as well as 
ethnicity.  However, ethnicity should not be conflated with race (Desflor Edles, 
2004; Oommen, 1994), as the next example demonstrates. 
20 It had actually been 60 years, which was clarified later on in the research when Angela 
Huggins confided that she has underestimated her age for years, and confirmed that the age 
her daughter had told me was correct.   
Growing up in Canada as a white, upper middle-class, Anglo-Canadian, I took 
for granted my membership in the majority group culture and undoubtedly 
enjoyed the privileges associated with this status, although I was not conscious 
of having white privilege (McIntosh, 1989) until much later in life.  My own 
moments of questioning (Frankenberg, 1993; Tyler, 2004), which were no 
doubt prompted by a developing sociological imagination (Wright Mills, 2000), 
took on greater significance when, at the age of 20 years, I lived in Spain for 
eight months to complete the third year of my undergraduate degree in 
Sociology and Spanish.  Although I retained my white and class privileges, I 
was firmly located as an outsider throughout my residency in Andalucia 
(Southern Spain), being a non-native Spanish speaker; having no 
Spanish/Latino ancestors; wearing clothing, accessories, and a hairstyle that 
marked me as North American; essentially, being an ethnic minority.  My 
outsider status was reinforced daily by shouts of guiri (derogatory term for a 
foreigner) as I walked along the street, being ignored in the line-up to buy 
produce at the local supermarket, having groups of young Spanish students 
point and laugh at me, among other instances.  After I had been in Spain for 
about four months, the Gulf War started and, as a precautionary measure, 
Canadian students were advised to follow guidance issued by the American 
embassy  not to speak English in the streets, not to wear clothing with 
American insignia, and not to gather in groups, particularly near train and bus 
stations.  Although Canadians spend a lot of time emphasizing the differences 
between ourselves and our neighbours to the South, every time I spend an 
extended period of time outside North America, I am forced to acknowledge 
that our similarities are much greater than our differences, in an international 
context.  To further demonstrate the complexities of ethnicity and privilege, 
although my North American accent marked me as an outsider in Spain, while I 
was working on a community development project in Costa Rica five years 
later, I was treated with deference more often than inferiority.  This was due to 
the fact that Costa Ricans saw me as having a Spanish accent and speaking 
correct Castellano, as opposed to having a Latino accent and speaking the 
more colloquial Spanish of Latin America; and my Anglo-Canadian ethnicity and 
fluency in both Spanish and English were markers of status in that context.   
I have related a few stories of my own experiences in an effort to be critically 
self-reflective; to demonstrate that ethnicity can be context dependent; and to 
highlight the importance of separating race and ethnicity, if we wish to achieve 
an understanding of the complexities of marginalization and domination.  I will 
now proceed to offer a third example that speaks to the variability of social 
class and the relationship with age or phase of the life course, in particular 
(Longino et al, 1989). 
That social class can vary in time and place, taking on more significance in one 
country than another, can be seen in Angela Huggins statement that her social 
class was more significant in Trinidad where they have a class thing than in 
Canada where there is more discrimination on the basis of race.  The 
contingency of social class is particularly evident amongst older people after 
they retire and become wholly or partially dependent on the government for 
income support (see the discussion of structured dependency theory in chapter 
2).  Julianna Molnar was a physician and her husband Gyorgy an engineer 
during their working lives in their native country of Hungary.  After they retired 
from their respective careers and, a few years later, immigrated to Canada, 
their financial and social status changed dramatically.  They became 
pensioners, with all the constraints and stigma associated with that label 
(Bytheway, 1995).  In highlighting significant components of her life history, 
Julianna Molnar  the only survivor of the Holocaust from her family of origin - 
noted that anti-Semitism was the overriding problem during her youth in 
Hungary and that being dependent on the Canadian government and her family 
for financial support was the challenge of her later years:  
Julianna Molnar: My youth was, it was very, it was very  There was a 
lot of anti-Semitism in Romania; there was a lot of anti-
Semitism in Hungary.  When we lived in Hungary, there 
was the big problem with anti-Semitism.  Since we live 
here, we [inaudible], we are living on the governments 
money.  But we are okay.  For ten years, my son was 
providing for us.  Then after that we got, how do you 
say?       
Wendy: Pension? 
Julianna Molnar: Its a pension.  Im going to go ask my husband  
At this point, Julianna Molnar called her husband Gyorgy into the room and he 
proceeded to explain that their income support as a couple includes quarterly 
restitution payments from the German government to low-income Holocaust 
survivors, in addition to old age pension and rent-geared-to-income housing 
provided by the Canadian government.  Although this amount is meagre, they 
can meet debts with it and it allows them to be independent from the two adult 
children who supported them for their first ten years in Canada.  
The first section of this chapter on engaging with the dementia subject draws on 
my own experiences and those of two of the research participants to 
demonstrate the context contingent nature of social location, and to explain the 
way that I have approached social location in this thesis.  I will now proceed to 
discuss the findings related to engaging with the dementia subject.     
6.3 Reluctance to discuss dementia  
In the previous section, I explained my understanding of social location and its 
application to this thesis and referred the reader to Appendices F, M and N that 
contain socio-demographic information and visual representations of Jim 
Heather, Joe Brown, Ester Hernandez, Bosse Knudsen, Angela Huggins, 
Julianna Molnar, Gus Holden and Nancy Matheson.  The voices and actions 
presented in the following pages bring to life these people with whom I worked.  
Now, I will discuss the process of engaging with the dementia subject, focusing 
on the widespread reluctance to discuss dementia and the insight question in 
particular.  The presentation of this initial data is meant to situate the reader 
and to prepare him/her for the detailed discussion of findings that is undertaken 
in the subsequent analysis chapters.    
Most of the eight older people with dementia in this study were initially 
uncomfortable talking with me about what it was like to have dementia, 
although they had agreed to do so at an information and consent meeting held 
in their own homes less than two weeks prior to the first interview, and their 
consent was confirmed at each subsequent meeting.  The participants did not 
refuse to answer questions on this topic, rather it was an area about which they 
were not as forthcoming, and to which I had to return repeatedly during the 
course of a single interview.  This resistance to discussing memory problems is 
exemplified by an extract from the third interview with Nancy Matheson, during 
which I tried anew to ascertain her views on having memory problems, which 
she again deflected: 
Nancy Matheson: I dont understand why its important to anybody what I 
remember or what I dont remember.  I mean, its 
nobody elses business. 
Wendy: Okay, well Im not interested so much in what you 
remember and what you dont remember, what Im 
interested in [is] what you just said, that its nobodys 
business what I remember, right? 
Nancy Matheson: Yeah, thats right. 
Wendy: Okay, can you tell me more about that? 
Nancy Matheson: Well no, its just a simple-I think the statement says 
itself; it really explains itself. 
Wendy: Its nobody elses business? 
Nancy Matheson: Its no one elses business.  Uh-huh.  I mean, I can 
remember something that happened 10 years ago or 
something but that wouldnt matter to anybody.  Thats 
not going to matter to anyone.  Mm-hmm. 
This feeling that ones personal thoughts and feelings surely would not be 
important to other people was expressed by other respondents as well, as 
shown in the following excerpt from an interview with Bosse Knudsen: 
Bosse Knudsen: Yeah.  Hey, come in here too [to her husband in the 
other room who tells her that its okay and to go ahead 
and talk with Wendy].  No, I cant take it [to husband]. 
Wendy: Its just, its just you and I talking 
Bosse Knudsen: Oh. 
Wendy: Bosse.  Yeah. 
Bosse Knudsen: How come? 
Wendy: How come? 
Bosse Knudsen: Yeah. 
Wendy: 'Cause its you Im interested in. 
Bosse Knudsen: Well how can you be int-, int-, interested in just me?  
Wendy: In just you?  
Bosse Knudsen: Yeah. 
Wendy: Cause Im interested in talking to you about what its 
like to forget things. 
In this case, Bosse Knudsen wished to defer to her husband, as indicated by 
her comment I cant take it, which does not mean I cant stand it, rather take 
is used in the sense of conduct, as in conduct an interview.  While Bosse 
Knudsens appraisal of her own (in)ability to perform and of her husbands 
authority on the matter was likely a direct reference to her cognitive impairment, 
this can be seen also as an example of embedding ones subjectivity in 
another (Gubrium & Wallace, 1990). 
A slightly different explanation for her own reluctance was given by Nancy 
Matheson who felt that what she was going through could not possibly be of 
interest to anyone else as we are such unique individuals; therefore, the 
experiences of others are bound to be different than hers and of no significance 
to anyone but themselves.  In her mind: 
Eventually youll have problems with something that you dont 
remember.  And its not going to be important to anybody but you at 
the time. 
This insistence on the incomparability of experiences was part of Nancy 
Mathesons overall strategy to avoid the label of dementia, as discussed further 
in Chapter 8; this meant that she rarely responded to a direct question with a 
direct answer and presented excuses to explain her behaviour.  For example, at 
the end of one particularly frustrating exchange, I asked her about the post-it 
notes that were affixed to items all over her apartment and that appeared to 
carry little reminders. 
Nancy Matheson: What little sticky notes are you? 
Wendy: Well, theres the one on the microwave, one on the 
tape player, up on the thermostat, theres a note by the 
entry phone 
Nancy Matheson: Uh-huhMo-, most of them I think were maybe put up 
by Sandy [her daughter]. 
Wendy: Oh, okay.  And why did she do that? 
Nancy Matheson: In case, if I wanted a telephone number or anything like 
that, I would have it available.  Uh-huh. 
Wendy: Maybe some of them are actually for the workers who 
come in-your support workers? 
Nancy Matheson: Could be. 
Wendy: Like the one on the microwave says, Please plug radio 
back in when through with microwave. 
Nancy Matheson: Yeah, mm-hmmmm-hmm. 
At the end of this conversation I colluded with her in suggesting that the person 
the notes were meant to assist was not her, although I could have asked her to 
explain how the note next to the entry phone could be for anyone but her, as 
she lived alone and it contained instructions about which buttons to press to 
open the door for visitors. 
The examples given thus far indicate the reluctance to discuss dementia 
encountered with nearly all the participants.  I will return to this issue after 
addressing the insight question, a question that inevitably arises in research of 
this nature.   
6.4 The insight question 
What I have described as a reluctance to discuss dementia should not be seen 
as a lack of insight on the part of the person with dementia, as this was not the 
case.  The concept of insight in dementia refers to the awareness of a patient 
that she has changed and that the changes are due to an illness (Jacques & 
Jackson, 2000: 210).  Determining the extent (or lack) of a persons insight is a 
standard part of any assessment, as insight and the lack of insight is a crucial 
ingredient in the progressive disorder that is dementia   (Fairbairn, 1997: 17).  
Insight is believed to begin to fail very early on in the illness (Jacques & 
Jackson, 2000: 211) and denial of insight is thought to be a coping mechanism, 
in that awareness of ones deficits has been found to be associated with 
depressive symptoms (Cotrell & Lein, 1993).  The conclusion of a study of 
assessment procedures used to determine insight in people with dementia 
(Howorth & Saper, 2003: 113) was that insight in dementia is a complex, multi-
dimensional, and value-laden concept; and there is a need to develop an 
appropriate protocol for the determination of insight that features objective and 
subjective measures.  The term awareness seems to be preferred by 
researchers concerned with the psychosocial context of dementia, although it 
too is acknowledged to be a complex concept (Clare, 2003).  As intimated at 
the outset of this section, the insight question was raised repeatedly by 
gatekeepers in conversations about the research methods and potential 
participants; and I had to reiterate continually that I was interested in subjective 
experiences of dementia, not the relative truth value of statements about life 
with dementia. 
My conclusion that the reluctance to discuss dementia that I encountered was 
not due to lack of insight is based on a subjective evaluation of each of these 
older people with whom I interacted on multiple occasions, for prolonged 
periods, in varied settings; this was informed by prior experience working with 
people with dementia in nursing, research, and social work and the unsolicited 
opinions of gatekeepers and significant others.  The process by which an astute 
observer can distinguish between lack of insight and purposive action is not 
easily supported by a single data bite, as it represents an assessment of an 
individual built up over several interactions.  Although she refused to 
acknowledge her memory problems, Nancy Matheson did show awareness that 
her memory was a concern to others and indicated that she felt she was being 
tested to see how well she could perform  both signs of insight.  This can been 
seen in my notes from her 87th birthday party, the site of the second participant 
observation session, detailing our first greeting and the second time I 
approached her that day: 
After the others had said hello, I came over and said hello and she 
greeted me warmly by name and then exclaimed youre the memory 
girl.  I reminded her of why I was there - to observe and take 
pictures and at mention of the pictures, she said with a grin and Ill 
say I dont remember. 
When I wandered over towards Nancy again, who was sitting beside 
Louise [her best friend] and joking and laughing with Ann [a friend of 
her daughter], she said with a smile heres Wendy trying to test my 
memory.  I responded that I was not testing her, just watching. 
The question of what it is like to live with memory problems was the primary 
focus of my research and therefore, I had to repeat and rephrase this question 
several times in order to gradually piece together a picture of each respondents 
attitude about dementia, which I then used in future interactions with them.  
There was a Tagalog interpreter present for the interviews with Ester 
Hernandez, who alternated between English and Tagalog, and we tried several 
different forms of this question, partly because Ester was easily distracted due 
to her moderate-severe cognitive impairment.  During one interview Ester 
Hernandez answered the question can you tell me what its like to have 
problems with your memory? with: 
I can remember, I have no problems with my memory, I can 
remember everything.  Yeah, I can remember everything, every 
worker for example. 
She then proceeded to talk about the workers in the Philippines and what they 
had called her, as well as the cleanliness of the apartment she shared with her 
daughter  the site of all of the interviews.  A while later I pointed to a picture of 
an older Indian woman with dementia. 
Figure 2 Alzheimer International Mary from India 
I told Ester that this woman had trouble remembering things and asked her 
what she thought that would be like.  The ensuing conversation went like this: 
Ester Hernandez: I dont know, somebody will 
Wendy: What do you think thatd be like? 
Ester Hernandez: I dont know, I dont know.   
Wendy: Well, what would it be like for you if you couldnt 
remember things? 
Ester Hernandez: I do not, I do not interfere with any, any of them 
anyway.  I dont understand what they are talking about 
like that. 
Wendy: You dont understand what who is talking about? 
Ester Hernandez: Yeah. 
Wendy: Who? 
Ester Hernandez: For example, somebody is talking, they are with it and 
they are not like others asking what are you guys 
talking about, I dont ask.  
Wendy: So you keep to yourself, you dont interrupt? 
Ester Hernandez: I dont ask what is the problem with you, I do not cross 
like that. 
Wendy: So, if you see somebody else has a problem, you dont 
Ester Hernandez: No. 
Wendy: No, okay.  What about if you had a problem? 
Ester Hernandez: I am not talking today. 
Wendy: No, you dont wanna talk about that? 
Ester Hernandez: I dont, I, I, I did not know, I do not know, I do not talk, I 
do not interfere, I do not ask. 
Wendy: Okay.  Do you have any problems at all? 
Ester Hernandez: No. 
Wendy: No? 
Ester Hernandez: No. 
Wendy: Okay, no problems. 
Perhaps Ester Hernandez was resisting being categorized as a person with a 
problem, which is something even I seemed to be doing.  Maybe she simply 
does not ask other people their business, and, therefore neither should I.  
Whatever her motivation, this interview segment indicates that Ester Hernandez 
was conscious of being considered with problems by other people. 
Participants often changed the subject when we were engaged in discussion of 
what it is like to have dementia.  A poignant example of this is shown in the 
following passage taken from the second interview with Julianna Molnar, 
conducted in Hungarian and English, with the aid of a Hungarian interpreter: 
Julianna Molnar: Right now it doesnt affect it very much.  But my 
husband, we go out almost every day, go for a walk, 
wherever we go, the ones that we keep in touch with, 
we speak either Hungarian or Romanian.  Even if I 
speak to them, situations arise where I forget what I 
want to   say.  Other than that, it doesnt really interfere.  
Not in particular, there are certain things that I may 
forget, but if somebody reminds me, then 
Wendy: Yeah.  How do you feel when you forget things? 
Julianna Molnar: [laughs] Not good. 
Wendy: Not good? 
Julianna Molnar: [in English] Not good. 
Wendy: Can you tell me more about that? 
Julianna Molnar: To say more?  I know very well, I was a doctor, I know 
well that at a certain age, there are certain things that 
are forgotten and your brain not working as it used to.  
For, at a certain level, at a certain level, I think its 
normal but I dont feel good about it.  Id like to ask if 
you [the interpreter] could ask her [the interviewer] 
would you like to try some kind of sweet? 
Wendy: [laughs] Well, its, we 
Julianna Molnar: Because last time you were here, you didnt want it. 
Wendy: I had one, I had one last time. 
Julianna Molnar: One.  Im going to bring it [starts to get up]. 
Wendy: Wait, wait just a few minutes.  Were almost out of tape 
so [laughs]. 
After she admitted how it made her feel to forget things, Julianna Molnar deftly 
steered the conversation away from this uncomfortable topic by offering her 
guests some baked goods from the kitchen.  The distraction was successful; 
and when I tried to resume the interview, she was saved from further 
interrogation of her feelings by the end of the tape. 
With one notable exception (Nancy Matheson), none of the people in my 
sample outright denied having memory problems; they all admitted to cognitive 
difficulties to some degree, although Ester Hernandez was particularly cagey 
about this, denying having any memory problems during the interview and then 
joking afterwards that the interpreter had caught her forgetfulness (see section 
9.5).  This willingness to expose ones failing memory is reflective of the widely 
held view that forgetfulness is simply part of getting older, and therefore it is not 
particularly risky to admit to this deficit.  The extent to which these older people 
- who had all been diagnosed with some form of dementia - were willing to 
ascribe to themselves medical labels such as Alzheimers disease, dementia, or 
cognitive impairment varied, however, and a few did claim not to have dementia 
or to be familiar with this concept, notably Joe Brown and Ester Hernandez, 
although the former used the phrase old-timers after I asked about 
Alzheimers.  Owning up to memory problems did not require one to admit to 
having dementia, as these were taken to be two different things  one normal 
and one pathological.  Katz (1996) explains in his seminal work on the 
formation of gerontological knowledge how the biomedicalisation of aging 
process (Estes & Binney, 1991) resulted in a discourse of senescence in 
which the aged body was neither diseased nor healthy but both normal and 
pathological (Katz, 1996: 44).  This dialectical view of the aged body will be 
addressed in Chapter 9 in relation to the theories that older people with 
dementia drew upon to explain what was happening to them. 
In discussing what it had been like to be part of the research, Joe Brown 
admitted that he told people who had seen us together during the participant 
observation sessions that I was his nurse, rather than a researcher, so that they 
didnt think he was crazy. 
Joe Brown: People ask me and I just tell them, I say thats my 
nurse. 
Wendy: Thats my nurse [laughs].  Why do you tell them that? 
Joe Brown: Well they ask me, I say thats my nurse. 
Wendy: But Im not your nurse, why do you tell them that? 
Joe Brown: What should I say to them? 
Wendy: .well, Im a researcher but I dont know if that would 
mean anything to them. 
Joe Brown: Well, then they say, oh man, you must be going crazy 
or somethin [laughs]. 
Joe Brown told the bank tellers that I was a lady doctor when we stopped by to 
say hello on our walk about the neighbourhood; his friends at the pub were 
informed that I was a police officer after they questioned him about me on his 
next visit there.  All of these alternate identities for the researcher helped Joe 
Brown to shift the focus of others to his physical health status, away from any 
suggestion of mental health problems.  When I tried to ascertain whether Ester 
Hernandez had ever heard of Alzheimers disease, she interpreted my 
description of: 
a disease that people get when theyre olderwhen they, they 
forget thingsno, its not contagiousits in your headits when 
changes happen in your brain 
to mean mentally crazy.  After I had described Alzheimers disease in these 
terms, she said: 
Me, I dont knowwalking a lotan old person walking around 
The interpreter explained that Ester Hernandez thought that Alzheimers 
disease means that a person is sick in the head or crazy. 
Several authors have noted that the word dementia does not exist in many 
languages other than English and that the concept itself does not translate well 
(Bowes & Wilkinson, 2002; Forbat, 2003).  It is for this reason that I chose to 
use the term memory problems at the outset of this research, though I had 
knowledge of the actual diagnoses from the gatekeepers.  In addition, there 
appears to be much confusion amongst laypeople about the relationship 
between dementia, Alzheimers disease, and memory problems, and the words 
are often used interchangeably; this can be seen in notes from the second 
observation session with Gus Holden: 
Sue introduced me [to Westie, a cottager] as a new friend doing 
research on dementia in Scotland and told Westie that since Gus 
has memory problems, he is working with me on this project.  Westie 
registered recognition and told of his 93 year old mother-in-law who 
has Alzheimers and is living in a care facility now and how he 
suspects his wife is going that way as well.  He prefaced his 
comments by noting that he doesnt know the difference between 
Alzheimers and dementia, yet did not pause long enough for me to 
give him the explanation.   
It was primarily due to the cultural relativity of the term dementia and the 
seemingly less threatening and more understandable nature of the phrase 
memory problems that I used the latter expression in the written materials and 
introduced the study with these words.  After engaging with each participant, I 
adjusted the language used, selecting from a repertoire that included 
Alzheimers, Alzheimers disease, dementia, memory problems, little memory, 
memory loss, forgetting.  The terms that I used in the interviews did not appear 
to correlate with the participants views of dementia, and this was confirmed 
when I ran searches in N*VIVO for these terms.  Through checking on this, I 
uncovered a significant finding: the participants did not draw upon the dementia 
lexicon at all for the most part; rather, I used these words and the participants 
talked about it, treating dementia as the white elephant (Albee, 1965) in our 
interactions.  I noted this studious avoidance of the topic of dementia on the 
part of significant others when having lunch with Jim Heather, his spouse and 
his eldest son during the first observation session: 
Despite discussion of my research, at no time was dementia 
mentioned by the family members or other people encountered 
(generally or specifically), nor was it acknowledged that Jim Heather 
has AD. 
It was much later that I became conscious of this having occurred with the older 
people with dementia themselves; the N*VIVO search was instigated by a 
discussion about my theorising chapter with a fellow dementia researcher who 
asked me what words people had used to talk about dementia and whether or 
not this was related to their theories of dementia.  The few exceptions were Gus 
Holden who referred to Alzheimers constantly in all of our interactions, Angela 
Huggins who increased her use of the word Alzheimers from our first interview 
on March 27, 2003 to our last on July 28, 2003 and Jim Heather who talked 
around dementia, mentioning Alzheimers related problems and Alzheimers 
medications.  This avoidance of the word dementia and associated terms on 
the part of the research participants is further evidence of the general 
reluctance to discuss this topic, and efforts to resist a problem focus and being 
reduced to a disease label.  This resistance was not universally expressed, 
however, as will be discussed in section 8.5 on internalized shame. 
6.5 Participants evaluations of the research  
Although discussion of their current lives in the context of dementia was not 
always welcome (see section 6.2.1), there was considerable interest in doing 
life review on the part of the participants.  Invitations to share some background 
information with the interviewer were met with lengthy, detailed stories that took 
up to 45 minutes to recount; thankfully, the study design allowed for this 
flexibility.  At the end of the research process, all of the participants reported 
that they had enjoyed the experience.  Bosse Knudsen, who was one of the 
more cognitively impaired people in the sample, said about the experience:  
Now that, I have enjoyed it. 
When I pressed her for reasons, she added: 
just that you, you seem to think me for what I am  Not that, dont, 
you dont try to change me.   
Angela Huggins, who had told me in the first interview that she was a private 
person, highlighted at the end of the process the extent to which she had 
opened up in the interviews: 
Angela Huggins: Yeah, because I dont even talk this much to um my 
homemaker, cause thats not what shes here for, and 
I-Id be keeping her back from her work.  But uh, with 
you I have voiced my innermost feelings, so.  I mean I 
have been more honest with you than with her. 
Wendy: Mm-hmm.  And how do you feel about that?  What was 
that like for you? 
Angela Huggins: Fine.  I felt more at home with you than the doctor.  
Poor soul [reference to second observation session]. 
Several authors have noted the importance of multiple interviews for building 
trust, as described in chapter 5, and this research has reinforced the value of 
doing so, even with people who may not recall a previous encounter with the 
researcher21.  Angela Huggins suggested that the people who expressed 
negativity about their experiences with dementia might benefit the most from 
being part of research such as this, as it would allow them the opportunity to 
vent.  Some of the other participants highlighted in particular the opportunity to 
discuss dementia and how it had positively affected their lives and their sense 
of self in the time since they first had became engaged in the research.  Gus 
Holden, in a long and thoughtful passage, told me:  
I, I think its been a good thing f for me because if I hadnt had it I 
would have sort of been crumbling like this, people who really dont 
know how to handle it would be saying things and Id be trying to 
wrestle with them and see how they plug in and I think well I dont 
really know.  But uh, this way youve made me think and you havent 
told me how to think but youve just uh brought up a subject and then 
how do I feel about it and uh, you havent uh for the most part said, 
no thats wrong. Uh, youve just then asked another question which 
makes me think, hey, I hadnt thought about that so instead of going 
that direction, Ill be able to go that direction and around because of 
A B or C.  Uh, I think, no question these have been a big help to 
bringing me back to my more or less an even keel in my life.  
21 I took a Polaroid photo of myself with the participant at our first meeting and left it with them 
as a memory aid for our next meeting.  
It was particularly gratifying when people spoke of the positive impact that 
participating in the research had had on their lives, especially in light of the 
long-standing, and hopefully now historical, tradition of avoiding talking to 
people with dementia about their experiences (Cottrell & Schulz, 1993; Downs, 
1997; Froggatt, 1988; Lyman, 1989), a tradition that this study was designed to 
overcome. 
6.6 Conclusions 
This short chapter described the process of engaging with people with 
dementia as research participants and with the subject of dementia itself.  The 
attributes table (Appendix M) emblematic photos (Appendix N) are meant to 
give a flavour of the diversity of the people with whom I worked and a sense of 
their individual lives.  The data given in this chapter pertains to the participants 
reluctance to discuss dementia, the strategies employed to avoid this topic, and 
the researchers need to continually return to this area of inquiry and rephrase 
questions, in order to ascertain participants views about the overall research 
question.  This chapter has also attended to the insight issue, by arguing that 
this reluctance to discuss dementia was not simply lack of insight, rather it was 
a purposeful act.  In addition, an unexpected finding was presented - that 
interactions were marked more by a lack of reference by the participants to any 
words from the dementia lexicon than by the predominance of any one term.  I 
will now proceed in the first analysis chapter to introduce the experiencing 
category of the grounded theory, highlighting the continuum of views about life 
with memory problems expressed by this diverse group of older people with 
dementia and the spheres of activities in which they were engaged.
Chapter - 7 Experiencing Dementia 
7.1 Introduction 
The purpose of this study was to explore the relationships between older 
peoples experiences of dementia and the intersections of race, ethnicity, 
class, and gender; in doing so, I discovered that there is indeed a connection 
between social location and subjective experiences of dementia.  These 
relationships between social location and the experiences of older people with 
dementia are complex and can be observed across the categories of 
experiencing, othering, and theorising, the focus of the three analysis chapters 
of this thesis.  This first analysis chapter focuses on the category of 
experiencing and sets the stage for the two subsequent chapters on othering 
and theorising.  The aims of this chapter are twofold: (1) to examine the ways in 
which older people with dementia conceptualize their experiences of living with 
memory problems; and (2) to analyze the effects of their social location on their 
subjective experiences of dementia.   
There has been an explosion of interest in ascertaining the views of people with 
Alzheimers disease and other forms of dementia about their illness 
experiences (Braudy Harris, 2002; Wilkinson, 2002a).  Although these efforts 
have been rather limited in scope, in that the focus has been on a narrow range 
of people, it is this particular partial view (Henderson, 1998) that has shaped 
service delivery for all people with dementia.  As became apparent through the 
course of this study, however, if a diverse group of people is sought out and 
asked for its opinions about dementia, a very different image of the experience 
of dementia emerges.  Indeed, we can not say there is one experience; rather 
there are a multitude of experiences that reflect the gender, racial, ethnic, and 
class backgrounds of the participants of any research.  As this thesis 
demonstrates, with a diverse sample, only a minority of the views expressed 
will conform to our present understandings of life with dementia  which are 
overwhelmingly negative.  The first section of this chapter details the findings 
about life with memory problems for older people with dementia, and the 
continuum of perspectives represented, ranging from not a big deal to hell.  
The next section explains the connection between older peoples experiences 
of dementia and their social location in more detail, using Maslows hierarchy of 
needs as a heuristic device, and putting forth a reconstruction of self-
actualization.  After this, the narrowing and expanding of social worlds that 
occurs with dementia is described and the observed gender differences are 
presented.  Lastly, some conclusions are offered about experiencing dementia, 
which lead to the next chapter on othering dementia. 
7.2 Life with memory problems - from not a big deal to hell 
This first section of the experiencing chapter offers a portrait of life with memory 
problems for the eight research participants, and introduces the main 
arguments that build over the course of the thesis and result in conclusions 
about dementia and intersectionality.  I will describe the continuum of views 
about life with memory problems, from not a big deal to hell before moving on 
to look more closely at the preoccupations and spheres of activity of the 
research participants. 
When I asked older people with dementia what it is it like to have this form of 
cognitive impairment, their responses ranged along a continuum from not a big 
deal to a nuisance to hell.  That is, very few actually described dementia in 
the negative terms employed by prominent books such as The Loss of Self 
(Cohen & Eisdorfer, 1986); Who Will I Be When I Die? (Boden, 1998); and 
Losing My Mind: An intimate look at life with Alzheimers (DeBaggio, 2002).  
There was more of a diversity of opinion than has been seen in the literature to 
date and these varying views correlated with the social locations of the 
respondents.  The more marginalized people dismissed the significance of 
dementia in their lives and the more privileged ones confirmed the commonly 
held belief that dementia is a living hell, as illustrated by the following extract 
from the second interview with Jim Heather: 
Wendy: Now how, what is it like to have Alzheimers? 
Jim Heather: Hellish. 
Wendy: Hellish? 
Jim Heather: Hmm. 
For Jim Heather, the world hell summed up his views on living with dementia.  
When I asked him to elaborate on this, he went on to talk about the symptoms 
or limitations that it posed: 
Well, having um a difficulty coming out with the right words for 
example or phrases or um having difficulty with uh numbers and um 
dates, times, um having difficulty coming up with um, difficulty um, 
coming up with just a common expression uh, or um even words that 
are very frequently used by anyone without the disease and um 
having difficulty coming up with just ordinary expressions 
In contrast, for Joe Brown, forgetting things was not such a big deal, as his 
memory didnt play a big role in his life. 
Joe Brown: I forget things that I dont wanna remember. 
Wendy: Mm-hmm.  But whats that like? 
Joe Brown: Dont bother me. 
Wendy: Dont bother you?  How come it doesnt bother you? 
Joe Brown: I pay my bills, what else I gotta do.  What, what else 
have I got to do, what other memory do I got to have? 
Perhaps Joe Browns communicative competence was not as bound to his self-
identity as it seemed to be for the two other men in my sample (see section 
6.5.2) - Jim Heather and Gus Holden, both of whom held more privileges than 
Joe Brown, on the basis of their race (white) and social class 
(professional/upper). 
Until now we have been exposed mainly to views that reflect the negative 
conceptualization of the dementia experience referred to earlier.  As I have 
noted previously (Hulko, 2002), the voices of people with dementia that have 
been elicited to date have been limited in the degree to which they represent 
older people in general.  The typical person with dementia encountered in 
published accounts of living with Alzheimers disease or another form of 
dementia is a middle-aged (40 to 60 years old), well-educated, white, married 
professional in the early stages of dementia, with strong religious or ideological 
beliefs, and a supportive family (Hulko, 2002).  This description almost perfectly 
matches the multiply privileged participants in my study.  The exception is their 
age, as the average age of my sample was 77 years, with a range of 73-87 
years. 
As noted, several of the participants dismissed the significance of having 
dementia, some writing it off as age related and others focusing on the lack of 
impact it had on their lives.  As Joe Brown stated several times: 
Ill tell you one thing about life, you remember what you wanna 
remember and you forget what you wanna forget 
Joe Brown did not see dementia as being significant or problematic in his life 
because, as he said: 
long as I can take care of Joe, thats all Im worried about. 
When I tried to ascertain whether or not Angela Huggins felt that dementia 
mattered in her life, she pointed out that old age posed more challenges for 
her than dementia: 
Angela Huggins: Well I guess Im lucky because I have a family around 
me. Its not something Im ashamed of or anything like 
that. I, I dont really think it matters. 
Wendy: Okay, so youre more with the people that say its not a 
big deal 
Angela Huggins: Yeah, yeahIts more the old age that is bothering me 
because I cant keep up, I cant run, like I say I cant go 
dancing, you know, this type of thing. 
Several of the participants tolerated dementia, noting the inconvenience it 
caused and downplaying the negativity associated with it.  Bosse Knudsen 
dismissed the significance of her memory problems and referred to her use of 
humour as an important coping technique.  A typical statement of hers evokes 
the acceptance shown by many of the older people with dementia:      
Yeah.  My memory is not all that good.  But here I am and here I stay 
[laughs]. 
Bosse Knudsen stressed repeatedly throughout our final interview that she was 
not treated any differently by those around her, whether they were aware of her 
dementia or not, and that people had always accepted her for who she is.  The 
following exchange happened in the latter half of the interview and is an 
example of her efforts to convince me that people do not treat her any 
differently because of her memory problems: 
Bosse Knudsen: Nobody, everybody has accepted me as I am. 
Wendy: Mm-hmm.  So you dont think theres anything wrong? 
Bosse Knudsen: It might be that I have it [Alzheimers] but what I am 
trying to say is they, they accept me the way that I am.  
Wendy: Okay, well, how about how you feel about yourself 
though? 
Bosse Knudsen: I feel good about myself. 
Wendy: Do you feel any different? 
Bosse Knudsen: No. 
Wendy: No. 
Bosse Knudsen: I am just a person that has something wrong with me 
and everybody accept me the way I am and I think 
thats wonderful. 
Wendy: Yeah, I agree. 
Bosse Knudsen: Yeah. 
For those people who accorded dementia slightly more significance than Joe 
Brown, for example, several claimed that their memory problems were not a big 
deal, as the things that they tended to forget really were not that important. 
I dont forget things Im really interested in. - Angela Huggins 
I always feel that if somethings important, Ill remember it.  I usually 
do. - Nancy Matheson 
or they felt that it was a tolerable inconvenience: 
Yeah, Im forgetfuland its a nuisance.  Bosse Knudsen  
While Julianna Molnar did eventually acknowledge that forgetting things caused 
her some emotional upset, by and large, she felt that her memory problems 
were quite manageable and pointed out how the actions of other people 
negatively influenced her ability to remember things. 
Julianna Molnar: Its a normal thing that at this age, certain things a 
person forgets, but they are, there are others who are 
able to keep their memory.  My husband is six years 
older but has a fantastic memory. 
Wendy: Right, okay, so what? 
Julianna Molnar: I forgot a lot of things. 
Wendy: Can you give me? 
Julianna Molnar: So when somebody reminds me of it, then I remember.  
But when I have to think about it myself, about certain 
things, there are lots of things that I, I cant recall. 
Wendy: Can you give me an example? 
Julianna Molnar: For example, we are talking to each other, and I wanna 
explain something, to say something, somebody 
interrupts me 
Wendy: Like me. 
Julianna Molnar: and then I forget what I was going to say. 
Wendy: Like Ive been doing. 
Julianna Molnar: [in English] Yes [laughs].  
This awareness of the disabling actions of other people was evident in Angela 
Huggins accounts of living with dementia as well.  While acknowledging that 
dementia limits her activities, Angela pointed out that this is connected to the 
views of others and their assessment of her ability to function.  Her words 
suggest that the impact of not being allowed to participate in a personally 
significant event due to another persons fears that she would fail could actually 
be worse than any negative outcome that might result from letting her try to do 
all that she can, and possibly failing in the attempt. 
Well, it limits, it limits my activities.  Like, the [Caribana22] parade is 
going to be on Saturday.  Ashley [daughter] is in the parade, you 
know. [struggles with words] Uhh [pauses and sighs] I dont even 
think Im going cause shes against it.  She says its too crowded 
and Im going to lose my sense of direction, which I do.  Even 
driving, when I was, have my own car, when I was married and uh, I 
never know which is North or South.  So she says youre going to get 
confused although I know the Lakeshore perfectly.  But she says 
with so many people there I might even stumble and fall and [pause] 
but uh, I cant see staying home and not going, you know.  Honest to 
god its going to be-Ill probably cry. 
As mentioned, there were a few people who saw dementia in a very negative 
light; they felt that it was extremely problematic in their lives.  More pessimistic 
views of dementia were expressed by those in the sample with the most 
privilege on the basis of their gender, race, ethnicity, and class.  The following 
quote from Jim Heather is representative of this view: 
awkward knowing that in front of you lies the territory weve never 
experienced before and that its getting worse uh, a slippery slope 
which is um, uh, either you dont know whether its steep or going to 
begradual. 
Gus Holden did not have quite as negative a view of dementia as Jim Heather, 
yet he did clearly identify it as a problem in his life, as the following exchange 
demonstrates: 
Gus Holden: Oh, it makes a difference, no, no.   
Wendy: Makes a difference? 
Gus Holden: Yeah, yeah.  You can fight it or try to overcome it or 
step around it, but its there and its not as if you can 
say that what a nuisance, Ill push it aside and carry on 
uh, my regular, no, you cant, its just a.  It is a different 
way of life.  And you can roll with it or I suppose you 
could go and hibernate, uh, tuck yourself away, but yes, 
it does make a difference. 
22 Caribana is an annual festival of Caribbean culture that takes place during the August long 
weekend in downtown Toronto and is the largest festival of its kind outside the Caribbean; the 
highlight is a parade along the Lakeshore of dancers in traditional dress accompanied by 
musicians playing steel drums.    
Gus Holden claimed that you cannot refer to Alzheimers as a nuisance, as it is 
much more significant than that, yet a nuisance is the exact term that Bosse 
Knudsen used to describe her life with memory problems, as seen earlier in this 
section.   
While for the most part Nancy Matheson denied having any memory problems 
herself, she did describe what it might be like for other people to have 
dementia, using familiar imagery and demonstrating some awareness of 
popular conceptions of life with dementia. 
I think theyd be sort of, its like living in a fog, that you wouldnt 
know, you [hits table with open hand] wouldnt have any things [hits 
table again] you could grab hold of, you know as a, as a fact, that uh, 
yeah.  I think that would be very difficult. 
At the following interview, I returned to her description of what it might be like to 
have dementia (as above plus later comments) and, as can be seen in the 
excerpt below, in rejecting the application of these words to her own situation, 
she admitted to having dementia herself, and indicated that it is not as 
problematic an experience for her as it is for others. 
Wendy: One of the things that you talked about last time, you 
talked about how you thought having Alzheimers would 
be like being in a fog or feeling lost and that you 
thought it would be very sad.  So Im wondering if you 
can tell me some more about that. 
Nancy Matheson: I dont really give it a thought.  I dont really think about 
that.  I dont feel like that.  Uh-uh.  I dont think so.  I 
dont agree that I feel as though Im in a fog. If I ever 
said that 
Some of the participants changed their opinions or had them validated over the 
course of the research through being exposed to the views of other older 
people with dementia or having the opportunity to talk about what they were 
going through (see catalytic validity in section 5.5).  Angela Huggins pointed 
specifically to the opportunity to compare herself with others as an element that 
she liked about being part of the research and noted how this had affirmed her 
own approach to dementia, which was to dismiss the significance, not to worry 
about it, and to focus on her remaining abilities. 
Wendy: Okay, well what did you like about the experience, 
about being a part of this research? 
Angela Huggins: Well because I learned that there are other people who 
are worse off than me and some, you know, their- their 
trials, what is- what is bothering them, how they adapt.  
And then, then I think how lucky I am that Im not as - 
My God, if I had- I think I would go crazy, if everyday I 
was saying, Oh god, I cant do this and I cant do that.  
Oh no. 
Gus Holden referred more to his own developmental growth that occurred over 
the course of the research, as opposed to himself in relation to others.  At the 
start of each interview, he shared with me a self-assessment, focusing mainly 
on his mood and ability to perform tasks.  Below is one of these reviews, taken 
from the final interview, and indicating progress towards the state of equilibrium 
that Gus Holden refers to having attained at the end of the research process. 
Its interesting this uh, this week- and the previous week- have been 
very good ones:  I get up and I feel as though its going to be a good 
day, and sure enough it is.  And that goes, I would say for the, four of 
the seven two weeks ago- the others werent really bad.  This week 
has been good up til today.  And today I felt- nothing to do with you 
coming at all [laughs] - but uh, it was still reasonably better than it 
used to be.  Because there are times when I thought No, this day is 
just hopeless; I just havent been able to do anything.  I keep on 
trying mind you.  But uh, others I feel Ive really done something and 
yes, I understand that, and I remember what I did yesterday kind of 
thing.  So, its been up and down, but I would say, oh [sighs], since 
the beginning, this has been a good week.  Not a great week but uh, 
compared to mynot a great week compared to what it used to be, 
but better than it had been for quite some time. 
As has been shown in this section, there was real variability in the experiences 
of older people with dementia and their reactions ranged from seeing it as not a 
big deal to a nuisance to hellish.  These views were not static, however, as 
some people moderated their opinions over time, others divulged more feelings 
as trust increased, some learned to adapt to the limitations posed by dementia, 
and others had their views reinforced by hearing of the experiences of other 
older people with dementia.  Further, perspectives on dementia were shown to 
be related to the reactions of other people and the extent to which their 
impairments were made disabling by their significant others, as will be 
discussed in more detail in Chapters 7 and 8.  The connection between social 
location and experiences of dementia will be explained in the next two sections 
of this chapter. 
7.3 Preoccupations or spheres of activity 
The next section explores the preoccupations of the older people with dementia 
and how this relates to their social locations.  I start with an explanation of how I 
came to use Maslows hierarchy of needs (Maslow, 1970) as a heuristic device.  
After laying out this conceptual framework, I proceed to look at experiencing 
dementia in relation to the different areas of Maslows hierarchy, treating them 
as spheres of activities or preoccupations, rather than basic needs, and 
demonstrating the relationship to social location.  
7.3.1 Maslows hierarchy of needs as an heuristic device 
Not long after I started collecting and analysing data, I discovered that Maslows 
hierarchy of needs (Maslow, 1970), originally published in 1954, was a useful 
tool for explaining the associations I had begun to see in the data, particularly to 
people with some post-secondary education and no knowledge of sociological 
concepts (see Appendix L).  Maslows hierarchy is so ubiquitous (Rowan, 1998) 
that most of the people I spoke with were familiar with his theory and nodded in 
recognition as I reviewed the five levels in the hierarchy  physiological, safety, 
love and belonging, self-esteem, self-actualization (Maslow, 1970).  By referring 
to this conceptual model and linking my findings to it, I was able to turn complex 
research into dinner party and barbeque conversation.  As I collected and 
analyzed more data, I realized that there might be more significance to the 
Maslow connection and that I needed to find out what this social psychologist 
actually wrote about human behaviour, rather than relying on secondary 
sources.  After critically reviewing the source document (Maslow, 1970), I 
turned to empirical testing of the hierarchy of needs and discovered that 
relatively little research of this nature had been published in the past 30 years 
(Rowan, 1998); moreover, despite the scorn that sociologists heap on Maslows 
work, I found only two distinctly sociological applications/critiques of the theory 
(Bay, 1980; Sirgy, 1986).  The sources I reviewed did not address one of my 
main criticisms of the hierarchy of needs, namely that Maslow attributes a 
persons inability to progress up the hierarchy to their individual neuroses, 
rather than seeing social location as an impediment to need fulfilment, as a 
sociologist and social worker such as myself might be inclined to do.  Indeed, 
Maslows (1970) conceptualization of a hierarchy of needs was rooted in Marxs 
materialist conception of history, as noted by Bay (1980); the latter is explained 
by Engels (Feuer, 1969: 11) as the: 
fact that men must first of all eat, drink, have shelter and clothing, 
therefore must work, before they can fight for domination, pursue 
politics, religion, philosophy, etc. 
Several reviews have determined that there is a lack of empirical support for 
Maslows hierarchy (Soper, Milford & Rosenthal, 1995) yet its popularity 
persists.  Most of those who refer to the hierarchy, however, neglect the 
amendments and clarifications that Maslow made in his later publications 
(Rowan, 1998; an example of this can be found in Hanley and Abell (2002).  
Interestingly, if the changes proposed by Maslow had been adopted in later 
interpretations, the hierarchy would be well-supported by empirical evidence 
(Rowan, 1998).  For example, Maslow distinguished between two types of self-
esteem (self and other), yet this has not been adopted by his followers, some of 
whom critique him for presenting self-esteem as only derived from within 
(Rowan, 1998).  Even more astoundingly, Maslow did not diagram his hierarchy 
(ibid); nevertheless, it is commonly presented as a pyramid (Trevithick, 2000), 
to the extent that this image has become synonymous with Maslows hierarchy 
of needs.  As I discovered, there are substantial grounds upon which a 
sociologist could theoretically engage with Maslow; for this thesis, however, I 
am treating his hierarchy primarily as a heuristic device.  That said, I am putting 
forth a reconceptualisation of self-actualisation that I believe should be explored 
in more detail in future research. 
7.3.2 Marginalization and physiological and safety needs 
As noted previously, the more marginalized people in my sample did not see 
dementia as particularly problematic.  They appeared to be preoccupied with 
their physiological and safety needs, and as long as the memory problems they 
were experiencing did not interfere with their ability to attend to these needs, 
then dementia was not something to worry about.  Joe Brown expressed this 
sentiment in the first interview and repeated it at the observation session that 
followed. 
I remember what I want to remember.  I dont forget to pay my rent, 
to pay the hydro, etc.  I eat, I sleep.  Listen, dear, Im 75 years old.  
Lifes not the same when youre older. 
He also talked of the importance of being able to take care of oneself and 
stressed that this was something he had been doing successfully his whole life.  
It was clear, however, that other people in his social world helped Joe Brown to 
maintain his independence and that sometimes this was appreciated, yet at 
other times, it was not; Joe Browns receptivity to assistance depended upon 
whose involvement was required.  Both of these instances are illustrated by an 
excerpt from my field notes written after our first meeting. 
While I was on the phone [talking to his niece about the research], 
someone banged on the door and gave Joe a pack of fish; he said 
people looked out for him and wondered if I told the woman 
downstairs why I was here. I said no as I wasnt sure if it was her 
business and he agreed that it wasnt her business and told me not 
to talk to her about why I was there. 
Joe Brown lived in a social housing building for older people and the woman 
downstairs was the manager of the building; he was worried that if I reported  
to her that he was having difficulties living on his own, she would force him  to 
move out of his apartment.  After Joe Brown and I completed all of our interview 
and observation sessions together and prior to the end of the research, Joe 
Brown was hospitalized due to a fall and did have to move into a care facility 
and relinquish his apartment.  Fortunately, it was only a block away from his 
former home, which made it easier for him to maintain his community 
connections and to continue with some of the patterns of his daily life.  A few 
pictures from the observation sessions, which both occurred prior to his 
relocation, illustrate Joe Brown taking care of himself, through focusing on his 
physiology and safety needs.  The rhythm of his daily life is best explained 
through his own words and related images:  
Whatever I do today, aint, aint gonna be no different than tomorrow.  
I get up, eat my breakfast, watch television, go out on the street, 
walk around, come home, watch TV and relax, bullshit, know. 
Figure 3 Joe Brown walking with his neighbour 
Figure 4 'Joe Brown' talking with the tellers in the bank 
Figure 5 'Joe Brown' eating a Jamaican patty at the donut shop 
Joe Browns constant sex talk during our interviews can be taken as further 
evidence of a participants preoccupation with physiological needs, as sex was 
identified by Maslow (1970) as one of the elements of this first level of his 
hierarchy of basic needs.  Sex is usually left out of enumerations of 
physiological needs in the literature on Maslow (Groves, Kahalas & Erickson, 
1975; Hanley & Abell, 2002; Soper at al, 1995; Rowan, 1998; Trevithick, 2000).  
This trend is quite pronounced when the hierarchy is applied to older people 
(Umoren, 1992; Nydn et al, 2003), likely because older people are generally 
seen as asexual (MacDonald & Rich, 1983; Thompson, 2001).  One exception 
to this omission of sex in relation to older people and Maslows hierarchy is 
found in Nicklowitz and Chois (1994) application of Maslows hierarchy and the 
concept of aging in place, to the design of a university-linked retirement 
community.  References to sex and money were very frequent in some of the 
initial interviews with older people with dementia, which could be an indication 
of a preoccupation with physiological needs.  At that stage of the research, I 
was unsure what might prove relevant to the research question and, therefore, 
was diligently line-by-line coding all the data I had collected up to that point.  
Through this process, I had created sex talk and money talk codes, under 
which I filed away all the references to sex and money I encountered, thinking 
they were tangential and not at all important to the research.  This could be an 
indication of the influence of secondary sources on Maslow - that omit sex, 
along with popular conceptions of sex and money as not important to older 
people, and certainly not basic needs. 
Angela Huggins spoke of her ability to meet her physiological needs in order to 
counteract her daughters concern about the effect of her memory problems; 
she dismissed as unimportant her inability to remember what she ate for lunch, 
focusing instead on the fact that she knew whether or not her nutritional needs 
had been met: 
Like if you say what did you have for lunch today and I sit here 
and Im thinking, I, its not important, why are you asking me this 
nonsense for gods sake.  I mean I ate, I did eat, Im not starving.  
But she [daughter], she wants to know every little thing you know 
what did I do, blah, blah.  She, shes practicing her social work on 
me [laughs]. 
My own line of questioning was influenced by the fact that I had been a social 
work practitioner myself, as I detected a problem focus running through some of 
the interviews, in spite of adopting a theoretical position that older people with 
dementia remain active and capable social actors.  Further evidence of this 
preoccupation with physiological and safety needs on the part of the more 
marginalized participants is provided by a conversation between myself and 
Ester Hernandez about cooking, during which we can see that the prospect of 
not being able to meet her physiological needs through cooking caused Ester 
Hernandez great distress: 
Wendy: Now you used to do a lot of cooking, didnt you? 
Ester Hernandez: I am cooking by myself. 
Wendy: By yourself? 
Ester Hernandez: Yeah, eating. 
Wendy: And how does that go for you?  Do you have? 
Ester Hernandez: Noth-, nothing, it goes for me for eating my, myself and 
my granddaughter. 
Wendy: Do you, do you manage okay cooking for yourself? 
Interpreter: [repeats in Tagalog] 
Ester Hernandez: [in Tagalog] Yes, [in English] I can do it by myself. 
Wendy: Okay, okay.  Can you, what do you think it would be 
like if you couldnt do it for yourself? 
Ester Hernandez: What? 
Interpreter: [repeats in Tagalog] 
Ester Hernandez: [in Tagalog] Why, why cant I, why cant I cook? [In 
English] I can cook it by myself.  
Wendy: Ester [start of attempt to diffuse situation]. 
Ester Hernandez: There is nothing wrong. 
Julianna Molnars preoccupation with physiological needs was indicated by her 
attention to ensuring that her guests were adequately fed and watered at each 
interview (see section 6.4).  Her concern with both physiological and safety 
needs is shown by her story of the difficulties she had walking and going to the 
grocery store, which she told me about in the third interview in response to a 
question about whether forgetting has changed her sense of self in any way. 
It wasnt that Im forgetting that changed me.  Its more so that Im 
having more difficulty moving, having more difficulty doing things.  
For example, ImumIm scared to go out alone for a walk.  Now 
that my husband is not homeI have my walker there.  If I really 
have to go to IGA [grocery store]if the suns shining, I might go a 
little further and then I come back.  But Im always holding on to that 
[indicates walker]. 
A preoccupation with physiological and safety needs amongst the more 
marginalized participants has been demonstrated through their talk about sex, 
money, groceries, cooking, eating, sleeping, walking, and paying bills, for 
example.  Not only are these all features of the hierarchy of needs, they are 
also activities of daily living (ADLs) or instrumental activities of daily living 
(IADLs)  both major preoccupations of those working in the dementia field 
(Beck, Zgola & Shue, 2000).  The link does not seem to get made between 
Maslows hierarchy of needs and the dementia discourse on ADLs and IADLs 
(Beck et al, 2000), however, though this clearly was the foundation for this 
taxonomy. 
7.3.3 Privilege and love and belonging and self-esteem needs 
The most privileged people in the sample had the luxury of being preoccupied 
with their love and belonging and self-esteem needs, as their physiological and 
safety needs were never an issue.  Yet, because they were focused on these 
higher order needs whose fulfilment required the involvement of others and 
which were more threatened by dementia, being cognitively impaired was a 
very big deal for them.  Jim Heather spoke often of the slippery slope and was 
preoccupied with the impact of his having dementia on his family members, 
particularly his becoming a burden to his wife and the reactions of his 
grandchildren, as well as the quality and duration of the disease trajectory.  His 
words evoked a sense of the existential concerns he was contemplating: 
and um Im concerned about [wifes name] um having the same 
feeling, you know is this going to be steep or shallow or what is it 
going to be and how is it going to affect both of us and what, whats, 
what um can we do or you know, you really feel that youve got no 
attack, from our point of view to prevent whats going to happen. 
Gus Holden similarly focused on his family and the role that they played, 
particularly his spouse Sue: 
If a man doesnt have a wife thats patient, theyre in trouble. 
As he was talking about the significance of his wifes support, Sue Holden 
entered the room and, surprised by her husbands words of thanks, chose to 
respond in a joking manner: 
Gus Holden: Its wonderful to have, uh, to see, uh.  Without her, Id 
probably be tucked away in some in-, institution. 
Sue Holden: Yeah, well other times you probably wish I was tucked 
away somewhere. 
Gus Holden: [laughs] 
Gus Holden also talked of the impact his dementia had on his ability to perform 
tasks that were associated with his prior career as an administrator and the 
gender roles in his household, which were being challenged by his memory 
problems.  In the first interview Gus Holden described some of the difficulties he 
had been experiencing in managing the family accounts.  When he returned to 
this topic in the second interview, he connected his task performance with 
gendered role expectations in the household, and it became clear from the 
content and delivery of his words that dementia was impacting on his self-
esteem needs. 
Its when I am trying to do something that Ive always done, well, 
finances is a good example.  Uh, Ive always looked after the family 
finances  That doesnt, Sue [spouse] not, she hasnt looked after 
the books so to speak, I have.  And uh more and more I am finding it 
difficult to just sort simple things.  Theres a whole lot of cancelled, 
cancelled cheques and how do I sort them and how do I enter that in 
the computer. 
In the final interview, Gus Holden spoke about the emotional impact of his 
memory problems and indicated once again that his self-esteem needs, as well 
as his love and belonging needs, were concerning him. 
Uh, I must admit thereve been times when Ive felt that Sue [spouse] 
has sort of abandoned me because shes so busy, she has so much 
going on and uh, shes inclined to say, Well, you did such and such, 
uh, yes, of course I dont remember thatso Im not, Im not reacting 
properly.  I should take it a that its a problem for her and the girls 
[their daughters] and for anybody else to not understand uh, I guess 
Ive said to myself several times, Oh, if only so and so could have a 
day feeling the way I do; that would make them understand what its 
like.  Because you cant explain it as far as Im concerned.  I dont 
feel, uh, there are words to explain it, but I dont feel the words, the 
vocabulary I have will get that feeling across.  Uh, but uh, Im feeling, 
yeah, I think Im feeling better.  That it was a long slide down, leveled 
off and I sort of [clears throat] almost gave up, I mean I chat with 
you, sort of, whats going to happen, how long can I possibly go on 
like this, and then, I would say that the last two weeks, maybe three, 
have improved.  Now that doesnt mean that everyday I get up and 
say, By golly, I got this, nothing like that.  But I come down and I say 
to Sue [spouse], I think this is going to be a good day.  And theres 
nothing specificits not long before I think, oh yes, heres 
something that oughta be done and Im going to tackle that first so 
uh, I 
This approach, that involved struggling against dementia and tackling things 
that oughta be done, was employed by the men more often than the women, 
as will be reviewed in section 7.5.2. 
The one multiply privileged woman  Nancy Matheson  focused on higher 
order needs (Maslow, 1970), such as love and belonging and self-esteem more 
often than either physiological or safety needs.  She did employ a personal 
support worker to ensure that all of these basic needs were being met, 
however, which mediated her experience of dementia (see section 7.4).  In the 
first interview, after confirming that her independence was important to her, 
Nancy Matheson told me of the pleasure she derived from living on the 21st 
floor and entertaining lots of people:  
Wendy: I, I get the sense that your independence is quite 
important to you. 
Nancy Matheson: Well, yes.  I think it is to most people.  
Wendy: Yeah, I think youre right.  I think it is to most people as 
well. 
Nancy Matheson: Yeah, mm-hmm. 
Wendy: Yeah. 
Nancy Matheson: Yeah.  I enjoy living on this floor, I have lots of people 
that come to see me and uh, uh, you know we have 
great discussions and everything and uh, I love it like 
that. 
In looking at the photos from the first observation session, which took place 
primarily in the kitchen of her spacious condominium, Nancy Matheson once 
again drew my attention to her surroundings and the view from the 21st floor, 
overlooking a large urban park23: 
Nancy Matheson: This is my friend Barbara [personal support worker] in 
the kitchenBarbara and [chuckles quietly] a picture 
of Barbara and me at the table [laughs again wistfully].  
This has been a great kitchen. Ive enjoyed this. 
Wendy:   Mm-hmm?  What do you like about the kitchen? 
Nancy Matheson:  I like the light, I like all the panes where I can see, you 
know, so far around the building.  Mm-hmm, mm-
hmm.oh yeah 
In section 7.4, further examples will be given to support the connection between 
Nancy Mathesons social location and her experiences of dementia, in relation 
to the narrowing and expanding of the social worlds of the research 
participants.  In this section, I have demonstrated that love and belonging and 
self-esteem needs were more of a preoccupation than physiological and safety 
needs for the multiply privileged older people with dementia and that this 
affected the extent which they saw dementia as problematic. 
7.3.4 Self-actualization through dementia 
The most problematic aspect of Maslows hierarchy (Maslow, 1970) is its 
presumed endpoint - self-actualization, which is often visually presented as the 
top of a pyramid (Trevithick, 2000).  As noted earlier, Maslow did not diagram 
his hierarchy of needs and I was quite surprised to discover that the ubiquitous 
23 Nancy Matheson did not grant me permission to use either of the photos that she was looking 
at while talking in this excerpt, as she felt they wouldnt mean anything to anybody; I suspected 
the real reason was that the pictures contrasted with the image of herself as independent that 
Nancy Matheson was anxious to preserve and to present to others. 
pyramid was not his product, as are other people when I share this little-known 
fact with them.  If he had diagrammed the hierarchy, he probably would have 
included a parallel pyramid with cognitive and aesthetic needs (Maslow, 1970).  
This kind of visual representation of the hierarchy of needs - the pyramid - has 
proven problematic in that it implies (a) that there is an end point to individual 
growth and development and (b) that this is not far away (Rowan, 1998).  This 
part of the hierarchy was not readily observable in the views that older people 
with dementia expressed about their experiences; for this reason, I have 
referred to the four other needs in discussing the findings of this research.  
There are indications in the data, however, that older people with dementia may 
have peak experiences and be able to achieve a degree of self-actualization, 
not in spite of having dementia, rather as a result of living with this impairment.  
McKinlay (1998: 1) hints at this notion in her description of dementia, which she 
included as a preface to her moving collection of telephone conversations with 
her mother prior to her mothers death due to multi-infarct dementia:  
A devastating disease of the brain.  Unrelenting unstoppable losses.  
A way of dying.  It could also be a state of mind.  An experience of 
being stripped to essences.  A journey of the soul. 
This tentative theory that dementia facilitates self-actualization in a spiritual 
sense is consistent with the characteristics of peak experiences described in a 
little book Maslow wrote after formulating the hierarchy of needs:  Religions, 
Values and Peak Experiences (1964).  Disorientation in time and space, being 
more loving and accepting, and a move to uniqueness and to become more a 
real person (p 67) are a few of the many features that Maslow highlights.  As in 
the pyramid and the definition of self-esteem, this might be another example of 
Maslow having been misunderstood, as the spiritual element of the hierarchy of 
needs is missing in much of his followers work based on the hierarchy.  
Maslow himself might not have agreed with this tentative theory of mine, 
however, having written that: 
the aging body and the nervous system is less capable of tolerating 
a really shaking peak-experience (Maslow, 1964: xv).  
Further, Maslows opinion as to the rewards of achieving self-actualization does 
not exactly accord with accepted knowledge about dementia: 
living at the high level means greater biological efficiency, greater 
longevity, less disease, better sleep, appetite (Maslow, 1970: 57).   
Summerlin and Bundricks (2000) research testing the generalisability of 
Maslows hierarchy that found that self-actualization is indeed possible under 
conditions of strain, is another possible source of support for a theory of self-
actualization through dementia.  Through interviews with homeless men, most 
of whom were African-American and middle-aged, they discovered that these 
multiply marginalized men had a very clear perception of who they were and 
their place in the universe and in this way could be seen to have achieved self-
actualization.  This awareness of ones place in the universe is evident in the 
words of Ester Hernandez, the most cognitively impaired of the participants, 
who told me that white people hold the power in the Philippines, as sugar 
plantation owners, and that they are hated by the rest of the population, 
including herself: 
No, no, but the ones who have lots of money is the white, they have 
lots of money, but every does hated them as long as we can.  They 
can lead a big sugar making that all. 
At the second observation session, Ester Hernandez again demonstrated her 
ability to distinguish class privilege, as shown in this excerpt from my 
observation notes:     
Ester said to me I think you are rich and I asked her why she thinks 
that, what it is about me.  She would or could not say why she thinks 
that. 
Indeed, I was struggling with this very issue myself  the visibility of class 
privilege and the reactions of others  as can be seen in notes about a visit to 
the neighbourhood where both Ester Hernandez and Joe Brown lived, for a 
participant observation session with Joe Brown: 
I felt too white and posh for the surroundings in my clothing and with 
my gear (cameras).  As I was walking along Bloor Street near 
University Avenue [wealthy retail area] earlier that day, a panhandler 
had asked me to spare some change for poor white trash.  Upon 
reflection I felt that this was not the way to dress in [Joe Browns] 
community, for either place we visited [bank and donut shop], my 
apparent (white and class) privilege in relation to them seemed to 
make people feel that they needed to impress me and perhaps to 
obey me or grant me whatever I requested.  However, if I had 
dressed more casually I would not have been given the same 
respect and my outsider status would not be as noticeable, which I 
think it should be.   
Maslows theory (1970) contained the caveats that (a) one does not need to 
fully satisfy one need before progressing on to a higher order need and (b) 
certain conditions need to be in place in order for people to satisfy their basic 
needs, such as the absence of war or famine.  Thus, his theory did not preclude 
that under conditions of strain, when presumably people are not having their 
physiological needs completely met, it is possible to meet higher order needs 
such as self-actualization.  If dementia does indeed open one up to episodic 
peak experiences, this may mean that the hierarchy, as it is commonly used, is 
turned upside down.  That is, people with dementia are self-actualizing through 
their illness experiences, yet need assistance with their physiological needs  
their activities of daily living.  As I mentioned earlier, Maslow believed that 
people are psychologically unhealthy if their needs are not met (Keegan, 2002), 
but what does this mean for people with dementia who are presumed to be 
psychologically unhealthy by virtue of their diagnosis?  
Maslow (1970) sees life as being more complex at the level of higher order 
needs; higher need gratification leads to more individualism, which is thought to 
be positive; and the search for love and respect necessarily involves other 
people (1970:58).  Is self-actualization inherently spiritual or does it neglect 
spirituality as claimed by Hanley and Abell (2002)?  Groves, Kahalas and 
Erickson (1975) suggested modifications to the upper end of the hierarchy, as 
they found self-actualization hard to operationalise; they added power, 
competition, accomplishment, and other-directedness (self, service, spiritual).  
Umoren (1992) uncritically applied the hierarchy to older people in nursing 
homes and called for more efforts to help residents move towards self-
actualization, with the underlying assumption being that residents of nursing 
homes are capable of achieving this state.  The extent to which self-
actualization should and indeed can be assessed by others is an unexplored 
point in the debate over the validity of Maslows hierarchy; as is the reality that 
this need seems to be interpreted as being about having a competitive nature 
(Groves et al, 1975), as opposed to a spiritual one.  If self-actualization is a 
spiritual goal, its achievement may not be outwardly visible, particularly to those 
who equate it with power, status and wealth; it may be an inwardly derived 
achievement.   
Spirituality and dementia is a relatively unexplored area (Bell & Troxel, 2001; 
Froggatt & Moffitt, 1997; Snyder, 2003), despite the fact that religiosity is a 
theme in the majority of published accounts of living with dementia (Hulko, 
2002), and that religion or spirituality have been found to affect meaning making 
in dementia and coping with the disease (Snyder, 2003).  Work to date on 
spirituality and dementia has been primarily focused on recognizing that people 
with dementia are (still) spiritual beings and suggesting ways to support their 
spiritual needs (Bell & Troxel, 2001; Froggatt & Moffitt, 1997), as well as 
highlighting the role that religion and spirituality play in the lives of people with 
dementia (Snyder, 2003).  The primary emphasis has been on the maintenance 
of spirituality, which exposes an underlying assumption that continued spiritual 
growth is not possible once a person develops dementia.  Snyder (2003: 309) 
suggests that since there is a link between faith and cognition - to have a 
specific faith requires a degree of cognitive capacity to formulate a set of 
beliefs - people with dementia might need the assistance of others to continue 
to practice their beliefs.  If we view self-actualization as a spiritual and a 
subjective state, and acknowledge that it is possible to achieve under 
conditions of strain, perhaps a disabling condition such as dementia can 
facilitate spiritual growth and allow for self-actualization through dementia.  
There are indications of this possibility in a conversation between Anthea 
McKinlay and her mother that occurred less than a month before the older 
womans death, which I am using to conclude this section.  These poetic words 
of an older woman with dementia support my call for further consideration of the 
possibility of self-actualization through dementia: 
A: Were hoping that youre coming home very soon to live near us.   
C: Am I? Well see. 
A: Dont you believe it? 
C: No, no, you see I have to go to a meeting upstairs to find out 
which way Im going. 
A: How do you mean? 
C: You just go away and think about it.  
(McKinlay, 1998: January 1997 entry) 
7.4 Narrowing and expanding social worlds  
The social dimension of the experiences of people with dementia is clearly an 
important area of research and is addressed in detail in the next two chapters; 
this section provides a bridge into the social realm.  Some of the people in the 
study described how their social worlds had narrowed after receiving a 
diagnosis of dementia or once they started to have troubles with their 
memories, a theme in Snyders (1999; 2001) compilations of the reflections of 
people with dementia.  Keady (1997: 26) termed the basic social process 
undergone by people with dementia, following the appearance of symptoms, as 
maintaining involvement, which he saw as requiring transitions through taking 
the initiative, responding to events, and withdrawing from situations.  
Although withdrawal from social contact is an expected phase of the dementia 
experience and clearly was part of some of the participants experiences, it was 
not a widespread phenomenon in this study.  Rather, the accounts reflected 
both a narrowing and an expansion of social worlds.    
In this research, those with narrowing worlds were the more privileged people 
who tended to have wider social circles, serving on boards of voluntary 
organizations, being prominent local businesspeople, attending church or 
participating in ethno-cultural activities, for example.  After a period of 
disengagement, they had reconnected with some of the groups with which they 
had been involved, though their engagement with civic affairs was very limited 
compared to their lives before dementia.  Jim Heather and Gus Holden were 
the best examples of this, as they had been community leaders, active with 
various groups including the board of the local hospital, Scouting, The Canoe 
Museum, and The United Church.  Both men had withdrawn from 
responsibilities with these organizations following their diagnoses of dementia, 
and had started to gradually reacquaint themselves with some aspects of their 
former lives after this initial period of disengagement. 
An example of ethno-cultural activities is provided by Bosse Knudsen and 
shows how her social world had decreased, and how she felt about this.  For 
the second interview with Bosse Knudsen, her husband Sven produced a photo 
album with pictures of the two of them folk dancing with other members of the 
Scandinavian Society, as well as attending events at the Scandinavian Club in 
Oshawa (a larger city mid-way between Peterborough and Toronto).  As she 
flipped through the photos and struggled to remember the people and the 
events captured on film in order to share this with me, Bosse Knudsen indicated 
her feelings of affection towards the Scandinavian community, of which she had 
been an active member.  She expressed a sense of loss as well, believing that 
this was all in the past, and that such a gathering only happened in Denmark. 
Bosse Knudsen: Oh yeah, I know him and I know this one.  This lady I 
dont seem to know and that man, these here I dont 
know.  They dont look familiar to me at all.  I dont 
know, do you think there are; are groups like that over 
here now? 
Figure 6 'Bosse Knudsen' looking at photos of Scandinavian folk dancing 
Wendy: This one is here from what Sven was saying, this is the 
Scandinavian club that you go to herethe 
Scandinavian club I think is in Oshawa. 
Bosse Knudsen: Oh. 
Wendy: And the Danish church is in Toronto. 
Bosse Knudsen: [said with incredulity] Does, does it really still exist? 
Wendy: Yeah and Sven said you go only about twice a year, 
around Christmas time and then in the summer for 
some kind of barbeque. 
Bosse Knudsen: Yeahyeah. 
Gus Holden described how the difficulties he is now having with memory and 
language had forced him to withdraw from public roles and how his wife had 
taken over some of this voluntary work: 
The idea I can still, I still know how it should be done, how Id like to 
do it but um, I, I know that if I got up in front of a group of friends and 
wanted to tell them something, um, I wouldnt be able to pull all these 
bits back and mesh them together into, not only a, an interesting 
comment or a, uh, exciting or a humorous one.  But uh, I just couldnt 
do that now.  But as far as, well, right now, [my spouse] Sues got 
this whole thing clear in her mind and [intake of breath] shes going 
back and shes talked to so and so about such and such and shes 
gathered all this together and then she goes to a meeting and um, I 
wouldnt say she takes over, but shes completely at, at home, at 
meetings than what she used to be. 
Gus Holden went on to explain how his wife was the one in control now, having 
taken on many of the functions he used to perform both publicly and privately; 
and when I asked him what that felt like for him, he spoke of the mixed 
emotions evoked by this simultaneous withdrawal (for him) and engagement 
(for her), which represented a transfer of roles in a sense: 
Uh, well on a good day, its fine, uh, it doesnt bother me at all.  I 
accept the fact that I can not do these things so dont hold it against 
Sue [spouse], its uh.  There have been days, bad days when I think 
uh, shes just taken everything that I used to do, I used to do that 
and I didnt have any trouble, why are you doing that, are you just 
trying to put me down.  But uh, for the most part, I can keep that 
from happening. 
The final statement in this passage evokes the sense of mastery demonstrated 
by the men in the sample when describing efforts to control their responses to 
the disease and to overcome its limitations (see section 6.5.2).  Gus Holden 
described how he felt he had achieved more of a balance in his life now than in 
the months following his diagnosis and how he had started to reconnect with 
activities and people from his pre-morbid life: 
Um, I do know that Ive had a, a lot of peaks and hollows.  Um, in the 
last, since the last year probably more um, fewer bad spells and 
more of equilibrium.  I dont think Im [intake of breath]; I dont worry 
about it as much.  Um, Ive felt better for I dont know why, just life 
seems to, well this is the way it used to be, I can continue it. 
There was one group of people with whom Gus Holden felt more comfortable 
now than he had before he developed Alzheimers.  This was a group of men 
who had cottages on the same lake as he and his wife Sue.  This community of 
cottagers  part of Sues social world since birth  had always seemed insular 
and exclusionary to Gus Holden; yet with his disclosure of having Alzheimers, 
he was made to feel an insider.  The first quote, taken from the third interview 
during which we discussed the participant observation session at the cottage, 
illustrates Gus Holdens perspective on the cottagers as a closed community:  
They know each other, they know the histories of the other families 
up there, they know when these people had their cottage built, what 
happened to them, when the first boat came etc. etc. 
When he discovered that they shared something in common, namely their 
status as people with Alzheimers disease, Gus Holden felt more comfortable 
around this group of men, a fact that he mentioned in two separate interviews:  
Turned out that there must have been, we, there was a group 
particularly going to a certain uh, uh, persons place and there must 
have been ei-, ten, twelve of us and turned out that three of us, three 
of us had Alzheimers and we compared notes. 
And one of the things that made me feel better was a meeting which 
I think I may have mentioned, with a group at Stoney Lake, uh, who 
were my first contact with anybody who had Alzheimers. 
The narrowing of Jim Heathers social world was evident in the recounting of his 
withdrawal from the board of the hospital fundraising committee, a decision he 
had made so that his diminished cognitive functioning would not negatively 
impact on the work of the board. 
Wendy: So they wanted you to continue 
Jim Heather: Yes. 
Wendy: and you decided not to. 
Jim Heather: Um-hmm. 
Wendy: How, how did that go? 
Jim Heather: That, from their point of view, they were perfectly happy 
to go with anything that I suggested.  Um and um that 
uh when they, I was surprised that they suggested that 
they would like to have me around still. 
Wendy: Why? 
Jim Heather: Um, particularly when, when uh, when Id found out 
what, what my problem was which had come on very 
rapidly, um I expected, I assumed that, that um it, it 
wasnt the thing to do, to stay on, on the board.  I think 
it, it would be um awk-, an awkward situation to be a 
member of the board and um be in a position where I 
had to come up with some important information and so 
on and to be involved in the amount that I was involved 
earlier would be, would not be in the best, the best 
interest of the, of the, the board or myself. [pause] And 
its worked out quite well. 
This expectation of shunning, and withdrawal in order to avoid it, will be 
discussed further with respect to internalized shame in section 7.5.  As shown 
earlier with Gus Holden, although Jim Heather withdrew from a number of his 
social engagements, there was a group of people with whom he felt 
comfortable in his new incarnation as a person with dementia and which 
provided him with opportunities for meaningful social interaction.  This group  
called the Turtles - was composed of retired male professionals associated with 
the United Church and may have been people amongst whom Jim Heather had 
much higher status pre-dementia.  Since he had relinquished his drivers 
license, a member would pick him up and drive him to group activities, such as 
the monthly pub lunch.  Unfortunately I was not allowed to attend the meeting 
that occurred during the data collection period, as women are not invited to 
attend, which was the precise reason I wanted to observe this part of Jim 
Heathers social world.  The number and range of social engagements open to 
both Jim Heather and Gus Holden is evidenced by the possibilities that existed 
for observation sessions.  For example, I did three participant observation 
sessions with Jim Heather and could have gone to at least three other events 
over the six weeks, yet with Ester Hernandez, it was a challenge to come up 
with two different possibilities during the same time period. 
Angela Huggins was quite an independent person and accustomed to spending 
time on her own; the annual festival of Caribbean culture and music  Caribana 
(footnote 16)  was a very important part of her life, as was the neighbourhood 
in Toronto in which she lived.  With respect to these two examples, her social 
world definitely had narrowed, yet this was not seen to be due to dementia; she 
attributed her withdrawal from Caribana more to her arthritis and her lack of 
social interaction to her recent (reluctant) move to a new city.  This is shown in 
an excerpt from my field notes from the first observation session:  
Angela told me that she would love to go to Caribana but is not sure 
how she would get home afterwards as Ashley [her daughter] will be 
performing in it again this year, exclaiming Ill be so frustrated if I 
cant be there.  Ashley asked what we were talking about and I filled 
her in.  She said shes not confident about leaving her mother on her 
own with whats going on, so Angela asked whats going on?  
Ashley gave a vague response about how Angela is forgetting things 
and this was not pursued at all. 
During the second interview, Angela Huggins pointed out one of the factors that 
negatively affected her life at present  being alone in the daytime.  She knew 
this could not be changed, as Ashley [her daughter] had to work, and so she felt 
that she had to grin and bear it.  Later in the same interview, she clearly 
identified factors other than her dementia as causing the narrowing of her social 
world: 
The only thing Im feeling now is being up here [a mid-size city 100 
kilometres North of Toronto].  So, you know, thats the only thing. Im 
not, Im not conscious of having Alzheimers or anything like that. 
Julianna Molnars situation was different than the other participants, in that her 
social world had been drastically reduced following the Holocaust in which her 
entire family was killed; and had narrowed again after her immigration to 
Canada in later life.  In Toronto, Julianna Molnars opportunities for social 
interaction were quite limited as neither she nor her husband were in paid or 
volunteer employment and she did not feel confident communicating in English.  
Nevertheless, she did mention a few people with whom she socialized and 
noted a few of the factors affecting her ability to spend time with other people, 
such as her age and the availability of other Hungarian or Romanian speakers.   
Julianna Molnar: The situation is that the people who are our age, we 
cant really get together.  There is a couple who live at 
the other end of Scarborough [community in East 
Toronto]; we get along the best, who are going for a 
month tonight to Budapest.  We get along with them 
best because they are the ones closest to us in, in 
their 
Wendy: Physically close? 
Julianna Molnar: years. 
Wendy: Oh, age wise, meaning their age. 
Julianna Molnar: In their years, age.  We also deal a lot with younger 
ones, especially the ones that my son gets along.  Uh, 
we were there just, they are from Romania specifically.  
Its a young couple.  The womans aunt, we went to 
university together. 
Wendy: Do, do you? 
Julianna Molnar: She is nine years younger than I am but we were really 
good friends.  We understood each other. 
Wendy: Do you feel closer to Hungarians and Romanians then? 
Julianna Molnar: Those ones I can really speak to.  For example, the 
ones in Scarborough, they are Hung-, they speak 
Hungarian, they dont speak Romanian because they 
come, they are from Budapest. 
Three of the participants expressed a view of themselves as independent, to 
varying degrees  Angela Huggins, Joe Brown, and Julianna Molnar.  While this 
attitude of independence was stressed to the interviewer, it was not always 
observable in their actions, as seen in the reference to Joe Brown in section 
7.3.2.  In discussing the two observation sessions that had both involved visits 
to the same local pub referred to as the donut shop, Joe Brown confirmed that 
what I had observed  him spending a great deal of time on his own  was his 
typical behaviour. 
Wendy: Well, that you seem, you seem to spend a lot of time on 
your own, sitting on your own, is that what you usually 
Joe Brown: What sitting by myself? 
Wendy: Yeah. 
Joe Brown: Oh, I know people sitting there, I dont, I dont know 
who sit with me, I sit by myself, dont bother me. 
Wendy: Okay.  Do you usually talk to other people? 
Joe Brown: I talk to other people.  If, if, if I feel like, if I feel like 
sitting by myself, I sit by myself and read the paper. 
Angela Huggins spoke of her independence as well as the safety and comfort 
she felt in her own little world, a phrase similar to the language used by Vittoria 
(1999) to describe the world created by care assistants working with people 
with dementia in residential care. 
Angela Huggins: I, I am very happy by myself, Im really not, not 
seeking some companionship even, nothing.  I, I have 
my own little world, like Im safe in it, its like a cocoon 
you know, Im safe in my little world there, its just great 
and now I have my grandchild, thats my life.  Yes, Im 
very happy. 
Wendy: So tell me a little but about your, your world that youre 
safe in.  
Angela Huggins: Well I, first Im independent enough that I can go 
wherever I want to, I dont have to ask permission.  
Because when I was married, it was, marriage it was 
like being in boarding school, sister may I do this, may I 
do that, you know and I thought ahh, not of my 
temperament, it didnt go, it didnt jive at all.  But uh, I 
mean I, the, the years I spent in boarding school, it, I 
was more lonely than, than anything else, you know, 
but then I would get, I read a lot.  In my apartment youll 
say my god, is this a library.  I have books all over.  
So, I lose myself in my world, thats like my world.  
This safe and familiar world described by Angela Huggins had been disrupted 
just prior to the research when it was determined that she should not be living 
alone and thus she was forced to move in with her daughter in Barrie - a much 
smaller city about 100 kilometres North of Toronto.  Although she still spoke of 
herself as independent in this first interview (see above), this sense of herself 
was less evident in later interviews, in which she spoke of how much smaller 
her world had become in this much smaller, less ethnically and racially diverse, 
and more spread-out city, where she was a foreigner.  This relocation, and 
resultant narrowing of her social world, was a direct result of having been 
diagnosed with dementia and labelled a risky person.  Although Angela 
Huggins was still living in the community, her movements were restricted by a 
lack of personal transportation and unfamiliarity with this new neighbourhood.  
Similarly, although Julianna Molnar did not live alone, she spoke of being on 
her own even when her husband Gyorgy was in the house as he spent a great 
deal of time on the computer.  In the second interview, she told me with a 
laugh: 
My husbands on the computer more than he is with me 
Julianna Molnar returned to this theme of being alone, even in the company of 
others, during the final interview: 
I dont like to be alone.  Uh, but the much of the time when Gyorgy is 
at home I am alone because hes at the computer and uh, and we 
are together only can I say when, when we are eating and usually if it 
is when we have supper, uh, we uh, we, uh, if it is cinemawe 
watch a movie together. 
As has been shown in this section, the participants as a group experienced 
reductions and expansions of their social worlds, and this was related to the 
kind and extent of opportunities for social engagement that had been available 
to them prior to dementia, as well as other factors such as age, language, and 
relocation. 
7.4.1 Mediating factors 
As mentioned earlier in relation to Nancy Matheson (see section 6.3.3), access 
to financial resources and social capital (Bourdieu, 1968) played a role in 
mediating peoples experiences, particularly their opportunities for social 
engagement.  While the most privileged older people with dementia  Gus 
Holden and Jim Heather  spoke of having withdrawn from past community 
involvement, they still had more opportunities for social interaction than the 
more marginalized people in the sample, who had never had the extensive 
social networks, in the formal sense, that these men enjoyed.  This is consistent 
with findings that older people living in deprived areas in the UK have high rates 
of exclusion from formal social relationships within their communities and low 
levels of engagement in civic affairs (Scharf et al, 2002).  I had noted that Joe 
Brown appeared to hold the position of King of Kensington24 in his 
neighbourhood and that he certainly had an extensive informal network, yet 
these kinds of social relationships and interactions often are not captured in 
aging research that focuses on services and formal activities. 
Nancy Matheson did not belong to any community groups and seemed to have 
limited opportunities for social engagement, apart from her family members and 
personal support workers.  She could afford to hire two personal support 
workers (Barbara and Aissa), which increased the number and range of her 
social interactions.  These workers, whom she referred to as her friends 
helped Nancy Matheson with her ADLS and IADLs - her physiological and 
safety needs - and engaged her in conversation over the five hours they spent 
with her on their assigned days.  In addition, Barbara accompanied her to the 
weekly film showings in the building, and they both took her for daily walks 
around the neighbourhood.  Both Barbara and Aissa were invited to Nancy 
Mathesons 87th birthday party and Aissa attended, along with her husband 
24 The King of Kensington was a popular CBC television program in Canada from 1975-1980 
that featured a character names Larry King - a pillar of the community, font of local wisdom, 
and shopkeeper in the Kensington Market area of downtown Toronto; the role was played by Al 
Waxman, who was born in the community himself, and who never lost his association with the 
King.  Kensington Market was, and still is, a densely populated, multi-ethnic, working class 
neighborhood that has the best produce market, butchers shop, cheese store, and second 
hand shops in Toronto.  This was not the area in which Joe Brown lived, though it is similar and 
most Canadians would understand the reference to someone being like the King of 
Kensington.      
Frank, though Barbara was unable to make it in the end.  The extent of 
involvement that Aissa and her own family have with Nancy Matheson can be 
detected in the picture below and the observation notes that follow, which detail 
conversations that occurred between the two interactions with Nancy Matheson 
cited in section 6.4: 
Figure 7 Nancy Matheson with Aissa (HSW) at birthday BBQ  
After this interaction, I went and sat behind Aissa and Frank, as it 
was a good spot from which to observe Nancy.  As I was sitting 
there, they engaged me in conversation and I learned that Frank is a 
limo driver and that they are both Arabians who immigrated to 
Canada in 1971.  I asked if they came through Pier 21 in Halifax or 
whether it had been closed by then and Frank clarified that they were 
immigrants, not refugees, and said that they had come directly to 
Toronto  Aissa told me about her family, including the fact that she 
is a grandmother and that her grandson really likes Mrs. Matheson. 
Had she not been able to afford her own personal support workers, Nancy 
Matheson would not have been able to remain in the condo that she spoke of 
with such fondness (see section 7.3.3), and may have had to move into a care 
facility as Joe Brown was forced to do during the course of the research (see 
section 7.3.2). 
At the second interview, as she looked at photographs of herself and her 
personal support worker Barbara from the first observation session25, Nancy 
Matheson made it clear that Barbara played a very significant role in her life  
referring to her consistently as a good friend.  It is obvious that Barbaras 
presence mediated Nancy Mathesons experiences of dementia. 
Nancy Matheson: Mm-hmm, mm-hmm, yeah, mm-hmmI think this is 
when Barbara was giving me tips on how to stand up 
[looking at photo]. Uh-huhYeah, shes been a good 
friend.  Mm-hmmOkay now lets see, thats my friend 
Barbara, and I guess thats me at the end by the 
walker  
Wendy: Thats as we head out of the building. 
25 Nancy Matheson looked at four photos during this section of the interview, two of which she 
did not give me consent to use when asked at the final interview. 
Figure 8 'Nancy Matheson' leaving condo with friend Barbara (HSW) 
Figure 9 'Nancy Matheson' walking with friend Barbara (HSW) 
Nancy Matheson: Mm-hmm, yeah.  Shes been a good friend [little laugh].  
Mm-hmm, yeahboy the flowers look beautiful here 
dont? Mm-hmm. 
Wendy: I think thats when you start singing Follow the Yellow 
Brick Road on the walk 
Nancy Matheson: Oh yes, because we were walking over a brick road. 
Yeah, mm-hmm, mm-hmmYeah Barbaras been a 
good friend [laughs again]on our walk [looking at 
photo; laughs softly]. 
Wendy: Does this look like a fairly typical visit with Barbara?  
Some of the things that you normally do? 
Nancy Matheson: Yes, I think so.  Mm-hmm.  Yep.  Shes the one I go to 
the movies withmm-hmmmm-hmmyeah. 
Ester Hernandez had very few opportunities for social interaction due to the 
degree of assistance she required with her activities of daily living and the 
financial strain her daughter was under26.  Her life was restricted to dementia 
related activities and people  the dementia day program she attended three 
days per week; the personal support worker who came to her house for mobility 
exercises on the two other weekdays; and myself as a researcher for roughly 6 
weeks.  When the bus for the day program broke down, Ester Hernandez was 
not able to attend for over a week; and she could not come to the feedback 
session as it was too difficult for her daughter to arrange transportation, despite 
offers of assistance from myself and the reimbursement of travel costs from the 
Alzheimer Society of Ontario.  No wonder Ester Hernandez had an active 
imaginary life, otherwise know as a tendency to confabulate27.  Her 
26 Both of these issues were the focus of much discussion with Ester Hernandezs daughter and 
possibly the reason she had been so keen for her mother to participate in the research.  While I 
expressed empathy during these conversations, I did not encourage her to discuss these issues 
during the research and waited until the end of the final interview to inquire about her sources of 
support and to refer her to the Alzheimer society and her mothers care coordinator at the 
community care access centre. 
27 Confabulation means making up answers to cover gaps in the memory (Jacques & Jackson, 
2000: 70).  It would be interesting to look at how this medical discourse might be used to 
opportunities for stimulation were so limited that it was surprising how well she 
was able to function and to resist efforts to disable her. 
7.5 Gender differences 
Although I was not looking for gender differences on their own, or separate from 
other identity factors, clear distinctions based on gender did emerge from the 
data in relation to experiencing dementia; for this reason, I chose to separate 
out gender in this analysis chapter.  While I did discuss race, ethnicity, and 
class in particular with respect to the variability of social location (see section 
6.2), these other identity constructs, for which there were at least three 
variables each, appeared to be more inextricably intertwined (Andersen & Hill 
Collins, 2001b; Anthias, 1992; Bannerji, 1995a; Bhavnani, 2001; Brah, 2001; 
Crenshaw Williams, 1994; hooks, 2000a).  Had I selected two particular ethnic 
and racial groups and two social classes, I might have been able to present 
the results as ethnic, racial, and class differences; I would not have done so, 
however, as this would be inconsistent with an intersectional approach.  I 
present the following gender differences with the caution that the sample size 
was small (eight people) and included more women (five) than men (three), as 
discussed in section 5.3.5; for this reason, these findings should be interpreted 
with caution and need to be supported by further research. 
7.5.1 Women - accepting and masking  
The most prevalent attitude amongst the women in the sample was a frank 
acceptance of memory problems, an approach that some of the women had 
pathologise or label as problematic everyday  bullshitting or story-telling, such as that 
undertaken by Joe Brown with his friends at the donut shop (see 7.3.2). 
employed in response to past troubles, such as the illness or death of a family 
member.  In the first interview, Nancy Matheson explained that worrying about 
problems like memory loss actually makes them worse and that one should try 
and avoid any such expressions of self-pity. 
Nancy Matheson: ...I dont worry about it.  I dont worry about it.  If you 
worry and fret about it, I think it makes everything 
worse.  If you just oh gosh, Ive lost my memory, you 
know.  No, no, no, you dont do that.  
Wendy: So you think that makes it worse? 
Nancy Matheson: Oh yes, of course it does.  Yeah, youd feel so-, if 
youre sorry for yourself, then thats no good. 
Julianna Molnar indicated a similar perspective in the second interview when 
she answered my question as to why she does not tell most people about her 
memory problems, with a simple question of her own: why should I be 
complaining?  As this was a gendered attitude, it could be an indication of 
support for the hypothesis that older women are more accepting of ill health and 
other problems encountered in later life because they have been socialized to 
accept their lot in life and to just get on with it (Ginn & Arber, 1995; Hughes & 
Metzuka, 1992).  The concept of resilience, which will be discussed in more 
detail in chapter 8, is useful for understanding this gendered approach to 
problem management, as it refers to strengths developed in the face of 
structural disadvantage.  Nancy Matheson stressed repeatedly the foolishness 
in fretting and fuming about things that one has no control over; and in the final 
interview, she summarized her opinion thus:  
I mean theres no use fretting and fuming about it.  That wont do you 
any good. 
The women employed various strategies to downplay the significance of 
dementia as well; in this way, they may have successfully integrated dementia 
into their lives (Keady & Nolan, 2003).  For example, Bosse Knudsen, who 
described herself repeatedly as a people person used humour to compensate 
for her inability to remember, as demonstrated in the following quote:  
NoI really dont worry about it, that I, that I cant remember so 
good.  Just that, either sometimes, sometimes happens you know 
that theres something I have forgotten and then instead Im, we just 
laugh about it, yeah. 
It may be significant that Bosse Knudsen said we laugh about it, rather than I 
laugh about it.  The personal pronoun plural also was used by other participants 
in describing how they dealt with memory problems.  In the following quote, 
Angela Huggins explained what happened when she forgot a doctors 
appointment and tried to claim that her daughter had not told her about it: 
And Ill say, you never told me. I dont remember that. And she 
says, Uh-huh. I know, old age setting And we make a joke about it. 
We dont argue about it. 
This strategy of aligning oneself with others to dismiss the significance of 
dementia was seen in Bosse Knudsens constant declarations that other people 
took her the way that she was, that they did not treat her any differently, as 
shown earlier in section 7.2.  The disconnect I observed between the 
participants views of their treatment by others and the actual words and actions 
of others with whom they interacted will be explored more fully in the next 
chapter on othering, particularly in section 8.4.   
Several of the women also noted that they did not disclose their dementia 
status and in a sense chose to pass (Goffman, 1963).  In a discussion of 
whether she was treated any differently due to dementia, as other participants 
had indicated, Angela Huggins questioned the need to tell other people about 
her diagnosis, explained that non-disclosure ensured her continued status as a 
normal person (discussed in detail in section 9.5), and demonstrated that her 
strategies varied depending on the degree of familiarity she had with the person 
in question. 
Angela Huggins: Well, I mean I dont tell everybody if I go to the store 
shopping, I dont tell everybody, by the way [coughs] 
by the way I have Alzheimers. So I dont see how I 
could be treated differently. 
Wendy: Okay, what about with your friends though. Do you tell 
them at all? 
Angela Huggins: Yeah, yeah, I make a jokeIll say, um, um lets 
thinksomeone was supposed to go to the show the 
other day and he didnt phone like he said, and Ill say, 
Ah, for Gods Sake, what is it with old age I mean, I 
wont mention the word Alzheimers but Ill joke about 
old age. Yes. I dont think that they even think that I 
have anything really wrong with me not to that extent. 
Because I really dont feel that way at all. I dont know. I 
mean if I see a good looking man coming down the 
street, Im gonna look You know, I mean Im not dead 
yet Lets face it. I, Im not feeling sorry for myself, lets 
put it this way. And Im aware of what is going on 
around me. Its not that Im forgetting to set the table for 
dinner or something like that. Im not forgetting anything 
like that. 
Wendy: Why do you not tell people? 
Angela Huggins: Because now that Im in Barrie [mid-size city 100 
kilometres North of Toronto], who am I going to tell? 
People that I dont know? You know, I dont know 
anybody here at all. Lets face it. So I dont have toIts 
nobodys business. Thats how IIts nobodys 
business what I haveum, I, Avon. I have a little girl 
who I buy Avon from her and uh she hasnt noticed 
anything because I  I you want to ask her but I 
mean why should I advertise something like thatI 
dont think its necessary. 
Wendy: Okay. So its nobodys business and its not necessary. 
Angela Huggins: Yeah. I go to a bakery shop in Toronto just before I 
came up here and still did my shopping as usual and 
nobody noticed anything different. They didnt have to 
say, cant you understand? or whatever. I mean, 
nobodys treated me like that  
This section has shown that the women were more likely to resign themselves 
to having dementia, as opposed to fighting it, and that they felt that it was not 
worth worrying about.  At the same time, the women employed various 
strategies to reduce the effect of their dementia on their relationships with other 
people, such as joking about memory problems and attributing them to old age, 
and passing for normal or not telling other people about their dementia status. 
7.5.2 Men - controlling and being upfront  
The men in the sample displayed a very different approach to dementia, which 
appears to be consistent with gendered behavioural norms that lead to men 
acting masterful and women powerless (Butler, 1990).  A belief that one should 
be able to control ones memory problems and in this way overcome dementia 
was espoused by all three of the men, two of whom were multiply privileged 
and one of whom fell in-between multiply marginalized and multiply privileged, 
being marginalized on the basis of his class and race, and privileged on the 
basis of his ethnicity and gender.  I was not able to explore the extent to which 
this response was related to the interaction of gender and class or simply 
gender, as I was unable to find another more marginalized male to test out this 
emergent theory, as noted in section 5.5 and detailed in footnote 13. 
Jim Heather felt confident in the ability of researchers to conquer Alzheimers 
disease in the near future, as the following exchange illustrates:  
Jim Heather: So uh, its strange disease.  You know I, I have a 
definite feeling that within probably two to five years 
theyll uh, this will be a disease that, the Alzheimer part 
of it, will be, will be able to be conquered and uh 
Wendy: What makes you think that?  Is that as a physician? 
Jim Heather: What, the, the defeating? 
Wendy: Yes. 
Jim Heather: Well, Ive been down to Toronto and seen the unit down 
there.  Have you been there? 
Wendy: Yes, at the Centre for Neurodegenerative Diseases?    
Jim Heather: Mm, yes. 
Wendy: I havent seen the labs; I was there for a meeting. 
Jim Heather: Yes, Ive been through the labs and theyre two or three 
people looking at different sides of it and it seems a 
pretty fairly complicated situation where theres um, 
theres two or three different ways of treating it possibly 
and uh and its theres two or three different types of 
things that happen when the disease is getting 
underway.  Its a bit complicated and thats why its still 
around. 
Despite having confidence in the researchers ability to conquer dementia over 
time, Jim Heather struggled with the limitations imposed on him by his cognitive 
impairment and lamented the ineffectiveness of his own defences against an 
attack of this nature: 
what um can we do or you know, you really feel that youve got no 
attack, from our point of view to prevent whats going to happen.  
Weve [him and his spouse] not had any ability to, to um, do that, 
with attack, so far  Um, so um, I think that um as I say I think that 
its [cough] very difficult to get around the feeling of defeat um as a 
result of the loss of human, brain dexterity.  
An exception among the women, in terms of gendered responses to dementia, 
was Bosse Knudsen, who alternated between the strategies of dismissal used 
by the other women (see section 7.5.1) and the belief in ones ability to control 
dementia espoused by the men.  Bosse Knudsen was one of the participants 
who fell in-between multiply marginalized and multiply privileged, being 
privileged on the basis of her race and class, and marginalized on the basis of 
her gender and ethnicity, and she was one of the most cognitively impaired 
participants.  These two things may explain her vacillation, or the fact that she 
did not hold firmly to one strong opinion or another.  The quote below illustrates 
how her views were similar to the ones the males expressed: 
Bosse Knudsen: I, I try to not forget things. 
Wendy: Mm-hmm.  How do you do that? 
Bosse Knudsen: I wor-, I just work harder on it, then think more about it. 
Wendy: So youre trying to control it? 
Bosse Knudsen: Hmm? 
Wendy: Youre trying to control it? 
Bosse Knudsen: Yeah, yeah. 
Wendy: And is that how youve approached other things in life? 
Bosse Knudsen: Yeah. 
Wendy: Yeah, okay.  How is that working for you? 
Bosse Knudsen: Its working good. 
An oft-heard refrain from Joe Brown was: 
Well I tell you what, I remember what I wanna remember and what I 
dont wanna remember I forget. 
And he expanded on this belief in a later exchange: 
Joe Brown: No.  I remember what I wanna remember, okay.  I 
wanna remember, I remember.  I dont know, things I 
have to, things I have to 
Wendy: So how do you do that though?  How do you control 
that? 
Joe Brown: I guess you get it in your mind. 
Wendy: Yeah. 
Joe Brown: What you want there, okay now I was sitting there just 
now, I was sittin here I was checking to see about my 
phone bills you know.  Then I said Im looking up at the 
thing, and I said oh, well I said I paid my phone bill last 
month so therefore I dont owe them no money, and 
now my rents paid, I dont owe nobody no money. 
Joe Browns technique of getting it in your mind is akin to Gus Holdens 
strategy of learning to lock something in wherever you can; when Gus Holden 
made the latter statement in the second interview, he accompanied it with a 
gesture of turning a key beside his head. 
In talking about the future, Jim Heather gave a sense of the rationale behind his 
strategy of confronting dementia head on, which entailed being upfront with 
other people about having memory problems: 
So um, I dont know whats ahead and uh I wished I didnt have to 
think about it occasionally but its um its very awkward to, but theres 
no other way I mean, youve got to confront things, confront them 
honestly and I think that uh that that is about the best we can do out 
of this. 
This approach of being upfront (see section 8.3) was employed by Gus Holden 
as well, as was seen in the story of sharing his diagnosis with fellow cottagers 
in an effort to align himself with them (section 7.4).  Not disclosing ones 
diagnosis and attempting to pass for normal did not seem to be an option for 
either Jim Heather or Gus Holden, both of whom felt that being upfront about 
their memory problems was the best approach.  This could be related to their 
shared social class and associated societal expectations about the 
performance of professional men in both work and social settings.  In fact, when 
I asked Gus Holden his perspective on the gender differences I had observed, 
he himself made this link to occupational background.    
No and because of my job and this is this not necessarily because 
Im a man, its just, I had to think ahead, plan something in my mind.  
I would have a speech to give or a uh, recommendation to put 
forward or something like that and I would, could be thinking about 
that on the way to a meeting and, and my mind, I would take my 
mind off that, right, talk to somebody uh, as I was going into the 
building and when I got to my, my time on the agenda, I would have 
no trouble.  It, it would be tucked back there and I would explain or 
ask the questions, or make the suggestions and, if necessary, even 
follow through with a discussion on it.  And uh, now, no, no, I couldnt 
do that now.  Now uh, Sue [spouse] can do that now.  Now whether 
thats because shes a woman or because she doesnt  
After I validated this occupational link and suggested a cohort effect as well, i.e. 
work expectations had been different for women than men in his generation, 
thus Sue did not have the same career opportunities, Gus Holden continued on 
with this argument and ended with a reference to losses: 
It was very much that way.  Uh, almost everything I did that I can 
remember in my career, uh, theres the heading and I would, pe-, 
people would, Id ask questions but I would develop that, it would be 
build it in my mind.  So when the time, time came for me to write it 
down, to tell somebody else about it, or to even get more questions, 
ask more questions to fill it out, all the information I needed was 
there in my, in my head and uh, the words came, the words that I 
needed, the terms and everything like that.  Uh, thats now missing. 
As has been shown by the data in this section, the women and the men who 
participated in this research had very different approaches to dementia in terms 
of the degree of importance they accorded their memory problems, their 
approaches to ameliorating its effects, and their strategies for interacting with 
other people.  Past research on subjective experiences of dementia has 
identified coping strategies including hiding memory lapses and going public 
(Keady & Nolan, 1995) and responses ranging from self-maintaining to self-
adjusting (Clare, 2003), yet these have not been analysed for gender 
differences (Keady & Nolan, 2003).  While my results indicate similar responses 
and strategies to people with dementia in past research, the significant finding 
is that these were gendered behaviours and this is supported by emerging 
literature on identity roles in later life (Arber & Ginn, 1995).  The extent to which 
these differences are due to gender alone or to gender interacting with social 
class is certainly an area for further investigation, as noted in chapter 6. 
7.6 Conclusions 
Several conclusions can be drawn from this chapter on experiencing dementia 
that build towards a grounded theory of the relationships between the 
experiences of older people with dementia and the intersections of race, 
ethnicity, class, and gender.  First, the benefits of engaging with the white 
elephant (Albee, 1965) - in this case dementia - are clearly evident.  Asking 
people with dementia about their experiences of living with a disabling condition 
such as this can generate rich data that not only challenges our existing 
knowledge base, but that also lead us towards a deeper and more complex 
understanding of this phenomenon called dementia.  It is indeed possible, and it 
is extremely valuable to undertake these sorts of investigations, both for the 
researchers and the researched, as argued by researchers preceding me in this 
area (Keady & Gilliard, 1999). 
Second, the problematisation of dementia occurs within a social and political 
context and is not transmitted to and/or integrated into the illness narratives 
(Kleinman, 1988) of all people with dementia in the same fashion.  The extent 
to which dementia is conceptualized as a problem varies; dementia is not 
viewed as problematic by all those who are living with it and this is related to 
the social location of the affected individual, as well as the reactions of 
significant others or other members of the participants social worlds.  The more 
privileged a person, the more likely they are to view dementia in a negative 
light; and the more marginalized an individual, the more likely they are to 
dismiss the significance of dementia and resist being viewed as the sum of their 
symptoms. 
Third, there are indications in the data that dementia may facilitate, rather than 
hinder, self- actualization, as it affords people an expanded view of the universe 
and their place within it (Summerlin & Bundrick, 2000).  This tentative finding 
builds on the large body of work to date that demonstrates the existing selfhood 
of people with dementia (Sabat, 2001), as well as emerging scholarship 
highlighting the agency of people with dementia (Hubbard et al, 2003; Cook, 
2003; McColgan, 2001) and the importance of spirituality in dementia (Bell & 
Troxel, 2001; Snyder, 2003). 
Lastly, this chapter on experiencing dementia clearly shows that diversity does 
make a difference.  When we expand the pool of respondents by factoring in 
race, ethnicity, class, and gender, the picture that emerges of life with 
dementia is bound to be more nuanced and complex, as it was in this research.  
Not only do older people with dementia conceptualize dementia differently, but 
also their preoccupations, the impact it has on their social worlds, and the 
strategies they use to ameliorate it, all vary by social location. 
Chapter - 8 Othering Dementia 
8.1 Introduction 
This chapter builds on the previous chapter on experiencing dementia to 
consider the interactive context of dementia.  The purpose is to argue that 
othering is a significant feature of the interactions of older people with dementia 
in their social worlds; to enumerate the othering practices engaged in by the 
significant others of people with dementia; and to demonstrate the connection 
between social location and othering dementia.  The latter argument expands 
on the link between social location and experiencing dementia established in 
the previous chapter. 
8.2 Othering as a political act 
There are at least two ways in which the concept of othering is used in 
sociological literature (Canales, 2000).  The first denotes an interactive process 
of defining the self in relation to the other and taking the role of the other in 
order to understand oneself, as described by symbolic interactionists such as 
Mead (1967), Blumer (1962), Horton Cooley (1969), Goffman (1959), and 
Strauss (1997).  The second use of othering refers to an overtly political 
negotiation of difference in which status as other is inscribed upon those who 
differ from the normative understanding of what it means to be a human being 
(de Beauvoir, 1997).  Othering has been written about extensively, particularly 
as the concept applies to disabled people (Hughes, 2002; Morris, 1991; 1996; 
Oliver, 1990; 1996), minority ethnic and racialised people (Anderson & Hill 
Collins, 2001a; Brah, 2001; Kumashiro, 2000; Reimer Kirkham, 2003; 
Rutherford, 1990; Young, 1990), and older people to a limited extent (Cohen, 
1994).  There have been a few studies looking specifically at othering practices 
within health care settings that have provided evidence that minority ethnic and 
racialised service users and health care professionals are Othered in these 
contexts (Canales, 2000; Canales & Bower, 1998; Reimer Kirkham, 2003).  
Canales (2000) distinguished between inclusionary and exclusionary processes 
of othering and argued that, if the former -  
a process that attempts to utilize power within relationships for 
transformation and coalition building (Canales, 2000: 19) -  
is practiced, it can overcome the latter.  Although she defines othering in 
symbolic interactionist terms as how we engage with those perceived as 
different from self (Canales, 2000:16), both these forms of othering draw on 
insider-outsider dichotomies and more political negotiations of difference.  
Reimer Kirkham (2003: 776) concludes that her own study: 
underlines the importance of uncovering, naming, and confronting 
those public scripts that say that certain people do not belong.   
This argument shares similarities with that of Valentine (1998), who found that 
the invisibility and silencing of marginalized groups, in this case sexual and 
racialised minorities in Japan, through othering practices such as naming 
serves to deny their identity and as such is a powerfully destructive force. 
The approach to othering associated with symbolic interactionism was first 
applied to dementia in the seminal work of Gubrium (1986a; 1986b; 1987) and 
Gubrium and Lynott (1985) on the social construction of Alzheimers disease 
and is evident in research on the social interaction of people with dementia 
(Cook, 2003; Hubbard et al, 2002a; Li & Orleans, 2002; Lyman, 1998; 
McGolgan, 2001; Vittoria, 1998; 1999; Williams & Roberts, 1995).  A review of 
literature on the management of people with Alzheimers disease in the late 
1980s to early 1990s found that symbolic interaction was a predominant and 
consistent theme (Moore, 1991) although explicitly sociological approaches to 
dementia care were rare at that time (Johnson, 1989).  As noted, the popularity 
of symbolic interaction as a framework for understanding dementia has endured 
and now the lens has shifted away from service provider interactions with 
people with dementia towards people with dementia engaging with one another 
(Cook, 2003; McColgan, 2001). 
It is the second meaning of othering, which can be traced back to Simone de 
Beauvoirs (1997) argument that women are treated as the Other28, that the 
data in this study support and of which there has been little discussion to date 
in the dementia literature, although an associated term - marginalization - has 
proven popular (Innes, Archibald & Murphy, 2004).  For example, 
marginalization was a significant theme that arose in support groups for people 
with early stage memory loss in the United States and the authors suggest that 
ways to reduce marginalization should be an agenda for future research (The 
Group Members, 2003).  Young (1990: 53) explained in her taxonomy of the 
five faces of oppression that: 
marginalization is perhaps the most dangerous form of oppression 
[as] a whole category of people is expelled from useful participation 
in social life. 
28 It is difficult to pinpoint the origin of the concept of the Other, in its overtly political incarnation.  
De Beauvoir, with whom the Other is often associated, referred to woman as mans inessential 
other (Barber, 2001: 71).  She argued that he is the subject, he is the absolute  she is the 
Other (de Beauvoir , 1997:16), yet attributed this usage to E. Levinas (de Beauvoir, 1997:16). 
Although othering as a concept was not used explicitly in the brief article about 
the early stage support group (The Group Members, 2003), it is clear from the 
examples given that the intended meaning is closer to othering as a political 
act, than the more common usage referring to negotiated meaning between two 
or more parties.  Being the other is described by Madrid (2001: 25) as 
involving a contradictory phenomenon:   
On the one hand, being the other frequently means being invisible  
On the other hand, being the other sometimes involves sticking out 
like a sore thumb.  What is she/he doing here?  If one is the other, 
one will inevitably be perceived unidimensionally; will be seen 
stereotypically; will be defined and delimited by mental sets that may 
not bear much relation to existing realities.  The other disturbs, 
disquiets, discomforts.  It provokes distrust and suspicion.  The other 
makes people feel anxious, nervous, apprehensive, even fearful.  
The other frightens, scares.       
It is more common in the literature to find references to the Other, such as the 
one above, together with descriptions of those who inhabit this category and 
what the experience is like for them, than explanations of the process of 
othering - how and why one comes to be othered and to other others.  In this 
chapter, othering is treated as the analytical lens through which the interactive 
components of the experiences of older people with dementia in this study are 
best understood, as well as a material reality of living with dementia.  
8.3 Othering practices 
The silencing and social distancing to which people with dementia are subject 
in settings and groups to which they are known was noted in most of the 
participant observation sessions.  When I mentioned these incidents to the 
participants at the follow-up interviews, more often than not they had not been 
aware of this othering process or they actively denied that they had been 
treated any differently.  This basic social process would not have emerged as 
significant had I relied on interviews alone; through using participant 
observation and interview methods, I was able to see for myself the ways that 
older people with dementia function in their social worlds, to elicit their 
perspectives on these social interactions, and to compare the two accounts 
(Lambert & McKevitt, 2002; Ikels et al, 1988).  A few of the participants did 
reflect upon the othering I had observed when asked about this in the 
subsequent interviews.  In the second interview with Julianna Molnar, I tried to 
ascertain the nature of her interactions with people in the building, whether they 
knew that she was having memory problems, and if they treated her any 
differently as a result of that knowledge.      
Wendy: Okay. What do they know about your current life? 
Julianna Molnar: These people who are there [referring to art class]? 
Wendy: Yeah. 
Julianna Molnar: They are some who are veryuhthey talk very 
nicely.There are some people who dont even notice 
meUhon this floor there isthere are few.there 
are few people, men and women, who know me. They 
always say hello, ask me how I am etc. etc. And they 
see that umthe time Im walking more with more 
difficulty. 
Wendy: So have your interactions with the people in the class 
or the people in the building, have those changed at all 
since you started having troubles with your memory? 
Julianna Molnar: I have a good relationship with the woman who is on 
the 10th floor from Romania. Theres a couple who are 
from Romania. And they are a couple who we met 
because we heard them on the elevator speaking 
Hungarian or Romanian. But the one that I go visit, 
theres only one. But I strictly see ?Very rarelyvery 
rarely the ones that speak Romanian sometimes they 
will come in. 
Wendy: Mm-hmmSo do any of these people know that youre 
forgetting things? 
Julianna Molnar: The one that I, the one that I see, were together once a 
week 
Wendy: The one on the 10th floor? 
Julianna Molnar: The 10th floor.but there are things that I forget. It 
happens that I speak to someoneif they stop and um 
they say something else and then I forget what I was 
going to say. But then they know and I remember. It 
happens for example that I go to the kitchen tofor 
something. By the time I get there I forget why I went. 
And I have to wait for a bit to remember. 
Wendy: Am I correct in assuming that you dont tell people? 
Julianna Molnar: I tell this oneI let her know. 
Wendy: But nobody elseAnd why is that? 
Julianna Molnar: Why should I be complaining? 
As Julianna Molnar only talked of her memory problems with her Romanian 
friend on the 10th floor with whom she visited weekly, the second observation 
session took place during one of these visits, with the Hungarian interpreter and 
Julianna Molnars husband Gyorgy present as well.  She stated during this visit 
that: 
everyone in the building complains about their aches and pains.  
Yet, in the prior interview (see above), she had told me that she does not 
disclose her memory problems to other people in the building for the very 
reason that this would be complaining.   
Confirmation by a participant of the othering I had observed is shown in an 
excerpt from my field notes, as well as part of an interview with Jim Heather.  I 
witnessed Jim Heather being othered during the first participant observation 
session, which took place at an airport hangar where his eldest son Mike 
manages one of the family businesses: 
Several people recognized Jim Heather and said hello and a few 
brief words.  There was a customer there who was introduced to Jim 
Heather as Mikes father and by name and he obviously knew of Jim 
Heather by name as he nodded, saying ahhh and gave Jim 
Heather a look of admiration.  However, as Mike and this man 
proceeded to discuss the work underway [which Mike had explained 
to Jim earlier], Jim Heather was left on the sidelines, an observer like 
me.  Jim Heather exchanged a look and weak smile with me. 
At the interview following this observation session, Jim Heather acknowledged 
that he had noticed a change in his interactions with the people at the hangar, 
who had been much more free and easy in discussing things with [him] and 
that sort of thing in the past.  When I asked him about the above exchange, he 
likened the mans reaction to that of other people when they learn that he has 
Alzheimers disease:   
Jim Heather: I, I guess Ive got used to it, uh and um I think I 
recognized that, that um he was, he was finding out 
something for the first time 
Wendy: Um-hmm. 
Jim Heather: that um, uh, yeah, it was certainly not the, the sort of 
way that you meet people normally, its artificial uh, in 
a, in a way. 
Wendy: How is it artificial? 
Jim Heather: That um when you, when you meet a new person, they 
um, uh, its, its not the sort of way that you meet 
someone normally.  You have to um indicate or feel 
that youve got to indicate that um to indicate the uh, 
the way that you can carefully give some sort of idea of, 
that theres some sort of abnormalityreally.   
Jim Heather felt that he had to declare himself as having an abnormality, that it 
was his responsibility to alert his conversation partner to his newly acquired 
deficits and hence, changed status as a person (see section 7.4).  While this 
approach did not always prevent the awkward silences and turning away that 
are characteristic responses to the other (Rutherford, 1990; Young, 1990), it did 
serve to alert other inhabitants of Jim Heathers social world to the possibility 
that they might not be understood and would need to adapt their conversational 
style accordingly. 
Most of the interactions that I observed between Gus Holden and his significant 
others were marked by enabling, as opposed to disabling behaviour (Brody et 
al, 1971); this was undoubtedly related to the mild state of his cognitive 
impairment and his retained abilities (Wells & Dawson, 2000; Zgola, 1999).  
Zgola (1999: 93) lists the retained abilities of people with dementia as: 
 Remember things from the distant past 
 Hold an opinion or offer advice 
 Perform habitual, over-learned patterns of behaviour 
 Learn new habits 
 Enjoy pleasurable sensory stimuli 
 Respond to and express emotions 
 Follow a logical train of thought 
Gus Holden was still able to perform the role of dynamic conversationalist and 
storyteller in social gatherings, which can be seen as an indication of a few of 
these retained abilities - performing habitual over-learned patterns of behaviour; 
responding to and expressing emotion; and holding an opinion or offering 
advice (Zgola, 1999: 93).  His abilities to do these things was diminished, 
however, as will be discussed in section 8.6.  
During the second participant observation session, which took place at a staff 
meeting at a clinic owned by Jim Heather and his spouse Patricia, Jim Heather 
used his position as chair of the meeting to talk about having Alzheimers 
related problems and Parkinsons.  I was very moved by his choosing to 
discuss openly what he was going through, including his fears and the negative 
reactions of others, and watched closely to see how the staff would respond to 
his disclosure.  As I wrote in my field notes below, neither the staff nor his 
spouse responded to Jim Heathers words, much less acknowledged the 
feelings behind his words; instead, they silenced him and reproduced the 
othering he had spoken of in relation to other people and their reactions to his 
having Alzheimers.        
Jim Heather then talked of his interest in this place [the clinic]; about 
having been on the board for so long; how good it is for him to be 
part of the team; and how he would be upset if he was not able to 
have a laugh with people and keep up with what people are doing.  
He ended by saying, with a smile on his face, its a sad time, but 
there you go.  After his words, Elaine [staff person] raised the issue 
of the shredder again and a heated discussion ensued about this; 
there was neither an acknowledgement of Jim Heathers feelings nor 
a response to his words by any of the people present.  Jim Heather 
sat and watched the action.  
In discussing the reactions of the staff to his disclosure during our next 
interview, Jim Heather indicated that, having disclosed his abnormality, he 
could have been asked to leave the clinic, but since he has been around for a 
long time and there is no precedent, that would be an extreme reaction on their 
part: 
Wendy: And how, what did you think about their reactionsto 
what you had to say at the meeting? 
[pause] 
Jim Heather: I dont know um, I really not sure why, what, Ive been 
doing this for so long that, and I know this people for so 
long, no ones been, I can only think of one person 
thats ever um told to leave um and that was, not 
anything to do with me, but theres the only person in 
the building so um.  No, I cant think of anything. 
As noted in section 7.4, Ester Hernandez has a much narrower social world 
than Jim Heather, with few opportunities for engagement that are not in some 
way connected to her status as a person with dementia.  It was rare for Ester 
Hernandez to be treated as a person, in the sense described by Kitwood 
(1997), and not surprisingly, her acts of resistance tended to be ignored as well.  
The second participant observation session took place at the apartment she 
shared with her daughter Maria and focused on the interaction between Ester, 
Maria, and Esters personal support worker Paula.  Paula had been contracted 
to help Ester with personal care; however, Ester objects to anyone other than 
Maria doing this intimate caring labour, and therefore, Paula assists with 
walking and other physical exercises instead.         
Paula told me that Ester used to sit and sleep [when Paula first 
started working with her], all hunched over in her chair, and that she 
is much more alert and mobile now.  After hearing this, Ester said 
improving.  I noted at this point that Paula and Maria regularly talk 
over Ester, as if she is not present or does not understand what they 
are saying.  
Ester Hernandez was one of the more cognitively impaired participants and as 
a result was subject to a great deal of excess disability (Brody et al, 1971): her 
daughter and other caregivers demonstrated a tendency to do for her, rather 
than allowing her to do for herself.  This can be seen in a few photos from the 
two participant observation sessions, the first of her being fed at the adult day 
program and the second of her being assisted to walk in her apartment with her 
personal support worker. 
Figure 10 Ester Hernandez being fed by Filipina day program staff 
member 
Figure 11 Ester Hernandez being helped to stand by Paula (HSW) 
Figure 12 Ester Hernandez being helped to walk by Paula (HSW)  
Figure 13 Ester Hernandez being assessed by daughter and Paula (HSW) 
In contrast, Nancy Mathesons support worker Barbara tried to maintain her 
clients independence as much as possible and while she did monitor Nancys 
performance, she did not seem to be actively disabling her, as can be seen by 
my notes from the first observation session.  As in the scenario with Ester 
Hernandez above, this interaction took place between Nancy Matheson and her 
support worker, in her own apartment: 
After she was ready, Barbara helped Nancy Matheson to her feet by 
holding steady her walker and pushing the little table out of the way, 
then grasping hold of Nancys arm to steady her once she was out of 
the chair; she did as little as possible to help her and was quite 
unobtrusive about it.  Nancy then decided to go to the washroom and 
spent a long time in there (~10minutes) before returning to us in the 
kitchen.  While she was gone, Barbara talked about working with 
Alzheimer patients and said what a sad disease it is as people are 
dying in front of you.  She asked me how I found Nancy that day 
and I said fine and noted that she had repeated a few things, but that 
she does very well in conversation.  Barbara told me how Nancy 
sees her as a friend, not a worker and how she needs to retain 
independence and control over her life. 
Barbaras own words and my observation notes are supported by the photo 
showing Nancy walking on her own with Barbara maintaining a respectful 
distance, ready to provide help if asked, but not directing Nancy in any way 
(see figure 9).29  At the end of the walk, the pair sat down for a rest and posed 
for a final picture.  
29 Nancy Matheson did not give permission for the use of several pictures of her from the first 
observation session, most of which showed her being assisted by Barbara or possibly 
appearing to be frail and dependent (see section 7.4.1).    
Figure 14 Nancy Matheson and her friend Barbara (HSW) after the walk    
Despite being treated by others as excessively disabled, Ester Hernandez 
continually surprised me with her insightful comments, that often were not 
heard or understood by her communication partners, perhaps since they were 
so unexpected from an older person with dementia who was thought to 
confabulate and perseverate30 routinely, and to have little knowledge of the 
English language.  An example of this is taken from the sunroom chatter 
activity during the first participant observation session at the dementia day 
program that Ester attended three days per week: 
The group leader asked if anyone knew what a calling card was and 
Ester said yes, you give your card and Ill see you.  The group 
leader did not seem to grasp the dual meaning of calling card so I 
explained that Ester was referring to how in the past you would 
present your calling card when you went to visit someone at their 
home or office.  The group leader said oh, thats a long time ago in 
response and clarified this was a card used to make a telephone call. 
I was impressed by the speed with which Ester Hernandez came up with the 
answer to this question and how well she articulated her understanding of the 
purpose of a calling card.  The group leader was not visibly impressed herself, 
nor did she acknowledge Esters skilful performance, an act which may have 
increased Esters status and visibility in the group, yet also could have drawn 
attention to the group leaders own lack of knowledge.  
30 These are both terms for perceptual disturbances or communication acts associated with 
dementia, signs of which are looked for during assessment.  Confabulation (see footnote 24 in 
section 7.4.1) is marked by the confident presentation of obviously untrue information in order 
to hide the fact that the answer is not known; it may be conscious or automatic; has been 
observed with many forms of cognitive impairment, though initially associated with Korsakoffs 
syndrome and can result from a disruption in the time-sequence of stored memories (Jacques & 
Jackson, 2000: 70 & 231).  My first experience with confabulation was while working on a life 
history project in 1993:  I interviewed an older man with Korsakoffs syndrome who was living in 
a long term care facility populated mainly by men who had been alcoholics and street people; 
by the end of the interview, he had two PhDs, was royalty, and had just married his care 
assistant.  Perseveration refers to a difficulty in shifting from one subject to another (Jacques & 
Jackson, 2000: 153); in more extreme cases, a word, phrase or story is repeated over and over 
again (ibid, 154); and it can happen with speech or actions (ibid, 179). 
In many of the interactions I observed, particularly with significant others, these 
older people with dementia were continually reminded of their memory 
problems, they were tested and set up for failure, and their status as people 
with dementia was reinforced.  I was guilty of this myself, as noted in section 
6.4:  this can be seen in the line of questioning that I pursued with many of the 
participants.  An example of this behaviour on the part of someone else is taken 
from the start of the first observation session with Bosse Knudsen, which took 
place at the dementia day program she attended every Wednesday.  The nurse 
manager tested Bosse Knudsen by asking her whether she knew me, and what 
my name is, despite our having met only twice before, both times in her home. 
After I arrived, Frances (nurse manager) came out to the hallway 
between the administration offices and the day program room to 
meet me.  When we entered the day program room, I noticed Bosse 
sitting at a table beside a woman and across from another woman 
who was folding napkins 
Figure 15 Bosse Knudsen sitting with friend at dementia day program 
Frances said I guess you remember Bosse and asked Bosse if she 
knew me.  Bosse smiled and said yes and then Frances asked her 
for my name but, to save her the struggle to remember, I said Hi 
Bosse, its Wendy 
The action I took in this example above is not the normal behaviour of a 
researcher, as this was a purposive strategy to consciously affect the research 
process and, as such, is an indication of my efforts to make the research less 
oppressive for the participants (see chapter 5). 
At the second observation session with Nancy Matheson, her son-in-law Dave, 
who is a special needs teacher, demonstrated to me the extent to which Nancy 
fell under the gaze (Foucault, 1994b) of her significant others, who are on 
constant alert for signs of her cognitive impairment and very conscious of her 
gaze themselves:     
Dave came over to chat and told me that he thought Nancy was 
over-stimulated, adding that he could tell by her eye movement, that 
she was not sure where to focus her gaze.  He told me that he visits 
her for 1-3 hours at a time during which they have long talks; he 
noted the problem with under-stimulation, as well as over-stimulation 
and said that he notices that her perseveration varies depending on 
her level of stimulation.  I had not noticed Nancy perseverating at all 
that evening; indeed, I had not noticed any cognitive deficits at all. 
Angela Huggins was being monitored constantly by her daughter Ashley who 
was a social worker with the Childrens Aid Society (see section 7.3.2).  During 
the first observation session, she asked her mother repeatedly what she had 
eaten that day: 
Angela said she was not hungry so Ashley asked her what she had 
eaten for lunch that day.  Angela could not remember but noted that 
she had eaten two peaches an hour earlier and for that reason was 
not hungry.  Ashley continued to ask her mother questions about her 
eating patterns and encouraged her to eat, without success.   Ashley 
told me that her mothers appetite had decreased and that getting 
her to eat was a big struggle. 
Despite Angela reporting that she was not hungry and that she had eaten two 
peaches an hour earlier, Ashley was not satisfied until she found evidence in 
the kitchen that her mother had eaten a meal earlier that day:  
When she noticed the dirty frying pan in the kitchen, Ashley figured 
out that her mother had eaten bacon and eggs for lunch and said 
that if she checked the bread, shed probably find that she had toast 
as well.  This triggered Angelas memory and she confirmed that this 
is what she had eaten for lunch that day.   
An extreme example of how people with dementia are Othered comes from the 
second observation session with Bosse Knudsen at a seniors group at the 
Seventh Day Adventist Church to which she and her husband belonged.   
While Bosse was meandering about, no one spoke to her; in fact 
they seemed to studiously ignore her.  One woman came up to me to 
expand on her earlier comments about the futility of attempting to 
build on First Nations reserves [in relation to the guest speaker from 
Habitat for Humanity] and after we talked for a few minutes, I told her 
why I was there.  A little while later, after she noticed me talking to 
Bosse, she pulled me aside, gave me a conspiratorial look and 
confided in me that you cant talk to herdementiashe has 
dementia you know.  I repeated that I was doing my PhD on 
dementia and was there to observe Bosse, and walked away from 
Not only was this woman treating Bosse as the other, but also she felt it her 
duty to instruct me in the techniques of othering so that I could conform to the 
practices of the group; my non-compliance disrupted her taken-for-granted 
assumptions about who should be othered and how this should be done.  One 
other person disobeyed the group sanctions that day and this was the lay 
pastor who had greeted the three of us upon our arrival and later came up to 
talk to Bosse Knudsen and placed a hand on her shoulder.  In the photo, Bosse 
Knudsen looks like the people-person she purports to be; the photo is 
significant though because this was the only person that I saw treat Bosse 
Knudsen as a person (Kitwood, 1997) during the entire three hours. 
Figure 16 Bosse Knudsen with the pastor at the seniors' church group 
Angela Huggins daughter Ashley tried to role model othering practices as well 
during the participant observation sessions when she repeatedly inquired as to 
her mothers eating habits and medication compliance (see below) and turned 
to me as if to say see, I told you shes losing it if Angela Huggins was unable 
to provide a satisfactory answer.  By the end of the second observation 
session, I had been tainted with courtesy stigma (Goffman, 1963; MacRae, 
1999)  transformed into another one of the kids whom Ashley had to look 
after, making sure we all went to the toilet before getting in the car and planning 
our route home: 
Before we left the store, Ashley asked where the washroom was and 
the clerk said that it was on the next level up and gave her the key.  
She asked her mother if she needed to go to the bathroom and 
Angela said no.  Ashley asked if she was sure and pointed out that 
its been an hour and itll be 45 minutes until were back at the 
house.  She noted that I could look after Maya [granddaughter] while 
they went together.  Angela became angry at Ashleys badgering her 
about the washroom and Ashley said pretend shes not here, 
gesturing at me.  Angela relented and said youre on to me and 
pointed at Maya.  I asked whether we should stay in the store and 
Ashley suggested I push Maya around the store in the shopping cart, 
which I did while they went to the washroom.  When they returned, 
Ashley checked with me whether I needed to go to the washroom 
and I lied and said that I was okay.  In truth I did need to go to the 
toilet, yet did not want to miss observing them.  
Once we were settled in the car and on our way again, Ashley 
listed our next activities: drive through Barrie, go to another 
drugstore for the knee brace, go by the house to take a family 
picture, and then home.  She asked how does that sound kids? and 
I wondered if I was one of the kids she was referring to.  Not getting 
a response, she said Gramma? and Angela said it sounded fine. 
Figure 17 The kids - Angela Huggins with her granddaughter Maya 
Angela was aware of these othering practices adopted by her daughter and 
how this made her feel like a decrepit old lady, particularly Ashleys recently 
adopted habit of referring to her mother as Gramma:   
Wendy: So you described Ashley like a mother hen.  Is that 
something more recent? 
Angela Huggins: Yeah, yeah, yeah, most definitely. 
Wendy: Yeah.  I guess the same with the questions about the 
eating, the routine questions about what to eat 
Angela Huggins: Yeah, and-and the pills.  She will say, Have you had 
your pills?  No but Ill have it in a short while, I havent 
eaten yet. So I have to eat first and take the pills.  And 
then she come back, All right, Im going to get the 
pills. She-Shes a mother hen, you know.  And-and 
now she calls me Gramma.  And it aggravates me no 
end  In the store, Gramma  And I dont answer.  And 
everybodys looking, Wheres Gramma?  You know?  I 
mean, good God call me mommy  You know, it is-its 
just-its just recently Sister Bonita she-because of the 
baby.  But the baby doesnt call me Gramma, the baby 
calls me Nana.  So if she would even say, Nana. 
Wendy: Yeah.  Have you told her that? [laughs] 
Angela Huggins: Several times but she forgets.  I feel like a decrepit little 
old lady, with a little cane you know coming down the 
street.  Good Lord 
Many of the participants felt that their memory problems did not cause them to 
be treated any differently by members of their self-identified communities, and 
for some this was indeed the case.  As I accompanied Joe Brown on a typical 
walk around his neighbourhood, I did not witness any of the people with whom 
he interacted treating him as a person with an abnormality.  Below is a long 
segment of my notes from this first observation session and a few of the photos 
from this excursion that together demonstrate the absence of othering in 
interactions between Joe Brown and the people he encountered in his 
neighbourhood:   
Upon leaving the building, Joe Brown said hello to an older Black 
woman who lives in his building and chatted with her as they walked 
along the street  [I] asked her if I could take a picture of them 
together as they walked.  She said okay if Joe didnt mind.  I took a 
picture of them as he was gesturing to a place across the street (see 
Figure 3).  We passed a younger Black man at an instant-teller 
machine and Joe Brown held out his hat to him as if asking for 
money; the man did not react at all.  I commented on this interaction 
and Joe said oh, I always bug him.  Soon after, we passed a 
younger Black woman who greeted Joe Brown with hey Joe, how 
you doin and I said something about him knowing a lot of people to 
which he responded I know everyone in [name of the community].  
We entered the cash and save which is a storefront bank and he 
greeted the tellers.   
Figure 18 'Joe Brown' greeting bank tellers 
He seemed to be more familiar with the middle-aged Black woman 
than the other two tellers [younger Asian man and middle-aged 
South Asian woman] [and he] sat down on the bench opposite the 
counter where she was sitting behind a pane of glass and started to 
chat with her from this position.   
Figure 19 'Joe Brown' talking to head bank teller  
She engaged in conversation with him normally and I checked 
whether this is what he normally did (sit down and shout at her from 
across the bank) and both of them confirmed that this was their usual 
pattern of behaviour.  
Figure 20 Head bank teller talking to 'Joe Brown' 
Being treated as the Other was not a strong feature in the observation sessions 
with Julianna Molnar either; she and her husband had requested that I not 
mention memory problems to any of the people present at her weekly art class, 
however, and I was introduced to the instructor and other class members as a 
young friend of hers doing a PhD and with whom she is working on a project 
about older people and their lives.  The first section of my notes from this first 
participant observation session shows Julianna Molnar being treated normally, 
while the second indicates there may have been some knowledge of her 
dementia and hence, special accommodation was made for her, though this is 
far less obvious than it was for most of the other participants.   
As Rick [art instructor] appraised Juliannas work and gave her some 
guidance in terms of colour,  
Figure 21 'Julianna Molnar' receiving suggestions from art instructor Rick  
he asked her for a pencil to draw in the cat and she immediately 
produced one from her toolbox.  Rick then pencilled in the size and 
location of the cat 
Figure 22 Art instructor Rick drawing cat as Julianna Molnar watches 
while Julianna watched with keen interest.  When I went to take a 
picture, she looked directly at me and smiled, as if posing for the 
camera.   
Figure 23 'Julianna Molnar' posing for camera at art class 
Rick did not appear to modify his behaviour in any way when 
interacting with Julianna and she did not demonstrate any 
communication deficits that may have tipped him off that she has 
memory problems.     
Despite the absence of othering in this interaction, later in the same session, I 
noted Julianna being treated differently than the other class members and felt 
at the time that this may be due to her cognitive impairment:    
Lorraine [class member] then made an announcement about the art 
show on June 18 that would be there in the building.  Rick [instructor] 
came by and wrote in pencil Art Show June 18 on the back of 
Juliannas painting, saying just so you remember.  I did not notice 
him do this with anyone else in the class so wondered if he was 
aware of Juliannas memory problems.   
This section has presented rich data on the othering practices engaged in by 
significant others and others within the social worlds of older people with 
dementia.  As has been shown, these othering practices were a frequent 
occurrence at the participant observation sessions and were commented upon 
by some of the older people with dementia themselves.  The specific 
techniques that are discernable in the examples given will be enumerated in the 
section that follows, along with the presentation of other taxonomies of othering 
practices. 
8.3.1 Techniques of othering 
Othering practices are modes of behaviour that render some people invisible, 
inferior, invalid, deviant or other and reinforce the dominance of those who 
enact these practices  in other words, a basic social process.  Techniques of 
othering are the everyday acts through which the dynamics of privilege and 
oppression are made real and visible; these are the tangible manifestations of 
othering.  During the course of this research, the following techniques were 
observed31: 
 Silencing 
 Distancing  
 Disabling 
 Treating as invisible 
 Avoiding/shunning  
 Testing/monitoring 
 Naming/labelling 
 Infantilising 
 Pathologising 
 Reducing (to disease state)  
There is a key difference between this list of techniques of othering and earlier 
catalogues of malignant social psychology (Kitwood, 1990; 1997a); earlier 
formulations were essentially psychological and thus, omitted the social.  
Othering is a basic social process, however, so the techniques can not be 
understood outside of the social context  they are learned and transmitted 
socially, as was evident in the observation session with Bosse Knudsen when 
31 This is by no means an exhaustive list; the techniques listed were the most frequent or salient 
examples to be found in the data.   
the group failed to teach me to other an older woman with dementia, despite 
their best efforts. 
Kitwood (1990: 181-184; 1997: 46-47) catalogued malignant social psychology 
(MSP) as: 
1. Treachery 
2. Disempowerment 
3. Infantilisation 
4. Intimidation 
5. Labelling 
6. Stigmatisation 
7. Outpacing 
8. Invalidation 
9. Banishment 
10. Objectification 
11. Ignoring 
12. Imposition 
13. Withholding 
14. Accusation 
15. Disruption 
16. Mockery 
17. Disparagement 
While this may have been a new list of malignant social psychology and 
certainly has been valuable for efforts to enumerate the depersonalising 
tendencies of care settings (Kitwood, 1997), many of these concepts have a 
long history in the sociology of deviance and are basically underpinned by 
labelling theory (Becker, 1963; Goffman, 1963; Lemert, 1972).  As a sociologist, 
I would be more apt to locate my work within the latter tradition than the 
frequently a-theoretical and a-historical dementia literature.  Not only did 
Kitwood (1990; 1997a) fail to acknowledge his intellectual ancestors in his work 
on MSP, but he actually psychologised sociological theory (Valentine, 2004, 
personal communication).  The descriptions given for each of the 17 examples 
attend to individual interactions and do not attempt to link these to social 
structures in any way.  For example, invalidation is described as: 
failing to acknowledge the subjective reality of a persons 
experience, and especially what they are feeling (p 46). 
Perhaps this was a case of adoption of terminology without a sound 
understanding of its intended meaning or an intentional definitional twist to 
make the concept more psychological.  As Zola (1982) clearly demonstrated in 
his chronicle of living with a disability, invalidation is a social process that 
occurs through four steps: 
1. Denial of sexuality 
2. Denial of anger 
3. Denial of vulnerability 
4. Denial of potentiality   
While these denials routinely occur during one to one interactions and the 
feelings of both parties are undoubtedly affected, denials of this nature are 
also evident in the policies and practices of institutions and organizations, and 
need to be understood within this social context.  
This section has clearly demonstrated that the techniques of othering used by 
significant others are connected to the basic social process of othering.  The 
individual acts that reinforce the categorisation of older people with dementia as 
problematic are connected to policies and practices that support othering.    
While most participants denied awareness of differential treatment due to their 
memory problems, there was evidence of familiarity with the process of othering 
related to other identity constructs, such as race, age, and ethnicity, as will be 
shown in the next section.    
8.4 Awareness of othering 
As noted in section 8.3, few of the participants commented on the othering that 
I saw at the observation sessions and most denied this having occurred when I 
raised it in the interviews.  There was, however, a greater awareness of 
othering practices in general on the part of two of the participants, namely 
Angela Huggins and Ester Hernandez.  Angela Huggins was quite articulate 
about the discrimination she had faced throughout her life, both in the West 
Indies and in Canada.  For this reason, of all the participants, she was most 
similar to the politically conscious women in past research on identity and 
oppression who spoke of themselves as intersectional beings (Mama, 1995a; 
Petersen, 2000; Sudbury, 2001).  In the first interview, as she told me about 
growing up in the West Indies and how a person of mixed race such as herself 
is viewed there, she clearly demonstrated her knowledge of othering practices: 
Angela Huggins: Like I am, not a known entity but I have um, one 
sixteenth of the population maybe, 1/32 of, very far. 
Wendy: Thats a change youre saying, it didnt used to be that 
Angela Huggins: No, no, it always has been like that but now theyre 
mixing a little bit more, like, like Indians, we have a big 
Indian population and a Black population, theyre the 
two majority races - the East Indian and, not red Indian, 
East Indian and, and the Negro.  And uh we are just a 
little sprinkling in-between.  So is, when, when, if I have 
an argument [laughs], like with, with another West 
Indian and shes Black, she say you, you red Ind-, you 
red niggers are so stupid and I say and you Black 
people are so ignorant too, you know.  We call each 
other names but, but 
Wendy: Yeah, what does she mean by red nigger? 
Angela Huggins: Because Im more red than white or Im not Black, so.  
Its a slur, its a slur, definitely its a slur.  And uh, when 
the Americans, we, they have a base in Trinidad and 
um, Id be riding my bicycle going to school and they 
would say, I would be riding my bicycle with other 
friends going home for lunch and they would be darker 
than I am.  These Americans would say oh my god, 
look at that one, just like back in the States.  So I was 
getting it on all sides, all sides.  It was very 
toughcause we even felt about Maya 
[granddaughter], if its going to be like that you know 
with, we have to find a place where she has, doesnt 
have discrimination at all, but where do you find a 
place, where, where can you go? 
Although more cognitively impaired than Angela Huggins and less forthcoming 
about her own experiences of discrimination, Ester Hernandez appeared to be 
conscious of othering processes as well, as demonstrated in the following 
interview during which she tells me that outsiders in Canada  are immigrants, 
old people, and Filipinos, much to my obvious surprise: 
Wendy: Yeah, so what do you think life is like for this woman 
here?  
Figure 24 Health Canada South Asian woman dancing with Asian nurse 
Ester Hernandez: This woman? 
Wendy: Mm-hmm. 
Ester Hernandez: I think maybe that they are outsiders. 
Wendy: Theyre which? 
Ester Hernandez: Outsiders. 
Wendy: Outsiders? 
Ester Hernandez: Yeah, maybe. 
Wendy: Why are they outsiders? 
Ester Hernandez: Because they are not born in Canada. 
Wendy: Because they werent, theyre not born in Canada? 
Ester Hernandez: I think maybe. 
Wendy: Lets, so, I have a lot of pictures here32, Ill show you 
some of the other ones.  So, theyre outsiders (Figure 
24), what would he be, what would he be? 
Figure 25 Time Slips white man without glasses 
Ester Hernandez: I dont know.  I dont know.  Whats that face, it looks 
like outsider? 
Wendy: He looks like an outsider too? 
Ester Hernandez: This old, hes old. 
Wendy: Because hes old? 
Ester Hernandez: Yeah, old people, looks like Filipino. 
32 I was referring to my deck of image cards (see section 5.3.2.1) that I was still using at this 
point.    
It became apparent, in a later interview, that when she was not wearing her 
glasses, Ester Hernandez assumed that the person she was speaking with or 
looking at in a picture was Filipino.  Thus, in this interview segment above, she 
considered this older white man to be an outsider like the older South Asian 
woman in the picture she had been shown before because to Ester he 
appeared to be old people, looks like Filipino. 
Although Angela Huggins and Ester Hernandez were clearly aware of othering 
processes in relation to race, ethnicity, and age, neither of them fully assumed 
awareness of being treated differently on the basis of their dementia status, as 
this exchange with Ester Hernandez indicates:   
Wendy: Ester, some of the other older people Ive talked to 
Ester Hernandez: Heh? 
Wendy: say that people treat them differently when they 
forget thingsdoes this happen to you? 
Ester Hernandez: I dont know that, I just know all the nice people.  If you 
are talking to someone older, somebody older who 
does not seem to understand, yeah, do not shout ever, 
that is one   
Ester Hernandez expanded on these views about the right way to interact with 
older people and, in the process, avoided referring specifically to herself and 
reframed forgetting things as normal behaviour for older people:  
You must tell in a nice way.  Dont tell her with shouting like that.  
Dont you know that that old people dont know how to speakold 
people, you must be kind to old people...and dont shout. 
Angela Huggins did not tell people about her diagnosis and felt that there was 
nothing different about her behaviour that would indicate to other people that 
she had Alzheimers, as seen in section 7.5.1 with the data about not telling 
storekeepers and how she was just a beginning Alzheimers patientnot way 
back on the list.  In response to the latter comment, I inquired as to whether 
Angela Huggins felt she might be subject to differential treatment as her 
dementia progressed.  She strenuously rejected this idea: 
No, no, nonoIll be treated differently here [Barrie] because they 
think Im a Black person, but as far as any other thing, no, no  
A blatant example of Angela Huggins being othered as a Black person from the 
West Indies is taken from lengthy segments of my notes on the interaction she 
had with her new family physician during the second observation session: 
The first thing the doctor said to Angela was is your heart crying out 
for Trinidad still?  Angela said yes and then he asked why she had 
left  Angela told how she came to Canada for schooland told him 
that the population of Trinidad is one million, when he asked.  In 
response to his question as to her occupation, she said that she had 
two - dancing and nail technician.  He seemed surprised that she 
had never smoked or drank, so she added that the music gets me 
going  The doctor asked Angela if she still cooks and she said no 
and explained that she went to a boarding school at age 14 so never 
really cooked.  The doctor, obviously trying to display his knowledge 
of the islands, said you should make conch soup.  Angela smiled 
at this and did not otherwise respond.  While she did not ignore or 
dismiss his questions, she tried to give him the least amount of 
information as possible.  He then asked her if she likes swimming in 
the ocean and she said oh yes, Im a beach person.  They chatted 
about the geography of Trinidad a bit and she shared with him the 
rumour that Trinidad had been part of Venezuela at one time, which 
he seemed surprised to hear The doctor said something about 
how nice Wasaga Beach is [popular beach near Barrie] and that 
Angela could go there and pretend she was in Trinidad.  Angela 
dismissed this idea with theres no palm trees  As we left he said 
if I need advice on Trinidad, I know where to go, to which Angela 
replied my pleasure. 
Angela Huggins was acutely conscious of the othering that she had been 
subject to in this interaction with her new family physician, which had included 
several sexist and ageist comments as well.  In the subsequent interview, 
Angela Huggins indicated that she felt that the doctors age was part of the 
problem, as he was at least 25 years her junior, and suggested how she might 
deal with his strong opinions in the future:  
Hes still too young for me, yeah.  He-he comes out very, very 
strong.  I can see he tells me one thing and I might say, Well, uh, I-
Ive had that medicine before, and he say, Well try it again.  And Ill 
say, Well, youre wasting my time.  You know, I-Ill answer him 
back  Well I mean I could be his mother, I mean I [inaudible] 
difference, you know, I could be his mother for sure.  He came on 
very, very strong. 
When asked about the doctors preoccupation with Trinidad after this, Angela 
Huggins suggested that he had viewed her as a travel agent 
Angela Huggins: Yeshe was probably planning a trip, I dont know. 
Wendy: [laughs] Thats what it seemed like. 
Angela Huggins: I mean, those are questions you would ask a travel 
agent. 
As has been shown in this section, while participants were often not conscious 
of othering practices related to their dementia status, the concept of othering 
was far from alien.  Further, while some participants were able to resist 
attempts by other people to treat them as inferior due to their race, ethnicity, 
age, class, or gender, for example, a few of the participants appeared to have 
internalized the shame of having dementia and being thought of as a silly 
patient, as will be shown in the next section. 
8.5 Internalized shame  we silly patients 
Both of the physicians in the sample gave evidence of having internalized the 
shame of being a cognitively impaired person and this was the impetus for a 
photo essay that I submitted to the International Journal of Epidemiology called 
From Doctor to Silly Patient: Seeing beyond the disease label (Hulko, 2005).  
Julianna Molnar stressed the association between status and cognition and 
asserted her own authority as a doctor in the following exchange about whether 
the act of forgetting matters and why some people admit to it and others do not:   
Julianna Molnar: It matters that you forget, for sureIt matters that you 
forget that you dontit doesnt feel good when I cant 
remember certain thingsBut there are some people 
who dont admit that they forget and then there are 
certain people who do admit that they forget. 
Wendy: Yeah, thats true. Why do you think that is? 
Julianna Molnar: Why do I think? Because I was a doctor (laughs). 
Wendy: (laughs) No, but why do you think that some people will 
admit it and some people wont? 
Julianna Molnar: (laughs) Well there are some people who admit to it 
and there are some people who deny it. 
Wendy: Mm-hmm. But do you have an idea or a theory yourself 
of why some people will admit to it and other people 
wont? 
Julianna Molnar: There are those whonot very many who would want 
to thinkwho would want others to think that they are 
smarter than they are. 
She went on to tell me her fears about the future; about the progression of her 
dementia and the lack of value her life would hold should she become 
completely stupid:  
Wendy: Yeah, what does it look like to you? That place you 
dont want to get to. 
Julianna Molnar: I dont want to be completely stupid. (laughs slightly) 
Wendy: Yeahcause your mind is an important 
Julianna Molnar: Then theres no point to live. 
Wendy: Well your mind is a very important part of who you are. 
Julianna Molnar: Yeah its very important. I know that. And many times it 
really hurts me that there are certain things that I dont 
remember. 
Wendy: Mm-hmm. 
Julianna Molnar: But my memory is still good enough that I canI 
can.I can keepI can maintainI cant say that its 
not worth it to live. 
Further strong evidence of internalized shame comes from the other physician 
in the group  Jim Heather, a man who was not only a surgeon and hospital 
administrator, but also a prominent local business person and a pillar of the 
community.  The latter designation carries more status and power than that 
given to people like Joe Brown and others like him who are viewed as their 
neighbourhoods equivalent of the King of Kensington.  At the final interview, 
after we had spoken about what it was like for him to be part of the research 
and I had thanked him for taking the time to talk with me and to share [his] 
experiences, Jim Heather told me: 
No I think that that was vital to get some idea of, more of what uh we 
silly patients are doing33.   
I used this quote in the title of this section and the associated photo essay 
(Hulko, 2005), as it so clearly demonstrated to me internalized shame  the 
eminent surgeon referring to himself as a silly patient.  In discussing his 
decision to withdraw from the board of the local hospital, Jim Heather referred 
to himself in a similarly negative light:  
I suggested that I felt that uh despite being on the board for three 
years, that I didnt want to be just a lamppost sort of standing in the, 
standing in the way of everyone. 
This reference to oneself as a silly patient and a lamppost indicates 
awareness of the negative social status afforded older people with dementia 
and the internalization of this stigmatization (Goffman, 1963).  The exchange 
33 This comment did not appear to be said with any irony; however, as Jim Heathers bodily 
expressiveness has been restricted by Parkinsons disease, it can be difficult to read his 
emotional responses.     
between Bosse Knudsen and myself during which she questions why I would 
want to speak with her and not with her husband, as reproduced in section 6.3, 
is another example of internalized shame.  The excerpts from interviews with 
Jim Heather and Julianna Molnar indicate that those older people with dementia 
who have further to fall or more social status to lose upon developing dementia 
 in this case physicians - are just as susceptible to internalized shame as their 
more marginalized counterparts, such as Ester Hernandez, if not more so. 
Ester Hernandez demonstrated some awareness of being othered by those 
around her; particularly the infantilizing practices (Hockey & James, 1993) to 
which she was subject.  In the second observation session, during which I had 
noted that her daughter Maria and the support worker Paula frequently spoke 
as if she was not present (see section 8.3), Ester Hernandez remarked on this 
herself:  
Ester then said she knows everything [gesturing to Maria], but the 
mother knows nothing.    
It is clear by the phrasing of this comment that Ester does not concur with this 
assessment of herself as lacking knowledge.  From this example, I can not say 
that she has internalized the shame of having dementia, yet her refusal to admit 
to having dementia discussed in section 6.4 may be an indication of this.  Why 
go to such an effort to avoid the label of dementia unless it is believed to carry a 
stigma (Allan, 2000; Goffman, 1963; MacRae, 1999)?  The stigma may be 
internalized, or the awareness that it is seen as such by others could be enough 
to compel someone to deny having it.  The strategic element to denials of 
dementia will be discussed in depth in section 9.5. 
8.6 Resilience as a mediating factor 
The degree to which participants were subject to othering as a result of their 
dementia status varied by social location, in much the same way as 
experiencing dementia differed for this diverse group of older people with 
dementia (see Chapter 7).  The more privileged older people with dementia  
Gus Holden, Jim Heather, and Nancy Matheson  generally were othered to a 
greater extent than those who were subject to marginalization on more than 
one domain, apart from dementia - Joe Brown, Angela Huggins, Ester 
Hernandez, Bosse Knudsen, and Julianna Molnar.  It could be argued that the 
othering to which Bosse Knudsen and Ester Hernandez were subject was at 
least as pronounced as that of Jim Heather, Gus Holden and Nancy Matheson, 
as may have been the impression given by the data presented earlier.  These 
two women were the most cognitively impaired of the participants, however, 
and for that reason, one would expect that they would be more likely to be seen 
as the other.  The cognitive deficits of the more privileged older people with 
dementia were not as noticeable in comparison with older people with dementia 
generally, and the participants in this study specifically.  Towards the end of the 
third and final interview as we discussed his slippery slope analogy, I 
explained this to Jim Heather, whose communication abilities had been affected 
by both Alzheimers and Parkinsons disease:   
Wendy: [laughs] So I certainly think that if you, we know that 
theres a relationship between education and Alzheimer 
disease in that education uh seems to be a protective 
factor so I would not be surprised if education also 
affects your progression, right. 
Jim Heather: In what way does it protect your 
Wendy: Well, what weve talked about that you, I would think 
that you would progress in terms of your 
communicative abilities 
Jim Heather: Mm-hmm. 
Wendy: and your, your language skills that you would lose 
those more slowly 
Jim Heather: Yes. 
Wendy: because youre starting from a higher starting point. 
Jim Heather: Yes, Ive, Ive wondered about that uh previously and 
uh its something I dont know anything about um and I 
hope thats true. 
Wendy: Well like I say I have, you communicate extremely well 
now and I know that its, that youve had a number of 
losses in your communication abilities but compared to 
people uh with or without cognitive impairments, you 
communicate very well. 
Jim Heather: Mm. 
Wendy: Does that surprise you [laughs]? 
Jim Heather: No, nothing surprises me anymore 
My view of these older people with dementia as able communicators (Cook, 
2003), was not always shared, however, as shown by the following exchange 
with Gus Holden in the second interview which followed the first observation 
session.  It is clear that while I thought he had been a dynamic 
conversationalist during the barbeque at his daughters home with her family 
and several neighbours, Gus Holden was conscious of not having contributed 
as much as he would have in the past:  
Wendy: Did you find that your, that your interactions have 
changed in any way?  You, you mentioned that maybe 
in the past you would have gone up and talked to, to 
Matt [neighbour]. 
Gus Holden: Yeah, mm-hmm. 
Wendy: Are there other things?  And you also mentioned that, 
although you appeared to be um, a dynamic 
conversationalist to me [laughs], that perhaps you 
might have been um, joking more and throwing out 
more or longer thoughts? 
Gus Holden: Yes, yes, because everybody else was carrying on a 
conversation and some of those things I know would 
have triggered a response from me that they, they 
would have understood.  And uh, sort of you remember 
such and such, you timed that, that ladder and dropped 
the paint on my toes, or something like that, if that was 
a fitting com-, a comment [reference to an incident the 
barbeque]. 
There were several instances when Gus Holden was actively involved during 
this particular observation session, as captured in two pictures, the first having 
been taken after Gus Holden was shown how to release the valve on the coffee 
urn so that he could complete his task of pouring it, and the second when a 
neighbour brought her infant granddaughter over to say hello to him: 
Figure 26 Gus Holden pouring coffee 
Figure 27 Gus Holden with infant girl  
The one-on-one conversations that Gus Holden engaged in during this 
gathering were primarily with his son-in-law Dave, when he was not outside at 
the barbeque, and my former partner Chris, who had been invited to attend by 
Sue Holden and whom I had agreed to bring along, so that Gus Holden would 
have someone to converse with about science, the environment, and the 
university, among other topics of mutual interest34. 
The significant others of the more privileged people were acutely conscious of 
any deviation from the normal (as in pre-dementia) behaviour of the older 
person with dementia in question and their standards for performance were so 
much higher, that minor failings were taken to be major deficits.  This can be 
seen in the words and actions of Nancy Mathesons son-in-law at her 87th 
birthday party that I presented in section 8.3, as evidence of othering practices, 
as well as Jim Heathers rationale for withdrawing from his position on the 
board of the local hospital, discussed in section 8.4.  In addition, significant 
others may become so accustomed to filling in the gaps for their partner with 
memory loss that when general information from the past is requested, they 
might mistake the request to be one for a specific memory of which they have 
no knowledge.  A misunderstanding of this nature happened in the course of a 
discussion about hockey at the first observation session with Gus Holden, as 
can be seen in my notes: 
34 This posed an ethical dilemma for me as I knew the participants anonymity would be 
compromised by the inclusion of someone separate from the research who was not a part of 
their lives; yet, I was aware that bringing my partner would assist with efforts to normalize the 
research experience and that Gus would appreciate a new conversation partner.  I explained 
my concerns when the invitation was extended and, based on our discussion, determined that 
the benefits outweighed any potential harms.  
Around 6-6:15pm the neighbours began to arrive, bearing food, and 
there was some small talk about the previous nights hockey game 
and the fact that 5 overtimes is not the longest game in playoff 
history, its the 4th longest.  Gus talked of listening to hockey on the 
radio when he was a child and looked to Sue for help with the name 
of the apparatus.  She replied gently I didnt know you then Gus, 
and he said no, I know and indicated that he was looking for the 
name of something from that time period, not a specific memory.  
Eventually he came up with the name crystal-set and told [another 
attendee] how he would listen to the hockey game under the covers 
with this radio.   
The concept of resilience35 is useful in helping to understand why the more 
marginalized participants did not appear to be Othered as frequently and 
indeed did not see dementia as particularly problematic, as explained in section 
7.2.  However, I am not using resilience as it is commonly referenced in the 
child psychology literature (Daniels, 2003, personal communication; Szalacha, 
Erkut, Coll, Fields, Alarcn & Ceder, 2003; Luther, 2003), where it is portrayed 
as an innate quality that if well developed enough, enables children who are 
victims of trauma to survive and thrive into adolescence and beyond.  
Resilience is definitely a sensitising concept (Glaser, 1978) in the social work 
field, as the belief amongst practitioners that people can benefit from adverse 
events fits well with a strengths perspective (McMillen, 1999; Saleebey, 1997) 
and the aforementioned definition of resilience is in operation.  The 
psychological approach to resilience is exemplified by Fosters (1997)  
gerontological research demonstrating that resilience is surprisingly well-
preserved throughout most of the life span (p 189), in which resilience is said to 
refer to: 
Positive changes in maintaining active or latent coping and 
adaptation capacities through various mechanisms (such as healing, 
35 I was not able to trace the origin of this concept.  I discussed this separately with two social 
work academics that use resilience in their published work, in the two distinct ways that I 
identify in this thesis; neither had the answer and one asked me to let her know if I found this 
out, as she thought it would be most helpful.  
restitution, refinement and enhancement) that may not be 
immediately apparent but become evident over time (p 190). 
Resilience has a parallel meaning within literature on marginalized or 
oppressed peoples (Blau & Brown, 2001; Brotman, Ryan & Cormier, 2003; 
Holstein & Minkler, 2003; Kirmayer et al, 2000; Littrell & Beck, 1999; Sonn & 
Fisher, 1998; Walters & Simoni, 2002), in which it is seen to be an acquired 
survival mechanism that results from experiencing discrimination on the basis 
of membership in a particular social group; and sometimes is termed cultural 
resilience (Kirmayer et al, 2000; Sonn & Fisher, 1998; Walters & Simoni, 2002).  
It is this second meaning of resilience to which the data in this research refers 
and, while it was one of my sensitizing concepts at the outset of this research 
(Appendix D); it has taken on more significance than originally anticipated.  
Resilience defined in this way is meant to capture the strengths and resources 
of marginalized communities that are buried or overlooked in the multiple 
jeopardies tradition and other expressions of a deficit-thinking mentality 
(Minkler, 1996), as many critical gerontologists have argued (Browne, 1995; 
Blakemore, 1989; Calasanti, 1996; Calasanti & Slevin, 2001; Dressel, 1991; 
Dressel et al, 1997; Ginn & Arber, 1995; Gonyea, 1994; Holstein & Minkler, 
2003; Hulko, 2004; Levy, 1988; McMullin, 2000; Minkler, 1996;  Victor, 1991; 
Vincent, 1995).  The data presented in this chapter demonstrates the 
connection between social location and othering dementia and indicates that 
resilience may help to explain both the responses of the more marginalized 
older people with dementia as well as those of the people with whom they 
interact in their social worlds.   
8.7 Conclusions 
This chapter on othering dementia has shown that othering practices are a 
marked feature of the interactions between older people with dementia and 
members of their self-identified communities and that it is the explicitly political 
use of this term blended with the meaning within symbolic interaction that is 
most applicable to this data.  Participants were often not conscious of having 
been Othered, although they may have shown awareness of othering practices 
in relation to identity factors, apart from dementia status, such as age, race, 
and ethnicity.  The othering practices found in the data included silencing, 
treating the person with dementia as invisible, distancing, avoiding, testing and 
monitoring, naming/labelling, disabling, infantilising, and pathologising.  The 
extent to which older people with dementia were subject to othering varied and 
was related to their social location with the more privileged participants 
experiencing a greater degree of othering and demonstrating more evidence of 
internalized shame than the more marginalized participants.  As argued earlier, 
this can be explained by the performance expectations of the participants self-
identified communities, with the more privileged older people being 
pathologised for displaying any cognitive deficits whatsoever, no matter how 
minor, while their more marginalized counterparts seemed to be benefiting from 
a more expansive definition of normal within their communities and more 
tolerance for slippage.   
In addition, the concept of resilience as an acquired characteristic has been 
shown to be important, in that those people who have experienced 
discrimination/disadvantage in their lives prior to developing dementia, on the 
basis of factors such as their race, ethnicity, class, and/or gender, seem to be 
able to apply this resilience to life with dementia  treating it as one more hurdle 
to overcome or just another thing to get on with.  This may explain the gender 
differences found in the data as well, as noted in section 7.5.1.  Finally, this 
chapter demonstrated the important role played by significant others in 
structuring and destructuring the course of illness (Gubrium, 1987).  Both 
enabling and disabling behaviours were observed during the course of this 
research, with the latter being much more common, and conceptualized as 
techniques of othering in this thesis.  Yet, as has been shown, older people with 
dementia as a group did not passively accept othering practices, rather many of 
them resisted such efforts to diminish their status as persons, and this was 
connected to their social location.  As described in section 8.5, Jim Heather 
accepted being seen as a lamp-post or a silly patient, while Ester Hernandez 
resisted being seen as a person with a problem or one who does not know 
anything (see section 6.4 and 7.3.2).  The strategic element to participants 
responses to othering practices will be addressed in more detail in chapter 9. 
Chapter - 9 Theorising Dementia 
9.1 Introduction 
The overall argument of this chapter on theorising dementia is that older people 
with dementia are active meaning makers, who strategically adopt certain 
theories of dementia as explanatory models (Kleinman, 1980) in order to avoid 
marginalization due to dementia.  This chapter starts with an introduction to the 
everyday nature of theorising, followed by a discussion of theorising by the 
ageing enterprise (Estes, 1979) and a review of the limitations of current 
dementia theorising, first introduced in Chapter 2.  I will then describe the 
theories about dementia to which this group of people subscribed and the ways 
in which these theories correlate with their social locations.  Next, the strategic 
nature of the dementia theorising undertaken by this diverse group of older 
people with dementia is presented, with particular reference to the normal aging 
theory and how the participants theorising represents the acceptance and 
rejection of the biomedical paradigm.  I conclude with insights into the 
reconciliation of emic and etic perspectives on dementia, arising from the words 
and actions of older people with dementia, which sets the stage for the 
concluding chapter of this thesis. 
This chapter takes as its starting point the recognition that individual people are 
the experts on their own lives and that they routinely engage in theorising about 
themselves and their relationships to society.  This activity is often referred to 
as meaning making in illness, or making sense of an experience (Askham, 
1995; Kleinman, 1988a; Menne et al, 2002; Williams & Healy, 2001), yet these 
are really acts of theorising that differ only from the work of theorists in their 
conceptual elaboration and the legitimacy they are accorded.  As noted in 
Chapter 3, there is an extensive literature base supporting the belief that 
definitions of and responses to illness, whether physical or mental, are 
influenced by culture; that normal and abnormal do not always mean the same 
thing within societies or cultural groups, let alone between them; and that 
illness narratives (Kleinman, 1988a) that counter the dominant biomedical 
paradigm are rarely taken seriously.  Health care professionals often refer to 
oppositional illness narratives - those that contravene or do not actively support 
biomedical beliefs  as folk narratives.  Several studies have situated this 
labelling in structures of power and domination, so as to contextualize meaning 
making in illness and to highlight the role and influence of power, not only in the 
creation of meaning, but also in the legitimating of meaning (Abrums, 2000; 
Goodman, 2001; Saris, 1995). 
9.2 Everyday theorising 
These arguments about the everyday nature of theorising rest on the work of a 
number of intellectual ancestors, namely Antonio Gramsci, Karl Marx, Alfred 
Schutz, and Dorothy Smith, together with sociologists who have applied this 
line of reasoning to older people (Auger & Tedford-Little, 2002; Gubrium & 
Wallace, 1990; Katz, 1996; Phillipson, 1998).  While the endorsements of 
critical gerontologists such as Katz (1996) and Phillipson (1998) are significant, 
Gubrium and Wallaces (1990) conclusions about older people theorising age 
have not been subjected to further empirical testing, with the notable exception 
being the research in the Canadian Maritimes undertaken by Auger and 
Tedford-Little (2002).  Further, there is an abundance of work on the social 
construction of Alzheimers (see chapter 2), yet older people theorising age 
remains an under-researched area (Gubrium, 2003, personal communication)  
both topics of relevance to this thesis.  While it was not something I set out to 
explore in this research, it became obvious fairly quickly that theorising was a 
significant component of the experiences of older people with dementia and 
that older people with dementia are active meaning makers, contrary to the 
popular (mis)conception.  When I discussed my preliminary findings with one of 
the critical gerontologists referenced above (Katz, 2003, personal 
communication), I was referred to the article by Gubrium and Wallace (1990), 
which became a source of support for my findings and significantly influenced 
my analysis. 
Although many sociologists have written about the everyday nature of 
theorising, influential writings by Gramsci (1971), Marx (1983), Schutz (1967), 
and Smith (1987) are particularly relevant to this chapter.  I will briefly outline 
some of their key points that are relevant to this research before going on to 
discuss the everyday theorising of the older people with dementia with whom I 
worked.  Gramsci (1971) argues that all people are intellectuals in that they 
philosophize about life, and arrive at understandings that have the potential to 
transform the world: 
everyone is a philosopher, though in his own way and 
unconsciously, since even in the slightest manifestation of any 
intellectual activity whatever, in language, there is contained a 
specific conception of the world (p 323)The active man-in-the-
mass has a practical activity, but has no clear theoretical 
consciousness of his practical activity, which nonetheless involves 
understanding the world in so far as it transforms it (p 333). 
This distinction between the populace who feel but dont always know or 
understand and intellectuals who know but dont always understand and 
especially dont always feel (Gramsci, 1971, as cited in Agger, 1979) underpins 
Gramscis philosophy of praxis with its call for a dialectic between the masses 
and the intellectuals.  Marx (1969)36 called for an acknowledgement of the 
intertwined nature of theory and practice - praxis in Gramscis terms - and, 
more importantly, the need to look for answers to theoretical questions in actual 
human practice: 
Social life is essentially practical.  All mysteries which mislead theory 
to mysticism find their rational solution in human practice and in the 
comprehension of this practice (p 285). 
For Marx, it is not enough to philosophize; intellectual activity must be 
channelled into action.  Thus his famous concluding statement in Theses on 
Feuerbach (1969: 286) - the philosophers have only interpreted the world, in 
various ways; the point, however, is to change it - is often seen as the origin of 
the concept of praxis (MacIntosh, 2003, personal communication).  Latter day 
Marxists and feminists have defined praxis as: 
Reflection and action upon the world in order to transform it (Freire, 
2001: 51). 
Thoughtful reflection and action that occurs simultaneously...the 
integration of knowing and doing (Kirby & McKenna, 1989: 34). 
The dialectical tension, the interactive, reciprocal shaping of theory 
and practiceat the centre of emancipatory social science (Lather, 
1991: 172). 
36 I have read slightly different versions of Theses on Feuerbach in three edited collections of 
Marxs writings (Agger, 1979; Feuer, 1969; Kamenka, 1983).  I decided to use the Feuer (1969) 
reprinting of the Theses, as this translation is based on editions published by the Foreign 
Languages Publishing House in Moscow and Feuers introduction to the collection indicated a 
thorough knowledge of Marxs work. 
Schutz (1967) argues that human beings pre-select and pre-interpret the social 
world through a series of common-sense constructs of the reality of daily life; 
and therefore, this means that scientists are actually working with: 
constructs of the second degree, namely constructs of the constructs 
made by the actors on the social scene (p 6). 
All of these interpretations are of course based on our own stock of experiences 
or what Schutz terms knowledge at hand and this meaning making takes place 
in a social context; for, as Schutz (1967) notes, individuals are always: 
in a biographically determined situation, that is, in a physical and 
socio-cultural environment as defined by him/herself and within 
which s/he has a physical, moral and ideological position (p 9). 
This means that, in the process of making social theory: 
Interpreters are inevitably caught up in the construction of models of 
models of models in recursive and reflexive fashion (Valentine, 1998: 
277).  
In her seminal work The Everyday World as Problematic: A Feminist Sociology, 
Dorothy Smith (1987) argues for an understanding of the social world, and the 
relations of ruling in particular, from the standpoint of women.  She explains the 
origins of this counter hegemonic way of thinking thus: 
It is this essential return to the experience we ourselves have directly 
in our everyday worlds that has been the distinctive mode of working 
in the womens movement  the repudiation of the professional, the 
expert, the already authoritative tones of the discipline; the science, 
the formal tradition, and the return to the seriously engaged and very 
difficult enterprise of discovering how to begin from ourselves (Smith, 
1987: 58). 
In order to accomplish this work of ascertaining and valuing the standpoints of 
women, and other marginalized peoples, and connecting our lived realities to 
the relations of ruling, Smith suggests that we focus on the everyday world: 
the world where people are located as they live, located bodily and in 
that organization of their known world as one that begins from their 
own location in it, is generated in its varieties by an organization of 
social relations that originate elsewhere (Smith, 1987: 91-92). 
The concept of problematic was developed by Smith to facilitate this link 
between the level of experience and that of conceptualization: 
to constitute the everyday world as that in which questions 
originateand to explicate a property of the everyday world as a 
focus for sociological work (Smith, 1987: 91). 
The active man-in-the-mass (Gramsci, 1971), the wide-awake man (Schutz, 
1967), and yes, even women or ourselves (Smith, 1987) are all seen to be 
actively making sense out of the social world.  It is these first order constructs 
(Schutz, 1967) that provide the foundation for the conceptual elaboration that 
sociologists and other social theorists do and for which the credit is often not 
shared.  As my epistemological approach treated participants as co-creators of 
knowledge (Fine, 1994), the results of this theorising are indisputably shared. 
9.3 Theory from the ageing enterprise  
Twenty-five years ago, the ageing enterprise (Estes, 1979) was first identified 
and implicated in many of the problems encountered in later life, with the author 
referring specifically to: 
the programs, organizations, bureaucracies, interest groups, trade 
associations, providers, industries, and professionals that serve the 
aged in one capacity or another (Estes, 1979: 2); 
and concluding that: 
the individual experience of aging is shaped by: (1) the perceptions, 
myths, and messages about aging that are communicated to old and 
young alike by media and opinion leaders, including gerontological 
researchers, and (2) the way a society treats its elders (directly or 
indirectly) via social policies on employment, retirement, health care,  
income, and the family (Estes, 1993: 292). 
In a newer work referencing the ageing enterprise, Estes and her co-authors 
note that these different professional groups and interests are able to define 
questions about growing old to their own advantage (Estes et al, 2003: 2).  This 
argument is related to Gubrium and Wallaces (1990) contention that the 
intellectual products of the ageing enterprise are very similar to the results of 
the everyday theorising of older people, an idea supported by one of the 
authors in earlier work (Phillipson, 1998).  In their groundbreaking article Who 
Theorises Age? Gubrium and Wallace (1990) provided rich data to support 
their claim that: 
not just professional gerontologists theorise age; we all do to the 
extent that we set about the task of attempting to understand the 
whys and wherefores of growing old[and] striking parallels can be 
found between the everyday theorising of ordinary men and women 
concerned with ageing and their more celebrated gerontological 
peers (Gubrium & Wallace, 1990: 132). 
Despite the parallels between the products of the intellectual work of the 
ageing enterprise and that of ordinary older people themselves, only the 
former has the authority or the legitimacy for its theories to be seen as such and 
then applied to the social world.  Gubrium & Wallace (1990) referred to these 
two existing worlds of theory in human experience as: 
..one engaged by those who live the experiences under 
consideration, and one organized by those who make it their  
professional business systematically to examine human experience 
(p 147). 
Attempts to replicate these results are not abundantly obvious through scanning 
the  gerontological literature, despite the seemingly widespread belief that more 
work needs to be done on theorising age (Estes et al, 2003; Gubrium, 2003, 
personal communication).  An excellent example of the integration of theories 
from the ageing enterprise with the products of everyday theorising can be 
found in a gerontological text by Auger and Tedford-Little (2002).  The authors, 
both Canadian social gerontologists, held eleven focus groups with older 
people, including Black and Mikmaw elders37, in Nova Scotia to try and 
ascertain how older people feel about gerontology and about the aging 
experience.  Not only did they ask general questions about the meanings of old 
age and aging, but they also tested out several gerontological theories on these 
groups of older people.  Their results confirm the findings of Gubrium and 
Wallace (1990) about the close relationship between the ordinary theorising of 
older people and the scientific reasoning of gerontologists.  
The need to develop theory that is grounded in the experiences of older people 
themselves, and those with dementia in particular, was identified as an 
imperative at the outset of this research, as this has been one of the gaps in 
past theorising on dementia (Hulko, 2002).  Harding and Palfrey (1997: 65), in 
their analysis of the social construction of dementia, sounded the caution 
against a-priori theory, noting that: 
we must be wary of imposing upon individuals and making them fit 
into off-the-shelf sociological theory. 
The preceding statements about the ways in which people make sense of their 
social worlds and the fact that theories of older people mirror those of 
gerontologists, form the theoretical framework underpinning the following 
discussion of the third category  theorising - of this grounded theory on 
dementia and Intersectionality. 
37 Mikmaw is a first nations community (aboriginal peoples) found in the Maritimes. 
9.3.1 Theories of dementia 
As I argued in Chapter 2 of this thesis and have stated elsewhere (Hulko, 2002; 
2003), dementia theorising to date has been characterized by a preoccupation 
with ontological questions regarding the nature of dementia, such as what is 
it?, how did it come to be? and what does it represent?  The way that 
dementia is viewed, undoubtedly affects the manner in which people respond to 
it as a social phenomenon (Robertson, 1990), as well as our everyday practices 
with individuals living with cognitive impairments.  This is illustrated in the table 
in section 2.4, which I created in an attempt to delineate these various 
approaches to understanding dementia and their practical applications (Hulko, 
2003), and to present the results in an accessible format. 
This chart (section 2.4) had its debut at an invited lecture at the McMaster 
Summer Institute on Gerontology in June 2003 to an audience of over 150 
health care practitioners and educators.  I used it to help this group of people 
working on the ground to understand the relationships between theory and 
practice in dementia care and to situate my own argument that dementia is best 
viewed as a bio-psycho-social phenomenon (Hulko, 2003).  The theoretical 
arguments I made that day appeared to resonate with the audience, many of 
whom shared case examples in support of my research findings; as a result, I 
was able to further elaborate the properties of what came to be the third 
category of this grounded theory - theorising. 
The properties of the theorising category are that normal aging was the most 
prevalent theory of dementia amongst the research participants, with the only 
exceptions being the most privileged participants  the two white Western 
upper class men  who believed that dementia is a brain disease.  Katz (1996) 
explains in his seminal work on the formation of gerontological knowledge how 
the bio-medicalisation of aging (Estes & Binney, 1991; Estes et al, 2003) has 
created a real dilemma: 
On the one hand, the aged body, no matter how healthy and alive, 
was examined according to the pathological signs of senescence 
that separated it from the bodies of other ages; on the other hand, 
such pathological signs were considered to be normal in old age no 
matter how diseased or dying the body.  Hence, in the discourse of 
senescence the aged body was neither diseased nor healthy but 
both normal and pathological since both conditions in old age were 
expressions of the same physiological laws (Katz, 1996: 44). 
This dialectical reasoning which treats age-associated conditions like dementia 
as both normal and pathological was very much in operation amongst my 
research participants and represented both the acceptance and the rejection of 
the biomedical paradigm or the gerontological narrative (Katz, 2003, personal 
communication); and is an example of the influence of the common assumption 
that older people are both ill and not ill (Thompson, 2001).  A similar 
argument has been applied to children, with childhood being seen historically 
as a disease state that children can outgrow with proper care and attention 
(Hockey & James, 1993).  Prior to explaining this dialectical reasoning about 
dementia in more detail, I will describe the theories of dementia that come 
straight from the horses mouth and that are shown to be influenced by the 
work of the ageing enterprise (Estes, 1979). 
9.4 Theory straight from the horses mouth 
Angela Huggins understood the importance of getting the story straight from 
the horses mouth  older people with dementia in this instance  as indicated 
by her use of this expression in the final interview to cut short my unnecessary 
explanation of the rationale for talking directly to people with dementia: 
Wendy: Okay.  So the reason I ask these questions is that this 
is something new that we havent really talked to 
people themselves who are going through this.  Its 
mainly been their caregivers that weve talked to. So we 
need to find out what the experiences have been like 
Angela Huggins: Straight from the horses mouth.  
The theories about dementia that were put forth by the older people with 
dementia to explain what was happening to them were that (1) dementia is a 
brain disease and (2) dementia  is part of normal aging.  In the following 
subsections, I will give examples of these two competing, though by no means 
distinct and separate, ideologies and explain the clear associations with the 
social locations of these everyday theorists.  After I have made clear the basic 
underlying premise and use of each of these theories and explained the ties to 
either the acceptance or the rejection of the biomedical paradigm, I will 
introduce the strategic nature of the theorising done by those participants who 
were marginalized on at least one domain. 
9.4.1 Dementia as a brain disease 
The two multiply privileged men in the sample  Gus Holden and Jim Heather  
were the only participants who supported the brain disease theory of dementia.  
At first glance, this is not unexpected from Jim Heather, as he had been a 
physician; the other former physician in the sample  Julianna Molnar - did not 
believe that her memory problems were pathological in nature, however, 
suggesting that intimate knowledge of the medical establishment does not 
account for this finding.  I asked Jim Heather in the final interview whether he 
thought being a physician made a difference to his approach towards dementia, 
which was to be upfront about his diagnosis (see section 7.5.2), and although 
his initial reaction was dismissive, he did feel that physicians have extra 
understanding: 
Wendy: Do you think that has anything to do with your being a 
physician?  Taking that approach? 
Jim Heather: Um, would I do it if I was a clockmaker or something? 
Wendy: [laughing] Well, I just, perhaps 
Jim Heather: Hmm. 
Wendy: If, if you were anything other than a physician, right? 
Jim Heather: I think some people would whether they were a 
physician or not have um that sort of approach but not 
necessarily very manycause they dont understand 
probably to the same extent that we do and 
Wendy: What is that like, having this extra understanding? 
Jim Heather: It makes it easier in some ways and in some ways it 
makes it harder. 
Wendy: How, how does it make it easier? 
Jim Heather: That um, uh we understand, we understand more fully 
um whats, whats happened to us and um I find that 
um, that uh other people [early stage support group 
members]didnt have quite the same approach.  Um, 
the people there were uh less likely to say, say um, uh, 
to be frank about it as to what weve got.   
The frankness referred to by Jim Heather in this exchange was not all that 
obvious in my interactions with the participants, almost all of whom avoided the 
use of any of the words in the dementia lexicon, and Jim Heather himself talked 
around Alzheimers (see section 6.4).  Jim Heathers extra understanding 
caused him difficulties as well, particularly now that his knowledge and expert 
status had been compromised by memory loss, as shown in his reflections on a 
visit to the Alzheimer research labs in Toronto, in the company of the early 
stage support group. 
Jim Heather: Yes.  And uh, it was easy for me to, to um be able to 
absorb what we were being told and rather difficult for 
the people to um, to uh absorb what information that 
they were being given.  And uh, Ive had um, a 
background of umof uh interest in, in um, 
neurophysiology and I felt very upset really when I was 
doing it, doing the trip through the labs, that here I was 
Id been an expert and I barely knew what, much more 
than some of the people could be expected to know, 
they knew about as much as I did about it I think. 
Wendy: The people working there or the people you were on 
the tour with? 
Jim Heather: People that are on the tour, very few of them were able 
to absorb it, the information.  And uh, they had as much 
knowledge that they picked up, by now they may have 
lost, it may have disappeared again, but they um had 
an amount of knowledge which would be miniscule 
compared with the amount I had when I was doing the 
degree in neurophysiology.   
Wendy: What was it that was upsetting about that?           
 Jim Heather: That Id lost all the, lots of information that I had when I 
was um, when I was in that sort of work. 
Jim Heathers extra understanding and expertise as a physician is not the same 
as Julianna Molnars, however; Julianna Molnar had a very different approach 
to dementia than Jim Heather, as seen in her answer to the same question 
about the effect of her medical background on life with dementia: 
Well, its natural that what you worked in, its more difficult to forget 
the profession you worked in, the things you worked in.  But now 
there are a lot of changes.  How can I know the brand new 
medicines?  And there are certain things that we really used and now 
people dont even know about it. 
While her answer was not unrelated to the question, in that she referred to 
professional knowledge and noted that she might not be up to date on the latest 
medicines, Julianna Molnar clearly did not see herself in the role of the patient.  
Thinking at the time that she had not understood the question, I tried rephrasing 
it in the hopes of getting her views about going from doctor to silly patient 
(Hulko, 2005): 
Wendy: But do you think that because of your background, 
even though youre not working now, that that might 
make it more difficult for you to have problems with 
your memory? 
Julianna Molnar: It doesnt feel good that I cant remember certain things 
and I dont remember certain things that happened to 
me or when I was young.  My memory has gotten 
worse quite a bit but Im aware.  But Im aware. 
As indicated by these examples and expanded upon in section 9.4.3, although 
these two participants shared the same professional background and similar 
medical knowledge, this had not led them to hold the same understandings of 
dementia.  Clearly, other aspects of their social locations, such as their gender 
and ethnicity, played a role in theorising dementia, in the same way it did for 
experiencing and othering dementia, as shown in chapters 7 and 8.  Before I 
discuss the role of social location further, however, I will demonstrate the use of 
the brain disease theory and show how it indicates acceptance of the 
biomedical paradigm. 
References to the pathological nature of dementia were expressed by the two 
multiply privileged men in an unquestioning tone that underscored just how 
taken for granted the standard paradigm (Kitwood, 1997a) remains today.  Jim 
Heather talked at length about the search for a cure and often turned the 
clinical gaze (Foucault, 1994b) on himself, as was seen in the exchange from 
first interview that was excerpted in section 7.5.2 and that ended with these 
words. 
Jim Heather: The um other disease Ive got is uh the Parkinsons and 
uh thats been treated fairly well, its beenyou can 
keep a fairly reasonable level of neurodegeneration in 
um with, with it but it still gets them in the end.  So its 
not aperfect situation either. 
In this passage (see section 7.5.2 and above), Jim Heather expressed his faith 
in the ability of scientists to conquer the disease, which was discussed as a 
gendered belief in section 7.5.2; referenced the complicated nature of dementia 
and scientific research seeking to unlock its mysteries; and indicated his own 
knowledge of neurodegenerative processes.  Although Gus Holden used the 
language of cancer, rather than brain disease, and does not have the same 
familiarity with medical language as Jim Heather, his words clearly indicate that 
he also sees dementia as a pathological state, and not as a normal part of 
aging: 
Wendy: why do you think this is happening to you? 
Gus Holden: [pause] Alzheimers? 
Wendy: Mm-hmm. 
Gus Holden: Well, uh, its cancer of certain uh [intake of breath], 
systems in my body. That, thats not word for word but 
uh, thats what uh I was told. I, I didnt know about it 
and then, uh, whats her name, oh dear, heres where 
Wendy: Dr. [name]? 
Gus Holden: Yes, yeah.  It is, was very good about explaining it and 
interpreting it for me and the, uh, she wasnt sure if I 
was initially but its been getting worse and I went 
through the various tests and things like that.     
Gus Holdens words describing the second time he came into contact with 
people with Alzheimers while at the family cottage (see section 7.4) 
demonstrate the micro-level application of the alzheimerisation of aging 
(Adelman, 1995)38 and indicate some of the benefits of heightened public 
consciousness of the association between dementia and later life: 
main thing was we were going from the uh, the shore, across to a 
party.  And in going, I was with a group of about half, heard 
somebody mention Alzheimers or something and I said yeah, Ive 
got Alzheimers and all of a sudden there were five of us that had Al- 
I think it was five of us, that had Alzheimers in some form.  I had just 
started I guess you would say.  Actually, no, I didnt even know that I 
had Alzheimers.  I was losing my memory as I said, I have a terrible 
memory now and then that broke one of the others, they had, and 
then somebody started, said well so and so had, had Alzheimers.  
It wasnt, it probably wasnt as, oh, I dont know, it didnt seem bad to 
me, it seemed to be fine and getting along famously.  
When I questioned Jim Heather about his use of the expression slipping in 
reference to his awareness of the signs and symptoms of dementia, he 
explained that this was an euphemism for being on a path of decline that he 
had used in the past when talking about his own patients.  This is another 
example of Jim Heather turning the clinical gaze (Foucault, 1994b) upon 
himself.  
Wendy: You, youve mentioned an expression to me a few 
times, the, slipping, youve used that word slipping and 
you talked about a slippery slope now as well. 
Jim Heather: Yes. 
38 This term was first used by Adelman (1995) to critique the disproportionate amount of funding 
spent on Alzheimers disease research by the National Institute on Aging in the United States.  
Adelman argued that this huge investment in dementia research was occurring at the expense 
of broader gerontological research interests and basic science in particular; and that the 
alzheimerization of aging was an example of the application of trickle-down economics (529) 
and successful science advocacy (531).  Adelman did not use this phrase to refer to the way 
that fear of Alzheimers disease has infected the public consciousness and reinforced the 
association between aging and dementia, however, although his work is clearly located within 
this critical tradition (see Binney & Swan, 1991; Bond, 1992; Cohen, 1998; Gubrium, 1986; 
1987; Herskovitz, 1995; Holstein, 2000; Hulko, 2002; Leibing, 2002; Lyman, 1989; Robertson, 
1990). 
Wendy: Can you tell 
Jim Heather: It just, its just 
Wendy: ...me some more? 
Jim Heather:  something that you, its a word we used quite a bit in 
talking about some pa-, patients that um.  Slope, the 
slippery slope was the, the person thatd got on this 
path of to, of decline for example, person with cancer 
and um, it, its a euphemism I suppose to describe a 
patients um, being on the slippery slope. 
A little while later I returned to this idea of slipping to confirm that Jim Heather 
applied this concept to himself, not only to his patients: 
Wendy: So you see yourself then on a path of decline? 
Jim Heather: Yes.  And uh its, theres, I realize that theres a slope.  I 
picture the slope and a picture of the expression is a 
useful way of describing, describing what the, what is 
going on. 
As is clear from the data presented in this section, the two most privileged 
participants fully accepted the brain disease theory and used it as their 
explanatory model of illness (Kleinman, 1980).  Further, the prevalence of the 
biomedicalisation of aging and the influence of the gerontological narrative is 
evoked in their descriptions of interacting with members of the ageing 
enterprise, as well as other laypeople or ordinary theorisers such as 
themselves.  This adoption of the biomedical paradigm occurred in spite of the 
fact that I had explicitly attempted to limit effects of this nature by choosing to 
work with a community-dwelling, non-institutionalized population (see Chapter 5 
for further discussion). 
9.4.2 Dementia as normal aging 
The normal aging theory was the most popular theory of dementia amongst the 
participants, which on its own is unsurprising, as this has been the case in past 
research on subjective experiences of dementia (Gillies, 1997; 2001; Keady et 
al, 1995; Keady & Gilliard, 1999; Phinney, 1998).  Every participant who was 
marginalized on at least one domain, whether race, ethnicity, class or gender, 
invoked the normal aging theory to explain the cause of their memory problems.  
The use of the normal aging theory is exemplified by the following quote from 
Angela Huggins, one of the multiply marginalized participants, from the first 
interview when I asked her why she thought this was happening to her: 
I just think Im getting older and, and I just, my memory isnt as good 
as it was cause my mother was just the sameand nobody thought 
of putting her in an institution or anything like that   
In the second interview, which occurred several months later, when I asked her 
where her ideas come from, Angela Huggins credited her doctor as an 
additional source for the normal aging theory that she applied to Alzheimers. 
Angela Huggins: Because I associate old age with Alzher-Alzheimers 
with old, older people. I dont think young people get it, 
really. Its more for older people. 
Wendy: Is that based on your personal experiences knowing 
older people? 
Angela Huggins: No, no. When I was told about Alzheimers I thought, 
Oh no, this doctors crazy. What is she talking about? I 
couldnt believe it. It threw me for a loop. I mean I 
accept it now because I realize too, when Ashley 
[daughter] tells me Im losing it you know, I sit here and 
I cant remember something, I think Oh God, shes 
right.  
Wendy: So if I were to ask you for your theory of why this is 
happening to you, would you say its because youre 
getting older? 
Angela Huggins: (inaudible) cause the doctors dont seem so concerned 
about it; Its not like I have cancer or something like 
that, you know.  Its just, its just uh, its just, just a thing 
that happens when youre getting older. 
Bosse Knudsen varied in the extent to which she acknowledged being 
cognitively impaired, as noted in section 7.2.  She denied knowledge of 
Alzheimers disease in the manner of Ester Hernandez (see section 6.4), yet 
did admit to having memory problems and being forgetful.  The rationale Bosse 
Knudsen provided for her memory problems varied as well, as can be seen by 
a few of the explanations that she produced, all in the same interview: 
Well, that I cant tell you.  I dont know. [pause]  I dont know its just, 
I guess thats just the way I am. 
I just think that days are different. 
Later on, Bosse Knudsen told me that other people dismiss with laughter her 
memory problems as they believe they are caused by age, so I explored with 
her how she feels about this age association:   
Wendy: So people attribute it to age and say its? 
Bosse Knudsen: Yeah. 
Wendy: because of age? 
Bosse Knudsen: Yeah, Yeah. 
Wendy: What do you think about that? 
Bosse Knudsen: Well it could be that, that it is, yeah.  I never really think 
about why. 
Wendy: You dont think about why its happening? 
Bosse Knudsen: Yeah, yeah.  I dont. 
Wendy: Why is, why do you think?  
Bosse Knudsen: I, I dont wanna fuss about it and thats it.  Thats not 
really big thing to me. 
In this sequence of explanations we can see Bosse Knudsen normalizing her 
forgetfulness and asserting her personhood; indicating the variability of life with 
dementia; agreeing with the normal aging theory; and explaining that shes 
never really thought about why its happening because its not a big deal to her.  
For Bosse Knudsen, theorising about dementia is linked to experiencing 
dementia - if its not a big deal or simply a nuisance, why worry about the 
cause?  The variability of dementia was noted by Jim Heather as well; though 
this had not shaken his opinion that Alzheimers is a pathological brain disease. 
Um, so uh and it very, the other thing, the disease itself, both of them 
[Alzheimers and Parkinsons] vary quite a bit.  It depends on what, 
what youve been eating I think, and did you take all your pills, which 
Ive, havent donesince uh this morning [gets up to look for pills].         
Although Ester Hernandez would not openly admit to having dementia in any of 
the interviews (see section 6.4), she did reference normal aging theory during 
the second participant observation session when her daughter pressed her to 
explain her memory problems: 
Then Maria asked her how come you cant remember? and Ester 
said its been a long time. 
Nancy Matheson  the only multiply privileged woman in the sample  usually 
chose to assert her individuality, and hence her incomparability; she did use the 
normal aging theory to align herself with other older people, however, and, 
through doing so, asserted her status as a normal older person:  
but it doesnt bother me because I think it happens to everyone, 
you know. 
There were a few novel theories as to what causes dementia offered by two 
people involved in the research, and these most closely align with psychological 
theories of dementia.  During the observation session when Ester Hernandez 
claimed that her forgetfulness is related to how long she has lived, her daughter 
Maria pinpointed a past emotional upset and Esters inability to recover from it, 
as the reason for her mothers memory loss, as detailed in my notes:     
Maria thinks that her mothers memory loss is connected with Marias 
youngest daughters elopement at age 18 when she became 
pregnant.  The two girls used to come over to the apartment while 
Maria was at work and Maria believes that Ester spoiled them.  After 
the elopement, Maria was so upset that she stopped talking to the 
girls.  Ester keeps thinking of them and Maria thinks this incident 
caused her memory loss. 
Joe Brown regularly used the normal aging theory - every dog has its day 
being his mantra in later life; yet, on one occasion, he told me that past 
emotional upset caused by a woman can affect a mans mind when he gets 
older, a theory that seemed rather incredible to me at the time: 
Joe Brown: I say, a lot of men, a lot of men, get married you 
know and, and especially if their wifes cheating on 
them you know, I think, I think when they get, if they 
stay with them women long enough, as they get older, I 
think it affects them. 
Wendy: They what? 
Joe Brown: I think it affects their mind. 
Wendy: It affects the mind? 
Joe Brown: Yeah, I think so, I think so, I... 
Wendy: Thats your theory huh? 
Joe Brown: Huh? 
Wendy: Thats your theory is it? 
Joe Brown: Yeah, I think so, I think so.  Because I know, I know 
because I, I know, I know about, I know, I know a guy.       
Unlike Jim Heather and Gus Holden, it was not doctors that Joe Brown most 
often referred to as his source of received wisdom about aging and dementia; 
rather, it was a group of old men that he hung around with when he was a 
young guy growing up in Nova Scotia: 
Wendy: So where do your ideas fr-, about Alzheimers come 
from?  The things that you just told me about what    
Joe Brown: Well, I know, I know this from when I, I know this from 
people that had old-timers when I was a young guy, 
Wendy: When you were young? 
Joe Brown: I know this from the old people, you know.  I used to 
know, when I was a young guy, I used to be messing 
around with nothing but old men, okay. 
Wendy: I know, youve told me that before. 
Joe Brown: Old men, all the old men. 
Although his doctor had helped him to understand that every dog has its day in 
relation to his diminished sex life in later life - a subject he spoke about 
frequently (see section 7.3.2) - he was first taught this lesson by another one of 
these old-timers, this time in Toronto after he had moved to the city in his late 
teens:     
You know, I tell you a story, I remember when I was a kid in Toronto, 
this old man used to tell me, this guy was about my age [now], an old 
guy, he used to, I would go, if Id go to the store for him, Id come 
back and Id sit down and hed say you know Joe, hed say son, he 
says enjoy yourself when youre young, he says when you get my 
age he says, its all in your mind, not in your pants [laughs]. 
As has been shown, there were two main theories proposed by the participants 
to explain their memory troubles/Alzheimers disease/dementia  brain disease 
and normal aging.  Some of the connections to the biomedicalisation of aging 
have been indicated, as well as the fact that received wisdom came from 
different sources.  In the next section, I explain the connection between 
dementia theorising by the participants and the degree of acceptance and 
rejection of the biomedical paradigm or the gerontological narrative (Katz, 
2003, personal communication). 
9.4.3 Acceptance and rejection of the bio-medical paradigm 
The different uses of the metaphor of cancer by a number of the participants is 
illustrative of the influence of the bio-medical or standard paradigm (Kitwood, 
1997a).  As the reader may have noted in section 9.4.1, those who supported 
the brain disease theory of dementia and who were the most privileged, both 
made use of the metaphor of cancer in theorising dementia.  Gus Holden 
referred to Alzheimers as a cancer of certain systems in [his] body and Jim 
Heather likened the path of decline associated with dementia to the slippery 
slope travelled by patients with cancer.  Angela Huggins, who was one of the 
multiply marginalized participants and who supported the normal aging theory, 
stressed that what she has is just a thing that happens when youre getting 
older and that its not like [she has] cancer or something like that, which she 
thought would be more concerning to the doctors (see section 9.4.2).  Cancer is 
undisputedly a pathological disease (Stacey, 1997) and was referred to directly 
by a few of the participants whose family members had died of cancer, 
including Gus Holden, whose son had died in adolescence of brain cancer.   
The differential use of the word cancer by research participants is evidence of 
this dialectical view of aging  as both normal and pathological (Katz, 1996) - 
and corresponds to the link I have established between everyday dementia 
theorising and the social locations of the theorists.  Two very different theories 
of dementia are supported by reference to the same disease state  its not like 
cancer; and it is like cancer.  This difference of opinion within my sample 
parallels the dispute that raged about Alzheimers in the early part of the last 
century (Cheston & Bender, 1999; Dillmann, 2000; Fox, 1989; Gubrium, 1986; 
1987; Leibing 2002; Robertson, 1990; Shenk, 2001) and that still resurfaces 
every now and again - is Alzheimers due to normal aging or is it a brain 
disease?  The question that is raised by these results is: do we need to 
choose?  What advantages might there be in espousing this dialectical view?  
The strategic nature with which the participants used the normal aging theory 
will help us to better understand these questions and thus is addressed in the 
next section. 
9.5 The strategic use of normal aging theory 
As was indicated in section 7.4 with respect to Ester Hernandez and her 
awareness of othering practices, there was a strategic component to the 
actions of those older people with dementia who had experienced 
marginalization on the basis of one or more aspects of their identity prior to 
being diagnosed with dementia.  This strategizing was most apparent with 
respect to dementia theorising, as will be shown in this section of the thesis.  
Unlike the other former physician in my sample  Jim Heather - who ascribed to 
the pathological view of dementia  or brain disease theory  Julianna Molnar 
drew on the normal aging theory and referenced her credentials as a medical 
doctor to legitimate her view that dementia is part of normal aging: 
I know very well, I was a doctor.  I know well that at a certain age, 
there are certain things that are forgotten and your brain not working 
as it used to.  For at a certain level, at a certain level, I think its  
normal but I dont feel good about it. 
The claim that Julianna Molnar used this theory in a strategic way is supported 
by the fact that she showed awareness of the marginalization to which older 
people with dementia are subject and for this reason did not tell people about 
her memory problems (see section 8.3).  As explained in section 8.3, Julianna  
Molnar and her husband had requested that I not mention memory problems to 
any of the people present at her weekly art class and for this reason I was 
introduced to the instructor and other class members as: 
A young friend of hers doing a PhD and with whom she is working on 
a project about older people and their lives.   
Attributing her memory problems to aging was a way for Julianna Molnar to 
retain her status as a normal older person, to avoid the othering that she knew 
she would be subject to, should people in her building find out about her 
dementia status.  She offered several explanations for why she does not 
disclose her dementia status to her neighbours, yet did not expressly 
acknowledge her awareness that she would be treated differently.  This can be 
seen in comments that she made about the people in her building at several 
points during the second interview, starting with her Romanian friend Maria, 
who is one of a small number of people that is aware that Julianna Molnar is 
experiencing memory loss. 
Julianna Molnar: Maria I just met here in this building.  Weve lived here 
for 15 years; its going to be 15 years in the fall.  She 
moved here I think maybe a year before.  We got to 
know each other quickly because we speak Romanian 
quite well. 
Wendy: I think you told me that she knows, that shes one of the 
few people that knows that youre having some trouble 
with your memory? 
Julianna Molnar: Yes, shes aware that my memory has gotten worse.  A 
little bit. 
Later on Julianna Molnar suggested a lack of familiarity with most of the people 
in the building as an explanation for why she does not disclose her memory 
problems:    
I am not in very good terms with a lot of people.  We know each 
other, we say hello, maybe a few words here and there, but if we see 
each other, but we are not together enough. 
Towards the end of the interview, after Julianna Molnar had told me how much 
she enjoyed the research experience because of the opportunity it gave her to 
talk to intelligent people, she pointed out one of her educated neighbours and 
indicated that ethnic differences are a factor inhibiting interaction in the building: 
That man whos coming in [pointing to television that shows the front 
entrance of building], he was a teacher.  He is I think a year older 
than I am.  Hes from Iran but he completed his university in Paris 
and he likes to meet with us and talk to us.  Its only on the outside 
when we meet; we dont go to each others house or places.  For him 
its very different and he has a very different culture than we do.  
Thats natural.  And there are a few who are Muslim and then they 
turn their head when they see us. 
As can be seen from these quotes, there are an array of factors influencing 
whether to tell and how much to tell the normals when one has a discrediting 
attribute such as dementia (Goffman, 1963).  Awareness of the othering that 
could ensue is a strong incentive to remain silent and pass for normal as long 
as possible (ibid); this passing is a strategic act and not an indication of 
internalized oppression, much like Kanuha (1999) found in his study of lesbian 
and gay men of colour.  Passing was typified as: dissociation, omission, mutual 
pretence, and playing with the audience (Kanuha, 1999: 34); and four 
conditions relevant to the decision whether or not to pass were identified (p 31): 
(1) fit; (2) risk and safety; (3) relationship with audience; and (4) motivation and 
energy.  While these conditions certainly applied to the older people with 
dementia in this research, based on my observations, I would not have 
expected to see or hear about examples of playing with the audience.  
However, perhaps that is exactly what Ester Hernandez was doing, as indicated 
in the data presented below. 
The best example of the strategic use of normal aging theory comes from the 
most cognitively impaired older person in the sample.  In the interview excerpt 
below, Ester Hernandez alternated between English and Tagalog and the 
interpreter was not as literal in her translations as she had been in the previous 
interview. 
Wendy: Esterhave you ever heard of something called 
Alzheimers disease? 
Ester Hernandez: Alzhe-? 
Wendy and Interpreter: Alzheimers. 
Ester Hernandez: Alzheimer, I just take something, for example. 
Wendy: Have you ever heard of that? 
Ester Hernandez: No, what does that mean? Whats that mean? 
Wendy: Its a disease that people get when theyre olderwhen 
they, they forget things. 
Ester Hernandez: They are contigous, contagious? 
Wendy: No, its not contagious 
Ester Hernandez: That is not contagious? 
Wendy: No, its not contagious; its not that kind of a disease.  
Its in your headIts when changes happen in your 
brain. 
Ester Hernandez: Me, I dont knowwalking a lot an old person 
walking around 
Interpreter: [explains that Ester Hernandez thinks this means 
somebody who is sick in the head, somebody crazy].  
Wendy: No, not really like that. 
Interpreter: [tells her it is not mentally crazy] 
Ester Hernandez: What is the sickness, what is Alzheimers?      
Interpreter: [asks Wendy if she can interpret it in a simpler way as 
she thinks Ester Hernandez is getting more confused] 
Wendy: Itsits when your memory doesnt work very well, 
when you have little memory [words suggested by the 
interpreter]. 
Ester Hernandez: No, I dont have that.  
This piece of data clearly illustrates Ester Hernandezs denial of general 
knowledge of Alzheimers disease, as well as the applicability of this label to 
herself.  Her question as to whether or not Alzheimers is contagious and her 
avowal that she does not have this sickness that affects your memory proved to 
be the most important features of this exchange, as will become evident upon  
reading the notes below about the events that followed. 
After about an hour, I determined that there was no point in 
continuing with the interview as it had not been fruitful up to that 
point and both myself and Ester Hernandez were getting tired.  
However, we had to remain until Maria [Esters daughter] returned, 
which was [half an hour later].  After I stopped the tape, we talked 
about singing and dancing. The interpreter sang the Philippines 
national anthem and Ester Hernandez sang the words that she could 
remember, following the interpreters lead.  The interpreter stopped 
since she could not remember the words and Ester told her in 
Tagalog that she had contaminated her with her forgetfulness.  
From these notes, we see that this profoundly impaired woman, who denied 
any knowledge of Alzheimers and refused to admit to having memory 
problems, had remembered our conversation about whether Alzheimers is 
contagious or not and then used this information, after the interview, to joke 
with the interpreter that she had contaminated her with her forgetfulness.  This 
is a clear example of the strategic behaviour that people with dementia are 
capable of performing, in order to protect their status as normal older people 
and avoid the stigma (MacRae, 1999;Goffman, 1963) associated with dementia 
and the othering to which a person with dementia is subject (see Chapter 8). 
9.6 Reconciling emic and etic perspectives 
As mentioned in Chapter 3, there are two different approaches to crosscultural 
psychiatric research, the emic and the etic approach, terms that are derived 
from anthropology.  The etic approach assumes that mental illness is 
universally similar and thus classification and measurement systems should 
apply globally, even though most are Western products.  The Mini-Mental State 
Examination (Folstein et al, 1975) is a prime example of this in the dementia 
field.  Conversely, the emic approach starts from the perspective of the local 
culture and tries to understand phenomena from within that context (Patel et al, 
1995a). 
Thus an emic perspective represents an insiders perspective (Braudy Harris & 
Sterin, 1999), based on subjective, local knowledge, while an etic perspective is 
the outsiders view  that of the ageing enterprise (Estes, 1979).  The latter 
approach is that which has been most often used to develop theory on ageing 
and dementia, and is that which this thesis has shown to affect dementia 
experiencing, othering, and theorising.  We have a dilemma now though, as the 
etic perspective on dementia has clearly influenced the emic one, in the manner 
of Giddens (1993) double hermeneutic.  Giddens (1993: 170) explained the 
complexities of this cross-contamination of thought processes  the double 
hermeneutic  as follows: 
Sociology, however, deals with a universe which is already 
constituted within frames of meaning by social actors themselves, 
and reinterprets these within its own theoretical schemes, mediating 
ordinary and technical language.  This double hermeneutic is of 
considerable complexity, since the connection is not merely a one-
way one; there is a continual slippage of the concepts constructed 
in sociology, whereby these are appropriated by those whose 
conduct they were originally coined to analyse, and hence tend to 
become integral features of that conduct (thereby in fact potentially 
compromising their original usage within the technical vocabulary of 
social science). 
The dialectical theory of dementia arising from this double hermeneutic process 
of theorising dementia is different than Kitwoods (1990) proposed theory of the 
dementing process in old age, with its focus on the dialectical interplay 
between neurological and social-psychological factors (Kitwood, 1990: 162).  
The dialectical theory arising from this grounded theory study proposes that 
dementia is both normal and pathological, in much the same way that the 
biomedicalisation of aging (Estes & Binney, 1991; Estes et al, 2003) or the 
discourse of senescence (Katz, 1996) has turned old age into both a normal 
and a pathological state.  Katz (1996) suggested a clear link between the 
discourse of senescence, the growth of the Alzheimers movement, and 
professional efforts at disciplining old age: 
But what it is the AD movement if not the biomedicalisation of senile 
dementia stripped of its social and economic dimensions?  In other 
words, the discovery of ADs proliferation may have more to do with 
how it is used to facilitate disciplinary alliances than with its actual 
epidemiological spread.  In this way, as in the earlier formation of the 
discourse of senescence, new representations of the aged body 
become resources for the professional expansion of gerontological 
knowledge (p 113-114). 
Faced with a dialectical theory of dementia as both normal and pathological, a 
theory that has come straight from the horses mouth, do we accept it or reject 
it?  If we choose to embrace the dialectic and wish to diminish the influence of 
the biomedical paradigm, perhaps conceptualizing dementia as a bio-psycho-
social phenomenon offers a way forward that best evokes the complexities and 
uncertainties of dementia and that reconciles these emic and etic perspectives. 
9.7 Conclusions 
This chapter has shown that older people with dementia are active meaning 
makers who engage in theorising dementia and do so in a strategic manner.  
The particular theories used by the participants to explain their memory 
problems do not represent the range of dementia theorising that exists to date 
(see Table 1 in section 2.4).  None of the participants referred to dementia as a 
psycho-neurological condition, or a disability, or a social construction.  Although 
several of the participants noted the significance of psychological and 
sociological factors in terms of experiencing and othering dementia, the 
theories espoused by the participants were those that biomedicine has been in 
conflict over since Alois Alzheimer first described the clinical features of the 
patient Frau D and Kraepelin named the condition she was suffering from 
Alzheimers disease (Dillmann, 2000; Fox, 1989; Gubrium, 1986; 1987; Leibing 
2002; Robertson, 1990; Shenk, 2001).  Rather than choose between these 
dominant theories of dementia, a dialectical theory of dementia that positions 
dementia as a bio-psycho-social phenomenon serves to disrupt this false 
dichotomy and reinvent the discourse of senescence (Katz, 1996) as a 
strategic theory derived from the integration of emic and etic perspectives. 
Chapter - 10 Conclusions 
10.1 Introduction 
In this final chapter, I will demonstrate how the aims of this thesis have been 
achieved and then draw together all the theoretical arguments presented thus 
far into a grounded theory of dementia and intersectionality.  After 
accomplishing this task, I will raise some of the implications for policy, practice, 
and research.  While the implications are directed primarily at the fields of 
dementia and aging and few examples are given, I hope that the reader will be 
able to see the applicability to parallel fields and to spot additional implications. 
Throughout this thesis, I presented numerous theoretical insights discovered 
while doing grounded theory research into older peoples experiences of 
dementia and the intersections of gender, class, ethnicity, and race.  The 
research question  what are the relationships between older peoples 
experiences of dementia and the intersections of race, ethnicity, class, and 
gender  was answered in full with the results having been encapsulated in the 
three categories of the grounded theory: experiencing dementia, othering 
dementia, and theorising dementia. 
The first research aim of exploring older peoples experiences of living with a 
cognitive impairment was met through interviews, photography, and participant 
observation with older people with dementia and their significant others.  The 
consideration of race, ethnicity, class, and gender and their intersections, as 
well as the dynamics of privilege and oppression, was evident not only in the 
composition of the sample, but also by the way in which I used 
intersectionality/social location as a lens through which the experiences of the 
various research participants were compared. 
The second research aim of developing a theory of older peoples experiences 
of dementia and intersectionality was met through the use of grounded theory 
research, the results of which were detailed in the preceding chapters on 
experiencing dementia, othering dementia, and theorising dementia.  After 
attending to the third research aim in the next paragraph, I will attempt to distill 
all this theorising into a succinct theoretical statement and an accompanying 
diagram that is both comprehensive and comprehensible, and to demonstrate 
the fit, workability, relevance, and modifiability of the grounded theory. 
The third research aim of critically reflecting on the research process was met 
through the use of a reflective journal, peer debriefing, and the solicitation of 
feedback from the participants, among other strategies and techniques.  These 
tools, combined with my own constant questioning of self and others, enabled 
me to attend to the ways in which the research was affecting all of the parties 
involved and to assess not only the outcome (grounded theory), but also the 
process (emancipatory/anti-oppressive research).  As was clear by the 
responses of the participants, not only was this a non-traditional way of doing 
research, but it also was a more inclusive and highly enjoyable experience for 
those involved and it had a positive impact. 
10.2 Grounded theory on dementia and intersectionality 
As has been shown throughout this thesis, new and varied views of dementia 
surface when the concept of intersectionality is applied to dementia research; 
and these perspectives pose challenges to our assumptions about what it is like 
to experience a phenomenon such as dementia.   The grounded theory arising 
from this study explains the complex nature of the relationships between the 
subjective experiences of older people living with dementia and the 
intersections of class, ethnicity, race, and gender.  The main argument 
presented is that there is a connection between social location and lived 
experiences of dementia; these relationships can be observed across and 
within the categories of experiencing, othering, and theorising; and dementia is 
a bio-psycho-social phenomenon that is understood by those living with it to be 
both normal and pathological.  
As has been argued, in order to be relevant and connected to the lives of real 
people and phenomena, theory needs to be grounded and straight from the 
horses mouth.  The use of a-priori theories about social life, particularly aging 
and dementia, created primarily by white Western upper middle class men, 
must be halted.  These theories cannot adequately capture the lives of those 
whose social locations differ from the theorists.  We must start to value the 
meaning making  the everyday theorising  that older people and other 
marginalized peoples engage in themselves and expand our disciplinary canon 
to reflect this wealth of knowledge. 
Associated with this latter point is a critique of the concept of intersectionality.  
Although I find tremendous value in an intersectional analysis and will continue 
to use this theoretical concept in my own work, I feel that it is simply a 
theoretical concept and level of analysis that primarily exists in the minds of 
theorists and can be alienating to those whose lives it is meant to capture.  
Therefore, I argue that intersectionality should be treated as a theoretical lens 
and a metaphor for the interaction of complex and intertwined identity 
constructs; however, it should not be introduced into our conversations with 
marginalised people if they are not familiar with this term.  To do otherwise, 
would be to superimpose the alienating discourse of academia onto the sphere 
of ordinary life. 
In chapters two through four of this thesis, we learned that the theoretical 
products of the ageing enterprise (Estes, 1979) have progressed outwards 
from the individual to the individual in society, yet have neglected older peoples 
views on aging and being old; that inequalities in later life are persistent, 
interactive and patterned by socio-demographic variables; that theories of 
dementia relate primarily to ontology and represent partial, atomistic views; that 
the dynamics of privilege and oppression affect our lives with and without 
dementia; and that despite the omission of the voices of marginalized people in 
tales of subjective experience of dementia, there are indications that social 
location does impact on experiences of dementia.   
Chapter five offered methodological insights, including how to steer a path 
through the great Grounded Theory divide, what grounded theory can look like 
when infused with feminist and anti-oppression sensibilities, how to 
operationalise intersectionality, ways to access subjective experiences and 
observe social worlds, and what it means to make research less oppressive for 
research participants and more inclusive of their voices and experiences.  In 
Chapter 6, we started to see the dismantling of key assumptions about 
dementia.  The data presented countered the view that people with dementia 
lack insight, and showed that a reluctance to discuss dementia and avoidance 
of words from the dementia lexicon can be seen as purposive acts on the part 
of older people with dementia.   
Chapter 7 presented the properties of the first category of the grounded theory 
 experiencing  and began to construct the argument that there are 
relationships between older peoples experiences of dementia and their social 
locations.  It was shown that complex insights can be gained through talking 
with older people with dementia about their experiences; this rich data counters 
commonly held assumptions about life with memory problems; dementia may 
facilitate self-actualization; and diversity does indeed make a difference.  
Through chapter 8, we were introduced to the second category of the grounded 
theory  othering  and learned that othering practices are frequent 
occurrences in the context of dementia; the extent to which people with 
dementia are subject to othering is related to their social locations; and the 
concept of resilience is important for understanding differential experiences of 
marginalization due to dementia.  The penultimate chapter presented the third 
category of the grounded theory  theorising  and argued that older people 
with dementia are active meaning makers who theorise about their dementia 
experiences, and do so strategically.  The next section will build on the 
conclusion reached in chapter 9 that older people with dementia propose a 
dialectical theory of dementia that positions dementia as both normal and 
pathological, and integrates emic and etic perspectives.  The result is a theory 
of dementia as a bio-psycho-social phenomenon. 
10.3 Dementia as a bio-psycho-social phenomenon   
As has been indicated thus far, the biological features of dementia - degree of 
cognitive impairment, symptomology, medical interventions - are not the sole 
factors affecting dementia experiencing, othering, and theorising for older 
people living with dementia.  Bosse Knudsen and Ester Hernandez were the 
most cognitively impaired of the participants, yet were not othered as often (see 
section 8.6.1) due to what some would term their social-psychology  being a 
people person and using humour in the case of Bosse Knudsen, and denying 
the label of dementia and drawing attention to other biographical features such 
as having been a dancer and a teacher for Ester Hernandez.  This can also be 
seen as a sociological dimension - the result of resilience developed through a 
lifetime of discrimination based on identity factors such as their race, gender, 
and ethnicity. 
The results of this research indicate that dementia is best viewed as a bio-
psycho-social phenomenon (Hulko, 2003), as the biology, psychology, and 
sociology39 of the individual in question affect the way that this phenomenon is 
experienced, responded to by others, and made sense of by the person with 
39 While psychology and biology are used in their unadulterated disciplinary forms to refer to 
individual characteristics, as in the biology or the psychology of Mrs. X, sociology is almost 
always presented in an altered form, such as the social context or the socio-cultural 
environment.  Because I dont see any reason not to, I am using the term sociology in the same 
way that psychology and biology commonly appear in reference to people.  
dementia him or herself.  Julianna Molnar implicated sociology in particular 
when she told me in the second interview that social isolation and lack of 
communication with others increases the likelihood of forgetting everything for 
those who already are experiencing memory loss: 
Those people who are forgetting about thingsI would sayI think it 
really adds to it if somebody takes awaylike you are not 
communicating anymore, youre not with people anymoreIn order 
for you to keep your memory to some extent, you need people 
because otherwise you forget everything. 
All people need to be surrounded by others, especially older people at risk of 
social isolation such as those with dementia (Alzheimer Scotland Action on 
Dementia, 2001).  The presence of fellow human beings can encourage 
rementia (Sixsmith et al, 1993) and the retention of abilities (Zgola, 1999: 93), 
the latter being reminiscent of the strengths perspective in social work 
(Saleebey, 1997) whose aim is to shift a social workers focus from pathology 
and problems, to strengths and challenges.  A paradigm shift of this nature is 
exactly what Kitwood (1995; 1997a) and others have long been advocating for 
in dementia and which many have thought attainable through the adoption of 
the social model of disability. 
Marshall indicated the naturalness of a holistic way of thinking about dementia 
amongst those who work directly with people with dementia when she referred 
to dementia as the most complex biopsychosocial disease (1999: 90) in an 
article about what service planners and policymakers need from research.  At a 
dementia seminar in Edinburgh soon after I arrived in Scotland to start my PhD, 
Jacques (2001) argued for a more holistic approach to dementia to avoid the 
polarization of the medical model and the social model; and I suggested that 
perhaps he was calling for a bio-psycho-social approach.  Based on the 
audience reactions, this appeared to be unfamiliar terminology or not the usual 
way of thinking about dementia in the UK; although I did notice that the other 
social worker in the room nodded in understanding.  The ambiguous 
relationship between social work and bio-medicine is evident by the fact that a 
social work monograph on the application of the personhood concept in work 
with older people with dementia drew heavily on sociological theory, yet framed 
dementia as a disease from the outset (Bryan, 2001). 
There are important differences between calling dementia a bio-psycho-social 
phenomenon and closely associated terminology such as a bio-psycho-social 
disease (Marshall, 1999) or a psycho-social condition, for example.  While 
Marshall (1999) used an expression that included all three elements  biology, 
psychology, and sociology  she retained the word disease and in doing so, 
indicated possible support for the view of dementia as pathological and not 
normal aging.  Even if Marshall had used the word disability, as she has done 
elsewhere (Marshall, 1998), this simply would have indicated another 
ontological position that is taken to be oppositional to the medical model.   The 
same would have been the case with condition or illness, which are both 
euphemisms for disease, though meant to indicate an emphasis on the 
patients or emic perspective, rather than the physicians or etic one (Conrad & 
Kern, 1981; Emami et al, 2000; Kleinman, 1988a).   Finally social construction 
is far too expansive a claim on its own, as it rejects the possibility of any 
biological features in dementia and denies the bodily experience of symptoms 
and behaviours (Phinney, 2003), although it accomplishes the important task of 
implicating the social world.  The word phenomenon is sufficiently neutral on its 
own, and when combined with bio-psycho-social, allows for equal emphasis on 
all three components  and it allows for a holistic approach that reflects the 
theories of older people with dementia that what they have is both normal and 
pathological. 
Three themes were evident in my earlier review of dementia theories (Hulko, 
2002): prior theorising on dementia has not been based on the lived 
experiences and viewpoints of people with dementia themselves  it has not 
come straight from the horses mouth; dementia theories have failed to 
account for the socio-cultural context of people with dementia, the intersectional 
nature of identities, and the interaction between these realms; and future 
sociological theorising on dementia and intersectionality needs to be grounded 
in an analysis of the structure and function of privilege and oppression in order 
to adequately account for the experiences of people who are simultaneously 
oppressed on the basis of multiple and intersecting identity categories.  Clearly 
a more holistic approach to dementia is needed to build a theory of dementia 
that adequately accounts for the variability of experiences.  This research 
supports the view that a bio-psycho-social approach may be the most 
appropriate model for understanding the ontological and phenomenological 
nature of dementia.  The timeless words of John Dewey (1939) explain the 
rationale behind this approach: 
It is my conviction that many perplexing problems now attendant 
upon human old age have a psycho-social origin Biological 
processes take place in economic, political and cultural contexts.  
They are inextricably wovenWe need to know the ways in which 
social contexts react back into biological processes... (As cited in 
Achenbaum, 1997:22) 
The bio-psycho-social approach is often referred to by health care practitioners 
(Dowrick, May, Richardson & Bundred, 1996) and its adoption has been 
recommended for aging research (Innui, 2003).  It has been shown that 
psychosocial aspects of health can be taught successfully to medical students 
(Burch, 1980-81) and easily applied to clinical practice (Egger, 2001).  
However, despite these expressions of support, this integrative approach has 
not been well evidenced in practice (Dowrick et al, 1996; Egger, 2001) and has 
yet to be applied to efforts towards achieving a greater understanding of the 
nature and/or experience of dementia.  Referring to dementia as a 
phenomenon, and a bio-psycho-social one at that, takes the debate further, into 
the realm of ontology.  It moves beyond an approach to dementia, towards a 
grounded theory of dementia.  
The model below illustrates this phenomenon called dementia as being 
comprised of the elements of biology, psychology, and sociology. 
Figure 28 Dementia as a bio-psycho-social phenomenon 
Biology
Psychology Sociology 
Dementia
In terms of the contributions of each element, biology can be seen to be 
causative as it refers to the degree of cognitive impairment, symptomology, and 
specific medical interventions such as pharmacotherapy; psychology is a 
mediating element made up of factors like personality traits, psychic resources, 
self-awareness, and challenging behaviours; and sociology, also mediating, 
can be seen in ones identity and social location, the social world surrounding 
the person with dementia, including interactions with significant others and 
health care professionals, and structural forces, such as the dynamics of 
privilege and oppression.  This holistic approach to dementia is grounded in the 
voices and experiences of older people with dementia themselves and reflects 
their everyday theorizing about this phenomenon that they believe to be both 
normal and pathological.  Coming from people with dementia themselves, this 
conceptualisation of dementia as a bio-psycho-social phenomenon overcomes 
some of the weaknesses of past theorising about dementia. 
I did not set out with a definition of dementia for this thesis, as I was not entirely 
comfortable with the biomedical one that I had been exposed to as a health 
care professional; nor was I satisfied with social constructionist perspectives, as 
they seemed to deny bodily experiences of dementia and the very real 
problems resulting from cognitive impairment that I had witnessed when 
working with people with dementia.  This critique of the social construction of 
dementia is similar to that of feminist disability activists who pointed out the 
limitations of the social model of disability due to its neglect of impairment 
(Crow, 1996; Morris, 1991; 1996).  The way that the social model of disability 
has been adopted within the dementia field (Bartlett, 2000; Kitwood, 1995; 
Marshall, 1998; Pool, 2000) appears to answer the call for a sociology of 
disability and impairment (Hughes & Patterson, 2000), one that acknowledges 
the social construction of disability while attending to the bodily experiences of 
impairment, essentially an approach that is integrative.  It has less to say about 
the ontology of dementia, however, as the focus is more on how we should 
respond to dementia than what dementia is, especially for the people who have 
As has been argued in this section, biology alone can not account for the 
variability of dementia experiencing, othering, and theorising amongst this 
group of older people with dementia.  The eight older people with dementia with 
whom I worked on this research ranged in age from 73 to 87 years, with 77 
years being the average; five of them were women and three were men; three 
were considered to be multiply privileged, three fell in-between multiply 
marginalized and multiply privileged, and two were multiply marginalized, on the 
basis of their race, ethnicity, class, and gender; six of the eight were born 
outside Canada and had immigrated in adulthood; all had been diagnosed with 
some form of dementia, primarily Alzheimers disease, with mixed dementia 
and dementia non-specified being the other diagnoses; and the degree of 
cognitive impairment for this group ranged from mild to moderate-severe, with 
the majority being moderately impaired.  The range of dementia experiencing, 
othering, and theorising amongst this diverse group of older people cannot be 
accounted for by a variation in the biological features of dementia alone, as 
shown by the data presented in this thesis.  The psychological and sociological 
aspects of dementia are just as important if we wish to achieve a complete and 
necessarily complex picture of subjective experiences of dementia, and one 
that reflects the dialectical theory of dementia as normal and pathological that 
has come straight from the horses mouth. 
10.4 Implications for research, practice, and policy 
Several implications arise from this grounded theory of dementia and 
intersectionality, as I expected at the outset (see chapter 5).  The implications 
that I am presenting are divided into research, practice, and policy, with the 
recognition that there are overlaps between these different domains.   Future 
research will have to address these implications, which are only briefly 
highlighted. 
10.4.1 Research 
This thesis has demonstrated that it is not necessary to choose between Glaser 
and his followers on one hand and the Strauss and Corbin school on the other, 
in order to do grounded theory research.  It is possible to steer a course 
through all the dogma and infighting and produce a workable alternative that 
deserves the grounded theory official stamp.  Moreover, grounded theory 
research that conforms to feminist principles and that makes use of anti-
oppressive research methods is achievable.  It must be stressed that this is a 
different way of doing grounded theory, and as such, it could be considered by 
current practitioners as too different or not at all different40.  While the form of 
grounded theory that I describe in this thesis is less dogmatic and more 
reflexive than originally prescribed (Glaser & Strauss, 1967), I believe that 
adhering to the basic strategies (see chapter 5) and conducting research in an 
ethical and rigorous manner ensures congruence with the tenets of Grounded 
40 See, for example, Glaser s (2002) response to Charmazs (2000) article distinguishing 
between objectivist and constructivist grounded theory; Glaser (2002: para 1) claims that 
Constructivist Grounded Theory (GT) is a misnomer as he believes that grounded theory has 
always been constructivist, despite clear arguments that this is a new approach to creating 
knowledge using grounded theory strategies (Charmaz, 2000; Clarke, 2003).     
Theory; at the same time, it allows for grounded theory research that makes 
more sense to researchers and research participants. 
Not only did this thesis show that it is entirely possible to talk to older people 
with dementia about their experiences, whatever their level of impairment and 
insight, it also proved that strategies to reduce power differentials, such as 
participant validation, using verbatim quotes and long narratives, and process 
consent, can be used successfully with older people with dementia.  Prior to 
using these practical strategies, the researcher must first conceptualise 
vulnerable old people, such as those with dementia, as active meaning makers 
(Russell, 1999).  Furthermore, this thesis proved that it is possible to obtain 
approval from a hospital ethics committee for critical social science research 
that uses anti-oppressive methods and employs an emergent research design. 
The therapeutic benefits of sharing ones stories of dementia were evident at 
several points during the research process, and this unexpected outcome was 
commented upon by several of the participants as well.  As Kleinman (1988a) 
argued, I too found that research can fill a therapeutic void, in that there is not 
always time in a clinical encounter for us to encourage story telling, yet we 
know that it is beneficial for people to be able to share their illness narratives 
with receptive listeners.  The therapeutic effect could be seen as one measure 
of success, as could the instances of catalytic validity (Lather, 1991), such as 
when Jim Heather told his staff about what it is like to have Alzheimers and 
how he had been treated, after having discussed his experiences in two 
interviews with me.  This moment of catalytic validity  the degree to which the 
research process re-orients, focuses, and energises participants towards 
knowing reality in order to transform it (Lather, 1991: 68)  is captured in the 
photo below of Jim Heather acting contrary to our expectations of a silly 
patient.      
Figure 29 Jim Heather chairing the staff meeting 
10.4.2 Practice 
At the Toronto feedback session, I was asked by the daughter of one of the 
participants, who was a social worker herself, why adult day programs dont run 
groups where people with dementia can talk about what they are going through.  
This is such a simple idea, yet rather revolutionary for dementia care.  When 
support groups are offered for people with dementia, as opposed to their 
caregivers, they tend to be directed at people in the early stages and/or those 
with early onset dementia (Cheston, Jones & Gilliard, 2003; The Group 
Members, 2003).  For those who are not eligible to attend these groups, we are 
often so focused on activity programming and keeping people busy (Katz, 
2000) that we neglect to discuss the phenomenon that brings people together 
for a full day, or half a day.  The photo below depicts the activity schedule at a 
dementia day program and evokes the busyness that is so common in 
dementia care, perhaps driven by a fear of idle hands: 
Figure 30 Activity schedule at dementia day program 
I suggest that over-programming might have more to do with our own 
discomfort with the topic of dementia and less to do with concern for the 
delicate emotions of people with dementia, as older people with dementia find it 
beneficial to talk about their experiences (see chapter 6; Bartlett & Cheston, 
2003).  It is entirely understandable to feel afraid to initiate a discussion that 
could go in any direction, raise uncomfortable emotions, and might not achieve 
resolution.  When the environment is one in which talking to people is viewed 
as slacking, as not really working, and not a valid activity in its own right, there 
is not much incentive to explore the therapeutic benefits of talking about life 
with dementia.  It has been argued that we risk marginalising some voices 
because theyre too painful for us to hear  we hear them already in our work, 
in our lives, as we think (or try not to think) about how we shall be when it is 
our turn, if it is to be our turn (Cheston, 2004: 167).  This avoidance of the topic 
of dementia might be owing in large part to cross-contamination from long-term 
care facilities, with their preoccupation with bed-and-body work (Gubrium, 
1997) and activities of daily living (Beck et al, 2000), and the lack of funding and 
recognition of the need for counselling services for older adults in general. 
In addition to life with dementia groups at adult day programs, we could make 
better use of the social work profession, by actually having social work positions 
at local Alzheimer societies.  Social workers could provide one to one 
counselling for people with dementia, which is not widely available at present, 
after which point people might decide to join a group of their peers.  Gus 
Holden only felt ready to join a support group after he had the experience of 
talking with someone individually about his experiences, yet the only option in 
his community that is available to him as a person with dementia is an early 
stage support group.  Angela Huggins noted how valuable it would be for those 
who are having a really hard time with dementia to talk to others.  We know that 
not everyone is a group person and that individual counselling should precede 
group work, yet support services for people with dementia have not been 
designed in this way, as they have been add-ons to services for caregivers, 
who were the primary client base of the Alzheimer Society for many years.  It 
should be noted, however, that not all social workers will be suited to this type 
of work, nor will they be skilled in using a reflexive approach, simply by virtue of 
their professional background.  Bryan (2001) concluded her monograph about 
person-centred social work with older people with dementia thus: 
By examining the person centred care approach and use of self as 
a social work method, it was found that the qualities defining the 
method were not a generic condition of all social workers, but a 
rigorous, reflexive philosophy that was hugely demanding to practice 
(p 41).   
An even more radical approach that is suggested by the findings of this thesis is 
to stop intervening in the lives of people with dementia, to stop making 
something problematic that is not viewed as a problem by the majority of the 
people who have it.  If dementia is not hell for everyone who has it, why are we 
acting as if it is?  Rather than adopting a policy of non-intervention per se, we 
should view this as an opportunity for community development  with a twist.  It 
is apparent that the communities of the multiply marginalised older people with 
dementia have something to teach to the members of the social worlds of the 
multiply privileged older people with dementia.  A transfer of knowledge and 
skills in human relations and a more expansive definition of normalcy needs to 
take place and this time it should come from acknowledging the strengths of 
marginalised communities, rather than emphasising their disadvantages 
(Minkler, 1996; Saleebey, 1997). 
People with dementia have started to advocate for themselves, and through 
doing so, to counter the negative, hopeless images associated with dementia 
(Friedell & Bryden, 2002; McKillop, 2001; Robinson, 2001).  For example, the 
Dementia Advocacy and Support Network (DASN) is a virtual community of 
people with dementia that started as a support group for people with dementia 
and has grown into a very strong lobbying and advocacy organization (DASN, 
2004).  While this is a very promising direction, we do need to ensure that the 
growing number of self-advocates are actually representative of older people 
with dementia and reflect the diversity of views about experiencing, othering 
and theorising dementia that are captured in this thesis. 
10.4.3 Policy 
At the policy and practice interface, the idea of creating dementia-friendly 
communities (Alzheimer Scotland Action on Dementia, 2001; Marshall, 1999) is 
certainly worth promoting and what this might look like should be explored in 
depth.  This campaign is meant to address the reality that the majority of people 
with dementia live in the community; indeed, they are not just receiving health 
services, but are moving about in our towns and cities like the rest of us  
(Marshall, 1999: 93).  It is within their own social worlds that people with 
dementia are marginalised on the basis of their dementia status and it is within 
their social worlds that people with dementia are subject to disabling 
behaviours.  Raising awareness about dementia and increasing sensitivity 
towards people who have dementia would go a long way towards achieving full 
citizenship rights for people with dementia (Cook, 2003; Innes, 2002).  
Associated with a community level response such as this is the policy of 
relinquishing control over resources to the communities that are in receipt of 
them, as in the independent living movement.  Perhaps the communities of the 
more marginalised older people with dementia  that seem to be far more 
accepting of difference or eccentricity - are unconsciously putting into action the 
policy of normalisation that has been championed by the learning disabilities 
movement.  In line with this shift, we need to alter our funding structures to 
ensure that psycho-social interventions receive as much funding as medical 
interventions; and that we move away from the medical focus on diagnosis, 
drugs, and doom to a more social emphasis on living life to the fullest. 
Reference List 
 1.  Abberley, J. The concept of oppression and the development of a social theory of disability. Disability, 
Handicap & Society. 1987; 2(1):5-19. 
 2.  Abrums, M. 'Jesus will fix it after awhile': Meanings and health. Social Science and Medicine. 2000; 50(1): 
89-105. 
 3.  Achenbaum, W. A. Critical gerontology . Jamieson, A.; Harper, S., and Victor, C., Editors. Critical 
Approaches to Aging and Later Life. Buckingham: Open University Press; 1997; pp. 16-26. 
 4.  Adams, M; Bell, L. A, and Griffin, P. Teaching for Diversity and Social Justice: A Sourcebook. New York: 
Routledge; 1997. 
 5.  Adams, T. and Bartlett, R. Constructing dementia. Adams, T. and Manthorpe, J., Editors. Dementia Care. 
London: Arnold; 2003. 
 6.  Adelman, R. C. The alzheimerization of aging. The Gerontologist. 1995; 35(4):526-532. 
 7.  Aderibigbe, Y. A. and Pandurangi, A. K. The neglect of culture in psychiatric nosology: The case of culture 
bound syndromes. International Journal of Social Psychiatry. 1995; 41(4):235-241. 
 8.  Adib, A. and Guerrier, Y. The interlocking of gender with nationality, race, ethnicity and class: the narratives 
of women in hotel work . Gender, Work and Organization. 2003; 10(4):413-432. 
 9.  Agger, B. Western Marxism: An introduction.  Classical and contemporary sources. Santa Monica, CA: 
Goodyear; 1979. 
 10.  Ahmad, W. I. U. Making black people sick: Race, ideology and health research in Britain. Ahmad, W. I. U., 
Editor. Raceand Health in Contemporary Britain. Buckingham: Open University Press; 1993; pp. 
11-33 . 
 11.  Ahmad, W. I. U. Race and Health in Contemporary Britain. Buckingham: Open University Press; 1993. 
 12.  Aidoo, M. and Harpham, T. The explanatory models of mental health amongst low-income women and health 
care practitioners in Lusaka, Zambia. Health Policy and Planning. 2001; 16(2):206-213. 
 13.  Albee, E. Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?  Harmondsworth: Penguin; 1965. 
 14.  Alexander, V. D. Analysing visual materials. Gilbert, N., Editor. Researching Social Life. London: Sage; 
2001; pp. 343-357. 
 15.  Allan, K. Dementia, research and consent: Dilemmas and new directions. British Society of Gerontology 30th 
annual conference ; Stirling .  2001. 
 16.  ---. Women and dementia: From stigma towards celebration. Ussher, J. M., Editor. Womens Health: 
Contemporary International Perspectives. Leicester: BPS Books; 2000; pp. 447-455. 
 17.   Alzheimer Scotland Action on Dementia. Creating Dementia-Friendly Communities . Edinburgh: Alzheimer 
Scotland Action on Dementia; 2001. 
 18.   Alzheimer Society of Canada.  Alzheimer Care Ethical Guidelines: Participation in research. 
1995http://www.alzheimer.ca/english/care/ethics-research, last accessed 04/08/02. 
 19.   Alzheimer Society of Canada.  Quality of life and coping are of paramount importance to people in the 
early stages of Alzheimer Disease: Alzheimer Society conducts focus group research.  Toronto: 
Alzheimer Society of Canada; 2002(; January 2, 2002 ).  
 20.   Alzheimer Society of Canada.  Shared Experiences: Suggestions for Those with Alzheimer Disease. 
Toronto: Alzheimer Society of Canada; 2002. 
 21.   Alzheimer Society of Canada .  Stigma and Alzheimer Disease Media Kit.  Public Opinion Poll Summary.
Toronto: Alzheimer Society of Canada; 2003; January 6. Accessed January 22, 2003 . 
 22.  Alzheimer Society of Toronto. Hearing their stories: The experiences of individuals with Alzheimer Disease. 
Alert. 2000; 18(3):1-2. 
 23.  Andersen, M.  and Hill Collins, P.  Race, Class, and Gender: An Anthology. 2nd  ed. Belmont, CA 
Wadsworth; 1995. 
 24.  Andersen, M. L. and Hill Collins, P. Introduction. Andersen, M. L. and Hill Collins, P., Editor. Race, Class, 
and Gender: An Anthology. 4th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth; 2001b; pp. 1-11. 
 25.  ---. Race, Class, and Gender: An Anthology . 4th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth; 2001a. 
 26.  Anderson, I.  and Brownlie, J. A neglected problem: Minority ethnic elders with dementia. Bowes, A. and 
Sims, D., Editors.  Perspectives on Welfare: The Experiences of Minority Ethnic Groups in 
Scotland. Aldershot: Ashgate; 1997. 
 27.  Anthias, F. New hybridities, old concepts: The limits of culture. Ethnic and Racial Studies. 2001; 24( 
4):619-641. 
 28.  Anthias, F. The problem of ethnic and race categories and the antiracist struggle. Manning, N. and Page, R., 
Editors. Social Policy Review. London: Social Policy Association; 1992. 
 29.  Anzaldua, G.  La conciencia de la Mestiza: Towards a new conciousness. Bhavnani, K., Editor. Feminism 
and Race. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2001; pp. 93-107. 
 30.  Armstrong, P. and Armstrong, H. Wasting Away: The Undermining of Canadian Health Care . Don Mills: 
Oxford University Press; 1996. 
 31.  Ashley, P. Now You See It, Now You Dont [Web Page]. 2001; Accessed 1919 Nov 1. Available at: 
http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/have/personal/hallucinations.html. 
 32.  Askham, J. Making sense of dementia: Carers perceptions. Ageing & Society. 1995; 15:103-114. 
 33.  Askham, J.; Henshaw, L., and Tarpay, M. Social and Health Authority Services for Elderly People from 
Black and Minority Ethnic Communities. London: Age Concern Institute of Gerontology; 1995. 
 34.  Auger, J. A. and Tedford-Little, D. From the Inside Looking Out: Competing Ideas About Growing Old. 
Halifax, NS: Fernwood Publishing; 2002. 
 35.  Bailey, S. and Darling, J. Tangles and Starbursts:  Living with Dementia. North Shields: Alzheimers Society 
North Tyneside Branch; 2001. 
 36.  Baker, C.; Wuest, J., and Stern, P. N. Method slurring: The grounded theory/phenomenology example. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing. 1992; 17:1355-1360. 
 37.  Baker, D. W. ; Gazmararian, J. A.;  Sudano, J., and Patterson, M. The association between age and health 
literacy among elderly persons. Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences. 2000; 55B(6):S368-S374. 
 38.  Balibar, E. and Wallerstein, I. Race, Nation, Class: Ambiguous Identities. London : Verso; 1991. 
 39.  Bannerji, H.  The paradox of diversity: The construction of a multicultural Canada and women of colour. 
Womens Studies International. 2001; 23(5):537-560. 
 40.  ---. The passion of naming: identity, difference and politics of class.  Bannerji, H. Thinking Through: Essays 
on Feminism, Marxism, and Anti-racism. Toronto : Womens Press; 1995b; pp. 17-40. 
 41.  Bannerji, H. Thinking Through: Essays on Feminism, Marxism, and Anti-Racism. Toronto:  Womens Press; 
1995a. 
 42.  Barber, M. D. Equality and Diversity: Phenomenological Investigations of Prejudice and Discrimination. 
Amherst : Humanity Books; 2001. 
 43.  Barer, B. M.  Men and women aging differently. International Journal of Aging and Human Development. 
1994; 38(1):29-40. 
 44.  Barnett, E. Including the person with dementia in designing and delivering care: I need to be me .  
London:  Jessica Kingsley; 2000. 
  45.  Bartlett, H.  and Martin, W. Ethical issues in dementia research. Wilkinson, H., Editor.  The Perspectives of
People with Dementia: Research Methods and Motivations. London : Jessica Kingsley; 2002; pp. 
47-62. 
 46.  Bartlett, R.  Dementia as a disability: Can we learn from disability studies and theory? Journal of Dementia 
Care . 2000; 8(5):33-36. 
 47.  Bartlett, R. and Cheston, R. Counselling people with dementia . Adams, T. and Manthorpe, J., EditorLondon: 
Arnold; 2003; pp. 86-102. 
 48.  Bay, C. Human needs, wants, and politics: Abraham Maslow, meet Karl Marx. Social Praxis. 1980; 
7(3/4):233-252. 
 49.  Beck, C.; Zgola, J., and Shue, V. Activities of Daily Living: An essential component of programming for  
persons with Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's Care Quarterly. 2000; 1(2):46-55. 
 50.  Becker, H. Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance. New York: The Free Press; 1963. 
 51.  ---. Photography and sociology . Studies in the Anthropology of Visual Communication. 1974; 1(1):1-19. 
 52.  ---. Whose side are we on? Social Problems. 1966; 14(1-4):239-247. 
 53.  Bell, C. and Newby, H. Introduction: The rise of methodological pluralism.   Doing Sociological Research. 
London: George Allen & Unwin; 1977; pp. 9-29. 
 54.  Bell, J. and McGregor, I. A challenge to stage theories of dementia. Kitwood, T. and Benson, S. The New 
Culture of Dementia Care. London : Hawker; 1995; pp. 12-14. 
 55.  Bell, V. and Troxel, D. Spirituality and the person with dementia - a view from the field  . Alzheimer's Care 
Quarterly. 2001; 2(2):31-45. 
 56.  Benbow, S. M. and Reynolds, D. Challenging the stigma of Alzehimer's disease . Hospital Medicine. 2000; 
61(3):174-177. 
 57.  Bender, M.; Snelling, E., and Wood, J. The presentation of self by people diagnosed as having dementia. 
PSIGE Newsletter. 2000; 71:22-32. 
 58.  Bender, M. P. and Cheston, R.  Inhabitants of a lost kingdom: A model of the subjective experiences of 
dementia. Ageing & Society. 1997; 17:513-532. 
 59.  Bengston, V. L.; Burgess, E. O., and Parrott, T. M. Theory, explanation, and a third generation of theoretical 
development in social gerontology . Journal of  Gerontology: Social Sciences . 1997; 
52B(2):S72-S88. 
 60.  Berdes, C. and Zych, A. A. Subjective quality of life of Polish, Polish-immigrant, and Polish-American 
elderly. International Journal of Aging and Human Development. 2000; 50(4):385-395. 
 61.  Berger, P. and Luckmann, T. The Social Construction of Reality. Middlesex: Penguin Books.; 1966. 
 62.  Bernard, M. and Phillips, J. Social policy and the challenge of old age. Bernard, M. and Phillips, J., Editors. 
The Social Policy of Old Age: Moving into the 21st Century . London: CPA; 1998; pp. 1-19. 
 63.  Bhavnani, K. Feminism and Race. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2001. 
 64.  Biggs, S. Understanding Ageing: Images, Attitudes and Professional Practice. Buckingham: Open University 
Press; 1993. 
 65.  Binney, E. and Swan, J. The political economy of mental health care for the elderly. Minkler, M. and Estes, 
C. Critical Perspectives on Aging: The Political and Moral Economy of Growing Old. Amityville, 
NY: Baywood; 1991; pp. 165-188. 
 66.  Bishop, A. Becoming an Ally: Breaking the Cycle of Oppression. Halifax:  Fernwood Publishing; 1994. 
 67.  ---. Becoming an Ally: Breaking the Cycle of Oppression in People  . 2nd ed. Halifax: Fernwood; 2003. 
 68.  Blakemore, K. Does age matter?  The case of old age in minority ethnic groups. Bytheway, B; Keil, T.; 
Allatt, P., and Bryman, A., Editors. Becoming and Being Old: Sociological Approaches to Later 
Life. London : Sage; 1989; pp. 158-1
 69.  Blakemore, K. From minorities to majorities: perspectives on culture, ethnicity and ageing in British 
Gerontology. In Jamieson, A.; Harper, S., and Victor, C., Editors. Critical Approaches to Ageing and 
Later Life. Buckingham : Open University Press; 1997; pp. 27-38. 
 70.  Blakemore, K. and Boneham, M.  Age, Race and Ethnicity: A Comparative Approach. Buckingham: Open 
University Press; 1994. 
 71.  Blandford, A. and Chappell, N. Subjective well-being among native and non-native elderly persons: Do 
differences exist?   Canadian Journal on Aging. 1990; 9(4):386-399.
 72.  Blau, J. R. and Brown, E. S. Du Bois and diasporic identity: the veil and the unveiling project. Sociological 
Theory . 2001; 19(2):219-233. 
 73.  Bloor, M. Shorter report.  On the analysis of observational data: A discussion of the worth and uses of 
inductive techniques and respondent validation.  Sociology. 1978; 12 (3):545-552. 
 74.  Blumer, H. Society as symbolic interaction. Rose, A. M., Editor. Human Behavior and Social Processes . 
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul; 1962; pp. 179-192. 
 75.  Boden, C. Who Will I Be When I Die? Sydney, NSW: Harper Collins; 1998. 
 76.  Bond, J. The medicalization of dementia. Journal of Aging Studies. 1992; 6:397-403. 
 77.  Bond, J. Sociological perspectives. Cantley, C., Editor. A Handbook of Dementia Care. Buckingham: Open 
University Press; 2001; pp. 44-61. 
 78.  Bond, J.; Briggs, R., and Coleman, P. The study of ageing. Bond, J.; Coleman, P., and Pease, S., Editors. 
Ageing in Society: An Introduction to Social Gerontology . London: SAGE; 1993. 
 79.  Bond, J. and Corner, L. Researching dementia: Are there unique methodological challenges for health 
services research?  Ageing & Society. 2001; 21:95-116. 
 80.  Bond, J.; Corner, L., and Graham, R. Social Science Theory on Dementia Research: Normal aging, cultural 
representation and social exclusion. Innes, A; Archibald, C., and Murphy, C. , Editors. Dementia and 
Social Inclusion: Marginalised groups and marginalised areas of dementia research, care and 
practice. London: Jessica Kingsley; 2004; pp. 220-236. 
 81.  Booth, D. Supporting Tom [Web Page]. 2001; Accessed 1919 Nov 1. Available at: 
http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/have/personal/tomsstory.html. 
 82.  Booth, W. Doing research with lonely people. British Journal of Learning Disabilities. 1998; 26:132-134. 
 83.  Bornat, J. Life experience. Bernard, M. and Phillips, J., Editors. Women Come of Age. London: Edward 
Arnold; 1993; pp. 23-42. 
 84.  Bourdieu, P.  The forms of capital. Richardson, J., Editor. Handbook of Theory and Research for the 
Sociology of Education . New York: Greenwood Press; 1986; pp. 241-258. 
 85.   Bowes, A. and Wilkinson, H. (University of Stirling).  Feasibility Study for Research on South Asian 
People with Dementia.  Report to the Chief Scientist Office  .  Stirling; 2002b; CLC/4/2/28.  
 86.  ---. South Asian people with dementia: Research issues. Wilkinson, H., Editor. The Perspectives of People 
with Dementia:  Research Methods and Motivations.  2002a; pp. 223-241. 
 87.  Brah, A. Difference, diversity, differentiation. Bhavnani, K., Editor. Feminism and Race . Oxford : Oxford 
University Press; 2001; pp. 456-478. 
 88.  Brah, A. and Phoenix, A. Ain't I A Woman? Revisiting Intersectionality . Journal of International Women's 
Studies . 2004; 5(3):75-86. 
 89.  Brannen, J. Research note: The study of sensitive subjects. The Sociological Review. 1988; 36(3):552-563. 
 90.  Braudy Harris, P. The Person with Alzheimers Disease: Pathways to Understanding the Experience. 
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press; 2002. 
 91.  Braudy Harris, P. and Sterin, G. J. Insiders perspective: Defining and preserving the self of dementia. Journal 
of Mental Health and Aging. 1999; 5(3):241-256. 
 92.  Brennan, T. Courage in the face of adversity. International Forum on Early Dementia. 1995; 1(4):1-4. 
 93.  Brewer, R.; Conrad, C. A., and King, M. C. The complexities and potential of theorizing gender, caste, race, 
and class . Feminist Economics . 2002; 8(2):3-18. 
 94.  British Sociological Association. Statement of Ethical Practice [Web Page]. 2002; Accessed 1922 May 2. 
Available at: http://www.britsoc.org.uk/about/ethic.htm. 
 95.  Brittan, A. and Maynard, M. Sexism, Racism and Oppression. Oxford : Basil Blackwell; 1984. 
 96.  Brody, E. M. and others. Excess disabilities of mentally impaired aged: Impact of individualized treatment. 
The Gerontologist. 1971; 11:124-133. 
 97.  Brotman, S. The incidence of poverty among seniors in Canada: Exploring the impact of gender, ethnicity 
and race.  Canadian Journal of Aging. 1998; 17(2):166-185. 
 98.  Brotman, S.; Ryan, B., and Cormier, R. The health and social service needs of gay and lesbian elders and 
their families in Canada. The Gerontologist. 2003; 43(2):192-202. 
 99.  Brown, G. W. and Harris, T. Social Origins of Depression: A Study of Psychiatric Disorder in Women . 
London: Tavistock; 1978. 
 100.  Browne, C. A feminist life span perspective on aging. Van Den Bergh, N., Editor. Feminist Practice in the 
21st Century. Washington : NASW Press; 1995; pp. 330-354. 
 101.  Bryan, S. Personhood and the Social Work Relationship in the Assessment of Older People with Dementia. 
Norwich: Social Work Monographs; 2001. 
 102.  Brydon-Miller, M.; Greenwood, D., and Maguire, P. Why action research? Action Research. 2003; 1(1):9-28. 
 103.  Burch E.A.  A bio-psycho-social interview model for freshman medical students. The Psychiatric Forum . 
1980; Fall/Winter:10-16. 
 104.  Burgess, R. G. Starting research and gaining access . Burgess, R. G., Author. In the Field: An Introduction to 
Field Research. London : Routledge; 1984; pp. 31-51. 
 105.  Burman, E. Experience, identities and alliances: Jewish feminism and feminist psychology. Feminism & 
Psychology. 1994; 4(1):155-178. 
 106.  Bury, M. Aging, gender and sociological theory . Arber, S. and Ginn/J., Editors. Connecting Gender and 
Ageing: A Sociological Approach. Buckingham : Open University Press; 1995; pp. 15-29. 
 107.  ---. Defining and researching disability: Challenges and responses. Barnes, C. and Mercer, G., Editors. 
Exploring the Divide: Illness and Disability. Leeds: Disability Press; 1996; pp. 17-54 . 
 108.  ---. Illness narratives: Fact or fiction?   Sociology of Health and Illness. 2001; 23(3):263-285. 
 109.  Busfield, J. Men, Women and Madness: Understanding Gender and Mental Disorder. Houndsmill: Macmillan 
Press; 1996. 
 110.  Butterfield, E. Intersectionality: New directions for a theory of identity. International Studies in Philosophy. 
2003; 35(1):1-12. 
 111.  Bytheway, B. Ageism. Buckingham: Open University Press; 1995. 
 112.  Cagney, K. A. and Lauderdale, D. S. Education, wealth, and cognitive function in later life. Journal of 
Gerontology: Psychological Sciences. 2002; 57B(2):163-172. 
 113.  Calasanti, T. Incorporating diversity: Meaning, levels of research, and implications for theory. The 
Gerontologist. 1996; 36(2):147-156. 
 114.  Calasanti, T. M. and Slevin, K. F. Gender, Social Inequalities, and Aging. Walnut Creek : Altamira Press; 
2001. 
 115.  Canadian Sociology and Anthropology Association. CSAA Statement of Professional Ethics [Web Page]. 
1994; Accessed 1922 May 2. Available at: http://alcor.concordia.ca/~csaa1/englcode.htm. 
 116.  Canadian Study of Health and Aging (CSHA) Working Group. Canadian Study of Health and Aging: Study 
methods and prevalence of dementia .  Canadian Medical Association Journal . 1994; 150:899-913. 
 117.  Canales, M. K. Othering: Toward an understanding of difference . Advances in Nursing Science. 2000; 
22(4):16-31. 
 118.  Canales, M. K. and Bowers, B. J. Expanding conceptualizations of culturally competent care . Journal of 
Advanced Nursing. 2001; 36(1):102-111. 
 119.  Carniol, B.  Case Critical: Challenging Social Services in Canada . 4th ed. Toronto: Between the Lines; 
2000. 
 120.  Castillo, R. L. Meanings of Madness. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole Publishing; 1998. 
 121.  Chappel male: Testing the double jeopardy hypothesis. The Sociological 
Quarterly. 1980; 21(2):157-171. 
 122.  Chappel ada: Issues for the millennium. Canadian 
Journal on Aging. 2001; 20(Supplement 1):82-110. 
 123.  Charlton isability Oppression and Empowerment. Berkeley : 
University of California Press; 1998. 
 124.  Charmaz ays: The Self in Chronic Illness and Time. New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers 
University Press; 1991. 
 125.  ---. The erson, R. M., Editor. Contemporary 
Field Research. Boston : Little & Brown; 1983; pp. 109-126. 
 126.  ---. Grou rs. 
Handbook of Qualitative Research. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA : Sage; 2000; pp. 509-535. 
 127.  ---. Iden d Corbin, J.,  Editors. Grounded Theory in 
Practice. Thousand Oaks: Sage; 1997; pp. 35-62. 
 128.  ---. Qual
ook of Interview Research: Context and method. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2002; pp. 
675-694. 
 129.  ---. Dis g chronic illness: Using grounded theory. Social Science and Medicine. 1990; 
30(11):1161-1172. 
 130.  Chater, K oss-cultural research on dementia. 
Canadian Journal of Nursing Research. 1996; 28(1):79-85. 
 131.  Chatterji lzheimers Disease patient in the Netherlands. 
Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry. 1998; 22:355-382. 
 132.  Chenitz, 
heory: Qualitative Research in Nursing. 
Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley; 1986; pp. 39-47. 
l, N. L. and Havens, B. Old and fe
l, N. L. and Penning, M. J. Sociology of aging in Can
, J. I. Nothing About Us Without Us: D
, K.  Good Days, Bad D
grounded theory method: An explication and interpretation. Em
nded theory: Objectivist and constructivist methods. Denzin, N. K. and Lincoln, Y. S., Edito
tity dilemmas of chronically ill men. Strauss, A. an
itative interviewing and grounded theory analysis. Gubrium, J. F. and Holstein, J. A., Editors. 
Handb
coverin
. Dilemmas of difference and the politics of comparison: Cr
, R. An ethnography of dementia: A case study of an A
W. C. Getting started: the research proposal for a grounded theory study. Chenitz, W. C. and 
Swanson, J. M., Editors. From Practice to Grounded T
 133.  ---. The i ded Theory: 
Qualitative Research in Nursing. Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley; 1986; pp. 79-90. 
 134.  Chenitz,  Grounded Theory: Qualitative Research in Nursing. 
Menlo Park, CA : Addison-Wesley; 1986. 
 135.  ---. Qual
ed Theory: Qualitative Research in Nursing. Menlo Park, CA: Addison-Wesley; 1986; pp. 
3-15. 
 136.   Cherno nd Economic Causes of Disease.  Ottawa:  Canadian Centre for Policy 
Alternatives; 1999. 
 137.  Chesler, P.  Women and Madness. San Diego : Harcourt Brace & Company; 1989. 
 138.  Cheston, ith dementia: A review of the literature . British Journal of 
Medical Psychology. 1998; 71:211-231. 
 139.  Cheston,  a Psychotherapy group for people with 
dementia. Ageing & Society. 1996; 16:579-602. 
 140.  ---. Top- , 
ised areas of dementia 
research, care and practice. London: Jessica Kingsley; 2004; pp. 153-168. 
 141.  Cheston, tanding Dementia: The Man with the Worried Eyes. London: Jessica 
Kingsley Publishers; 1999. 
 142.  Cheston, ve dementia in the evaluation of services: A 
review. Journal of Mental Health. 2000; 9(5):471-479. 
 143.  Cheston,
tia . Adams, T. and Manthorpe, J., Editors. Dementia Care . London: Arnold; 2003; pp. 
136-147. 
 144.  Clare, L. elf: awareness in early stage Alzheimer's disease. Social Science & Medicine. 
2003; 57:1017-1029. 
 145.  Clarke, C
le with Dementia: Research Methods and 
Motivations. London: Jessica Kingsley; 2002; pp. 25-46. 
 146.  Clarke, C . L., 
Editors. Dementia Care: Developing Partnerships in Practice. London: Balliere Tindall; 1999. 
 147.  Cohen, D y 
erican Journal of Alzheimers Care and Related Disorders and 
Research. 1991; 6 (06-Nov). 
 148.  Cohen, L ge]. 2000; Accessed 1919 Nov 1. 
Available at: http://www.anso.ubc.ca/graham/group.html. 
 149.  Cohen, L Bad Family, and Other Modern Things. Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press; 1998. 
nformal interview. Chenitz, W. C. and Swanson, J. M., Editors. From Practice to Groun
W. C. and Swanson, J. M. From Practice to
itative research using grounded theory. Chenitz, W. C. and Swanson, J. M., Editors. From Practice to 
Ground
mas, R.  The Social a
 R. Psychotherapeutic work with people w
 R.  Stories and metaphors: Talking about the past in
Dogs and Under-Dogs: marginalising problematic voices. Innes, A; Archibald, C., and Murphy, C.
Editors. Dementia and Social Inclusion: Marginalised groups and marginal
 R.  and Bender, M. Unders
 R. ; Bender, M., and Byatt, S. Involving people who ha
 R.; Jones, K., and Gilliard, J. Remembering and forgetting: group work with people who have 
demen
 Managing threats to s
. and Keady, J. Getting down to brass tacks: A discussion of data collection with people with 
dementia. Wilkinson, H., Editor. The Perspectives of Peop
. L. Dementia care partnerships: knowledge, ownership and exchange . Adams, T. and Clarke, C
. The subjective experience of Alzheimers disease: The anatomy of an illness as perceived b
patients and families. The Am
. The Emergent Biopolitics of Alzheimers-life [Web Pa
. No Aging in India: Alzheimers, the 
 150.  Cohen, L. Old age: Cultural and critical perspectives . Annual Review of Anthropology. 1994; 23:137-158. 
 151.  ---. Toward an anthropology of senility: Anger, weakness, and Alzheimers in Banaras, India. Medical 
 152.  Conrad, P. and Kern, R. The experience of illness. Conrad, P. and Kern, R., Editors. The Sociology of Health 
 153.  Cook, A. Understanding the Communication of Older People with Dementia Living in Residential Care. 
 154.  Cotrell, V.  and Lein, L. Awareness and denial in the Alzheimers Disease victim. Journal of Gerontological 
 155.  Cotrell, V.  and Schulz, R. The perspective of the person with Alzheimers Disease: A neglected dimension 
 156.  Crensha Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A Black Feminist critique of 
antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory and antiracist politics. University of Chicago Legal 
 158.  Crenshaw y, identity politics, and violence against women 
of color. In Fineman, M. Albertson and  Mykitiuk, R., Editors. The Public Nature of Private 
 159.  Crisp, J. Making sense of the stories that people with Alzheimers tell: A journey with my mother. Nursing 
 160.  Crisp, R. J. and Hewstone, M. Multiple categorization and social identity. Capozza, D. and Brown, R., 
Editors. Social Identity Processes: Trends in Theory and Research. London: Sage; 2000; pp. 
 161.  Cronin, A. Focus groups. Gilbert, N., Editor. Researching Social Life. 2nd ed. London: Sage; 2001; pp. 
 162.  Crow, L. Including all our lives: Renewing the social model of disability. Barnes, C. and Mercer, G., Editors. 
 163.  Crystal, S.  and Shea, D. Cumulative advantage, cumulative disadvantage, and inequality among elderly 
 164.  Daker-W .; Gilliard, J., and Means, R. Minority ethnic groups in dementia care: A 
review of service needs, service provision and models of good practice. Aging & Mental Health. 
 165.  Dannefer, D. Cumulative advantage/disadvantage and the life course: cross-fertilizing age and social science 
 166.  Dassori, A. M; Miller, A. L., and Saldana, D. Schizophrenia among hispanics: Epidemiology, phemenology, 
Anthropology Quarterly. 1995; 9(3):314-334. 
and Illness: Critical Perspectives. New York: St. Martins Press; 1981; pp. 123-125. 
Stirling: University of Stirling; 2003. 
Social Work. 1993; 19(3/4):115-132. 
of dementia research. The Gerontologist. 1993; 33( 2):205-211. 
w Williams, K. 
Forum. 1989. 
 157.  Crenshaw Williams, K. The intersectionality of race and gender discrimination . 2000: 2-22.  
 Williams, K. Mapping the margins: Intersectionalit
Violence. New York: Routledge; 1994; pp. 93-118. 
Inquiry. 1995; 2:133-140. 
149-166. 
164-177. 
Exploring the Divide: Illness and Disability. Leeds : Disability Press ; 1996; pp. 55-73. 
people. The Gerontologist. 1990; 30(4 ):437-443. 
hite, G.; Beattie, A. M
2002; 6(2):101-108. 
theory  . Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences  . 2003; 58B(6):S327-S337. 
course, and outcome. Schizophrenia Bulletin. 1995; 21(2):303-312. 
 167.  Davies, R. My Journey into Alzheimers Disease. Bucks : Scripture Press; 1989. 
 168.  Davis, D. H. J. Dementia: Sociological and philosophical constructions. Social Science & Medicine. 2004; 
58:369-378. 
 169.  Davis, J. M. Disability studies as ethnographic research and text: Research strategies and roles for promo
social change
?   Disability & Society . 2000; 15(2):191-206. 
ors, and gender in clinical psychopharmacology. 
Psychopharmacology Bulletin. 1996; 32(2):293-289. 
 172.  De Beau
 Theory and Research. London: Sage; 2000; pp. 1-14. 
 ; 2001; 
pp. 1-9. 
 175.  Delgado Theory: The Cutting Edge. Philadelphia: Temple University Press; 1995. 
 York University 
4; 27(1):37-68. 
:1105-1117. 
 184.  Dillmann, R. Alzheimer Disease: Epistemological lessons from History?   Whitehouse, P.; Maurer, K., and 
d Related Disorders and Research. 1991; 6(3):30-34. 
 170.  Davis, K.; Grant, P., and Rowland, D. Alone and poor: the plight of elderly women. Generations. 1990; 
14(3):43-47. 
 171.  Dawkins, K.  The interaction of ethnicity, sociocultural fact
voir, S. The Second Sex.  London: Vintage; 1997. 
 173.  Deaux, K. Models, meanings and motivations. Capozza, D. and Brown, R., Editors. Social Identity Processe
Trends in
 174.  ---. Social identity.  Encyclopedia of Women and Gender, Volumes One and Two.  Academic Press
, R.  Critical Race 
 176.  Delgado, R.  and Stefancic, J. Critical Race Theory: An Introduction. New York : New
Press; 2001. 
 177.  Dementia Advocacy and Support Network. 2004; Accessed 2004 Nov 1. Available at: 
http://www.dasninternational.org. 
 178.  Desfor Edles, L. Rethinking 'race', 'ethnicity' and 'culture': Is Hawai'i the 'model minority' state?   Ethnic and 
Racial Studies . 200
 179.  Desjarlais, R. R. Yolmo aesthetics of body, health and soul loss. Social Science and Medicine. 1992; 
34(10)
 180.  DeVault, M. L. Liberating Method: Feminism and Social Research. Philadelphia: Temple University Pre
1999. 
 181.  DeVault, M. L. Talking and listening from women's standpoint: feminist strategies for interviewing and 
analysis. Social Problems. 1990; 37(1):96-116. 
 182.  Dewing, J. From ritual to relationship: A person-centred approach to consent in qualitative research with 
older people who have a dementia. Dementia. 2002; 1(2):157-1
 183.  Dick, B. Grounded Theory: a thumbnail sketch (On line)  [Web Page]. 2002; Accessed 1910 Sep 3. 
Available at: http://www.scu.edu.au/schools/gcm/ar/arp/grounded.html. 
Ballenger, J., Editors. Concepts of Alzheimer Disease: Biological, Clinical and Cultural 
Perspectives. Baltimore: John Hopkins University Press; 2000; pp. 129-157. 
 185.  Disman, M. The subjective experience of Alzheimers disease: A sociocultural perspective. The American 
Journal of Alzheimers Care an
 186.  Dominelli, L. Anti-Racist Social Work: A Challenge for White Practitioners and Educators. 2nd ed. 
Hampshire: Macmillan; 1997. 
 187.  Dowd, M. and Bengston, V. Aging in minority populations: An examination of the double jeopardy 
hypothesis. Journals of Gerontology. 1978; 33:338-355. 
20:369-375. 
 189.  ---. The 
rhetoric or reality?  British Journal of General Practice. 1996; 46(February):105-107. 
 191.  Dreidge
 192.  Dressel, P.  Gender, race and class: Beyond the feminization of poverty in later life. Minkler, M. and Estes, 
ances and opportunities. 
International Journal of Health Services. 1997; 27(4):579-600. 
 194.  Du Bois cett; 1953. 
estern 
2-825. 
Methods. Newbury Park, CA : Sage; 1993. 
 197.  Essed, P. Understanding Everyday Racism: An Interdisciplinary Theory. Newbury Park, CA : Sage; 1991. 
 198.  Estes, C.
 199.  Estes, C. and Binney, E. The biomedicalization of aging: Dangers and dilemmas. Minkler, M. and Estes, C., 
Amityville, NY : Baywood; 1991; pp. 117-134. 
 200.  Estes, C. erontologist. 1993;  33(3):291-298. 
tion . 
Maidenhead, Berkshire: Open University Press; 2003. 
 203.  Ezzy, D.  Time, hope and HIV. Social Science and Medicine. 2000; 50(5):605-617. 
f the Art in Dementia Care. London: CPA; 
1997; pp. 13-18. 
 205.  Fanon, F retched of the Earth. London : Penguin; 1963. 
 207.   Federal ial and Territorial Advisory Committee on Population Health ACPH.  Toward a Healthy 
 188.  Downs, M. Dementia in a socio-cultural context: An idea whose time has come. Ageing & Society. 20
emergence of the person in dementia research. Ageing & Society. 1997; 17:597-607. 
 190.  Dowrick, C. ; May, C.; Richardson, M., and Bundred, P. The biopsychosocial model of general practice
r, L. and Chappell, N. Aging and Ethnicity: Toward an Interface. Toronto : Butterworth; 1987. 
C., Editors. Critical Perspectives on Aging: The Political and Moral Economy of Growing
Amityville, NY: Baywood; 1991; pp. 245-252. 
 193.  Dressel, P. ; Minkler, M., and Yen, I. Gender, race, class, and aging: Adv
, W. E. B. The Souls of Black Folk. New York : Faw
 195.  Emami, A.; Benner, P. E.; Lipson, J. G., and Ekman, S. L.  Health as continuity and balance in life. W
Journal of Nursing Research. 2000; 22(7):81
 196.  Erlandson, D. A; Harris, E. L; Skipper, B. L., and Allen, S. D. Doing Naturalistic Inquiry: A Guide to 
 The Ageing Enterprise.  San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass; 1979. 
Editors.  Critical Perspectives on Aging: The Political and Moral Economy of Growing
 L. The Aging Enterprise Revisited. The G
 201.  ---. Theoretical perspectives on old age policy: A critique and a proposal. The World Congress of 
Gerontology; Vancouver, Canada.  2001. 
 202.  Estes, C. L.; Biggs, S., and Phillipson, C. Social Theory, Social Policy and Ageing: A Critical Introduc
 Illness narratives:
 204.  Fairbairn, A. Insight and dementia . Marshall, M., Editor. State o
. The W
 206.  Fazio, S.; Seman, D., and Stansell, J. Rethinking Alzheimer's Care . Baltimore: Health Professions Press ; 
1999. 
, Provinc
Future: Second Report on the Health of  Canadians. Health Canada, Statistics Canada Canadian 
Institute of Health Information. Ottawa: Minister of Public Works and Government Services Canada 
; 1999. 
 208.  Feinberg hoices?   
The Gerontologist . 2001; 41(3):374-382. 
 209.  Ferguson . 
oney, G. Class Struggle and Social Welfare. London: Routledge; 2000; pp. 228-249. 
urnals of Gerontology. 1996; 
51B(6):S319-S328. 
 211.  Feuer, L : 
Anchor Books, Doubleday and Company Inc.; 1969. 
 212.  Fine, M.
housand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1994; pp. 70-82. 
ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2000; pp. 107-131. 
 214.  Folstein, al State: A practical method for grading the 
cognitive state of patients for the clinician. Journal of Psychiatric Research. 1975; 12:189-198. 
 215.  Forbat, L eepers' and minority ethnic 'service users' . 
Journal of Health Psychology . 2003; 8(5):645-655. 
 216.  Foster, J. R. Successful coping, adaptation and resilience in the elderly: an interpretation of epidemiologic 
 217.  Foucault, M. The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception  . New York : Vintage; 1994b. 
 218.  ---. Genealogy and social criticism . Seidman, S., Editor. The Postmodern Turn: New Perspectives on Social 
 219.  ---. Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of Reason. New York : Random House; 1965. 
 220.  Fox, K.; ake up the caregivers burden: Stories of care for urban African 
American elders with dementia. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry. 1999; 23(4):501-529. 
 221.  Fox, P. From senility to Alzheimers Disease: The rise of the Alzheimer's disease movement. The Milbank 
 224.  Friedell, M. and Bryden, C. A word from two turtles: A guest editorial. Dementia. 2002; 1(2):131-133. 
 225.  Friel Mc imers. San 
Francisco: Elder Books; 1993. 
, L. Friss and Whitlach, C. J. Are persons with cognitive impairment able to state consistent c
, I. Identity politics or class struggle?  The case of the mental health users movement. Lavalette, M
and Mo
 210.  Ferraro, K. F. and Farmer, M. M. Double jeopardy, aging as leveller, or persistent health inequality?  A 
longitudinal analysis of white and black Americans. Jo
ewis E. Marx and Engels: Basic writings on politics and philosophy. Fontana (2nd) ed. New York
 Working the hyphens: Reinventing self and other in qualitative research. Denzin, N. K.  and 
Lincoln, Y. S. Handbook of Qualitative Research. T
 213.  Fine, M; Weis, L; Weseen, S., and Wong, L. For whom?  Qualitative research, representations and social 
responsibilities. Denzin, N. K.  and Lincoln, Y. S., Editors. Handbook of Qualitative Research. 
 M. F.; Folstein, S. E., and McHugh, P. R. Mini-Ment
. Concepts and understandings of dementia by 'gatek
data   . Psychiatric Quarterly. 1997; 68(3):189-219. 
Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 1994b; pp. 39-45. 
 Levkoff, S., and Hinton, W. L. T
Quarterly. 1989; 67(1):58-102. 
 222.  Frank, A. W. The standpoint of storyteller. Qualitative Health Research. 2000; 10(3):354-365. 
 223.  Freire, P. Pedagogy of the Oppressed . 30th Anniversary ed. New York: Continuum; 2001. 
Gowin, D. Living in the Labyrinth: A Personal Journey Through the Maze of Alzhe
 226.  Froggatt ller, Tom., Editors. Mental 
Health Problems in Old Age: A Reader. Chinchester: John Wiley and Sons; 1988. 
 227.  Froggatt  practice in dementia care. Marshall, M., Editor. 
State of the Art in Dementia Care. London : CPA; 1997; pp. 225-229. 
 228.  Frye, M.  . 
 2001; pp. 48-52. 
 230.  Gee, E. M. Population and politics: voodoo demography, population aging, and social policy. Gee, E. M. and 
erational  Challenges, and Social Policy . Don Mills: Oxford University Press; 2000; pp. 
5-25. 
 231.  Giddens  Self-Identity: Self and Society in the Late Modern Age. Cambridge: Polity 
Press; 1991. 
 232.  ---. New Rules of Sociological Method: A positive critique of interpretive sociologies. 2nd ed. Cambridge: 
 233.  Gillies, B.  The experience of dementia. Journal of Dementia Care. 1997; 5:26. 
 234.  ---. Lette The experience of living through dementia. International Journal of Geriatric 
Psychiatry. 2001; 16(1):111-112. 
 235.  ---. A me ounts of living through dementia. Aging & Mental Health. 2000; 
4(4):366-374. 
 236.  Gilroy, P
01-343. 
r and Ageing: A Sociological Approach. Buckingham: Open University Press; 
1995; pp. 1-14. 
 238.  Girdham ng end of male care: Experiences of older disabled women. Generations Review. 
2002; 12( 1):7-8. 
 239.  Glaser, B gence Vs. Forcing. Mill Valley, CA : Sociology 
Press; 1992. 
 240.  Glaser, B  theory?  Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung/Forum: Qualitative Social 
Research (On Line). 2002; 3(3):47 paragraphs. 
 241.  Glaser, B nded Theory Perspective: Conceptualization Contrasted with Description. Mill Valley, 
CA: Sociology Press; 2001. 
 242.  ---. Theo s in the Methodology of Grounded Theory. Mill Valley, CA: Sociology 
Press; 1978. 
 243.  Glaser, B  A. L. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. 
, A. Self-awareness in early dementia. Gearing, B.; Johnson, M., and He
, A. and Moffitt, L. Spiritual needs and religious
 Oppression. Andersen, M. L. and Hill Collins, P. , Editors. Race, Class, and Gender: An Anthology
4th ed. Belmont: Wadsworth;
 229.  Gatz, M.; Svedberg, P.; Pedersen, N. L.; Mortimer, J. A.; Berg, S., and Johansson, B. Education and the risk 
of Alzheimers Disease. The Journals of Gerontology Series B: Psychological Sciences and So
Sciences. 2001; 56:292-300. 
Gutman, G. M., Editors. The Overselling of Population Aging: Apocalyptic Demography, 
Intergen
, A.  Modernity and
Polity Press; 1993. 
r to the Editor: 
mory like clockwork: Acc
. Diaspora and the detours of identity. Woodward, K., Editor. Identity and Difference. London: 
Sage; 1997; pp. 3
 237.  Ginn, J. and Arber, S. Only connect: Gender relations and ageing. Arber, S. and Ginn, J., Editors. 
Connecting Gende
, M.  At the receivi
. G. Basics of Grounded Theory Analysis: Emer
. G. Constructivist grounded
. G. The Grou
retical Sensitivity: Advance
. G. and Strauss,
New York : Aldine; 1967. 
 244.  Goffman, E.  Asylums: Essays on the Social Situation of Mental Patients and Other Inmates. Middlesex: 
Penguin; 1961. 
 245.  Goffman tion of Self in Everday Life. Garden City, NY: Doubleday and Company; 1959. 
 247.  Goldsmith, M. Hearing the Voice of People with Dementia: Opportunities and Obstacles. London : Jessica 
 248.  Gonyea, J. G. The paradox of the advantaged elder and the feminization of poverty. Social Work. 1994; 
of Haredi male 
patients and their rabbis. Culture, Medicine and Psychiatry. 2001; 25(2):169-194. 
 250.  Gramsci ndon: Lawrence & Wishart; 1971. 
 252.  Groves, D. L.; Kahalas, H., and Erickson, D. L. A suggested modification to Maslow's need hierachy. Social 
andbook of Qualitative Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1994; pp. 105-117. 
 255.  Gubrium, J. F. Oldtimers and Alzheimers: The Descriptive Organization of Senility. Greenwich, CT: JAI 
 256.  ---. The social preservation of mind: the Alzheimer's disease experience. Symbolic Interaction. 1986; 
 257.  ---. Struc  and destructuring the course of illness: The Alzheimers disease experience. Sociology of 
Health and Illness. 1987; 9(1):1-24. 
 258.  Gubrium, J. F. and Lynott, R. J. Alzheimer's disease as biographical work. Petersen, W. A. and Quadagno, J., 
 260.  Gutmann, D.  Qualitative research: Legitimacy and the uses of the stranger. Reinharz, S. and Rowles, G. D., 
 261.  Gutterman, D. S. Postmodernism and the interrogation of masculinity . Whitehead, S. M. and Barrett, F. J., 
 262.  Gwilliam, C. and Gilliard, J. Dementia and the social model of disability. Journal of Dementia Care. 1996; 
 263.  Hall, S. Cultural identity and diaspora. Woodward, K. Identity and Difference. London: Sage; 1997; pp. 
, E. The Presenta
 246.  Goffman, E.  Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled Identity. New York: Simon & Schuster; 196
Kingsley; 1996. 
39(1):35-41. 
 249.  Goodman, Y.  Dynamics of inclusion and exclusion: Comparing mental illness narratives 
, A.  Selections from the Prison Notebooks. Lo
 251.  Grinyer, A.  The anonymity of research participants. Social Research Update. 2002; (36). 
Behavior and Personality  . 1975; 3(1):65-69. 
 253.  Guba, E. G.  and Lincoln, Y. S. Competing paradigms in qualitative research. Denzin, N. K. and Lincoln, Y. 
S., Editors. H
 254.  Gubrium, J. F. Living and Dying at Murray Manor. Charlottesville: University Press of Virginia; 1997. 
Press; 1986. 
9(1):37-51. 
turing
Editors. Social Bonds in Later Life: Aging and Interdependence. Beverly Hills: Sage; 1985; pp. 
349-367. 
 259.  Gubrium, J. F. and Wallace, B.  Who Theorises Age? Ageing and Society. 1990; 10:131-149. 
Editors. Qualitative Gerontology. New York: Springer; 1988; pp. 304-310. 
Editors. The Masculinities Reader. Cambridge: Polity Press; 2001; pp. 56-71. 
4(1):14-15. 
51-59. 
 264.  Hammond, J. M. Multiple jeopardy or multiple resources?  The intersection of age, race, living 
University Press; 1995. 
hology . 2002; 42(4):37-57. 
e Research. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2000; pp. 717-732. 
motion. Perspectives in Psychiatric Care. 2001; 37(1):7-14. 
he elderly. The Gerontologist. 
1980; 20(4):404-417. 
 274.  Henderson, C. Smith. Partial View:  An Alzheimers Journal. Dallas, TX : Southern Methodist University 
 275.  Hepworth, M. Stories of Ageing. Buckingham: Open University Press; 2000. 
 276.  Herbert, 001; 28:577-582. 
y Quarterly. 1995; 9(2):146-164. 
 confusion and 
loneliness in old age. Culture, Medicine, and Psychiatry. 1999; 23(4):453-475. 
 279.  Hockey, ondon: 
 281.  Holstein, M. Aging, culture, and the framing of Alzheimer Disease. Whitehouse, P.; Maurer, K., and 
ltimore : John Hopkins University Press ; 2000; pp. 158-179. 
arrangements, and education level and the health of older women. Journal of Women and Aging. 
1995; 7(3):5-24. 
 265.  Haney Lpez, I. F. The social construction of race. Delgado, R., Editor. Critical Race Theory: The Cutting 
Edge. Philadelphia: Temple 
 266.  Hanley, S. J. and Abell, S. C. Maslow and relatedness: creating an interpersonal model of self-actualizat
Journal of Humanistic Psyc
 267.  Harding, N.  and Palfrey, C. The Social Construction of Dementia: Confused Professionals?  London : 
Jessica Kingsley Publishers; 1997. 
 268.  Hardy, M. A. and Hazelrigg, L. E. Gender, Race/Ethnicity, and Poverty in Later Life. Journal of Aging 
Studies. 1995; 9(1):43-63
 269.  Harper, D. Reimagining visual materials: Galileo to Neuromancer. Denzin, N. K. and Lincoln, Y. S., Edito
Handbook of Qualitativ
 270.  Havens, B. The twin challenges of doing research and delivering services in rural areas. Valencia Forum; 
Valencia, Spain .  2002. 
 271.  Havens, B. and Chappell, N. L. Triple jeopardy: Age, sex and ethnic variations. Canadian Ethnic Studies. 
1983; 15(3):119-122. 
 272.  Hedelin, B.  and Strandmark, M. The meaning of mental health from elderly womens perspectives: A basi
for health pro
 273.  Hellebrandt, F. Aging among the advantaged: A new look at the stereotype of t
Press; 1998. 
 C. P. Cultural aspects of dementia. Canadian Journal of Neurological Sciences. 2
 277.  Herskovits, E. Struggling over subjectivity: Debates about the self and Alzheimers Disease. Medical 
Anthropolog
 278.  Hinton, W. L. and Levkoff, S.  Constructing Alzheimers: Narratives of lost identities,
J. and James, A. Growing Up and Growing Old: Ageing and dependency in the life course. L
Sage; 1993. 
 280.  Holstein, J. A. and Gubrium, J. F. The Active Interview. Thousand Oaks: Sage; 1995. 
Ballenger, J., Editors. Concepts of Alzheimer Disease: Biological, Clinical and Cultural 
Perspectives. Ba
 282.  Holstein, M. B. Ethics and Alzheimers disease: Widening the lens. Journal of Clinical Ethics. 1998; 
9(1):13-22. 
 283.  Holstein, M. B. and Minkler, M. Self, society and the "new gerontology". The Gerontologist . 2003; 
 284.  hooks, b. Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center. 2nd ed. Cambridge : South End Press; 2000a. 
 285.  ---. Whe
; pp. 217-219. 
 288.  Hubbard, G.; Downs, M., and Tester, S. Including older people with dementia in research: challenges and 
 289.  Hubbard, G; Downs, M., and Tester, S. Including the perspectives of older people in institutional care during 
 290.  Hughes, B. Bauman's strangers: Impairment and the invalidation of disabled people in modern and 
 291.  Hughes, B. and Mtezuka, M. Social work and older women: Where have older women gone?  Langan, M. 
ry Practice 
 293.  Hulko, W. From doctor to 'silly patient': seeing beyond the disease label . International Journal of 
 294.  ---. Making the Links: Social theories, experiences of people with dementia and intersectionality. Leibing, A. 
 295.  ---. Put Out to Pasture?:  A feminist analysis of dementia care. Congress of the Learned Societies; Memorial 
urphy, 
d Social Inclusion: Marginalised groups and marginalised areas of dementia 
research, care and practice. London: Jessica Kingsley; 2004a; pp. 237-254. 
 297.  ---. Youth as Political Beings: Surfacing Their Experiences.  
 298.  Huppert,
 Press; 1994. 
 300.  Ikels, C; Keith, J., and Fry, C. L. The use of qualitative methodologies in large-scale cross-cultural research. 
43(6):787-796. 
re We Stand: Class Matters. New York : Routledge; 2000b. 
 286.  Horton Cooley, C. Looking-glass self. Manis, J. G. and Meltzer, B. N., Editors. Symbolic Interaction: A 
Reader in Social Psychology  . Boston: Allyn and Bacon; 1967
 287.  Hubbard, G. ; Cook, A.; Tester, S., and Downs, M. Beyond words: Older people with dementia using and 
interpreting nonverbal behaviour. Journal of Aging Studies. 2002; 16:155-167. 
opportunities . Aging & Mental Health. 2003; 7(5):351-362. 
the consent process. Wilkinson, H., Editors. The Perspectives of People with Dementia: Research 
Methods and Motivations. London: Jessica Kingsley; 2002; pp. 63-82. 
post-modern cultures . Disability & Society. 2002; 17(5):571-584. 
and Day, L., Editors.  Women, Oppression and Social Work: Issues in Anti-Discriminato
.  1992; pp. 220-241. 
 292.  Hughes, B. and Patterson, K. The social model of disability and the disappearing body: Towards a sociology 
of impairment. Disability & Society. 1997; 12(3):325-340. 
Epidemiology. 2004b. 
and Scheinkman, L., Editors. The Diversity of Alzheimers Disease: Different Approaches and 
Contexts. Rio de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB; 2002; pp. 231-264. 
University, St. Johns, Newfoundland.  1997. 
 296.  ---. Social science perspectives on dementia research: Intersectionality. Innes, A; Archibald, C., and M
C., Editors. Dementia an
 F. ; Brayne, C., and O'Connor, D. W. Dementia and normal aging. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University
 299.  Hyden, L. C. Illness and Narrative. Sociology of Health and Illness. 1997; 19(1):48-69. 
Reinharz, S. and Rowles, G. D., Editors. Qualitative Gerontology. New York: Springer ; 1988; pp. 
274-296. 
 301.  Ingrisch, D. Conformity and resistance as women age. Arber, S. and Ginn, J. Connecting Gender and Ageing: 
A Sociological Approach. Buckingham: Open University Press ; 1995; pp. 42-55. 
 302.  Innes, A
 303.  ---. The social and political context of formal dementia care provision. Ageing & Society. 2002; 22:483-499. 
 304.  ---. View ., and 
Turner, S. Quality in Later Life: Rights, Rhetoric and Reality: Proceedings of the British Society of 
 2004. 
ls of 
Explorations of Women and Aging. Cumnor Hill: Westview Press; 1997; pp. 37-42. 
 308.  Jacques, 
knowledge.  Dementia Research and Care Seminar Series; Edinburgh.  
 309.  Jacques, erstanding Dementia.  3rd ed. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2000. 
s the only factors? Age and Ageing . 1992; 21:404-411. 
 311.  James, C. E. and Shadd, A. Talking About Identity: Encounters in Race, Ethnicity and Language. Toronto : 
ccessed 1914 Mar 2. Available at: 
http://www.thestar.ca/NASApp/cs/ContentServer?pagename=thestar/Layout/Article_Typ. 
 313.  Jenkins,
tland.  
an Development. 1994; 38(1):13-27. 
 in qualitative health research. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing. 2001; 33(2):243-249. 
 317.  Johnson e of health status among older adults. 
The Gerontologist. 1994; 34(1):24-35. 
 318.  Jones, J.
. Developing ethnically sensitive and appropriate dementia care practice. Adams, T. and Manthorpe, 
J., Editors. Dementia Care. London: Arnold; 2003. 
s of people with dementia: Challenges and opportunitiesTester, S.; Archibald, C.; Rowlings, C
Gerontology 30th annual conference; University of Stirling, Stirling, Scotland. Stirling: University 
of Stirling; 2001: 249-252.  
 305.  Innes, A; Archibald, C., and Murphy, C. Dementia and Social Inclusion: Marginalised groups and 
marginalised areas of dementia research, care and practice. London: Jessica Kingsley;
 306.  Innui, T. S. The need for an integrated biopsychosocial approach to research on successful aging. Anna
Internal Medicine. 2003; 139(5 (Part 2)):391-394. 
 307.  Jackson, J. Johnson. The plight of older Black women. Pearsall, M., Editor. The Other Within Us: Feminist 
A. The many medical models of dementia   . Understanding dementia?  Current thinking and 
 A. and Jackson, G. A. Und
 310.  Jagger, C.; Clarke, M.; Anderson, J., and Battcock, T. Misclassification of dementia by the Mini-Mental St
Examination: Are education and social clas
Between the Lines; 2001. 
 312.  James, R. Immigrants are now our lifeblood: They fill the void as population grows slowly [Web Page]. 
2002; A
 R.  Social Identity. London : Routledge; 1996. 
 314.  ---. Time to stop talking about difference: Rethinking identity; University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, Sco
2002. 
 315.  Johnson, C. L. Differential expectations and realities: Race, socioeconomic status and health of the oldest-old. 
International Journal of Aging and Hum
 316.  Johnson, M. ; Long, T., and White, A. Arguments for British Pluralism
, R. J. and Wolinsky, F. D. Gender, race, and health: the structur
 M. Prejudice and Racism. Reading : Addison-Wesley; 1972. 
 319.  Jordan, J. Report from the Bahamas. Andersen, M. L. and Hill Collins, P., Editors. Race, Class, and Gend
An Anthology. 4th ed
. Belmont: Wadsworth; 2001; pp. 35-44. 
al of Sociology and Social Welfare. 1999; 26(4):27-46. 
. 2000; 
14(2):135-152. 
 323.  Katz, Ste ing Old Age: The Formation of Gerontological Knowledge. Charlottesville: 
University Press of Virginia; 1996. 
 324.  Kaufman y in old age: A case study. Ethos. 1981; 9(1):51-87. 
 327.  ---. Mantaining involvement: a meta concept to describe the dynamics of dementia . Marshall, M., Editor. 
 328.  Keady, J erience of Alzheimer's disease: implications for partnerships and 
practice. Adams, T. and Clarke, C. L., Editors. Dementia Care: Developing Partnerships in Practice . 
 329.  Keady, J. and Nolan, M. (University of Wales, Bangor//University of Sheffield). It's because I care: Working 
 330.  Keady, J.; Nolan, M., and Gilliard, J. Listen to the voices of experience. Journal of Dementia Care . 1995; 
 331.  Keefover, R. W.; Rankin, E. D.;  Keyl, P. M.; Wells, J. C.; Martin, J., and Shaw, J. Dementing illnesses in 
s, and parameters.   Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences. 2000; 924:184-193. 
 320.  Kanuha, V. K. The social process of passing to manage stigma: Acts of internalized oppression or acts 
resistance? Journ
 321.  Katz, S. Alarmist demography: power, knowledge, and the elderly population. Journal of Aging Studies. 
1992; 6(3):203-225. 
 322.  ---. Busy Bodies: Activity, aging, and the management of everyday life. Journal of Aging Studies
phan. Disciplin
, S.  Cultural components of identit
 325.  Keady, J. The Dynamics of Dementia: A Modified Grounded Theory Study. Bangor, Wales : University of
Bangor; 1999. 
 326.  ---. The experience of dementia: A review of the literature and implications for nursing practice. Journal o
Clinical Nursing. 1996; 5:275-288. 
State of the Art in Dementia Care. London: CPA; 1997; pp. 25-31. 
. and Gilliard, J. The early exp
London: Balliere Tindall; 1999; pp. 227-256. 
together and the joint construction of dementia. Gerontological Society of America Conference; Sa
Diego, CA .  2003. 
3(3):15-17. 
rural populations: The need for research and challenges confronting investigators. The Journal of 
Rural Health. 1996; 12(3):178-187. 
 332.  Kezar, A. Transformational elite interviews: principles and problems. Qualitative Inquiry. 2003; 
9(3):395-415. 
 333.  Khachaturian, Z. S. Epilogue.  Toward a Comprehensive Theory of Alzheimer's Disease - Challenges, 
Caveat
 334.  Killick, J.  and Allan, K. Communication and the Care of People with Dementia . Buckingham: Open 
University Press; 2001. 
 335.  Killick, J.  and Cordonnier, C. Openings: Dementia Poems and Photographs. London : Hawker Publicatio
2000. 
 336.   King's Fund. Living Well Into Old Age: Applying Principles of Good Practice to Services for People wi
Dementia .  London: King's Fund Publishing Office; 1986. 
 337.  Kirby, S. and McKenna, K. Experience, Research, Social Change: Methods from the Margins. Toronto :
Garamond Press; 1989. 
adian Journal of Psychiatry. 2000; 45(7):607-616. 
 340.  Kitchin, R.  The researched opinions on research: Disabled people and disability research. Disability & 
 341.  Kitwood, T.  The concept of personhood and its relevance for a new culture of dementia care. Miesen, B and 
Routledge; 1997d; pp. 3-13. 
 342.  ---. Cult radition and change . Kitwood, T. and Benson, S. The New Culture of Dementia Care. 
London : Hawker; 1995; pp. 7-11. 
 343.  ---. Dementia Reconsidered: The Person Comes First. Buckingham : Open University Press; 1997a. 
 344.  ---. The dialectics of dementia: With particular reference to Alzheimers Disease. Ageing & Society. 1990; 
 345.  ---. The experience of dementia. Aging & Mental Health. 1997b; 1(1):13-22. 
 346.  ---. Towards a theory of dementia care: the interpersonal process. Ageing and Society. 1993; 13 (1):51-67. 
 347.  ---. The ementia . Marshall, M., Editor. State of the Art in Dementia Care . 
London: CPA; 1997c; pp. 36-39. 
 348.  Kitwood d Benson, S. The New Culture of Dementia Care. London : Hawker; 1995. 
Society. 1992; 12:269-287. 
 350.  Kleinman, A. The Illness Narratives: Suffering, Healing and the Human Condition. New York : Basic Books; 
 351.  ---. Patients and Healers in the Context of Culture. Berkeley : University of California Press; 1980. 
 352.  ---. Reth w York: The Free Press; 1988. 
support group 
8; 35(4):537-544. 
Document.  Ottawa: Minister of Supply and Services Canada; 1974. 
 355.  Lambert d McKevitt, C. Anthropology in health research: From qualitative methods to 
multidisciplinarity. BMJ. 2002; 325(27 July ):210-213 . 
 356.  Larson, J. S. The conceptualization of health. Medical Care Research and Review. 1999; 56(2):123-136. 
 357.  Lather, P agogy With/In the Postmodern . New York: Routledge; 
 338.  Kirmayer, L. J; Brass, G. M., and Tait, C. L. The mental health of aboriginal people: Transformation of 
identity and community. Can
 339.  Kirmayer, L. J. and Young, A. Culture and somatization: Clinical, epidemiological, and ethnographic 
perspectives. Psychosomatic Medicine . 1998; 60(4):420-430. 
Society. 2000; 15(1):25-47. 
Jones, G., Editors. Care-Giving in Dementia: Research and Applications, Volume 2. London
ures of Care: T
10:177-196. 
uniqueness of persons with d
, T.  an
 349.  Kitwood, T.  and Bredin, K. Towards a theory of dementia care: Person-hood and well-being. Agein
1988. 
inking Psychiatry: From Cultural Category to Personal Experience. Ne
 353.  Labarge, E. ; VonDras, D., and Wingbermuehle, C. An analysis of themes and feelings from a 
for people with Alzheimers Disease. Psychotherapy. 199
 354.   Lalonde, M. (Minister of Health and Welfare).  A New Perspective on the Health of Canadians: A Work
, H.  an
. Getting Smart: Feminist Research and Ped
1991. 
ue, K. Each persons journey is unique. Alzheimers Care Quarterly. 2001; 2(2):79-83 358.  Laurenh . 
populations. Leibing, A. and Scheinkman, L, Editors.  The Diversity of Alzheimers Disease: 
 361.  ---. Narrowing worlds: On Alzheimers Disease and biography in Brazil.  Leibing, A., Editor . The Medical 
ce-Hall; 1972. 
 365.  Levy, J. Intersections of gender and aging. The Sociological Quarterly. 1988; 29(4):479-486. 
 366.  Li, R. an
ging and Identity . 2002; 7(4):227-244. 
ctors for 
ure: The use of 
institutionalization by African-Americans. The Gerontologist. 1993; 33(3):379-385. 
 370.  Littrell, J
s, and reliance on God in African-American homeless men. Journal of Sociology and 
Social Welfare  . 1999; XXVI(4):137-158. 
 371.  Living A
 372.  Longino, C. F. Jr; Warheit, G. J., and Green, J. A. Class, aging, and health. Markides, K. S., Editor. Aging 
r. Computer-Aided Qualitative Data Analysis: Theory, Methods and Practice. 
London: Sage; 1995; pp. 41-51. 
 374.  Lorde, A . Andersen, M. L. and Hill Collins, P., 
Editors. Race, Class, and Gender: An Anthology. 4th ed. Belmont: Wadsworth; 2001; pp. 177-184. 
 375.  Lowe, A. Doing a PhD in Business and Management: Programme 8: Grounded theoryStirling: University of 
 359.  Lee, R. M. The access issue in research on sensitive topics. Lee, R. M., Author. Doing Research on Sensitive
Topics. London: Sage; 1993; pp. 119-141. 
 360.  Leibing, A.  Ideology and biology: Some remarks on Alzheimers disease, genes and risk in different 
Different Approaches and Contexts. Rio de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB; 2002; pp. 55-76. 
Anthropologies in Brazil. Berlin: VWB; 1997; pp. 221-240. 
 362.  Lemert, E. Human Deviance, Social Problems and Social Control. 2nd ed. New Jersey : Prenti
 363.  Letherby, G. Claims and disclaimers: knowledge, reflexivity and representation in feminist research  . 
Sociological Research Online. 2002; 6(4). 
 364.  Letherby, G. Feminist Research in Theory and Practice . Buckingham: Open University Press; 2003. 
d Orleans, M. Personhood in a world of forgetfulness: an ethnography of the self-process among 
Alzheimer's patients. Journal of A
 367.  Lincoln, Y. S. and Guba, E. G.  Establishing trustworthiness.  Naturalistic Inquiry . Newbury Park,
Sage; 1985; pp. 289-331. 
 368.  Lindsay, J. ; Laurin, D.; Verreault, R.; Hbert, R.; Helliwell, B.; Hill, G. B., and McDowell, I. Risk fa
Alzheimers Disease: A prospective analysis from the Canadian Study of Health and Aging. Pap
Submitted for Publication. 2001. 
 369.  Liska Belgrave, L.; Wykle, M. L., and Choi, J. M. Health, double jeopardy, and cult
. and Beck, E. Perceiving oppression: relationships with resilience, self-esteem, depressive 
symptom
rchive Project. Listen to Me. Milton Keynes: Living Archive Press; 2001. 
and Health: Perspectives on Gender, Race, Ethnicity, and Class. Newbury Park: Sage; 1989; pp.
79-109. 
 373.  Lonkila, M.  Grounded theory as an emerging paradigm for computer-assisted qualitative data analysis. 
Kelle, U., Edito
. Age, race, class, and sex: Women redefining difference
Stirling; 1996. 
 376.  Luker, K er, S. J., and Owens, R. G. Meaning of illness for women with breast cancer. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing. 1996; 23(6):1194-1201. 
 377.  Luske, B e Psychic Border. New York: Aldine de Gruyter; 1990. 
ics. 1998; 9(1):49-57. 
ontologist. 1996; 36(6):749-760. 
 York: Continuum; 
2001. 
 383.  MacRae case of Alzheimer's disease . Sociology of Health & Illness. 
1999; 21(1):54-70. 
 384.  Mama, A. Beyond the Masks: Race, Gender and Subjectivity. London: Routledge; 1995a. 
 385.  Mama, A arching subjectivity. Mama, A. Beyond the Masks: Race, Gender and Subjectivity. London: 
Routledge; 1995b; pp. 65-88. 
 386.  Manning . Problems in interpreting interview data. Sociology and Social Research. 1967; 5(3):302-316. 
 subject. Disability & Society. 1999; 
14(5):611-626. 
 389.  Marshall ementia as a disability . Journal of Dementia Care. 1998; 
6(1):15-17. 
 390.  ---. State 
 391.  Marshall, M. What do service planners and policy-makers need from research? International Journal of 
 392.  Marshall, M. and Rowlings, C. Facing our futures: Discrimination in later life. Lenick, B., Editor. 
 politics and 
philosophy. Fontana (2nd) ed. New York: Anchor Books, Doubleday and Company Inc.; 1969. 
 394.  ---. Theses on Feuerbach. Kamenka, E., Editor. The Portable Karl Marx. New York: The Viking Press and 
 395.  Maslow,  Motivation and Personality. 3rd ed. New York: Harper and Row; 1970. 
. A.; Beaver, K.; Leinst
. Mirrors of Madness: Patrolling th
 378.  Lyman, K. Bringing the social back in: A critique of the biomedicalization of dementia. The Gerontologist. 
1989; 29( 5):597-605. 
 379.  ---. Living with Alzheimers Disease: The creation of meaning among persons with dementia. Journal of 
Clinical Eth
 380.  Lynott, R. J. and Lynott, P. Passuth. Tracing the course of theoretical development in the sociology of aging  
. The Ger
 381.  Macdonald, B. and Rich, C. Look me in the Eye: Old Women, Aging and Ageism. San Francisco: Spinster'
Ink; 1983. 
 382.  Macedo, D. Introduction. Freire, P. Pedagogy of the Oppressed. 30th Anniversary ed. New
, H. Managing courtesy stigma: the 
. Rese
, P. K
 387.  Markides, K. S. Aging and Health: Perspectives on Gender, Race, Ethnicity, and Class. Newbury Park: Sag
1989. 
 388.  Marks, D. Dimensions of oppression: theorising the embodied
, M. Environment: How it helps to see d
of the Art in Dementia Care. London: CPA; 1997. 
Geriatric Psychiatry . 1999; 14:86-96. 
International Perspectives in Social Work: Countering Discrimination in Social Work. Aldershot: 
Ashgate; 1998; pp. 67-87. 
 393.  Marx, K. Theses on Feuerbach. Feuer, L. S., Editor. Marx and Engels: Basic writings on
Penguin Books; 1983; pp. 155-158. 
 A. H.
 396.  Maslow, A. H. Religions, Values and Peak Experiences. New York: Penguin; 1964. 
 397.  Mathews, H. F.; Lannin, D. R., and Mitchell, J. P. Coming to terms with advanced breast cancer: Black 
38(6):789-800. 
 398.  Mathew ement of Self-Identity . Beverly Hills, CA : Sage; 
1979. 
 399.  Mays, N  July):109-112 . 
elationships of People with Dementia. 
Stirling, Scotland: University of Stirling; 2001. 
 401.  McColg  Valentine, J., and Downs, M. Concluding narratives of a career with dementia: Accounts of 
Iris Murdoch at her death. Ageing & Society. 2000; 20:97-109. 
 402.  McCrack age; 1988. 
h Project, Health 
Network CPRN. Ottawa: CPRN; 2000; October.  
 405.  McKillop, J. Did research alter anything?   Wilkinson, H., Editor. The Perspectives of People with 
 407.  McMillen, J. C. Better for it: how people benefit from adversity. Social Work. 1999; 44(5):455-467. 
 408.  McMulli state of sociological aging theory. The Gerontologist. 2000; 40(5):517-530. 
 P. Creating health with chronic illness. 
Advances in Nursing Science. 1996; 18(3):1-15. 
 410.  Mead, G.
 412.   Medical Research Council of Canada, Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada and 
arch involving humans.  Ottawa : Medical Research Council of Canada; 
1998. 
 413.  Melia, K  stories: Interviewing student nurses. Miller, G. and Dingwall, R., Editors. 
Context and Method in Qualitative Research. London: Sage; 1997; pp. 26-36. 
 414.  Mellor, J lth. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management. 
2001;  20(1):151-155. 
 415.  Menne, H nd Morhardt, D. J. 'Trying to continue to do as much as they can do'. Dementia. 
2002; 1(3):367-382. 
womens narratives from eastern North Carolina. Social Science and Medicine. 19
s, S. H. The Social World of Old Women: Manag
. and Pope, C. Rigour and qualitative research. BMJ. 1995; 311(8
 400.  McColgan, G. They come here to tangle: An Ethnographic Study of R
an, G.;
en, G. The Long Interview. Newbury Park, CA : S
 403.  McDonald, L. The invisible poor: Canadas retired widows. Canadian Journal on Aging. 1997; 
16(3):553-583. 
 404.   McKay, L. (CPRN).  Making the Lalonde Report.   Towards a New Perspective on Healt
Dementia: Research Methods and Motivations. London: Jessica Kingsley; 2002; pp. 109-114. 
 406.  McKinlay, A. Inside - Out: A Journey with Dementia. Isle of Bute :  Charcoal Press; 1998. 
n, J. Diversity and the 
 409.  McWilliam, C. L.; Stewart, M.; Brown, J. B.; Desai, K., and Coderre,
 H. Mind, Self and Society From the Standpoint of a Social Behaviorist. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press; 1967. 
 411.  Mechanic, D. Medical Sociology. New York : The Free Press; 1968. 
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada.  Tri-Council Policy Statement: 
Ethical conduct for rese
. Producing plausible
. M. and Milyo, J. D. Income inequality and hea
.; Kinney, J. M., a
 416.  Migliore, S. From illness narratives to social commentary: A Pirandellian approach to nerves. Medical 
Anthropology Quarterly. 2001; 15(1):100-125. 
 417.  Milford, G. E. and Soper, B. Belief when evidence does not support theory. Psychology & Marketing. 1995;
12(5):415-422. 
 Social Sciences Review. 1998; 8(1):25-41. 
 Society. 1996; 
16:467-487. 
 421.  Moraga, C. La Gera. Andersen, M. L. and Hill Collins, P., Editors.  Race, Class, and Gender: An 
 424.  Morris, ility. London: Womens Press; 1996. 
 426.   Morris, M., Author (CRIAW/ICREF).  Participatory research and action: A guide to becoming a researcher 
 of Women (CRIAW); 2002. 
 428.  Mullaly, R.  Challenging Oppression: A Critical Social Work Approach. Don Mills, ON : Oxford University 
 429.  Murphy, C. The experience of people with dementia in community services. Braudy Harris, P., Editor. The 
Johns Hopkins University Press; 2002; pp. 187-210. 
 430.  National egro in America Today. New York: National Urban 
League; 1964. 
 431.  Nicklowi d Choi, K-S. Hierarchy of needs. Journal of Housing for the Elderly. 1994; 11(1):121-143. 
 433.  Norman, A. Triple Jeopardy: Growing Old in a Second Homeland. London: Centre for Policy on Ageing; 
 434.  Nydn, K ersson, M., and Nystrm, M. Unsatisfied basic needs of older patients in emergency care 
environments - obstacles to an active role in decision making . Journal of Clinical Nursing. 2003; 
 418.  Millar, M. Psychology and anti-oppressive social work: Understanding the complexity of individual lives. 
Social Work &
 419.  Mills, M. Narrative identity and dementia: A study of emotion and narrative in older people with dementia. 
Ageing & Society. 1997; 17:673-698. 
 420.  Minkler, M.  Critical perspectives on ageing: New challenges for gerontology. Ageing &
Anthology. 4th ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth; 2001; pp. 28-35. 
 422.  Morgan, D. L. Focus Groups as Qualitative Research . Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1988. 
 423.  Moriarty, J. Costs and dementia care: how much and who pays? 2002: 1-12.  
J. Encounters with Strangers: Feminism and Disab
 425.  ---. Pride Against Prejudice: A Personal Politics of Disability. London: The Womens Press; 1991. 
for social change . Muzychka, M., Literature review . Ottawa: Canadian Research Institute for the 
Advancement
 427.  Mullaly, B.  Structural Social Work: Ideology, Theory, and Practice. 2nd ed. Toronto : Oxford University 
Press; 1997. 
Press; 2002. 
Person with Alzheimers Disease: Pathways to Understanding the Experience. Baltimore, MD:  
 Urban League. Double Jeopardy: The Older N
tz, M. an
 432.  Nolan, M.; Ryan, T.; Enderby, P., and Reid, D. Towards a more inclusive vision of dementia care practice 
and research. Dementia. 2002; 1(2):193-211. 
1985. 
.; Pet
12:268-274. 
 435.  Nygird, d of altering meaning: Expressions of the illness experience of dementia 
in everyday life over three years. The Occupational Therapy Journal of Research. 1998; 
., and Oliver, S., 
Editors.  Critical Issues in Social Research: Power and Prejudice. Buckingham: Open University 
 437.  Oliver, M acmillan Education; 1990. 
 439.  Ontario Human Rights CommissionPolicy and Education Branch, Ontario Human Rights Commission. An 
 Toronto: 2001 Oct 9. 
 Review . 1992; 
40(Spring):52-69. 
 442.  Orona, C
ed Theory in Practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1997; pp. 171-196. 
 444.  Patel, N; Mirza, N. R; Lindblad, P; Amstrup, K., and Samaoli, O. Dementia and Minority Ethnic Older 
 445.  Patel, V. Explanatory models of mental illness in Sub-Saharan Africa. Social Science and Medicine. 1995; 
 446.  Patel, V.; Gwanzura, F.; Simunyu, E.; Lloyd, K., and Mann, A. The phenomenology and explanatory models 
ism in Harare. Psychological Medicine. 1995; 25(3):485-493. 
entia. Family 
Relations. 2002;  51:55-62. 
 451.  Petersen, S. Multicultural perspective on middle-class womens identity development. Journal of Counseling 
 452.  Phair, L. and Good, V. Dementia: A Positive Approach. London : Scutari Press; 1995. 
L. and Borell, L. A life-worl
18(2):109-136. 
 436.  Oakley, A. Peoples ways of knowing: gender and methodology. Hood, S.; Mayall, B
Press; 1999; pp. 154-170. 
. The Politics of Disablement. London : M
 438.  ---. Understanding Disability: From Theory to Practice. Hampshire: Palgrave; 1996. 
Intersectional Approach to Discrimination: Addressing Multiple Grounds in Human Rights Cla
Discussion Paper . 
 440.  Oommen, T. K. Race, ethnicity and class: An analysis of interrelations. International Social Science Jour
1994; 139(Feb):83-93. 
 441.  Opie, A. Qualitative research, appropriation of the 'other', and empowerment. Feminist
. Temporality and identity loss due to Alzheimers disease. Strauss, A. and Corbin, J., Editors. 
Ground
 443.  OGrady-LeShane, R. Older women and poverty. Social Work. 1990; 35(5):422-424. 
People: Managing Care in the UK, Denmark and France. Lyme Regis: Russell House Publishing; 
1998. 
40(9):1291-1298. 
of common mental disorder: A study in primary care in Harare, Zimbabwe. Psychological Medicin
1995; 25(6):1191-1
 447.  Patel, V.; Musara, T.; Butau, T.; Maramba, P., and Fuyane, S. Concepts of mental illness and medical 
plural
 448.  Pauline and Mica. Pearls of wisdom from a mother and daughter. International Forum on Early Dement
1996; 2(1):6-8. 
 449.  Penning, M.  Multiple jeopardy: Age, sex and ethnic variations. Canadian Ethnic Studies. 1983; 
15(3):81-105. 
 450.  Perry, J. and OConnor, D. Preserving personhood: (Re)membering the spouse with dem
& Development. 2000; 78 (1):63-71. 
 453.  Phillipso  Age: New Agendas in Social Theory and Practice . London: Sage; 1998. 
Psychiatric Quarterly. 2001; 72(2):167-179. 
 457.  Pollitt, P gical Medicine. 1996; 
26(5):1061-1074. 
 458.  Pool, J. B  practice. Journal of Dementia Care. 2000; 8(5):28-30. 
ng in Canada: Social 
Perspectives. Toronto:  Fitzhenry and Whiteside; 1980; pp. 80-87. 
 460.  Potts, K. rcher. Canadian Association of Schools of Social 
Work conference; Toronto.  2002. 
 461.  Prior, P. Health. Houndsmill: Macmillan Press; 1999. 
wer. Disability & Society. 
2001; 16( 3):361-376. 
 464.  Prosser, J. and Schwartz, D. Photographs within the sociological research process. Prosser, J., Editor. 
 465.   Province of Ontario.  Health Care Consent Act.  Toronto : Queens Printer; 1996. 
 466.   --.  Sub Act.  Toronto: Queens Printer; 1992. 
 468.  Ramazanoglu, C. On feminist methodology: male reason versus female empowerment  . Sociology. 1992; 
 469.  Rank, M. R.  and Hirschl, T. Estimating the proportion of Americans ever experiencing poverty during their 
-S193. 
so.ubc.ca/graham/ray2.html. 
Society. 2001; 16(3):377-392. 
n, C. Reconstructing Old
 454.  Phinney, A.  Living with dementia from the patients perspective. Journal of Gerontological Nursing. 19
24( 6):8-15. 
 455.  Pilgrim, D.  and Rogers, A. A Sociology of Mental Health and Illness. 2nd ed. Buckingham : Open
University Press; 1
 456.  Pollack, L. E. and Aponte, M. Patients perceptions of their bipolar illness in a public hospital setting
. A. Dementia in old age: An anthropological perspective. Psycholo
uilding a bridge from philosophy to
 459.  Posner, J. Old and female: The double whammy. Marshall, V. W., Editor. Agi
 and Brown, L. Becoming an anti-oppressive resea
M. Gender and Mental 
 462.  Prior, P. M. and Hayes, B. C. Changing places: Men replace women in mental health beds in Britain. Social 
Policy and Administration. 2001; 35(4):397-410. 
 463.  Proctor, G.  Listening to older women with dementia: Relationships, voices and po
Image-Based Research. London: Falmer Press; 1998; pp. 115-130. 
stitute Decisions 
 467.  Ragin, C. Using comparative methods to study diversity. Ragin, C., Author. Constructing Social Research. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press; 1994; pp. 105-130. 
26(2):207-212. 
elderly years. Journals of Gerontology: Psychological Sciences and Social Sciences. 1999; 
54(4):S184
 470.  Ray, R. Toward a situated, discursive approach to dementia research [Web Page]. 2000; Accessed 1919 N
1. Available at:  http://www.an
 471.  Reid, D. Coming to terms with dementia: a social researcher's perspective. Generations Review. 2003; 
13(3):4-8. 
 472.  Reid, D.; Ryan, T., and Enderby, P. What does it mean to  listen to people with dementia?   Disability & 
 473.  Reimer Kirkham, S. The politics of belonging and intercultural health care. Western Journal of Nursing 
Research . 2003; 25(7):762-780. 
 474.  Richards, L. Using NVivo in Qualitative Research. 2nd ed. Bundoora, Victoria : QSR International; 2000
n, A. The politics of Alzheime
 475.  Robertso rs disease: A case study in apocalyptic demography. International 
Journal of Health Services. 1990; 20(3):429-442. 
 476.  Robinso  part in research? Wilkinson, H. , Editor. The 
Perspectives of People with Dementia: Research Methods and Motivations . London : Jessica 
 477.  Rodeheaver, D. and Datan, N. The challenge of double jeopardy: Toward a mental health agenda for women. 
pproach the 21st century. 
American Psychologist. 1990; 45(9):1018-1034. 
 479.  Rogers, 
 481.  Rowles, G. D. and Reinharz, S. Qualitative gerontology: themes and challenges. Reinharz, S. and Rowles, G. 
 482.  Russell, C.  Interviewing vulnerable old people: Ethical and methodological implications of imagining our 
 483.  Rutherford, J. A place called home: Identity and the cultural politics of difference. Rutherford, J., Editor. 
 484.  Rutherford, J. and Bhabha, B. The third space: Interview with Homi Bhabha. Rutherford, J., Editor . Identity, 
 485.  Sabat, S. Through a Tangled Veil  . Oxford: Blackwell 
Publishers; 2001. 
 486.  Sabat, S. ind: Negotiating and assessing personhood and dignity among elderly 
Canadians with dementia [Web Page]. 2000; Accessed 1919 Nov 1. Available at: 
 487.  ---. Voices of Alzheimer Disease sufferers: A call for treatment based on personhood. Journal of Clinical 
Society. 1992; 12(4):443-461. 
 489.  Saleebey cial Work Practice. 3rd ed. Boston: Allyn & Bacon; 2002. 
 491.  Saris, A. J. Telling stories: Life histories, illness narratives, and institutional landscapes. Culture, Medicine 
n, E. Should people with Alzheimers disease take
Kingsley; 2002; pp. 101-108. 
American Psychologist. 1988; 43(8 ):648-654. 
 478.  Rodin, J. and Ickovics, J. R. Womens health: Review and research agenda as we a
C. R. Carl Rogers on Personal Power. London: Constable; 1978. 
 480.  Rose, L. Show me the Way to Go Home. Forest Knolls, CA : Elder Books; 1996. 
D., Editors. Qualitative Gerontology. New York: Springer; 1988; pp. 3-33. 
subjects  . Journal of Aging Studies. 1999; 13(4):403-417. 
Identity, Community, Culture, Difference .  London: Lawrence & Wishart; 1990; pp. 9-27. 
Community, Culture, Difference. London: Lawrence & Wishart; 1990; pp. 207-221. 
 The Experience of Alzheimers Disease:  Life 
 Matters of the heart and m
http://www.anso.ubc.ca/graham/sabat2.html. 
Ethics. 1998; 9(1):35-48. 
 488.  Sabat, S. and Harr, R. The construction and reconstruction of self in Alzheimers Disease. Ageing & 
, D. The Strengths Perspective in So
 490.  Sankar, A. and Gubrium, J. F. Qualitative Methods in Aging Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1994. 
and Psychiatry. 1995; 19(1):39-72. 
 492.  Sarton, M. Toward another dimension... Pearsall, M., Editor. The Other Within Us: Feminist Explorations
Women and Aging. Cumnor Hill: Westview Press; 1997; pp. 229-231. 
 494.  Sassen, Saskia. The Participation of States and Citizens in Global Governance. Indiana Journal of Global 
 495.  Sayce, L. Beyond good intentions. Making anti-discrimination strategies work. Disability & Society. 2003; 
 496.  Sayce, L. From Psychiatric Patient to Citizen: Overcoming Discrimination and Social Exclusion. London : 
 497.  Scharf, T.; Phillipson, C.; Smith, A. E., and Kingston, P. Growing Older in Socially Deprived Areas: Social 
 498.  Schussler, G. Coping strategies and individual meanings of illness. Social Science and Medicine. 1992; 
 499.  Schutz, A. Collected Papers Volume 1: The Problem of Social Reality. Natanson, M., Editor and author of 
ague: Martinus Nijhoff; 1967. 
 502.  Seale, C. and Silverman, D. Ensuring rigour in qualitative research. European Journal of Public Health   . 
 503.   Secreta r Action .  London: 
Department of Health; 2003. 
 504.  Seman, D ations. Braudy Harris, P., 
Editor. The Person with Alzheimers Disease: Pathways to Understanding the Experience. 
 505.  Shakespeare, T. Disability, identity and difference. Barnes, C. and Mercer, G., Editors. Exploring the divide: 
 506.  Shea, D. G. ; Miles, T., and Hayward, M. The health-wealth connection: Racial differences. The 
 507.  Shelia. What its like to live with Alzheimers . Alzheimers Disease International - Global Perspective. 2000; 
 508.  Shenk, D Forgetting: Alzheimer's: Portrait of an Epidemic  . New York: Anchor Books, Random 
House, Inc.; 2001. 
 509.  Silveira, terminants of psychiatric morbidity and well-being in immigrant 
elders and whites in East London. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 1998; 
 510.  Simic, A. Aging and ethnic identity: A refutation of the double-jeopardy theory. Journal of Case 
 493.  Sartre, J. P. Being and Nothingness: An Essay on Phenomenological Ontology. London: Methuen; 1957. 
Legal Studies . 2003; 3(5). 
18(5):625-642. 
Macmillan Press; 2000. 
Exclusion in Later Life. London: Help the Aged; 2002. 
34(4):427-432. 
introduction. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff ; 1967. 
 500.  ---. Collected Papers Volume 1: The Problem of Social Reality. Natanson, M., Editor and Author of 
Introduction. The H
 501.  Scott, H. Black and White: Ageing in Cultural Diversity. Edinburgh: Age Concern Scotland; 2000. 
1997; 7:379-384. 
ry of State for Health .  Tackling Health Inequalities: A Programme fo
. Meaningful communication throughout the journey: Clinical observ
Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press; 2002; pp. 134-149. 
illness and disability. Leeds: The Disability Press; 1996; pp. 94-113. 
Gerontologist. 1996; 36( 3):342-349. 
10(2):3. 
. The 
 E. R. T. and Ebrahim, S. Social de
13(11):801-812. 
Management. 1993; 2(1):9-13. 
 511.  Sinason, the 
s; 1992; pp. 87-110. 
der and higher. American Journal of 
Economics and Sociology . 1986; 45(3):329-342. 
 513.  Sixsmith, A.; Stilwell, J., and Copeland, J. Rementia: Challenging the limits of dementia care. International 
 514.  Smiley, M. Feminist theory and the question of identity. Women & Politics. 1993; 13(2):91-122. 
 515.  Smith, A al research on Alzheimers disease: A critical review. Transcultural Psychiatric 
Research Review. 1996; 33:247-276. 
 516.  Smith, D World as Problematic: A Feminist Sociology. Toronto : University of Toronto 
Press; 1987. 
 517.  Smith, J. alitative methodology: Analysing participants perspectives. Current Opinion in Psychiatry. 
1996; 9:417-421. 
 518.  Smith, L digenous Peoples. London: Zed Books Ltd.; 
1999. 
 519.  Smith, S. J. Bounding the Borders: Claiming space and making place in rural Scotland. Transactions of the 
 520.  Smyer, M. A. and Qualls, S. H. Aging and Mental Health. Oxford: Blackwell Publishers; 1999. 
 521.  Snyder, f Alzheimers: Understanding the feelings and subjective accounts of 
persons with the disease. Alzheimers Care Quarterly. 2001; 2(2):8-22. 
 522.  Snyder, n spiritual faith and practice for persons with dementia . Dementia. 
2003; 2(3):299-313. 
 523.  Snyder, als with Alzheimers. New York : W.H. 
Freeman and Company; 1999. 
 524.  Sonn, C. C.  and Fisher, A. T. Sense of community: Community resilient responses to oppression and 
 525.  Stacey, J. Teratologies: A Cultural Study of Cancer . London: Routledge; 1997. 
 526.  Stalker, es in research with people with learning difficulties. 
Disability & Society. 1998; 13(1):5-19. 
 527.  Stalker, at works. International Journal of 
Geriatric Psychiatry. 1999; 14:120-134. 
 528.  Stasiulis
Relations in Canada. Toronto: Oxford University Press; 1990. 
 529.  Statistics  2. 
Available at: http://www12.statcan.ca/english/profil01/Details1pop.cfm?SEARCH=BEGINS&]  . 
 V.  Chapter 4: The man who was losing his brain. Sinason, V., Author. Mental Handicap and 
Human Condition. London: Free Association Book
 512.  Sirgy, M. J. A quality-of-life theory derived from Maslow's developmental perspective: 'quality' is related to 
progressive satisfaction of a hierarchy of needs, lower or
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry. 1993; 8(12): 993-1000. 
. Cross-cultur
. E. The Everyday 
A. Qu
. Tuhiwai. Decolonizing Methodologies: Research and In
Institute of British Geographers . 1993; 18(3):291-308. 
L. The lived experience o
L. Satisfactions and challenges i
L. Speaking Our Minds: Personal Reflections from Individu
change. Journal of Community Psychology. 1998; 26(5):457-472. 
K.  Some ethical and methodological issu
K.; Gilliard, J., and Downs, M. Eliciting user's perspectives on wh
, D. Theorizing connections: Gender, race, ethnicity, and class. Li, P., Editor. Race and Ethnic 
 Canada. Community Profile - Peterborough County [Web Page]. 2002; Accessed 1929 Jul
 530.  Statistics 2. Available 
at: http://www12.statcan.ca/english/profil01/Details1pop.cfm?SEARCH=BEGINS&]  . 
 531.  Statistics 1929 Jul 2. Available at: 
http://www12.statcan.ca/english/profil01/Details1pop.cfm?SEARCH=BEGINS&]. 
 532.  Stone, E  
researchers. British Journal of Sociology. 1996; 47( 4):699-716. 
 533.  Stone, R g the elderly. Pearsall, M., Editor. The Other Within Us: 
Feminist Explorations of Women and Aging. Cumnor Hill: Westview Press; 1997; pp. 43-55. 
 534.  Strauss, ative Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques. 1st 
ed. Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1990. 
 535.  ---. Basic developing grounded theory. 2nd ed. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1998. 
 536.  ---. Grounded theory methodology: An overview. Denzin, N. K. and Lincoln, Y. S. Handbook of Qualitative 
 538.  ---. Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists. Cambridge, MA : Cambridge University Press; 1987. 
 539.  Sudbury ence and collective identity in 
Britain. Ethnic and Racial Studies. 2001; 24(1):29-49. 
 540.  Summerl  Happiness and self-actualization under conditions of strain: a sample 
of homeless men. Perceptual and Motor Skills. 2000; 90(1):191-203. 
 541.  Sutton, L s mind. 10th International Conference of Alzheimers Disease International; 
Edinburgh, Scotland.  1994. 
 542.  Swain, J
 543.  Swanwick, G. R. J.; Coen, R. F.; Maguire, C. P.; Kirby, M.; Walsh, J. B.; ONeill, D.; Coakley, D., and 
 and Ceder, I. Perceived discrimination 
and resilience . Luther, S. S., Editor. Resilience and vulnerability: adaptation in the context of 
 545.  Szasz, T. Mental illness is still a myth. Society. 1994; 31(4):34-39. 
 546.  Taylor, D  medicare?   Journal 
of the American Geriatrics Society. 2000; 48(6):639-646. 
 547.  The Group Members. Reflections of an early stage memory loss support group for persons with Alzheimer's 
 Canada. Community Profile  Kawartha Lakes [Web Page]. 2002; Accessed 1929 Jul 
 Canada. Community Profile  Toronto [Web Page]. 2002; Accessed 
. and Priestly, M. Parasites, pawns and partners: Disability research and the role of non-disabled
. I. The feminization of poverty amon
A.  and Corbin, J. Basics of Qualit
s of Qualitative Research: Techniques and procedures for 
Research. Newbury Park, CA: Sage; 1994; pp. 273-285. 
 537.  Strauss, A. L. Mirrors and Masks: The Search for Identity. New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers; 1997. 
, J.  (Re)constructing multiracial blackness: Womens activism, differ
in, J. R. and Bundrick, C. M.
. What it is to lose one
.; French, S.; Barnes, C., and Thomas, C. Disabling Barriers, Enabling Environments. 2nd ed. 
London: Sage; 2004. 
Lawlor, B. A. The association between demographic factors, disease severity and the duration on 
symptoms at clinical presentation in elderly people with dementia. Age and Ageing. 1999; 
28:295-299. 
 544.  Szalacha, L. A.; Erkut, S.; Coll, C. Garca; Fields, J. P.; Alarcn, O.,
childhood adversities. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 2003; pp. 414-435. 
. H., Jr. and Sloan, F. A. How much do persons with Alzheimer's disease cost
and their family members. Alzheimer's Care Quarterly. 2003; 4(3):185-188. 
 548.  Thompson, E. H, Jr. Older Mens Lives. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 1994. 
 549.  Thompson, E. P. The Making of the English Working Class. Hardmondsworth : Penguin; 1968. 
 550.  Thompson, N. Anti-Discriminatory Practice. 3rd ed. Houndmills : Palgrave; 2001. 
 551.  Thorslun ng the oldest old. Journal of Aging and Health. 
1994; 6(1):51-69. 
 552.  Townso  and Social Factors Affect Our Well Being. Ottawa : 
Canadian Centre for Policy Alternatives; 1999. 
 553.  Tranmer tario: prevalence and health services utilization. Canadian 
Journal on Aging. 2003; 22(4):369-379. 
 554.  Traphagan, J. Taming Oblivion: Aging Bodies and the Fear of Senility in Japan. Albany, NY : State 
 555.  Tregask ciety. 2002; 17(4):457-470. 
position across the lifecourse and cognitive function in late middle age. Journal of 
Gerontology: Social Sciences. 2002; 57B(1): S43-S51. 
 557.  Tyler, K
with Dementia [Web Page]. 2000; 
Accessed 1919 Nov 1. Available at:  http://www.anso.ubc.ca/graham/group.html. 
 559.  Umoren, y of needs and OBRA 1987: Toward need satisfaction by nursing home 
residents. Educational Gerontology. 1992; 18(6):657-670. 
 560.  Valentin . Sociological Research 
On-Line. 1998; 3(4). 
 561.  Verbrugge, L. M. Gender, aging, and health. Markides, K. S., Editor. Aging and Health: Perspectives on 
; pp. 23-78. 
 563.  Vincent, J. A. Inequality and Old Age. London: UCL Press Ltd; 1995. 
 564.  Vittoria, A. "Our own little language": Naming and the social construction of Alzheimer's disease. Symbolic 
 565.  ---. Preserving selves: Identity work and dementia. Research on Aging. 1998; 20(1):91-136. 
 566.  Walters, . and Simoni, J. M. Reconceptualizing native women's health: an "indigenist" stress-coping 
model. American Journal of Public Health. 2002; 92(4):520-524. 
 567.  Ward, R nd the gay community. Journal of Dementia Care. 2000; 
8(3):24-25. 
 568.  Wasserfa oice. Thousand 
Oaks: Sage; 1997; pp. 150-168. 
d, M. and Lundberg, O. Health and inequalities amo
n, M.  Health and Wealth: How Economic
, J. E. and Coyte, P. C. Dementia in On
University of New York Press; 2000. 
is, C. Social model theory: the story so far. Disability & So
 556.  Turrell, G. ; Lynch, J. W.; Kaplan, G. A.; Everson, S. A.; Helkala, E-L.; Kauhanen, J., and Salonen, J. T
Socioeconomic 
. Reflexivity, tradition and racism in a former mining town. Ethnic and Racial Studies . 2004; 
27(2):290-309. 
 558.  UBC Dementia Research Collaborative Working Group. Matters of the Heart and Mind: Negotiating and
Assessing Personhood and Dignity Among Elderly Canadians 
 J. A. Maslow hierarch
e, J. Naming the Other: Power, politeness and the inflation of euphemisms  
Gender, Race, Ethnicity, and Class. Newbury Park: Sage; 1989
 562.  Victor, C. R. Continuity or change: Inequalities in health in later life. Ageing & Society. 1991; 11(1):23-39. 
Interaction. 1999; 22(4):361-384. 
. Waiting to be heard: Dementia a
ll, R. R. Reflexivity, Feminism, and difference . Hertz, R., Editor. Reflexivity and V
 569.  Watson, N. Daily denials: the routinisation of oppression and resistance. Riddell, S. and Watson, N., Edi
Disability, culture and identity. Harlow :  Pearson Prentice Hall ; 20
tors. 
03; pp. 34-52. 
 571.  Weiss, M. G.; Raguram, R., and Channabasavanna, S. M. Cultural dimensions of psychiatric diagnosis: A 
 pp. 259-278. 
atry . 2004; 19:391-397. 
e Black 
 578.  Wilkinson, H. Including people with dementia in research: Methods and motivations. Wilkinson, H., Editor. 
p. 9-24. 
 581.  Williams, B. and Healy, D. Perceptions of illness causation among new referrals to a community mental 
 584.  Williams, G. Representing disability: Some questions of phenomenology and politics. Barnes, C. and Mercer, 
996; pp. 
194-212. 
 585.  Wilson-F among elderly women. Journal of Women and Aging. 1990; 2(4):5-20. 
. 1997; 
 570.  ---. Well, I know this is going to sound very strange to you, but I dont see myself as a disabled person: 
Identity and disability. Disability & Society. 2002; 17(5):509-527. 
comparison of DSM-III-R and illness explanatory models in South India. British Journal of 
Psychiatry. 1995; 166:353-359. 
 572.  Wenger, C. Interviewing older people. Gubrium, J. F. and Holstein, J. A., Editors. Handbook of Interview
Research: Context and method. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage; 2002;
 573.  Werner, P. and Davidson, M. Emotional reactions of lay persons to someone with Alzheimer's disease . 
International Journal of Geriatric Psychi
 574.  White, L. R. Towards a program of cross-cultural research on the epidemiology of Alzheimers disease. 
Current Science. 1992; 63(8):456-469. 
 575.   Whitehead, M.; Townsend, P.; Davidson, N., and Davidson, N., Editors.  Inequalities in Health: Th
Report and the Health Divide  .  London: Department of Health; 19
 576.  Whitehead, S. M. Man: The invisible gendered subject?  Whitehead, S. M. and Barrett, F. J. The 
Masculinities Reader. Cambridge: Polity Press; 2001; pp. 351-368. 
 577.  Whitehead, S. M. and Barrett, F. J. The sociology of masculinity. Whitehead, S. M. and Barrett, F. J., Editors
The Masculinities Reader. Cambridge: Polity Press; 2001; pp. 1-26. 
The Perspectives of People with Dementia: Research Methods and Motivations. London: Jes
Kingsley; 2002b; p
 579.  ---. The Perspectives of People with Dementia: Research Methods and Motivations. London: Jessica 
Kingsley; 2002a. 
 580.  ---. The Perspectives of People with Dementia: Research Methods and Motivations. London: Jessica 
Kingsley; 2002a. 
health team: Explanatory model or exploratory map.  Social Science and Medicine. 2001; 
53(4):465-476. 
 582.  Williams, B. and Roberts, P. Friends in passing: social interaction at an adult day centre. International Journal 
of Aging and Human Development . 1995; 41(1):63-78. 
 583.  Williams, F. Somewhere over the rainbow: Universality and diversity in social policy. Manning, N. and Page, 
R., Editors. Social Policy Review 4.  Social Policy Association; 1992; pp. 200-219. 
G.,  Editors. Exploring the Divide: Illness and Disability. Leeds: The Disability Press; 1
ord, V. Poverty 
 586.  Wilson, G. A postmodern approach to structured dependency theory. Journal of Social Policy
26(3):341-350. 
G. Understanding Old Ag 587.  Wilson, e: Critical and Global Perspectives . London: Sage; 2000. 
l Approach. Buckingham: Open University 
Press; 1995; pp. 98-113. 
 589.  Wimpen unded theory: Is there any difference?   
Journal of Advanced Nursing. 2000; 31(6):1485-1492. 
 590.  Woods, B. Discovering the person with Alzheimers disease: Cognitive, emotional and behavioural aspects. 
 591.  ---. Talking point: Kitwoods the experience of dementia. Aging & Mental Health. 1997; 1(1):11-12. 
 592.  Woodwa oncepts of identity and difference. Woodward, K., Editor. Identity and Difference . London: 
Sage; 1997; pp. 8-50. 
 593.   World 
2002. 
 594.  Wright Mills, C. Situated Actions and Vocabularies of Motive. Manis, J. G. and Melter, B. N., Editors. 
 595.  Wright Mills, C. The Sociological Imagination. 40th Anniversary ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2000. 
 596.  Wuest, J. Feminist grounded theory: An exploration of the congruency and tensions in two traditions in 
 598.  Yeo, G. and Gallagher-Thompson, D. Ethnicity and the Dementias. Washington : Taylor & Francis; 1996. 
 599.  Young, A. M. and Ackerman, J. Reflections on validity and epistemology in a study of working relations 
 600.  Young, C. Descent into Alzheimers. Macleans . 2000; March 13:30-31. 
 601.  Young, ., Author. Justice and the Politics of Difference. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press; 1990; pp. 39-65. 
 602.  Zabbia, ough Alzheimers. 
Minneapolis, MN : Fairview Press; 1996. 
 603.  Zambran ues affecting poor and minority women: A model for understanding 
their health needs. Women and Health. 1988; 12(3/4):137-160. 
 604.   Zarb, G ondon : 
University of Greenwich; 1993. 
 605.  Zborows nts in responses to pain. Conrad, P. and  Kern, R., Editors. The Sociology 
of Health and Illness: Critical Perspectives. New York : St. Martins Press; 1981; pp. 126-138. 
 606.  Zgola, J. rks: A relationship approach to persons with dementia. Baltimore, MD : Johns Hopkins 
 588.  ---. Im the eyes and shes the arms: Changes in gender roles in advanced old age. Arber, S. and Ginn, J., 
Editors. Connecting Gender and Ageing: A Sociologica
ny, P. and Gass, J. Interviewing in phenomenology and gro
Aging & Mental Health. 2001; 5(Supplement 1):S7-S16. 
rd, K. C
Health Organization.  Active Ageing: A policy framework.  Geneva : World Health Organization; 
Symbolic Interaction: A Reader in Social Psychology. Boston: Allyn and Bacon; 1967; pp. 355-
knowledge discovery. Qualitative Health Research. 1995; 5(1):125-137. 
 597.  Yeo, G. Ethnicity and dementia. Journal of the American Geriatric Society. 2001; 49(10):1393-1394. 
between deaf and hearing professionals. Qualitative Health Research. 2001; 11(2):179-189. 
I. M. Five Faces of Oppression. Young, I. M
K.  Howes. Painted Diaries: A Mother and Daughters Experience Thr
a, R. E. A research agenda on iss
. and Oliver, M. Aging With a Disability: What Do They Expect After All These Years?    L
ki, M. Cultural compone
 Care that Wo
University Press; 1999. 
 607.  Zola, I. K. Missing Pieces: A Chronicle of Living with a Disability. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University 
Press; 1982. 
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
Making the links: Social theories, experiences of  
people with dementia, and intersectionality 
WENDY HULKO* 
Introduction 
The intent of this chapter is to introduce a new area of social science 
inquiry into the field of dementia - intersectionality/interlocking 
oppressions - and to apply this to an analysis of the literature to date on 
subjective experiences of dementia.  This particular investigation is 
sociological in nature, however, critical theorists, practitioners and 
educators have been talking intersectionality across several disciplines for 
over a decade.  The concept is rooted in Freires (2001) depiction of 
oppression as a structure of domination in which all humans participate, 
both as oppressors and as the oppressed.  In the 30 years since the first 
publication of Freires seminal text on oppression, terms like multiple, 
simultaneous, interdependent and interlocking have been affixed to the root 
word oppressions in an attempt to broaden the theory to include systems 
of inequality other than class and to do so in a way that consciously avoids 
the add and stir approach (Dressel, 1991).  Freire himself was engaged in 
this work as noted by Macedo (2001) in his introduction to the 30th 
anniversary edition of Pedagogy of the Oppressed: Freires later works 
make it clear that what is important is to approach the analysis of 
oppression through a convergent theoretical framework where the object of 
oppression is cut across by such factors as race, class, gender, culture, 
language and ethnicity(p 15). 
Intersectionality/interlocking oppressions as a theoretical concept 
and level of analysis resides in a decidedly critical terrain that seems not to 
be marked by disciplinary boundaries and  positioning, but by a shared 
sense of the emancipatory potential of theory that is derived from lived  
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
experiences and subjugated knowledges1.  The introduction of this way of 
thinking about identity and difference is attributed to critical legal theorists 
(Crenshaw, 1994;1989; Delgado 1995), although it surfaced in broader 
feminist and anti-racist writings of the same period (Andersen and Collins, 
1995; Bannerji, 1995; Bishop, 1994; Stasiulis, 1990).  Since then it has been 
adopted by social work (Carniol, 2000; Dominelli, 1997; Mullaly, 1997; 
Oliver, 1996; Thompson, 2001) and eventually made incursions into critical 
gerontology (Dressel, Minkler and Yen, 1997; Estes, 2001; Vincent, 1995).  
A distinction was made between the micro-sociological concept of 
intersectionality and the macro-sociological concept of interlocking 
oppressions by Collins in 1995: 
First, the notion of interlocking oppressions refers to the macro 
level connections linking systems of oppression such as race, 
class, and gender.  This is the model describing the social 
structures that create social positions.  Second, the notion of 
intersectionality describes micro level processes - namely, how 
each individual and group occupies a social position with 
interlocking structures of oppression described by the metaphor 
of intersectionality.  Together they shape oppression (as cited in 
Dressel, Minkler and Yen, 1997, p 583-584). 
Intersectionality is used to point to the ways in which multiple and complex 
identity categories such as gender, race2, ethnicity, class, age, able-
bodiedness, sexual orientation and faith/religion interact to shape individual 
life experiences.  We cannot compartmentalise people and investigate, for 
example, how either race or class contributes to individual experiences 
of a particular social phenomenon, as we are all racialized and classed and 
interact with the world as holistic beings. This chapter on dementia and 
intersectionality treats interlocking oppressions as the structural framework 
that shapes and constrains the  
1 I use subjugated knowledges in the Foucaultian (1994) sense of naive knowledges, located low 
down on their hierarchy, beneath the required level of cognition or scientificity, oppositionally 
situated in relation to dominant and dominating scientific discourse (p 41).  See Leibing (1997) for an 
excellent example of the explanatory power of subjugated knowledges in relation to dementia in 
Brazil.    
2 I use race in quotation marks to denote that I subscribe to the view that race is a social 
construction .  Moreover, it should remain an important focus of sociological analysis as long as the 
values ascribed to this term and the resulting hierarchies remain in existence, shaping all our 
experiences of privilege and oppression.  For a clear articulation of this position, see Crenshaw 
(1994). 
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
identities and the experiences of people with dementia as they try to make 
meaning of their lives as intersectional beings. 
The application of this analytical lens to dementia represents a 
progression from the preoccupation with the self/person that has 
characterised much dementia theorizing and research since the 
groundbreaking work of Kitwood (1990) and Sabat and Harr (1992).  It is 
also a move towards the concept of identities - as intersecting, fluid and 
problematized - and an attempt to excavate and accord central importance to 
subjugated knowledges (Foucault, 1994) regarding identities and lived 
experiences of dementia.  Emergent interest in identity follows a decade of 
heavy criticism of the predominance of biomedicine in the field of dementia 
(Binney and Swan, 1991; Bond, 1992; Downs, 2000; Herskovits, 1995; 
Holstein, 2000; Lyman, 1989; Robertson, 1990).  Social scientists and 
others have been arguing for alternative approaches to dementia that focus 
on the person, not only the disease/disability, and many have contested the 
belief that dementia is an organic condition, seeing it instead as a social 
construction (see Harding and Palfrey, 1997).  Although there is this 
aforementioned trend in dementia concerned with personhood (Kitwood, 
1997a; Kitwood and Bredin, 1992) and selves (Sabat, 2001; Sabat and 
Harr, 1992), this has not been approached with an understanding of 
identities as multiple and intersecting.  Rather, identity is used 
interchangeably with selves and person and is constructed as both 
universal, in that we all are presumed to have one, and particular, in that we 
each have a unique, personalized one.  The way in which identity categories 
interact with one another and the broader socio-cultural context of dementia 
is essentially ignored in these largely psychologically-oriented approaches 
to understanding dementia.  These approaches do, however, represent 
progression from bio-medical models that see pathology as central and 
exclude both psychological and socio-cultural factors. 
If one ascribes to the belief that dementia is a disability, it is 
relatively easy to see that dementia represents an intersectional state of 
being, as it resides most often at the intersection of age and able-bodiedness 
with prevalence increasing as it does with age.  Add to this gender, race, 
ethnicity and class and the picture no longer lends itself to individualistic 
theories that appear to view people as homogeneous beings apart from their 
biology and/or psychology.  As there is a lack of  
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
theorizing and research in dementia on how older people with dementia 
conceptualize their experiences in relation to intersectionality, literature 
must be drawn together from fields that are often disconnected: critical 
gerontology, mental health and illness, disability studies, critical race 
studies, womens studies, social work, cultural anthropology and 
legal/human rights theory.  Making these links enables connections to be 
made across different experiences of intersectionality and interlocking 
oppressions.  This chapter will apply the foregoing analytical discussion to 
the literature to date on subjective experiences of dementia. Prior to 
embarking on this however, a few theoretical distinctions are necessary in 
order to substantiate the position that we do not yet have an adequate 
explanation for this particular realm of human experience. 
Dementia theorizing 
Several ontological theories regarding dementia have been put 
forward. However, phenomenological perspectives remain a major, 
acknowledged gap in the literature.  Given the lack of experiential theories, 
the focus here will be on theories that address the nature of dementia.  It is 
noted, however, that in order to begin to understand dementia, we need to 
ask the people who are labelled as such about their experiences and then 
generate theory from these answers, rather than imposing a meta-theory on 
observed /described phenomena.  Current theories on dementia may be 
loosely classified as: (1) dementia as a brain disease, (2) dementia as a 
normal part of the aging process, (3) dementia as a psycho-neurological 
condition, (4) dementia as a disability, (5) dementia as a mental health 
problem, and (6) dementia as a social construction.  This fairly recent 
proliferation in the number of theories, or alternative conceptualizations of 
this phenomenon we call dementia, is closely related to dissatisfaction with 
the ability of the medical model to adequately account for the variability 
and diversity of symptoms and behaviours found in people with dementia.  
The arbitrary manner in which dementia was classified as a brain disease 
assists us in understanding the dissatisfaction with this model as an 
explanatory theory and will be briefly reviewed below. 
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
Dementia as a brain disease 
The medical model sees dementia as a brain disease and has been 
the dominant paradigm in this field since Kraepelin named an amalgam of 
symptoms and associated behaviours Alzheimer Disease (AD) in 1910 and 
classified it as a distinct subset of senile dementia (Cheston and Bender, 
2000; Dillmann, 2000; Fox, 1989; Gubrium, 1986; Herskovits, 1995; 
Holstein, 2000; 1998; Leibing 2001; Robertson, 1990).  This naming served 
to differentiate AD from senile dementia, a decision which Alois Alzheimer 
himself disputed at the time as he believed that what he had witnessed 
clinically was not the result of a distinct disease process, but rather a variant 
of senile dementia.  A related debate, which predated this declaration of 
AD, was whether any distinction could be made between senile dementia 
and normal ageing.  These scientific deliberations fell largely dormant until 
the early 1970s when AD was rediscovered by medicine and psychiatry 
and agreement was reached to treat AD as an organic condition that is both 
related to and distinct from senile dementia.  This led to the reintroduction 
of the general category of dementia in the fourth edition of the Diagnostic 
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-IV) in 1994.  As Cheston 
and Bender (2000) state, this re-creation of Alzheimers disease...has 
served to place people with Alzheimers disease within a constricting 
explanatory framework in which they tend to be perceived as diseased 
brains rather than as social beings with active mental lives (p 44). There is 
undeniably an association between dementia and ageing in that incidence 
and prevalence rates increase with age, however this does not support the 
belief that dementia is a normal part of the aging process.  Contemporary 
theorists view dementia as a pathological condition that primarily strikes 
individuals at random.  In this sense, the brain disease theory is akin to the 
personal tragedy theory heavily criticized in disability studies (Bond and 
Corner, 2001; Oliver, 1996) which sees disability (dementia) as a tragic 
quirk of fate that leaves the affected individual subject to the pity of others.  
The resulting societal responses focus on assisting the individual to adapt, 
rather than fundamentally altering social structures to accord disabled 
people full citizenship rights.  The discovery of a pathological brain 
represents just such a personal tragedy in the world  
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
of biomedicine, a tragedy that medicine is driven to avert through the 
discovery of a cure. 
Questions of normalcy and critiques of the biomedicalization of dementia 
Aging is not a condition, but rather a process.  Although various 
conditions may attach themselves to older people as they age, it is 
questionable whether the process of aging itself can be said to cause a 
condition such as dementia.  There are compelling arguments that aging has 
been turned into a condition through a process of medicalization (Estes and 
Binney, 1991; Robertson, 1990), and the same process has been said to have 
solidified the location of dementia under the gaze (Foucault, 1975) where 
it is then subject to regulation by the medical profession (Bond, 1992; 
Lyman, 1989; Robertson, 1990).  As Dillmann (2000) concludes, dementia 
can be thought of as a subset of the changes identified by the usage of the 
concept of aging [and] this subset is the result of a normative decision to 
evaluate a particular area of the range as abnormal (p 151).  This process 
of ascribing phenomena with a designation of normal or abnormal certainly 
applies to dementia, just as it has operated in the past for madness and 
senility (Foucault, 1965).  Indeed, the determination of whether dementia 
and other conditions that connect brain and behavior exist as facts or 
whether we have created them relies on an understanding of the creation of 
the other and the designation of behavior as normal or abnormal. 
Early treatises on the creation of the other in relation to ideas of 
normalcy may have been concerned with ostensibly different subject matter, 
for example madness (Foucault, 1965),  stigma(Goffman, 1963) and 
deviance (Becker, 1963), yet the common thread is the identification of a 
situation that has been problematized by society and that subsequently 
results in discrimination of those who are classified as others, in this case 
people with dementia.  Recently the term senility has been reclaimed as a 
rejection of the medical classification of dementia, which is thought to be 
concerned only with the pathological.  The use of the word senility is a 
political act meant to signal a concentration on the physiology, political 
economy and social relations that structure loss and decay of the body and 
its voice (Cohen, 1998;  
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
Traphagan, 2000).  The term, however, cannot escape its contested past in 
which it was equated with the aging process and as a result senility was 
seen to be an expected part of the aging experience.  The degree to which 
dementia and senility are believed to be qualitatively different conditions is 
still under debate and although we may think now that the former term 
represents an advance in medical thinking and social awareness, it may just 
be a surface appeasement.  That is to say, the response to dementia has not 
improved in terms of removing the stigma and engaging with the other in 
a meaningful way.  At the meta-level, the political economy of social 
relations of domination and difference has not been structurally altered by 
adoption of the clinical term dementia.  Poverty, marginalization, and social 
exclusion are seen as non-medical issues and through their omission from 
under the gaze, the aging process is effectively depoliticized (Robertson, 
1990).  Once we deconstruct the use of the words and the conditions they 
describe, we may come to the conclusion as stated above that it is all about 
the social construction of the other and if that is the case, then society is 
necessarily implicated.  And as Sayce (2000) states in referring to mental 
illness in general, purely genetic explanations let society off the hook (p 
Dementia as a psycho-neurological condition: the inclusion of the mind 
Given the concerns with the reductionist, and quite possibly 
unscientific brain disease theory, it is no surprise that a move to a theory 
that took into account individuality and personality characteristics was 
embraced by those concerned more with the care than the cure of people 
with dementia.  Kitwoods concept of personhood (Kitwood, 1990; 1997a; 
1997b; Kitwood and Bredin, 1992;) and Sabat and Harrs corresponding 
focus on selfhood (Sabat and Harr, 1992; Sabat, 1998; 2000; 2001) was 
readily embraced and people eagerly adopted what they saw as a social-
psychological approach, not the integrative theory that Kitwood proposed 
(Pool, 2000) that sees dementia as the interaction of both neurological and 
social-psychological domains.  By factoring in the mind, Kitwood 
postulated that it is possible to observe some degree of re-mentia 
(Kitwood, 1997a; Kitwood and Bredin, 1992) and research  
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
has indeed supported this hypothesis (Sixsmith et al, 1993).  Kitwood does 
not disavow the influence of pathology, rather he adds another component - 
the social-psychological - and asks that we view dementia first as a 
disability and then as an illness (Bartlett, 2000; Kitwood, 1997a). He has 
expanded the notion of what constitutes dementia and developed a method 
of assessing both well- and ill-being in dementia and an approach to care 
based on this synthesis of social-psychology and neurology (Kitwood and 
Bredin, 1992; Pool, 2000).  At the same time, Sabat and Harr (1992) and 
Sabat (1998; 2000; 2001) were busy accumulating proof of the existence of 
selves in people with dementia, selves that seemed to persist well into the 
disease process and whose maintenance was shown to be dependent on the 
actions of others in their environment. 
Personhood as defined by Kitwood (1997a) refers to a standing or 
status that is conferred on an individual by others in the context of a 
relationship, thus it is said to emerge in a social context (Kitwood and 
Bredin, 1992, p 275) and Sabat and Harr acknowledge that social 
constructionist theory (Sabat 2000; Sabat and Harr, 1992) forms the 
backdrop for their research on selfhood.  However, neither Kitwoods nor 
Sabat and Harrs work truly enters into the social realm.  It stays not only 
at the level of the individual, but at the basic psychology of the individual, 
leaving little room for an articulation of the role and influence of 
intersecting identities based on class, gender, race and ethnicity.  Another 
limitation of this theory is that it is not grounded in experiences of people 
with dementia; people with dementia were not asked how they would 
explain dementia (Harding and Palfrey, 1997), although this has been 
endorsed as a direction for future research (Kitwood 1997a; 1997b).  
The personhood/selfhood concept and the accompanying theory of 
the interaction of brain (pathology, development, activity) and psychology 
is important to this project on dementia and intersectionality as it expands 
on the bio-medical notion of dementia as solely a brain disease, it 
champions the importance of understanding the person behind the disease 
and in doing so, lays the groundwork for further explorations of the nature 
of identity and the socio-cultural context of dementia.  Dementia can be 
seen to challenge our notions of normalcy (Kitwood, 1997b) and encourage 
us to better understand what it means to be a  
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
person (Kitwood, 1997a).  Our next step should be to explore what it means 
to be a person with multiple and intersecting identities, a person of a certain 
race, ethnicity, class and gender, an exploration that would take us into the 
sociological realm of understanding dementia.  Kitwood (1997a) intimates 
this direction in his conclusion that the paradigm he espouses brings into 
focus the uniqueness of each person, respect for what they have 
accomplished and compassionate to what they have endured (p 135).  The 
question of endurance in the face of discrimination is central to the 
following theory which views dementia as a disability and which is in 
essence a sociological theory. 
Dementia as a disability and the connection to mental health and illness 
Disability theorists and activists have not addressed dementia or 
mental ill health specifically, however it is becoming increasingly common 
in dementia and in mental health and illness to turn to the social model of 
disability championed by Oliver (1996; 1990) as a more adequate paradigm 
for understanding cognitive impairment (Bartlett, 2000; Gwilliam and 
Gilliard, 1996; Sayce, 2000).  The attractiveness of the social model of 
disability is that it does not see impairments as problematic, rather it 
postulates that society has problematized impairment.  Society is seen to 
disable people in the way that people with impairments are unnecessarily 
isolated and excluded from full participation in society (Oliver, 1996); 
society has not shifted attitudes and adapted environments to accommodate 
those who differ from the norm (Phair and Good, 1995).  This is a move 
completely away from brain disease theory into the realm of the social, 
towards a political economy of disabilities.  However, Oliver sees a clear 
distinction between theories and models and does not refer to the product of 
his thinking as a theory.  He calls it a model since he believes models aid in 
understanding (Oliver, 1996) and do not seek to explain as theories do.  
There are differing opinions as to what distinguishes a theory (McMullin, 
2000).  This semantic distinction has not been as critical in dementia, and so 
this model has been adopted as an explanatory theory - a theory of how 
dementia should be viewed, not how it is caused.  Naming dementia as a 
disability moved dementia theorizing to a focus on society, away from  
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
the brain, or the brain and behavior combined.  The realm of the social leads 
us to questions as to how society shapes and constrains the experiences of 
people with dementia through our conceptualization of this 
disease/illness/disability and the interaction of relations of domination.  It is 
this question that Oliver poses in his suggestion that the way forward on a 
theoretical level for disabilities is the creation of social oppression theory, 
developed by disabled people, and in this way grounding the theory in the 
experiences of people living with impairments, who are consequently 
disabled by society (Oliver, 1990).  Oliver further highlights the need for an 
analysis that sees oppressions as intersecting and acknowledges that the 
social model of disability does not address this issue (Oliver, 1996).  The 
imperative for the future is that theory be derived from the experiences of 
the people under study, a need that was identified earlier in relation to 
future dementia research.  Initial indications are that it is natural for people 
to talk in the language of intersectionality, as the following quote 
demonstrates:  As a black disabled woman, I cannot compartmentalize or 
separate aspects of my identity in this way.  The collective experience of 
my race, disability and gender shape and inform my life (Hill, 1994, as 
quoted in Oliver, 1996).  The concern expressed in the quote of the dangers 
in and futility of sectioning off parts of oneself is at the heart of an 
intersectional analysis.  Aligning dementia with disability places cognitive 
impairment in a socio-political context and moves towards an understanding 
of the status of being disabled as an outcome of relations of subordination 
and privilege. 
An analysis of intersecting oppressions is central to Liz Sayces 
(2000) investigation into the discrimination and social exclusion of people 
with mental health problems and how to overcome this state of affairs.  Her 
finding that people with mental health problems, referred to as 
users/survivors, are socially excluded, and that this intersects with other 
forms of discrimination, is based on extensive research with users/survivors, 
mental health professionals, policy makers, disability activists, advocates 
and lawyers in the US and the UK.  She concludes that the disability 
inclusion model (based on the social model of disability) is the most likely 
model to lead to social inclusion and full citizenship rights as it places 
users/survivors as a minority group in society, it is inclusive of differences 
within the group in terms of decisions about whether to receive treatment or 
not, it acknowledges intersecting identities and it  
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
builds alliances with other groups to address simultaneous discrimination.  
Her rationale for focusing on oppression/ discrimination, rather than 
stigma for example, is that the latter stays at the level of the individual and 
the former points to patterned or systemic exclusion from social and 
economic life (Sayce 2000).  The adoption of the disability model by 
users/survivors, being people who are socially excluded due to mental 
health problems, lends further credence to its applicability to dementia. 
The influence of sociology: dementia as a social construction 
Sociologists have been criticized for not engaging with the needs 
and concerns of older people with mental health problems (Pilgrim and 
Rogers, 1999).  Indeed Sayce (2000) identifies older people with mental 
health problems as those among the unheard voices that we need to actively 
seek out and suggests that mental health groups should build alliances with 
older peoples groups in order to increase their strength as social 
movements.  Although there is little evidence of sociological theorizing on 
dementia specifically, sociological theories have been applied to the study 
of dementia (Bond and Corner, 2001) and this link has not always been 
recognized3.  The impact of work that has applied a sociological perspective 
to dementia has been profound in terms of our understanding of the social 
construction of Alzheimers disease (Gubrium, 1986; Harding and Palfrey, 
1997) and the purpose it has served for the Alzheimers 
Enterprise(Binney and Swan, 1991), the biomedicalization of dementia 
(Bond, 1992; Lyman, 1989; Robertson, 1990) and the emphasis on lived 
experiences of dementia (Froggatt, 1988; Lyman, 1989; Lyman, 1998; 
Bond 1992; Bond and Corner, 2001; Robertson, 1991; Vittoria, 1998).  
Dementia as a subject matter seems to have fallen through the cracks 
between social gerontology and medical gerontology, with neither specialty 
paying much attention to the social forces that affect the conceptualization 
and experience of the disease(Lyman, 1989, p 599).  This in turn has led to 
a lack of social theories of dementia. 
3 For example, Kitwoods (1990) description of malignant social psychology draws on the 
sociology of deviance, namely labeling theory (Becker, 1963; Lemert, 1972), and 
Goffmans (1963) work on stigma; Sabat and Harrs (1992) and Sabats (1998 & 2000 & 
2001) work on selfhood is grounded in social constructionist theory (Berger and 
Luckmann, 1966). 
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
  In line with the question of normalcy addressed earlier in relation to 
the brain disease theory and the biomedicalization of dementia, social 
constructionists view normalcy as a socially negotiated designation 
(Harding and Palfrey, 1997; Pilgrim and Rogers, 1999) based on social 
constructions of unwanted or deviant behavior.  This theorizing is derivative 
of Thomas Szaszs 1961 thesis The Myth of Mental Illness (Szasz, 1994) 
and Berger and Luckmanns (1966) seminal work The Social Construction 
of Reality in which they state that questions of psychological status cannot 
be decided without recognizing the reality-definitions that are taken for 
granted in the social situation of the individual...psychological status is 
relative to the social definitions of reality in general and is itself socially 
defined (p 196).  Rather than biology or physiology, it is society that is 
seen to create mental illness through its definition of normative behavior.  
The resulting label of abnormal is applied differentially and it has a variable 
effect on those to whom it is applied based on factors such as their race, 
ethnicity, class, gender and age (see Cohen, 1995).  Harding and Palfrey 
(1997) question to what extent dementia is a label applied to people who 
resist oppression through an assertion of their individuality and their 
independence.  Pilgrim and Rogers (1999) claim that it is the roles and 
context of peoples situations that influence the type and rate of mental 
distress (p 40).  Referring to the social construction of senility in 
particular, Traphagan (2000) states that it is a matter of human identities as 
they change and are negotiated between and among people over their lives 
(p 186) and stresses that this social construction is not universal, it is 
culturally mediated.  For this reason, anthropologists, such as Traphagan 
(2000) and Cohen (1998), refer to senility as culturally, rather than socially, 
constructed.  Viewing dementia as a social construction is helpful in that it 
speaks to the political economy of dementia - the interaction of the political, 
the economic and the social structures, and their impact on human 
experience.  It runs the risk, however, of negating the very real experience 
of disorientation, memory loss, diminished judgement, and other symptoms 
endured by people with dementia.  Further, it does not adequately explain 
the role of intersecting identities, nor does it place people in a socio-cultural 
context that differentially supports or disables them based on where they lie 
on the dual axes of privilege and oppression.  For older people with 
dementia who are experiencing the  
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
intersectionality of age and disability, without even factoring in other 
dimensions of their identities, there is a need for theory that is grounded in 
their lived experiences and that further develops our understanding of the 
intersecting nature of oppression. 
Implications for future theoretical developments 
Three themes have run through this review of dementia theories:  (1) 
prior theorizing on dementia has not been based on the lived experiences 
and viewpoints of people with dementia themselves; (2) dementia theories 
have failed to account for the socio-cultural context of people with 
dementia, the intersectional nature of identities, and the interaction between 
these realms; and (3) future sociological theorizing on dementia and 
intersectionality needs to be grounded in an analysis of the structure and 
function of privilege and oppression in order to adequately account for the 
experiences of people who are simultaneously oppressed on the basis of 
multiple and intersecting identity categories.  From this theoretical review, 
we now move onto the literature on subjective experiences of dementia and 
its relevance to our understanding of dementia and intersectionality. 
Subjective experiences of people with dementia  
The movement to hear the voices of people with dementia started 
with a few pioneers who stated in legitimating fora that perhaps dementia 
researchers should place less emphasis on caregiver coping, stress and 
burden and start to examine what people with dementia are experiencing 
(Cotrell and Schulz, 1993; Cotrell and Lein, 1993; Froggatt, 1988; Lyman, 
1989; Robertson, 1990).  This probably was not a revelation for a number 
of people working directly with individuals with dementia who had come to 
realize experientially that perhaps the PDWADs [persons diagnosed with 
Alzheimers disease] themselves...have something to tell us about what it 
means to be human in the face of such dissolution, if we but ask and listen 
(Robertson, 1990, p 436).  Nevertheless, a movement was born that sought 
to understand the subjective experiences of people with dementia, through 
eliciting their perspectives and observing their social interactions.  
Resulting research has covered biomedical concerns of diagnosis, 
symptoms and treatment; the psychological arena of cognitive change and 
its impact on performance, affective states, loss and coping mechanisms;  
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
anthropological investigations into cross-cultural definitions of and 
attitudes towards dementia; and sociological questions about the nature of 
being in the world and the influence of structural factors and institutions 
such as work, the family, the state and what Estes (1979) termed the aging 
enterprise.  These sociological questions are perhaps the least researched, 
as instrumental concerns have taken precedence for those who might have 
explored these larger issues, e.g. social work researchers.  
Subjugated knowledges 
The pioneering researchers acknowledged that their proposed line of 
inquiry would be fraught with difficulties, primarily in terms of 
methodology.  In addition, the assumption that people with dementia are 
not reliable historians or credible witnesses, even about/to their own 
lives, was omnipresent and as such could be found in surprising quarters.  I 
recall in 1997 discussing my interest in hearing the voices of people with 
dementia (see Goldsmith, 1996) with a social work professor whose 
commitment to feminist research I respected and shared.  I was not 
surprised that she queried my proposed methodology as I was accustomed 
to her intellectual rigor and precision.  However, her attempts to dissuade 
me from research of this nature seemed to arise from a judgement that we 
cannot learn anything from people with dementia because they are unable 
to phrase their answers in a way that we can understand and/or that would 
be considered legitimate by the research community.  This dismissal 
seemed inconsistent, not only with her epistemological standpoint, but also 
with growing evidence to support the refutation of similar arguments that 
have been applied to almost every oppressed and disempowered group in 
society (Proctor, 2001), examples being people with disabilities and 
children.  A direct link seems to be made between cognition and validity in 
a demonstration of what has been aptly termed cognitive superiority 
(Shepphard, 1991, as cited in Harding and Palfrey, 1997, p 42).  Although 
used by Shepphard to refer to the exclusive control of experts over the 
diagnosing (defining) of dementia, cognitive superiority translates to the 
belief that if someones cognitive capacities are impaired, anything they tell 
us should be viewed as suspect.  Moreover, emotional responses are not 
seen to  
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
carry as much weight as cognitive responses, if any at all, which greatly 
impacts upon people who communicate primarily through non-verbal 
means, such as those with advanced dementia.  This attitude of cognitive 
superiority effectively means that a person with dementia does not have the 
power or authority to define his/her own experience.  Maybe the unspoken 
problem is that asking people with dementia about their experiences might 
lead us to question and potentially re-evaluate our definitions of normalcy 
and abnormality and leave us with an uncomfortable doubt in our own 
cognitive superiority.  It is within this context that we can understand this 
recent move to hear the voices of people with dementia and the composition 
of the group of individuals we have heard from to date. 
Knowledge sources 
The literature reviewed takes the form of personal accounts (see 
Boden, 1998; Davis, 1989; Henderson, 1998; McGowin, 1993; Rose, 
1996), narratives produced with the involvement of a supportive other (see 
Killick and Cordonnier, 2000; Living Archive Project, 2001; McKinlay, 
1998; Snyder, 1999; Zabbia, 1996), qualitative research studies (see 
Chatterji, 1998; Cohen, 1995; Cheston, 1996; Cotrell and Lein, 1993; 
Froggatt, 1988; Gillies, 2001; Keady et al, 1995; Labarge et al, 1998; 
Leibing, 1997; Lyman, 1998; Mills, 1997; Phinney, 1998; Proctor, 2001; 
Sabat, 2001; Sinason, 1992; Snyder, 2001; Sutton, 1994; Vittoria, 1998) 
and stories posted on Web sites or available in hard copy for the purpose of 
raising public awareness (see Alzheimer Society of Toronto, 2000; Ashley, 
2001; Booth, 2001; Pauline and Mica, 1996; Shelia, 2000).  Past research 
into subjective experiences of dementia has employed various 
methodological approaches, such as ethnographies, case studies, clinical 
observations, participant observations, focus groups, and semi-structured 
and structured interviews; has taken the person with dementia and/or their 
caregivers/family members as the primary subject(s); and has occurred in a 
number of different field settings, for example, care facilities, homes of 
people with dementia, neighborhoods, hospitals, and adult day programs.  
This body of literature (personal accounts, narratives produced with the 
involvement of a supportive other, qualitative research studies, and stories 
posted on internet sites) is  
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
reviewed critically in the following sections in terms of who is telling these 
stories of dementia, what these stories tell, whose voices are still 
silent/silenced and how untold experiences might differ. 
Who is telling these stories of dementia 
Although there has been exponential growth in work of this nature 
and thus many sources now exist, some troubling generalizations can be 
made regarding the voices that we are hearing: younger people in their 
forties to sixties who are well-educated, white, married, professionals, with 
strong religious or ideological beliefs and supportive families, who would 
be classified as early stage4 in terms of their disease progression.  These are 
generalizations and as such will not be applicable to all sources cited nor to 
all narratives produced by or with the involvement of individuals with 
dementia.  The explanatory purpose of grouping this set of characteristics is 
to evoke a sense of the dominant voices that have captured the public 
consciousness and thus have come to speak for a marginalized group of 
people with varied experiences as a whole and intersecting identities as 
individuals.  A promising exception is the recent book by Lisa Snyder 
called Speaking Our Minds: Personal Reflections from Individuals with 
Alzheimers (1999).  For her exploration of the subjective experience of 
Alzheimers disease, Snyder has deliberately chosen people of different 
ages, ethnicities, and educational and professional backgrounds (p viii) 
and these biographical details come through in the narratives.  It is apparent 
however that the seven people whose lives are showcased in the book have 
not been asked in the taped, in-home interviews, whether and in what way 
these controlled-for identity constructs shape their experiences of dementia.  
The influence of strong religious and/or ideological beliefs is evident in all 
but one of the narratives and may be a consequence of the authors decision 
to pursue this specific line of questioning (Snyder, 1999, p viii).  The role 
of religious beliefs will be returned to in a later section of this paper, as it is 
a recurrent theme in many of the personal accounts published to date. 
4 Downs (1997), in a cogent review of the emerging trend in dementia research of looking 
at the person with the disease, notes that the emphasis has been on people in the early 
stages of dementia. 
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
What these stories tell us about identities, problematized and intersecting 
I have looked at Snyders (1999) collection of experiences of 
dementia in depth for two reasons: (1) it is groundbreaking in that the 
author set out to hear voices of people with dementia, diversified her 
sample in terms of age, ethnicity, educational and professional background, 
and has published the results in a format that is accessible to the public; and 
(2) the narratives indicate the influence of gender, age, and class on the 
interviewees experiences of dementia despite the authors inattention to 
this - she did not ask about this according to her notes (Snyder, 1999: viii) 
and does not analyze its appearance in the narratives either in this 
journalistic tale or in a recent academic piece based on the same research 
(Snyder, 2001).  Owing to Snyders noted attention to identity constructs in 
her sample selection, it is logical to presume that these accounts have the 
most likelihood of furthering our understanding of dementia and 
intersectionality.  As the excerpts indicate, gender, age and class may be 
important to these individuals in terms of how they make meaning out of 
their experiences of dementia.  Moreover, ethnicity may factor in as well, 
although its role and influence was invisible in the narratives presented in 
the book.  The information given does not give us a fulsome picture, but it 
does raise the possibility that identity categories do shape individual 
experiences of dementia in an intersecting fashion.  There are indications in 
the words of Snyders (1999) interviewees that they may conceptualize 
their experiences in terms of identity categories, age being the most 
pronounced, with gender and class showing up as well. 
Age and gender 
Age seems to hold explanatory power for many people with 
dementia, as evidenced by personal accounts of and research with 
individuals with dementia.  Some researchers have noted the influence of 
age in their analysis of the data while others have not, yet often the 
influence can be picked up in the narratives of the people with dementia that 
are included.  As an example of the first approach, Gillies (1997) found that 
the 20 older people with dementia she interviewed about  
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
their experiences attributed their memory problems to old age, its an age 
thing and I put it down to age being common statements (p 26).  As very 
few of these people had been told their diagnosis, this finding should be 
interpreted with caution.  Further support for this age association is 
presented in Phinneys (1998) study of experiences of early dementia in 
which three of the five people who were interviewed at length and observed 
in their own homes interpreted their experiences in the context of 
themselves growing older (p 13).  Examples of the secondary types, in 
which the interaction of age and gender or age alone shows up in the data 
presented, although it is not analyzed by the researcher, are numerous.  I 
have chosen a few to illustrate this point: A 78 year old woman in Chestons 
(1996) study reportedly stated: Sometimes Ive got to sit there and just 
think, or close my yes until it comes back.  Then Im alright and off I go 
again.  But then Im getting older... (p 595). Christopher Young, a 
prominent Canadian journalist until his retirement in 1996, writes about 
being 78 years old and living with Alzheimers disease that People of my 
tragedy when younger people are stricken with Alzheimers...We older ones 
expect problems...(Young, 2000, p 31). 
Snyder (1999) reflects on how one participant named Jean had 
courageously examined her roles and identity as a female [and] had 
participated in a demolition of the boundaries traditionally surrounding 
women in an evolving Western society (p 68) over the course of her life.  
The continuing influence of her identity as a woman can be seen in some of 
the following excerpts from her narrative: If Im in a group of women with 
whom I am comfortable, Im not as likely to have a problem (p 60); The 
women who helped me out - they were saints.  They were the sweetest, 
loveliest women.  Ill never forget them (p 64); and I guess there are 
people out there handling this marvelously [sic].  But it just isnt me.  I want 
to cry and whine and kick  Not as ladylike, I must admit (p 71).  Age as an 
identity construct may be influential as well in Jeans experience, as the 
following quote with respect to her rationalization of early symptoms of 
memory loss indicates: Id think, well, Im almost 70' (p 60).  Her ideas 
of age-appropriate behaviour further shape her decision-making now: I 
think living alone at this point now is something that is just plain old.  I 
want some interaction  
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
with people (p 74).  Age intertwines with gender in the following quotes 
about Jeans relationship with the womens movement, now: I was very 
active in the womens movement, and all these women I know are still 
working.  Theyre much younger than me, and theyre all busy (p 67), and 
in the past: So these women became my family.  Age didnt mean 
anything.  Nothing meant anything except our belief in ourselves...The 
whole feeling was really sisterhood (p 67). 
A few samples from John Killicks life history and poetry work with 
people with dementia evoke a sense of the dislocation and marginalization 
experienced by older people with dementia, especially older women: a 
well-educated woman named Alice who is in her mid-80s and lives in a 
care facility states: As you well know, Im being held prisoner here.  My 
sister has stolen my life.  Now Im old and expected to dream my time 
away (Killick, 1996, p 291); and in the poem The Bad Home (Killick and 
Cordonnier, 2000, no p #), a line reads: Im too old to do anything.  Im 
just a dustbin.  This sense of being shunted aside and objectified is echoed 
in the words of a 78 year old woman named Betty in Snyders (1999) study 
who highlights the importance of seeing the person behind the disease in all 
his/her complexity and seeking the meaning of the experience for people 
with dementia.  She describes the attitude of health care professionals: 
They know the diagnosis, but they dont take time to find out what it truly 
things than just their diagnosis.  Each person is a whole human being 
(Snyder, 1999, p123-124).  Lastly, these haunting words from the poem 
Openings (Killick and Cordonnier, 2000, no p #): Its really scary when 
youre an old woman.  
Gender, age, and class 
As seen in the earlier quotes, an 82 year old man named Booker 
explains his dementia in terms of his age: Time brings this disease on and 
Ive been going on a while now. You come to an age when your system 
changes (Snyder, 1999, p 101).  Interestingly, a younger woman Consuelo, 
aged 33 years, who has tested positive for the Gene responsible for early 
onset Alzheimers disease, does not seem to think that age would make a 
difference to her experience:  I dont know if its harder  
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
at my age than it would be I were 70.  Maybe it would be the same.  But I 
always expected to get ill or have Alzheimers when I got older, not now 
when Im in my thirties (Snyder, 1999, p 148).  Although Consuelo does 
not problematize age, social class may have an influence on the way she 
conceptualizes her experience, as the next quote illustrates: But Im more 
educated than the rest of my family, so I thought I wouldnt get it.  Then I 
recalled that my uncle was a lawyer and he had the disease.  So, your 
schooling doesnt matter.  You can go to college and still get Alzheimers 
(p 138). 
Another older interviewee (aged 70 years) named Bob indicates the 
influence of gender with respect to his adaptation to changing roles within 
the family: Poor Erika [Bobs wife] has to do all the driving, thinking, and 
putting things together.  Instead of my doing things for her, now shes the 
one who jumps in and gets things done (Snyder, 1999, p 85).  This 
indication of the influence of gender roles is also evident in Cotrell and 
Leins (1993) study in which the female caregivers engineered their 
spouses retirement in such a way that they could gracefully retire without 
losing face (p 125) and thereby avoid stressful situations.  However, the 
women with dementia continued to perform cognitive tasks that were 
frustrating and stressful for them (p 125) as their male caregivers did not 
plan and execute face-saving avoidance strategies on their behalf.  
Questioning the concept of gender and the persistence of its importance in 
her life as a person with dementia who is acutely aware of her lack of worth 
as a human being, Diana Friel McGowin asks the reader If I am no longer 
a woman, why do I still feel Im one? (1993, p 123). 
Gender is a variable that to date has been largely ignored by 
qualitative researchers addressing the nature of experiences of dementia, 
with the exception of a recent study by Proctor (2001).  In this qualitative 
exploratory study, the author looked at gender and power in relation to the 
service experiences of four older women with dementia in a day hospital.  It 
is unusual in its focus on gender and power dynamics and in the application 
of this emphasis to the research process itself.  The method of data analysis 
employed was developed specifically to uncover the voices and experiences 
of disempowered individuals, originally adolescent women (Brown and 
Gilligan, as cited in Proctor, 2001).  Through repeated and varied listenings 
to the data, hidden truths are  
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
uncovered that may be missed through conventional data analysis that is not 
attuned to power in the relationships.  
 The author (Proctor, 2001) notes how one woman named Marion 
had difficulty making herself heard with the doctors and how she had 
interpreted this as owing to her lack of education: I was going to a doctors.  
I arent right well educated you know and I havent learnt big words or owt 
like that (p 371).  Another woman in describing why she relates differently 
to the doctors and nurses than she does with the other patients states that 
Theres always a difference.  Theyre higher up (p 372).  The influence of 
class is clearly evidenced in the words of these two women, although it is 
the role of gender that is under investigation in this study.  Gender is often 
intertwined with age as the voices of older women noted earlier demonstrate 
and indications from Proctors (2001) study are that class needs to be 
explored as an identity construct that intersects with other aspects of ones 
identity as well.  This is supported by a recent study (Leibing, 1997) of a 
middle class population in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.  Rio de Janeiro is home to 
the countrys highest proportion of older people, many of whom have 
mental health problems.  The research looked at the illness narratives 
employed by 52 caregivers of Alzheimer patients and found that 
respondents believed that in addition to genetic factors, the ill persons 
biography and personality played a role in their current status as Alzheimer 
patients; stress, loss and a hard life were thought to bring on the disease.  
The findings indicate that the social context is important to subjective 
explanations of dementia and that the caregivers responses could be 
perceived as a wider societal way of coping in a world which does not 
seem to have space for everybody (Leibing, 1997, p 236).  It is possible 
that gender played a role with adherence to strict gender roles being 
observed in the sample - the women were mostly housewives and the men 
were primarily in the military - and the women with dementia more likely to 
be described as happy personality types.  The role and influence of gender 
is not clear however, as the explanations as to cause of the disease did not 
vary by gender.  Cohen (1995) found differences in perceptions and 
explanations of behavioural and personality changes in old age by the 
gender and class of the older person in question, but not by the respondent, 
although this was not the case for all  
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
conceptualizations of aberrant behaviour.  This ethnographic research was 
undertaken in four neighbourhoods in Banaras, a city in India with a high 
concentration of older people and pronounced stratification by social class.  
The finding that old voices in Banaras are heard primarily as extremes of 
power or abjection (Cohen, 1995, p 323) leads Cohen to conclude that 
what is needed to move forward in our understanding of the social 
construction of senility is a phenomenology of the voice, which means to 
take the act of listening seriously (p 320,  emphasis in original). 
Religion 
The first published personal account of living with dementia was 
written by an American evangelical priest named Robert Davis (1989) and 
could be said to have shaped the way that subsequent true stories of 
dementia have been framed and interpreted.  For example, his use of the 
word journey to describe his experience of dementia has been repeated in 
several accounts that followed (Crisp, 1995; MacKinlay, 1998; McGowin, 
1997; 1993); it figures prominently in the title - Each Persons Journey is 
Unique - of a recent article in which a number of these insiders tales of 
dementia are reviewed (Laurenhue, 2001); and Keady et al (1995) found 
from their in-home interviews with six people in the early stages of 
dementia that this is an apt description of the experience, adding that it is a 
journey largely into the unknown.  A related theme of spiritual redemption 
and acceptance of Gods will is echoed in many of the stories of dementia 
that followed Davis account (Bailey and Darling, 2001; Brennan, 1995; 
Cheston, 1996; Living Archive Project, 2001; MacKinlay, 1998; McGowin, 
1993; Phinney, 1998; Snyder, 1999; Zabbia, 1996) although none of these 
views of people with dementia demonstrate quite the same degree of 
fervency as Davis (1989), exemplified by the following quote: Perhaps the 
journey that takes me away from reality into the blackness of that place of 
the blank, emotionless, unmoving Alzheimers stare is in reality a journey 
into the richest depths of Gods love that few have experienced on earth (p 
137).  Davis decided to write his story in order to be the voice for all those 
victims who lost their ability to communicate even before they knew what 
was bringing on all these devastating changes (p 18).  He  
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
sees himself as a spokesperson for people with dementia, believing that he 
has the ability to personally express what the countless voiceless people are 
feeling (p 18).  At the end of the book, his belief in redemption and the 
healing power of heaven is so strong that his heart develops a strange 
homesickness for heaven (p 156) where he will be made complete and 
have new abilities [such as a new mind] that are wonderfully magnified (p 
155). 
Two examples from the subsequent literature evoke the influence of 
religious beliefs that was first evocatively described by Davis: Phinney 
(1998) reports that one of the women she interviewed in her study into the 
experiences of people with dementia felt that Alzheimers was Gods way 
of making her slow down (p 13) and Cheston (1996) reports that a 
participant in the psychotherapy group that he co-facilitated and videotaped 
stated I always say Gods on one shoulder and my husbands on the other 
shoulder, so youll never walk alone (p 595).  Interestingly, one of the first 
articles calling for research into the experiences of people with dementia 
concluded with the suggestion that future research should address the 
effect of strongly held religious or ideological beliefs, and of the presence of 
close affectionate relatives, or a confidante, on maintaining the self 
(Froggatt, 1988, p 136).  I am not aware of research that has taken up this 
call, although both of these themes are visible in a close reading of the 
literature published to date, as the examples above indicate, and interest in 
the self clearly abounds (Bender et al, 2000; Crisp, 1995; Jonas-Simpson, 
2001; Herskovits, 1995; Kitwood, 1990; 1997; Kitwood and Bredin, 1992; 
Mills, 1997; Sabat, 2001; 2000; 1998; Sabat and Harr, 1992; Small et al, 
1998; UBC Dementia Research Collaborative Working Group; Vittoria, 
1998). 
Whose voices are still silent/silenced  
As has been shown through this review, we have not heard from 
traditionally marginalized groups of people such as ethnic and racial 
minorities, lesbians/gays/ bisexuals, poor people, and uneducated people.  
The influence of race and ethnicity on subjective experiences of dementia 
is a relatively unexplored domain (Bowes and Wilkinson, 2001) although 
interest in race and ethnicity has been growing in the areas of risk and 
prevalence, assessment, service provision and caregiving  
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
(Anderson and Brownlie, 1997; Innes et al, 2001; Patel et al, 1998; Yeo and 
Gallagher-Thompson, 1996).  Lisa Snyder (1999) identified ethnicity as one 
of the bases upon which she diversified her sample, however it seems that 
she is using ethnicity as a polite word for race.  We are given hints 
through the authors narrative about the racial background of two of the 
respondents in a way that asks the reader to integrate their assumptions into 
the text.  We presume that Consuelo is Mexican-American as she has a 
Latin name, as does her husband Juan, and since she spent part of her 
childhood living in Mexico while commuting to school in her native United 
States.  We also surmise that Booker is African-American when we learn 
that his father was emancipated from slavery at age nine.  The meaning for 
Consuelo and Booker of these ascribed identity categories is not explored.  
No clues are given as to the ethnicity of the five other people with 
dementia that are profiled, leaving us to assume that they are all white and 
are not members of any ethnic minority groups.  The other research studies 
covered in this review report on factors such as gender, age, diagnosis, 
marital status and family status, past occupation and sometimes faith in 
terms of the composition of their samples.  The lack of information on 
race, ethnicity, sexual orientation and abilities leads us to assume firstly, 
that the participants are all white able-bodied heterosexuals from the 
majority ethnic community and secondly, that this information is not 
relevant for understanding subjective experiences.  Further, if the 
information is given at all, it is reported in a descriptive fashion; these 
identity constructs are not seen as worthy of investigation either holistically 
or separately.  We will not know whether and in what way an individuals 
unique and intersecting identity shapes their experience of dementia until 
we include these sorts of questions in our research design and ask them 
directly of the people whose lives we are studying. 
How experiences of dementia may differ if we look at intersecting 
identities - Striving for normalcy  
Another theme that runs through the literature and that is relevant to 
this project on dementia and intersectionality is that of striving to be 
normal, normal usually taken to mean pre-morbid or without dementia.  
Phinney (1998) found through interviewing five people with dementia  
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
and their spouses and observing them at home that two themes emerged: 
being unsure and trying to be normal.  Trying to be normal involved efforts 
to maintain continuity in their lives despite the presence of dementia and 
strategies were classified as self-monitoring, keeping an active mind, 
staying engaged and downplaying.  Phinney (1998) also discovered that her 
queries that were related to corporeal experiences of symptoms and disease 
were substantially less important to her interviewees than the broader 
experience of living with Alzheimers in terms of its meaning to them and 
their concerns (p 14). 
Comparing oneself to others in terms of normalcy and striving for 
normal status is prevalent in personal accounts of living with dementia and 
could reflect motivations for publicizing ones private troubles - yes to 
make it a public issue (Mills, 1959), but also to normalize the experience, to 
hold onto the status of oneself as a normal human being.  Christopher 
Young (2000, p 31) writes, I live a fairly normal life, yet it is not the 
same.  Normal, but different - this sentiment echoes the voices of disability 
and mental health activists.  Diana Friel McGowin (1993) takes her 
construction of self as normal a step further in establishing her past life as 
one of normalcy, perhaps to provide additional support for a continuation of 
this status.  She states at the outset of her book that her account is one of 
an average family with nothing more than lifes typical problems (p 11) 
and towards the end of the book enumerates several problems that she and 
other people with dementia encounter because we look okay (p 125).  
This theme of striving for normalcy is important to dementia and 
intersectionality for the simple reason that for marginalized peoples - older 
people, women, ethnic and racial minorities, poor people, 
lesbians/gays/bisexuals, disabled people, people with mental health 
problems - striving for normalcy is the stuff of daily life.  It is extraordinary 
for most oppressed people to be seen and treated as normal, to have a 
powerful voice, to be part of the dominant discourse, to be seen to have 
legitimate knowledge claims.  With this understanding, the importance of 
locating this type of research within an analytical framework of 
intersectionality/interlocking oppressions and of making links across 
experiences of oppression becomes clearer. 
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
Implications for future theory and research 
Through a review of dementia theorizing and the literature on 
subjective experiences of dementia, it has been shown that identity as a 
concept has not been addressed to any extent and certainly not within an 
understanding of how people are simultaneously situated and describe their 
experiences in terms of their intersecting identities.  This gap in the 
literature exists for three reasons:  (1) the dominant voices telling their 
stories of dementia do not, by and large, include marginalized people - 
ethnic and racial minorities, older people, lesbians/gays/ bisexuals, 
disabled people, poor people, uneducated or minimally educated people  
who may conceptualize their experiences differently than the mainstream 
voices; (2) when identity constructs i.e. gender, age and class are referred 
to, they usually are not problematized or seen as salient concepts in 
furthering our understanding of experiences of dementia; and (3) the 
striving for normalcy theme in the dominant discourse does not leave space 
for those who were likely concerned about their full human rights 
before/apart from their diagnosis of dementia, those who were striving 
already.  As a starting point, future dementia theorizing and research needs 
to move beyond a limited focus on the self/person, towards an awareness of 
and investigation into identity.  The next step would be to build in an 
understanding of intersectionality/interlocking oppressions  meaning an 
analysis of how we are all differentially located on axes of both oppression 
and privilege and how this is determined by where we are situated and 
situate ourselves in terms of our own intersecting identities.  Only then do 
we have the possibility of unearthing the subjugated knowledges that lie 
buried under the dominant dementia discourse - le savoir des gens 
(Foucault, 1994, p 41) - that should serve as our guide to and through this 
realm of human experience. 
References 
ALZHEIMER SOCIETY OF TORONTO.  Hearing their stories: The 
experiences of individuals with Alzheimer Disease.  Alert n.18, v.3, p.1-2, 
2000. 
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
ANDERSON, Irene and BROWNLIE, Julie.  A neglected problem: 
minority ethnic elders with dementia in BOWES, Alison and SIMS, 
Duncan. (eds.).  Perspectives on Welfare: The Experiences of Minority 
Ethnic Groups in Scotland.  Aldershot, Ashgate, 1997.   
ANDERSEN, Margaret and COLLINS, Patricia.  Race, Class, and Gender: 
An Anthology, 2nd edition.  Belmont, CA, Wadsworth, 1995.    
ASHLEY, Peter.  Now You See It, Now You Dont.  
Http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/have/personal/hallucinations.html.  2001.  
Accessed on Nov 19, 2001. 
BAILEY, Sharon and DARLING, Julia.  Tangles and Starbursts:  Living 
with Dementia.  North Shields, Alzheimers Society North Tyneside 
Branch, 2001.   
BANNERJI, Himani.  Thinking Through: Essays on Feminism, Marxism, 
and Anti-Racism.  Toronto, Womens Press, 1995. 
BARTLETT, Ruth.  Dementia as a disability: Can we learn from disability 
studies and theory?  Journal of Dementia Care, v.8, no.5, p.33-36, 2000.  
BECKER, Howard. Outsiders: Studies in the Sociology of Deviance.  New 
York: Free Press. (1963).   
BENDER, Mike, SNELLING, Emma and WOOD, J.  The presentation of 
self by people diagnosed as having dementia.  PSIGE Newsletter, v.71, 
p.22-32, 2000. 
BERGER, Peter and LUCKMANN, Thomas.  The Social Construction of 
Reality.  Middlesex, Penguin Books, 1966. 
BINNEY, Elizabeth and SWAN, James.  The political economy of mental 
health care for the elderly in MINKLER, Meredith and ESTES, Carroll. 
(eds.). Critical Perspectives on Aging: The Political and Moral Economy of 
Growing Old, Amityville, Baywood, 1991. 
BISHOP, Anne.  Becoming an Ally: Breaking the Cycle of Oppression.  
Halifax, Fernwood Publishing, 1994.  
BODEN, Christine.  Who Will I Be When I Die.  Sydney, NSW, 
HarperCollins, 1998. 
BOND, John.  The medicalization of dementia.  Journal of Aging Studies, 
v.6, p.397-403, 1992. 
BOND, John and CORNER, Lynne.  Researching dementia: Are there 
unique methodological challenges for health services research?  Ageing and 
Society, v.21, p.95-116, 2001. 
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
BOOTH, Debbie.  Supporting Tom.  In Sharing the Experience of 
Supporting People with Dementia.  Extract posted on-line at 
Http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/have/personal/tomsstory.html.  2001.  
Accessed Nov 19, 2001 
BOWES, Alison and WILKINSON, Heather.  Researching the views and 
experiences of South Asian people with dementia in TESTER, Susan, 
ARCHIBALD, Carole, ROWLINGS, Cherry and TURNER, Steve. (eds.). 
Quality in Later Life: Rights, Rhetoric and Reality: Proceedings of the 
British Society of Gerontology 30th Annual Conference.  University of 
Stirling, Stirling, 2001.     
BRENNAN, Tim.  Courage in the face of adversity.  International Forum 
on Early Dementia, v.1, no.4, p.1-4, 1995.   
CARNIOL, Ben.  Case Critical: Challenging Social Services in Canada, 4th 
edition.    Toronto, Between the Lines, 2000. 
CHATTERJI, Roma.  An ethnography of dementia: A case study of an 
Alzheimers Disease patient in the Netherlands.  Culture, Medicine and 
Psychiatry, v.22, p.355-382, 1998. 
CHESTON, Rik.  Stories and metaphors: Talking about the past in a 
Psychotherapy group for people with dementia.  Ageing and Society, v.16, 
p. 579-602, 1996. 
CHESTON, Rik and BENDER, Mike.  Understanding Dementia: The Man 
with the Worried Eyes.  London, Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 2000. 
COHEN, Lawrence.  No Aging in India: Alzheimers, the Bad Family, and 
Other Modern Things.  Berkeley, University of California Press, 1998.   
COHEN, Lawrence.  Toward an Anthropology of senility: Anger, 
weakness, and Alzheimers in Banaras, India.  Medical Anthropology 
Quarterly v.9, no.3, p.314-334, 1995.   
COTRELL, Victoria and LEIN, Laura.  Awareness and denial in the 
Alzheimers Disease victim.  Journal of Gerontological Social Work, v.19, 
no.3/4, p.115-132, 1993. 
COTRELL, Victoria and SCHULZ, Richard.  The perspective of the 
person with Alzheimers Disease: A neglected dimension of dementia 
research.  The Gerontologist, v.33, no.2, p.205-211, 1993.   
CRENSHAW, Kimberl.  Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity 
politics, and violence against women of colour in FINEMAN, Martha 
Albertson and MYKITIUK, Rixanne. (eds.).  The Public Nature of Private 
Violence, New York, Routledge, 1994.    
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
CRENSHAW, Kimberl.  Demarginalizing the intersection of race and 
sex: A Black Feminist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist 
theory and antiracist politics.  University of Chicago Legal Forum, 1989. 
CRISP, Jane.  Making sense of the stories that people with Alzheimers 
tell: A journey with my mother.  Nursing Inquiry, v.2, p.133-140, 1995.     
DAVIS, Robert.  My Journey into Alzheimers Disease.  Bucks, Scripture 
Press Ltd, 1989.  
DELGADO, Richard.  Rodrigos sixth chronicle: Intersections, essences, 
and the dilemma of social reform in DELGADO, Richard.  (ed.). Critical 
Race Theory: The Cutting Edge, Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 
1995.   
DILLMANN, Rob.  Alzheimer Disease: Epistemological lessons from 
History? in WHITEHOUSE, Peter, MAURER, K. and BALLENGER, J.  
(eds.). Concepts of Alzheimer Disease: Biological, Clinical and Cultural 
Perspectives.  Baltimore, The John Hopkins University Press, 2000. 
DOMINELLI, Lena.  Anti-Racist Social Work: A Challenge for White 
Practitioners and Educators.  Hampshire, Macmillan Press Ltd, 1997. 
DOWNS, Murna.  Dementia in a socio-cultural context: An idea whose 
time has come.  Ageing and Society, v.20, p.369-275, 2000. 
DOWNS, Murna.  The emergence of the person in dementia research.  
Ageing and Society, v.17, p.597-607, 1997. 
DRESSEL, Paula.  Gender, race, and class: Beyond the feminization of 
poverty in later life in MINKLER, Meredith and ESTES, Carroll.  (eds.). 
Critical Perspectives on Aging: The Political and Moral Economy of 
Growing Old.  Amityville, Baywood, 1991.  
DRESSEL, Paula, MINKLER, Meredith and YEN, Irene.  Gender, race, 
class, and aging: Advances and opportunities.  International Journal of 
Health Services, no.27, v.4, p.579-600, 1997.  
ESTES, Carroll.  Theoretical perspectives on old age policy: A critique 
and a proposal.  Paper presented at the World Congress of Gerontology, 
Vancouver, Canada, July 1-6, 2001. 
_____.  The Ageing Enterprise.  San Francisco, Jossey-Bass, 1979. 
ESTES, Carroll and BINNEY, Elizabeth.  The biomedicalization of aging: 
Dangers and dilemmas in MINKLER, Meredith and ESTES, Carroll.  
(eds.). Critical Perspectives on Aging: The Political and Moral Economy of 
Growing Old, Amityville, Baywood, 1991.    
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
FOUCAULT, Michel.  Genealogy and social criticism in SEIDMAN, 
Steven. (ed.). The Postmodern Turn: New Perspectives on Social Theory, 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1994.       
_____.  The Birth of the Clinic.  New York, Vintage, 1975.  
_____.  Madness and Civilization: A History of Insanity in the Age of 
Reason.  New York, Random House, 1965.  
FOX, Peter.  From senility to Alzheimers Disease.  Millbank Memorial 
Fund Quarterly, v.67, no.1, p.58-102, 1989. 
FREIRE, Paolo.  Pedagogy of the Oppressed, 30th anniversary edition.  New 
York, Continuum, 2001.   
FROGGATT, Alison.  Self-awareness in early dementia in GEARING, 
Brian, JOHNSON, Malcolm and HELLER, Tom. (eds.). Mental Health 
Problems in Old Age: A Reader.  Chinchester, John Wiley and Sons, 1988.     
GILLIES, Brenda.  The experience of living through dementia.  
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, v.16, no.1, p.111-112, 2001. 
GILLIES, Brenda.  The experience of dementia.  Journal of Dementia 
Care, v.5, p.26, 1997. 
GOFFMAN, Erving.  Stigma: Notes on the Management of Spoiled 
Identity.  New York, Simon & Schuster, 1963.  
GOLDSMITH, Malcolm.  Hearing the Voice of People with Dementia: 
Opportunities and Obstacles.  London, Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 1996.   
GUBRIUM, Jaber.  Oldtimers and Alzheimers: The Descriptive 
Organization of Senility.  Greenwich, JAI Press, 1986.  
GWILLIAM, Clair and GILLIARD, Jane.  Dementia and the social model 
of disability.  Journal of Dementia Care, Jan/Feb, p.14-15, 1996. 
HARDING, Nancy and PALFREY, Colin.  The Social Construction of 
Dementia: Confused Professionals?  London, Jessica Kingsley Publishers, 
1997.     
HENDERSON, Cary Smith.  Partial View:  An Alzheimers Journal.  
Dallas, Southern Methodist University Press, 1998.  
HERSKOVITS, Elizabeth.  Struggling over subjectivity: Debates about the 
self and Alzheimers Disease.  Medical Anthropology Quarterly, v.9, 
no.2, p.146-164, 1995. 
HOLSTEIN, Martha.  Aging, culture, and the framing of Alzheimer 
Disease in WHITEHOUSE, Peter, MAURER, K. and BALLENGER, J.  
(eds.).  Concepts of Alzheimer Disease: Biological, Clinical and Cultural 
Perspectives.  Baltimore, The John Hopkins University Press, 2000. 
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
HOLSTEIN, Martha.  Ethics and Alzheimers Disease: Widening the 
lens.  The Journal of Clinical Ethics, v.9, no.1, p.13-22, 1998.   
INNES, Anthea, ASHRAF, Fahmida, ISMAIL, Latifa and GALLAGHER, 
Tricia.   Dementia, ethnicity and family caregiving : Challenges and 
opportunities in TESTER, Susan, ARCHIBALD, Carole, ROWLINGS, 
Cherry and TURNER, Steve. (eds.). Quality in Later Life: Rights, Rhetoric 
and Reality: Proceedings of the British Society of Gerontology 30th Annual 
Conference, 2001.     
JONAS-SIMPSON, Christine.  From silence to voice: Knowledge, values, 
and beliefs guiding healthcare practices with persons living with dementia.  
Nursing Science Quarterly, v.14, no.4, p.304-310, 2001. 
KEADY, John, NOLAN, Mike and GILLIARD, Jane.  Listen to the voices 
of experience.  Journal of Dementia Care, v.3, no.3, p.15-17, 1995. 
KILLICK, John and CORDONNIER, Carl.  Openings: Dementia Poems 
and Photographs.  London, Hawker Publications, 2000. 
KILLICK, John.   A far fetch (conversations with Alice).  Changes, v.14, 
v.4, p. 289-294, 1996.  
KITWOOD, Tom.  Dementia Reconsidered: The Person Comes First.  
Buckingham, Open University Press, 1997a. 
KITWOOD, Tom.  The concept of personhood and its relevance for a new 
culture of dementia care in MIESEN, Bre and JONES, Gemma.  (eds.). 
Care-Giving in Dementia: Research and Applications, Volume 2, 1997b. 
KITWOOD, Tom.  The dialectics of dementia: With particular reference to 
Alzheimers Disease.  Ageing and Society, v.10, p.177-196, 1990. 
KITWOOD, Tom and BREDIN, Kathleen.  Towards a theory of dementia 
care: Person-hood and well-being.  Ageing and Society, v.12, p.269-287, 
1992. 
LABARGE, Emily, VON DRAS, Dean and WINGBERMUEHLE, Cheryl.  
An analysis of themes and feelings from a support group for people with 
Alzheimers Disease.  Psychotherapy, v.35, no.4, p.537-544, 1998.  
LAURENHUE, Kathy.  Each persons journey is unique.  Alzheimers 
Care Quarterly, v.2, no.2, p.79-83, 2001.  
LEIBING, Annette.  Ideology and biology: Some remarks on Alzheimers 
Disease, genes, and risk in different populations.  Paper submitted for 
publication, 2001.  
LEIBING, Annette.  Narrowing worlds: On Alzheimers Disease and 
biography in Brazil in LEIBING, Annette. (ed.). The Medical 
Anthropologies in Brazil, Berlin, VWB, 1997.    
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
LEMERT, Edwin.  Human Deviance, Social Problems and Social Control.  
Englewood Cliffs, Prentice Hall, 1972. 
LIVING ARCHIVE PROJECT, The.  Listen to Me.  Milton Keynes, Living 
Archive Press, 2001. 
LYMAN, Karen.  Living with Alzheimers Disease: The creation of 
meaning among persons with dementia.  The Journal of Clinical Ethics, v. 
9, no.1, p.49-57, 1998.    
LYMAN, Karen.  Bringing the social back in: A critique of the 
biomedicalization of dementia.  The Gerontologist, v.29, no.5, p.597-605, 
1989.   
MACEDO, Donaldo.  Introduction in FREIRE, Paolo.  Pedagogy of the 
Oppressed,  30th annniversary edition. New York, Continuum, 2001. 
MCGOWIN, Diana Friel.  Unplanned journey in Read, J. and Reynolds, 
J. (eds.). Speaking Our Minds: An Anthology of Personal Experiences of 
Mental Distress and Its Consequences.  London, Macmillan Press, 1997. 
MCGOWIN, Diana Friel.  Living in the Labyrinth: A Personal Journey 
Through the Maze of Alzheimers.  San Francisco, Elder Books, 1993.   
MCKINLAY, Anthea.  Inside - Out: A Journey with Dementia.  Isle of 
Bute, Charcoal Press, 1998. 
MCMULLIN, Julie.  Diversity and the state of sociological aging theory.  
The Gerontologist, v.40, no.5, p.517-530, 2000. 
MILLS, Charles Wright.  The Sociological Imagination.  New York, 
Oxford University Press, 1959.  
MILLS, Marie.  Narrative identity and dementia: A study of emotion and 
narrative in older people with dementia.  Ageing and Society, v.17, p.673-
698, 1997. 
MULLALY, Bob.  Structural Social Work: Ideology, Theory, and Practice, 
2nd edition.  Toronto, Oxford University Press, 1997. 
OLIVER, Michael.  Understanding Disability: From Theory to Practice.  
Hampshire, Palgrave, 1996. 
OLIVER, Michael.  The Politics of Disablement.  London, Macmillan 
Education, 1990. 
PATEL, Naina, MIRZA, Naheed, LINDBLAD, Peter, AMSTRUP, Kirsten 
and SAMAOLI, Omar.  Dementia and Minority Ethnic Older People: 
Managing Care in the UK, Denmark and France.  Lyme Regis, Russell 
House Publishing, 1998.   
PAULINE and MICA.  Pearls of wisdom from a mother and daughter.  
International Forum on Early Dementia, v.2, no.1, p.6-8, 1996. 
Appendix A 
Published in Leibing, A. & L. Scheinkman (eds.).  (2002).  The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different approaches and contexts, pp. 231-264. Rio 
de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
PHAIR, Lynne and GOOD, Valerie.  Dementia: A Positive Approach.  
London, Scutari Press, 1995. 
PHINNEY, Alison.  Living with dementia from the patients perspective.  
Journal of Gerontological Nursing, v.24, no.6, p.8-15, 1998. 
PILGRIM, David and ROGERS, Anne.  A Sociology of Mental Health and 
Illness, 2nd edition.  Buckingham, Open University Press, 1999. 
PROCTOR, Gillian.  Listening to older women with dementia: 
Relationships, voices and power.  Disability and Society, v.16, n.3, p.361-
376, 2001. 
POOL, Jackie.  Building a bridge from philosophy to practice.  Journal of 
Dementia Care, v.8, n.5, p.28-30, 2000. 
ROBERTSON, Anne.  The politics of Alzheimers Disease: A case study 
in apocalyptic demography.  International Journal of Health Services, v.20, 
n.3, p.429-442, 1990. 
ROSE, Larry.  Show me the Way to Go Home.  Forest Knolls, CA, Elder 
Books, 1996. 
SABAT, Steven.  The Experience of Alzheimers Disease:  Life Through a 
Tangled Veil.  Oxford, Blackwell Publishers, 2001. 
SABAT, Steven.  Matters of the heart and mind: Negotiating and assessing 
personhood and dignity among elderly Canadians with dementia.  On-line 
discussion paper at http://www.anso.ubc.ca/graham/sabat2.html.  2000.  
Accessed Nov 19, 2001. 
SABAT, Steven.  Voices of Alzheimer Disease sufferers: A call for 
treatment based on personhood.  The Journal of Clinical Ethics, v.9, n.1, 
p.35-48, 1998. 
SABAT, Steven and HARR, Rom.  The construction and reconstruction 
of self in Alzheimers Disease.  Ageing and Society, v.12, n.4, p. 443-461, 
1992. 
SAYCE, Liz.  From Psychiatric Patient to Citizen: Overcoming 
Discrimination and Social Exclusion.  London, Macmillan Press, 2000. 
SHELIA.  What its like to live with Alzheimers.  Alzheimers Disease 
International - Global Perspective, v.10, n.2, p.3, 2000. 
SINASON, Valerie.  Chapter 4: The man who was losing his brain in 
Mental Handicap and the Human Condition.  London, Free Association 
 Books, 1992. 
SIXSMITH, Andrew, STILWELL, John and COPELAND, John.  
Rementia: Challenging the limits of dementia care.  International 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, v.8, n.12, p.993-1000, 1993. 
*Doctoral student in the Department of Applied Social Science, University 
of Stirling, Scotland 
SMALL, Jeff, GELDART, Kathy, GUTMAN, Gloria.  and SCOTT, Mary 
Ann. Clarke.  The discourse of self in dementia.  Ageing and Society, 
v.18, p.291-316, 1998. 
SNYDER, Lisa.  The lived experience of Alzheimers: Understanding the 
feelings and subjective accounts of persons with the disease.  Alzheimers 
Care Quarterly, v.2, n.2, p.8-22, 2001. 
SNYDER, Lisa.  Speaking Our Minds: Personal Reflections from 
Individuals with Alzheimers.  New York, W.H. Freeman and Company, 
1999. 
STASIULIS, Daiva.  Theorizing connections: Gender, race, ethnicity, and 
class in  LI, P. (ed.). Race and Ethnic Relations in Canada.  Toronto, 
Oxford University Press, 1990. 
SUTTON, Laura.  What It Is To Lose Ones Mind.  Paper presented at 
the 10th International Conference of Alzheimers Disease International, 
Edinburgh, Scotland, 21-23 September, 1994. 
SZASZ, Thomas.  Mental illness is still a myth.  Society, v.31, n.4, p.34-
39, 1994.    
THOMPSON, Neil.  Anti-Discriminatory Practice, 3rd edition.  Houndmills,  
Palgrave, 2001. 
TRAPHAGAN, John.  Taming Oblivion: Aging Bodies and the Fear of 
Senility in Japan.  Albany, State University of New York Press, 2000. 
UBC DEMENTIA RESEARCH COLLABORATIVE WORKING 
GROUP.  Matters of the Heart and Mind: Negotiating and Assessing 
Personhood and Dignity Among Elderly Canadians with Dementia.  On-line 
discussion paper at  http://www.anso.ubc.ca/graham/group.html.  2000.  
Accessed Nov 19, 2001.  
VINCENT, John.  Inequality and Old Age.  London, UCL Press, 1995. 
VITTORIA, Anne.  Preserving selves: Identity work and dementia.  
Research on Aging, v.20, n.1, p.91-136, 1998. 
YEO, Gwen and GALLAGHER-THOMPSON, Dolores. (eds.).  Ethnicity 
and the Dementias.  Washington, Taylor & Francis, 1996. 
YOUNG, Christopher.  Descent into Alzheimers.  Macleans, March 13, 
p.30-31, 2000. 
ZABBIA, Kim Howes.  Painted Diaries: A Mother and Daughters  
Experience Through Alzheimers.  Minneapolis, Fairview Press, 1996. 
Appendix B 
How does who you are as a person  
shape living with memory problems? 
A research project by Wendy Hulko, MSW, PhD Candidate 
University of Stirling, St. Josephs Health Centre, Alzheimer Society of Ontario 
Gender:  
 assigned at birth 
 based on our sex parts 
 man or woman   
Race: 
 label others give to us 
 based on our physical appearance (mainly skin 
color) 
 Black, white, Asian, mixed, Aboriginal    
Ethnicity: 
 self-chosen 
 group of people we identify with or feel part of 
 based on shared clothing, dress, food, religion, 
language, birthplace, etc. 
Class: 
 determined by self and others 
 based on education, occupation, income, access 
to status and resources, etc. 
 lower or working class, middle or managerial 
class, upper or professional class  
Appendix C  
Hulko, W1. (2004) Social science perspectives on dementia research: intersectionality.  
In A. Innes, C. Archibald and C. Murphy (eds) Dementia and Social Inclusion. London; 
Jessica Kingsley Publishers. 
Introduction 
The aims of this chapter are to introduce the concept of intersectionality, highlight 
its relevance for social science research on dementia, and address methodological 
issues arising from a grounded theory study of dementia and intersectionality.  This 
chapter is based on research that was in progress at the time of writing; and that was 
concerned with subjective experiences of dementia in later life, particularly the influence 
of ones social location on this life process.  Explorations of the subjective realm of 
dementia are fairly recent (see Braudy Harris 2002; Downs 1997; Proctor 2001; 
Wilkinson 2002; Woods 2001), despite researchers having highlighted this gap well over 
a decade ago (Cotrell and Schulz 1993; Froggatt 1988; Lyman 1989).  Moreover, this 
body of research is incomplete, as minimal attention has been paid to the influence of 
identity categories such as age, class, gender, race2, and ethnicity (Disman 1991; 
Downs 2000; Hulko 2002).  Socio-cultural factors such as ones gender, racial, ethnic, 
and class identity impact on ones world view and life course and are thus an important 
consideration in seeking to understand what it is like to live with dementia. 
 Despite the growing voices of people living with dementia, these have largely 
excluded the input and participation of people who belong to traditionally marginalised 
groups (Hulko 2002).  We will not know whether and in what way an individuals unique, 
complex, and intersecting identity shapes their experience of dementia until we include 
these questions in our research and ask them directly of the people whose lives we are 
studying.  Moving away from selfhood and personhood, into the realm of identity, calls 
for an analysis of intersectionality - a metaphor for the entanglement and interaction of 
multiple and complex identity categories.  If we are to move beyond narrow conceptions 
of personhood that are now claiming space alongside biomedical views of dementia and 
for which credit is due Tom Kitwood and his colleagues striving towards a new culture 
of dementia care (see Kitwood 1997;1990; Kitwood and Benson 1995; Kitwood and 
Bredin 1992), we must expand the epistemological and ontological bases of dementia 
research, embrace lessons from parallel knowledge traditions, and develop theory that 
is grounded in the voices of people experiencing this phenomenon.  This chapter 
introduces a study that was designed to achieve these aims and uses it as a case study 
to highlight emerging issues for social science research in dementia.  After an 
introduction to the concept of intersectionality, I present findings from the literature 
related to dementia and intersectionality, focusing on dementia theorising, subjective 
experiences of dementia, identity factors, and social location.  I then describe the 
research project, discuss methodological issues that have arisen, and conclude with 
1 Wendy Hulko is a PhD Candidate in the Department of Applied Social Science at the University of 
Stirling.  Her research is supported by a University of Stirling departmental studentship, an Overseas 
Research Student award, and a University of Stirling Alumni Association small project grant.     
2 I use race in quotation marks and racialized people (Fanon 1963) to denote that I subscribe to the view 
that race is socially constructed (see Haney Lpez 1995).  Moreover, it should remain an important focus 
of sociological analysis as long as the attributes ascribed to different races and the resulting hierarchies 
remain in existence, shaping our experiences of privilege and oppression (see Crenshaw Williams 1994). 
Appendix C  
comments about the potential implications of a grounded theory of dementia and 
intersectionality, and key questions that have arisen from the study. 
Intersectionality  Meaning and use of this concept 
As I have discussed elsewhere (Hulko 2002), intersectionality as a theoretical 
concept and analytical perspective has been used by scholars and activists in critical 
legal theory, feminism, anti-racism, and more recently, social work and critical 
gerontology.  Intersectionality is used to point out the reality that we are all holistic 
beings, inhabiting multiple and complex identities that should not be teased apart into 
separate units of analysis (Anderson and Hill Collins 2001; Bannerji 1995; Brah 2001; 
Dressel, Minkler, and Yen 1997; Lorde 2001; Woodward 1997).  Further, we each 
possess different degrees of oppression and privilege based on our relative positioning 
along axes of interlocking systems of oppression, such as racism, classism, sexism, 
ethnocentrism, and ageism.   Where each of us lies in relation to the center and the 
margin (hooks 2000) - our social location - is determined by our identities, which are 
necessarily intersectional.  Intersectionality is related to key sociological concepts such 
as identity, social location, subjectivity, and the self, all of which have been a focus of 
intense interest within the dementia field in recent years.  There are two approaches to 
the study of identity/subjectivity, with one approach seeing identity as fixed and 
transhistorical (essentialism) and the other treating identity as fluid and contingent 
(Woodward 1997).  This study takes the latter approach, using the terms identity and 
subjectivity interchangeably, recognizing that the former has a political meaning 
(Bannerji 1995) while the latter denotes status as a subject and signifies the coming to 
voice of oppressed peoples (Mama 1995). 
Intersectionality and its corollary interlocking oppressions have been applied to 
human rights claims/discrimination cases (OHRC 2002) in the critical race theory 
tradition (Crenshaw Williams 1994; 1989; Delgado 1995; Delgado and Stefancic 2001).  
However, this has not been accompanied by empirical research to date.  
Intersectionality may feel right and make sense intuitively as a way of thinking about our 
multiple selves, and may appear theoretically and politically attractive as it leads us 
away from fruitless attempts to find the ultimate oppression to which all others can be 
reduced.  However, it needs to be bolstered by empirical research, a task made 
daunting by the fact that it is a very difficult concept to operationalise, and efforts to do 
so are rarely discussed (see Hulko 2003).  Nevertheless, it represents an important 
development in thinking about identity and difference and could offer valuable insights 
for dementia research.   
Knowledge to date about dementia theorising, subjective experiences, identity, and 
social location 
 Given the dearth of literature specifically related to the topic of dementia and 
intersectionality, the literature review that I undertook for this project involved extensive 
reading in the substantive field of dementia, as well as sampling of material from related 
disciplines and parallel knowledge fields.  I sought out knowledge about subjective 
experiences of dementia, as well as concepts, evidence, and theories that could 
potentially assist in the development of a grounded theory of dementia and 
intersectionality.  Since I have detailed elsewhere my findings related to dementia 
Appendix C  
theorising and subjective experiences of dementia (Hulko 2002), I will summarize this 
material and then give an overview of the literature related to identity and social 
location. 
 Dementia theorising has been largely ontological in nature, focused on what 
dementia is or how it should be viewed and thus the question of how dementia is 
experienced has been largely overlooked (Hulko 2002).  The absence of 
phenomenological perspectives on dementia is an acknowledged gap in the literature 
and accounts for my attention to ontological theories of dementia in this review.  The 
divergent and overlapping dementia theories that have been put forth to date see 
dementia as: (1) a brain disease; (2) normal ageing; (3) a psycho-neurological 
condition; (4) a disability; (5) a mental health problem; and (6) a social construction.  
While this proliferation of theories is indicative of growing disaffection with the medical 
model (Bond 1990; Estes and Binney 1991; Lyman 1989; Robertson 1990), chiefly for 
its inability to adequately explain this phenomenon called dementia (see Leibing 2002), 
theories which address the social and environmental context of dementia have not been 
free of some of the limitations of their predecessors.  The brain disease and normal 
ageing theories were the first explanatory theories of dementia put forth and have yet to 
be reconciled with one another, despite the fact that both are rooted in the bio-medical 
paradigm.  The psychological and sociological theories that followed did not alter the 
ontological course of dementia theorising in that they are not grounded in the voices 
and experiences of people living with dementia, nor do they take into consideration 
identity factors and social location.  It appears that the next step should be to try to 
develop theory through the active engagement of people with dementia themselves, 
taking into consideration their socio-cultural context (Downs 2000).  
 In my search for information on subjective experiences of dementia, I reviewed 
personal accounts, narratives produced with the involvement of a supportive other, 
qualitative research studies, and stories posted on Web sites or available in hard copy 
for the purpose of raising public awareness (see Hulko, 2002).  I looked closely at who 
is telling these stories of dementia; what these stories tell; and whose voices are still 
silent/silenced.  Then I asked myself how untold experiences might differ.  I found that 
the typical person with dementia in these published accounts was a middle-aged (40 to 
60 years old), well-educated, white, married professional in the early stages of 
dementia, with strong religious or ideological beliefs, and a supportive family.  The 
voices that are missing in the dementia literature are those of minority ethnic and 
racialised people, poor people, uneducated or minimally educated people, and 
lesbian/gay/bisexual/two-spirited people; and while the voices of older and disabled 
people do appear, this is certainly not a dominant feature.  Identity was rarely treated as 
a salient variable in the literature and was certainly not viewed as multiple, complex, 
and simultaneously expressed.  When identity categories, such as age, gender, and 
ethnicity were mentioned at all, it was in a descriptive fashion in that any influence these 
factors might have on subjective experiences was not analysed.  Yet despite this 
omission, through a close reading of the texts, I was able to discern class, gender, 
religion, and age effects in the views and stories told by people living with dementia and 
found evidence of intersectional thinking on the part of the respondents.  With regards 
to how untold stories might differ, a predominant theme in the literature was that of 
striving for normalcy, with normal being used to refer to life before/without dementia.  
Appendix C  
This theme does not leave space for those who might have been striving for normalcy 
prior to a diagnosis of dementia or who reject societal definitions of normalcy.  
 From reviewing the literature on meanings of health, illness, and disability cross-
culturally; identity and oppression; race/ethnicity and dementia; class, gender, and 
dementia; and inequalities in later life, I garnered further insights that shaped this study.  
For example, conceptions of illness show similarities and differences across and within 
cultures and certain concepts are helpful to understanding how individuals make 
meaning of their experiences, including illness narratives (Kleinman 1988) and 
exploratory maps (Williams and Healy 2001).  While insiders perspectives such as 
these are valuable, they should be critically analysed, considering the temporal and 
socio-cultural context in which the teller lives and the tale is told.  Researchers in turn 
need to design studies in a way that connections can be made between subjective 
meaning making (individual experiences) and the social forces that both support and 
impede these efforts (social structures), a longstanding problematic in sociology (Smith 
1987).   
Research on race/ethnicity to date has focused on: comparative risk, incidence 
and prevalence rates for various racialised groups; challenges in assessment and 
diagnosis in a multicultural context; provision of services to minority ethnic and 
racialised people with dementia and their caregivers; caregiving amongst minority ethnic 
and racialised groups; and the meanings of dementia for certain minority ethnic and 
racialised groups.  There is an obvious gap in that lived experiences of dementia have 
not been a concern for researchers interested in race/ethnicity and dementia and, 
interestingly, many racial/ethnic differences fall away when education is controlled for 
(Yeo 2001), a finding which indicates the entangled nature of identity categories.  
Another factor that may prove to be the unspoken, yet most salient, variable in 
dementia research is class, and it may be that people belonging to the upper class are 
more fearful of dementia (Hellebrandt 1980) because it represents more significant 
losses in terms of their social roles, while those from the lower class are accustomed to 
dealing with adversity and dementia represents one more challenge to overcome.  
Gender may prove to be significant in terms of adherence to or liberation from gendered 
identities in the context of dementia and the ways in which gender relations mediate 
experiences of dementia for both men and women.   It may be difficult, however, to 
ascertain mens views of the influence of their gender as it seems that they are not 
accustomed to thinking of themselves in this way, unlike women who are said to 
possess epistemic privilege (Whitehead 2001).  This is akin to Du Bois theory of double 
consciousness (1953) which postulates that oppressed people, being conscious of the 
dynamics of privilege and oppression and their own relative positioning, are able to see 
both the privilege of their oppressors and the way that efforts to sustain that privilege 
result in their own oppression.  Thus, it may be unfamiliar for white people to talk about 
the effect of their race on their experiences, as most do not recognize their whiteness 
as having an influence, particularly in terms of privilege.   
It appears that social location has an influence in terms of peoples 
conceptualisations of their experiences and that privilege and oppression need to be 
considered as dialectical, rather than oppositional (Bishop 2002; Freire 2001).  This 
means that we need to interrogate privilege as well as oppression, as social life is 
relational and it is the same power dynamics shaping privilege as oppression, including 
Appendix C  
the relative amount we each hold and the meaning this has for our life experiences 
(Calasanti 1996).  Several critical gerontologists note the importance of looking at forms 
of oppression as interacting with one another in complex ways; and as rooted in 
processes of domination and subordination; plus viewing marginalised peoples as 
having strengths; and as actively resisting oppression (Browne 1995; Blakemore 1989; 
Calasanti 1996; Calasanti and Slevin 2001; Dressel 1991; Ginn and Arber 1995; 
Gonyea 1994; Levy 1988; McMullin 2000; Minkler 1996; Victor 1991; Vincent 1995).  A 
key concern arising from the literature on intersectionality/interlocking oppressions, 
however, is that this is a difficult concept to operationalise and thus, there is a lack of 
empirical research to substantiate all the theorising and personal reflections.  Trying to 
address this gap clearly requires creativity and a willingness to take chances with ones 
research design and data collection tools, particularly interview questions, along with 
reflexivity in the field to follow possible leads, weave together threads of meaning, and 
make connections between individual experiences and social structures.  These are all 
lessons that apply to this project on dementia and intersectionality, which I will describe 
in the next section. 
Grounded theory research into subjective experiences of dementia and intersectionality 
 It became apparent after a thorough review of the literature that this project could 
not be anything but exploratory in nature and qualitative in design, and that grounded 
theory methods (Charmaz 2000; Glaser 2001; Glaser and Strauss 1967; Strauss and 
Corbin 1998) could best address the research question - what are the relationships 
between older peoples experiences of dementia and the intersections of race, 
ethnicity, class, and gender.  The research aims, which reflect the feminist, critical 
gerontology, and anti-oppressive social work stance I brought to this project, were: 
 To explore older peoples experiences of living with a cognitive impairment, taking 
account of race, ethnicity, class, gender and their intersections and the dynamics of 
privilege and oppression 
 To develop a substantive theory of older peoples experiences of dementia and a 
formal theory of dementia and intersectionality, grounded in the voices and 
(inter)actions of older people with dementia 
 To critically reflect on the research process, particularly the roles and effects on the 
researcher, the researched and the emerging theory, and the applicability and 
effectiveness of anti-oppressive research methods 
 Using grounded theory meant that the research design would be emergent and 
this would require me to be reflective, reflexive, and able to tolerate a degree of 
uncertainty.  For example, the size and composition of the sample and the interview 
questions evolved throughout the course of the project, based on the results of the 
simultaneous collection and analysis of data and my reflections on the effectiveness of 
the methods I was using.  The other grounded theory strategies I used were:  two step 
data coding process; comparative methods; memo writing to construct conceptual 
analyses; sampling to refine emerging theoretical ideas; and integration of the 
theoretical framework (Charmaz 2000, p.510-511).  I was determined that this would 
apply from conception through completion in the classic grounded theory tradition 
(Glaser and Strauss 1967) and wanted to avoid a mistake noted in the literature (Glaser 
2001; Strauss and Corbin 1994) whereby researchers claimed to have used a grounded 
Appendix C  
theory approach when it is little more than inductive analysis.  The generation of theory 
that is grounded in the data  not merely conceptual description - is the hallmark of 
grounded theory research (Glaser 2001) and all three aspects of inquiry (induction, 
deduction and verification) are absolutely essential (Strauss 1987, p.12) in order to 
achieve this result.  Through engaging in grounded theory, infusing it with anti-
oppression sensibilities, and reflecting on my experiences throughout, I hoped to add to 
these and other methodological debates about this popular and seemingly 
misunderstood method of research.  The themes in the literature and the suggestions 
put forth for doing research with people with dementia, together with my own experience 
in dementia care and research, informed the design of this project. 
 My data collection tools included interviews, participant observation, and 
photography with older people with dementia who ranged from multiply oppressed to 
multiply privileged, and focus groups with their significant others.  I used conversation 
aids such as images of older people and third party questioning to increase both 
comfort and familiarity with the questions and to help to unlock subjectivity, and 
photographs of my research participants that I took at the observation sessions and in 
their homes, as well as family pictures that they shared with me, to stimulate thinking 
about life with memory problems.  My sample evolved throughout the project in 
accordance with theoretical sampling (Glaser and Strauss 1967), and was comprised of 
older people with dementia in two different communities who were recruited through a 
local geriatrician and the Alzheimer society in one community, and a clinic for older 
people at an acute care hospital in the other.  Over the course of a month, I would do 
three semi-structured interviews of 30 minutes to an hour and half with a participant, 
interspersed with two observation sessions of about two hours at a setting or event of 
their choosing.  The interview questions were designed to stimulate self-identification in 
terms of identity and social location and to evoke thoughts on living with memory 
problems.  I used a Polaroid camera as I felt this would be more dementia-friendly than 
a digital camera or a 35mm camera, primarily for the instantaneous photo developing, 
and the size and appearance of the photographs.  As a result of this, I was able to 
speak with my participants about the events, people, and objects captured on film at the 
time that they occurred and I could leave behind a record of the time that we spent 
together to serve as a memory aid for my next visit.  I used a computer program to 
assist with the data analysis - N*VIVO - and once I became comfortable with its 
operation, it enabled me to organize all of the data collected and to perform functions 
such as linking documents, embedding visual data and memos, and modelling 
relationships (Lonkila 1995; Richards 2000).  More details of my methods will be offered 
in the subsequent discussion of the methodological challenges I encountered.  
Methodological challenges and attempts to address them 
 Several methodological challenges have arisen in the course of this research 
project on dementia and intersectionality and while they are specific to this project on 
dementia and intersectionality, they offer insights for other research endeavours in 
dementia.  In this section, I will raise the issues and describe my attempts to address 
them; this is a work in progress and this will be addressed in more depth in a 
forthcoming paper (Hulko 2003).  The challenges I encountered relate to:  (1) 
Appendix C  
configuring the sample; (2) translating sociological concepts; (3) describing the project; 
(4) designing interview questions; and (5) being reflective and reflexive.    
In configuring my sample, I had to resist the pull towards essentialism that seems to 
arise in research related to identity and difference.  I knew that my participants, as a 
group, should represent various social locations, rather than different mathematical 
configurations of the variables of race, ethnicity, class, and gender.  However, I was 
not sure how to accomplish this so I played with different algebraic formulas in an effort 
to devise a diverse sample and considered using Ragins (1994) truth table method of 
quantifying data when researching diversity.  I was able to reject this process of 
essentialising people with its ostensible goal of simplifying complexity/diversity once I 
came upon an alternate method that was more in line with my research aims and still 
resulted in a sufficiently diverse sample.  My approach calls for the selection of people 
who lie at different points on the axes of oppression and privilege, based on their race, 
ethnicity, class, and gender.  In this way, similar/shared social locations, ranging from 
multiply privileged to multiply oppressed, rather than individual characteristics, form the 
basis upon which the sample is stratified.  I was aided by a tool that is popular in anti-
oppression workshops for graphically determining ones own social location.  In this 
exercise, multiple axes of oppression and privilege are drawn in a form reminiscent of 
the spokes of a wheel and each is labelled with a different identity construct, i.e. age, 
gender, class, sexual orientation, race, ethnicity, religion, (dis)ability, language, health 
status.  The centre of the circle represents privilege and the outside represents 
oppression/marginalisation (see hooks 2000).  The task is to situate oneself on each of 
these axes in relation to the margin and the centre and, through doing so, to become 
(more) conscious of the degree of privilege and oppression one owns and that makes 
the everyday world problematic (Smith 1987), more so for some than for others.  I did 
not plan to make these diagrams with my participants, rather I used the socio-
demographic information I was given to construct a diagram for each participant and 
then located each of them along a continuum from multiply oppressed to multiply 
privileged.  This process necessarily took place over the course of the project as people 
entered the project at different points and I assessed the composition of my sample.      
The second challenge I had to deal with on an ongoing basis was in the translation 
of sociological concepts.  Theoretical questions had to be translated to research 
questions, and then turned into interview questions, that could be expressed in 
everyday language.  The questions asked of participants had to be understandable and 
respectful at the same time, while still derivative of the original theoretical concepts to 
enable back translation.  For example, the title of my thesis Dementia and 
Intersectionality: Exploring the experiences of older people with dementia and their 
significant others, became How does who you are as a person shape living with 
memory problems? on the information leaflets and consent forms.  To ensure that my 
materials would be understandable to older people with memory problems, I checked 
the readability statistics in MS Word and edited these documents repeatedly until the 
information leaflet was at a grade four level and ratio of 86/100 for reading ease, and 
the consent form was at a grade five level and ratio of 76/100 for reading ease.  The 
standard is a grade seven to eight level with a ratio of 60-70/100 for reading ease.  
Sociological concepts can be complex and since these are not often the terms we use 
to describe ourselves, it was very difficult to explain this research in written and verbal 
Appendix C  
form.  The following excerpt from the information leaflet for research participants lists 
factors upon which people differ or how we are all unique and represents my attempt to 
translate gender, ethnicity, race, and class into plain language: 
 whether we are a man or a woman 
 the languages we speak, food we eat, and clothes we wear 
 where we come from 
 how old we are 
 how other people see us 
 the schooling, jobs, and money we have or had 
 how easy or hard life is for us 
Race is not easily identifiable in this list; the language I have used could be thought to 
refer to age or disability.  This probably has more to do with my own discomfort over 
using certain words or phrases, such as skin colour, that may be more descriptive, yet 
indicate acceptance of the ideology of racial differences.    
Describing the project was a concern not only for my interactions with research 
participants, but also with each of the interpreters that I worked with and all the 
gatekeepers, meaning those individuals in an organisation who have the power to grant 
or withhold access to people or situations for the purposes of research (Burgess 1984, 
p.48).  The gatekeepers I had to pass through in order to speak with older people with 
dementia included the research director and research committee, program manager, 
geriatricians, professional and administrative staff, and public affairs department at one 
recruiting site; the Alzheimer Society executive director and support counsellors, and a 
geriatrician and administrative staff at the other site; the people in charge at the various 
observation settings; and the significant others in both locations in the case of those 
people whom I was told not to contact directly.  I demonstrated my 
legitimacy/credentials in order to gain access to research participants and to build 
rapport with gatekeepers, yet essentially had little control over which of their clients they 
chose to refer to me.  At first, most gatekeepers interpreted my research as being solely 
about minority ethnic and racialised people - the Other - and tended to place greater 
emphasis on language and race/ethnicity than either gender or class.  As the inclusion 
of privileged people is equally as important in seeking to understand the dynamics of 
privilege and oppression (Calasanti and Slevin 2001; Lee 1993) and hence was critical 
for my study, I had to continually explain to the gatekeepers what I was attempting to 
do, why, and how they could help me, while being attentive to any misinterpretations 
that might have been transmitted to potential participants.  For example, one recruiting 
site left me a message that they had one for race, one for race and class, and one for 
ethnicity.  I interpreted this as meaning these people were marginalized on these 
grounds and privileged on the basis of the factors not mentioned, and clarified the next 
time we talked that each of us has a gender, class, race, and ethnicity.     
The challenges in designing the interview questions relate to my interest in 
facilitating self-identification and the expression of subjectivity on the part of my 
research participants.  This was in the hopes of avoiding mislabelling people or placing 
too great or too little importance on an aspect of their identity.  To try and achieve this 
goal, I posed general questions such as tell me some important things about yourself; 
when you think of yourself, what image comes to mind; and how would other people 
describe you.  These questions did not elicit the responses I was hoping for at the 
Appendix C  
beginning of my research as more often than not, participants referred to personality 
characteristics.  I realized that I had to be more direct with my questioning, as in what is 
it like to be an old Filipina woman.  I used images of older people who were diversified 
by ethnicity, race, class, and gender and asked questions about the people in the 
pictures such as what do you think of him/her; who has the best/worst deal in life; and 
who is the most/least like you.  I had difficulty overcoming my own reservations about 
being insensitive or too personal and using language that I was not comfortable with 
such as old or asking questions of a Black man that seemed self-evident such as so 
why is he a brother in reference to a picture of another Black man. 
The last challenge is that of being both reflective and reflexive, which essentially 
means being on at all times, continually analysing and responding to insights derived 
from the research process.  Reflection represents the critical introspection the 
researcher undergoes and reflexivity the action that flows from this; the latter being akin 
to praxis in Marxist terms (see Kirby and McKenna, 1989).  These terms are often 
conflated in methodological discussions, however, with researchers referring to the 
importance of reflexivity in the sense of documenting ones reactions to the research 
and situating oneself in the research process, yet not giving any evidence of their 
methods having been modified on the basis of these reflections.  For this project, I 
carried a reflective journal with me in which I recorded thoughts on the research 
process; made notes on most encounters, particularly the initial one which was the 
information and consent meeting; introduced new questions and/or put aside the 
pictures if they didnt appear to be achieving the desired result; developed an interview 
guide prior to each encounter based on my analysis to date; and consulted with peers 
about my techniques and results.  Despite all of these efforts, I feel that I could have 
been even more reflexive if I had the time and concentration to thoroughly reflect, and 
the freedom from institutional expectations or constraints, such as those imposed by the 
recruiting site, ethical review committee, and funders.      
Conclusion - possible implications and key questions  
 At the time of this writing, the data collection and analysis was still in progress 
and therefore, possible implications are tentative.  A grounded theory of dementia and 
intersectionality could further our understandings of lived experiences of dementia in 
later life, and address the socio-cultural context of dementia.  It may well lead to further 
questions about how to design and deliver services that are based on the desires of 
users, rather than on the opinions of providers about what older people with dementia 
need; and it could raise the controversial issue as to whether we should be intervening 
in their lives at all.  As this research project drew on parallel knowledge traditions and 
crossed disciplinary boundaries, the findings are likely to have implications for several 
fields of study and various disciplines; and the implications could be for any level of 
scholarly activity such as theory, research, policy, and practice.  As the potential 
audience is wide and the research-policy-practice interface important to me, I plan to 
disseminate the findings widely, which will necessarily entail publishing in multiple 
genres (DeVault 1999; Fine et al 2000) to ensure that all those who may benefit from 
having the information have access to it (Kirby and McKenna 1989).  For my research 
participants, I committed to preparing a summary of one to two pages in an accessible 
format and to sharing this information with them verbally, in a group format or one-on-
Appendix C  
one sessions.  Some dementia researchers might question the purpose and utility of 
sharing results with participants as the nature of their cognitive impairment may 
preclude any understanding of that which is presented to them. Yet, as Elaine Robinson 
(2002) writes of her experience taking part in research, it would be very disheartening 
for us to spend our time taking part in interviews or providing written material only to find 
that we never hear from those conducting the research (p 106).  I only hope that the 
emerging theory makes sense to the people upon whose experiences it is based and 
that it can be presented to them and others in an accessible format that will empower, 
rather than alienate.  If it does not make sense, then does their cognitive impairment 
impede their ability to understand or has the researcher not accurately reflected their 
perspectives and experiences?  This is a question that researchers are forced to 
grapple with in seeking to involve participants meaningfully.  Do participants need to talk 
about themselves as intersectional beings or is this the lens and the methodology that 
the researcher brings to the project?  Working with the concept of intersectionality can 
be cognitively demanding due to the complexity and may require a politically conscious 
subject.  If that is the case, we may set ourselves up for failure if we try to move beyond 
our analytical frame as researchers using an intersectional perspective and look for 
evidence of intersectional thinking in the words and actions of our participants.  These 
are some key questions that have arisen to date and for which it is hoped some 
answers may emerge.  Through presenting this work in progress as a case study and 
detailing the methodological issues that have arisen in working with the concept of 
intersectionality, perhaps other researchers may encounter useful insights for their own 
work and choose to grapple with these and other complex questions. 
References 
Andersen, M.L. and Hill Collins, P. (eds) (2001) Race, Class, and Gender: An 
Anthology, 4th Edition. Belmont: Wadsworth. 
Bannerji, H. (1995) The passion of naming: identity, difference and politics of class.  
Thinking Through: Essays on Feminism, Marxism, and Anti-racism. Toronto: Womens 
Press. 
Bishop, A. (2002) Becoming an Ally: Breaking the cycle of oppression in people.  2nd 
Edition.  London and New York: Zed Books; Halifax: Fernwood Publishing. 
Blakemore, K. (1989) Does age matter?  The case of old age in minority ethnic groups. 
In B. Bytheway, T. Keil, P. Allatt and A. Bryman (eds) Becoming and Being Old: 
Sociological Approaches to Later Life. London: Sage. 
Bond, J (1992) The medicalization of dementia Journal of Aging Studies 6. 397-403. 
Brah, A. (2001) Difference, diversity, differentiation. In K. Bhavnani (ed) Feminism and 
Race. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Appendix C  
Braudy Harris, P. (ed) (2002) The Person with Alzheimers Disease: Pathways to 
understanding the experience. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University Press. 
Browne, C. (1995) A feminist life span perspective on aging.  In N. Van Den Bergh (ed) 
Feminist Practice in the 21st Century. Washington: NASW Press. 
Burgess, R.G. (1984) Starting research and gaining access. In the Field: An 
Introduction to Field Research. London: Routledge. 
Calasanti, T (1996) Incorporating diversity: Meaning, levels of research, and 
implications for theory The Gerontologist 36. 2. 147-156. 
Calasanti, T.M. and Slevin, K.F. (2001) Gender, Social Inequalities, and Aging. Walnut 
Creek, CA: Altamira Press. 
Charmaz, K. (2000) Grounded theory: Objectivist and constructivist methods.  In N.K. 
Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln (eds) Handbook of Qualitative Research.  Second Edition. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Cotrell, V and Schulz, R (1993) The perspective of the person with Alzheimers 
Disease: A neglected dimension of dementia research The Gerontologist 33. 2. 205-
Crenshaw Williams, K. (1994) Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity politics, 
and violence against women of color.  In M. Fineman, Albertson and R. Mykitiuk (eds), 
The Public Nature of Private Violence. New York: Routledge. 
Crenshaw Williams, K (1989) Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A Black 
Feminist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory and antiracist politics 
University of Chicago Legal Forum. 
Delgado, R. (ed) (1995) Critical Race Theory: The Cutting Edge. Philadelphia: Temple 
University Press. 
Delgado, R. and Stefancic, J. (2001) Critical Race Theory: An Introduction. New York: 
New York University Press. 
DeVault, M.L. (1999) Liberating Method: Feminism and social research. Philadelphia: 
Temple University Press. 
Disman, M (1991) The subjective experience of Alzheimers disease: A sociocultural 
perspective The American Journal of Alzheimers Care and Related Disorders and 
Research, 6. 3. 30-34. 
Downs, M (2000) Dementia in a socio-cultural context: An idea whose time has come  
Ageing & Society 20. 369-375. 
Appendix C  
Downs, M (1997) The emergence of the person in dementia research Ageing & Society 
17. 597-607. 
Dressel, P. (1991) Gender, race and class: Beyond the feminization of poverty in later 
life.  In M. Minkler and C. Estes (eds) Critical Perspectives on Aging: The Political and 
Moral Economy of Growing Old. Amityville, NY: Baywood. 
Dressel, P., Minkler, M. and Yen, I.  (1997).  Gender, race, class, and aging: Advances 
and opportunities.  International Journal of Health Services, 27(4): 579-600. 
Du Bois, W.E.B. (1953) The Souls of Black Folk. New York: Fawcett 
Estes, C. and Binney, E. (1991) The biomedicalization of aging: Dangers and 
dilemmas. In M. Minkler and C. Estes (eds) Critical Perspectives on Aging: The Political 
and Moral Economy of Growing Old. Amityville, NY: Baywood. 
Fanon, F. (1963) The Wretched of the Earth. London: Penguin. 
Fine, M., Weis, L., Weseen, S. and Wong, L. (2000) For whom?  Qualitative research, 
representations and social responsibilities.  In N.K. Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln (eds) 
Handbook of Qualitative Research. Second Edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Freire, P. (2001) Pedagogy of the Oppressed, 30th Anniversary Edition. New York: 
Continuum. 
Froggatt, A. (1988) Self-awareness in early dementia.  In B. Gearing, M. Johnson, and 
T. Heller (eds) Mental Health Problems in Old Age: A Reader. Chinchester: John Wiley 
and Sons. 
Ginn, J. and Arber, S. (1995) Only connect: Gender relations and ageing.  In S. Arber 
and J. Ginn (eds) Connecting Gender and Ageing: A Sociological Approach. 
Buckingham: Open University Press. 
Glaser, B.G. (2001) The Grounded Theory Perspective: Conceptualization Contrasted 
with Description. Mill Valley, CA: Sociology Press. 
Glaser, B.G. and Strauss, A.L. (1967) The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies 
for qualitative research. New York: Aldine. 
Gonyea, J.G (1994) The paradox of the advantaged elder and the feminization of 
poverty Social Work 39. 1. 35-41. 
Haney Lpez, I.F. (1995) The social construction of race.  In R. Delgado (ed) Critical 
Race Theory: The Cutting Edge. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
Appendix C  
Hellebrandt, F (1980) Aging among the advantaged: A new look at the stereotype of the 
elderly The Gerontologist 20. 4. 404-417. 
hooks, b.  (2000) Feminist Theory: From Margin to Center, 2nd Edition. Cambridge: 
South End Press. 
Hulko, W (2003) Operationalizing Intersectionality in Research with Older People with 
Dementia Canadian Association of Schools of Social Work conference Halifax. 
Canada. June. 
Hulko, W. (2002) Making the Links: Social theories, experiences of people with 
dementia and intersectionality.  In A. Leibing and L. Scheinkman (eds) The Diversity of 
Alzheimers Disease: Different Approaches and Contexts. Rio de Janeiro: CUCA-IPUB. 
Kirby, S. and McKenna, K. (1989) Experience, Research, Social Change: Methods from 
the margins. Toronto: Garamond Press. 
Kitwood, T. (1997) Dementia Reconsidered: The Person Comes First. Buckingham: 
Open University Press. 
Kitwood, T (1990) The dialectics of dementia: With particular reference to Alzheimers 
Disease Ageing & Society 10. 177-196. 
Kitwood, T and Benson, S. (1995) The New Culture of Dementia Care. London: 
Hawker. 
Kitwood, T and Bredin, K (1992) Towards a theory of dementia care: Person-hood and 
well-being Ageing & Society 12. 269-287. 
Kleinman, A. (1988) The Illness Narratives: Suffering, Healing and the Human 
Condition. New York: Basic Books. 
Lee, R.M. (1993) The access issue in research on sensitive topics.  Doing Research 
on Sensitive Topics. London: Sage. 
Leibing, A. (2002) Ideology and biology: Some remarks on Alzheimers Disease, genes, 
and risk in different populations.  In A. Leibing and L. Scheinkman (eds) The Diversity 
of Alzheimers Disease: Different Approaches and Contexts. Rio de Janeiro: CUCA-
Levy, J (1988) Intersections of gender and aging The Sociological Quarterly 29. 4. 479-
Lonkila, M. (1995) Grounded theory as an emerging paradigm for computer-assisted 
qualitative data analysis.  In U. Kelle (ed) Computer-Aided Qualitative Data Analysis: 
Theory, Methods and Practice. London: Sage. 
Appendix C  
Lorde, A. (2001) Age, race, class, and sex: Women redefining difference.  In M.L. 
Andersen and P. Hill Collins (eds) Race, Class, and Gender: An Anthology, 4th Edition. 
Belmont: Wadsworth. 
Lyman, K (1989) Bringing the social back in: A critique of the biomedicalization of 
dementia The Gerontologist, 29. 5. 597-605. 
Mama, A. (1995) Beyond the Masks: Race, Gender and Subjectivity. London: 
Routledge. 
McMullin, J (2000) Diversity and the state of sociological aging theory The 
Gerontologist 40. 5. 517-530. 
Minkler, M (1996) Critical perspectives on ageing: New challenges for gerontology 
Ageing & Society 16. 467-487. 
Ontario Human Rights Commission.  (2001) An Intersectional Approach to 
Discrimination: Addressing multiple grounds in human rights claims. Toronto: Ontario 
Human Rights Commission. 
Proctor, G (2001) Listening to older women with dementia: Relationships, voices and 
power Disability & Society, 16. 3. 361-376. 
Ragin, C. (1994) Using comparative methods to study diversity. Constructing Social 
Research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.    
Richards, L. (2000) Using NVivo in Qualitative Research. Second Edition. Bundoora, 
Victoria: QSR International. 
Robertson, A (1990) The politics of Alzheimers disease: A case study in apocalyptic 
demography International Journal of Health Services 20. 3. 429-442. 
Robinson, E. (2002) Should people with Alzheimers disease take part in research?  In 
H. Wilkinson (ed) The Perspectives of People with Dementia: Research methods and 
motivations. London: Jessica Kingsley. 
Smith, D.E. (1987) The Everyday World as Problematic: A Feminist Sociology. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press. 
Strauss, A.L. (1987) Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists. Cambridge, MA: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. (1998) Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and 
procedures for developing grounded theory.  Second Edition. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage. 
Appendix C  
Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. (1994) Grounded theory methodology: An overview.  In N.K. 
Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln (eds) Handbook of Qualitative Research. Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage. 
Victor, C.R (1991) Continuity or change: Inequalities in health in later life Ageing & 
Society 11. 1. 23-39. 
Vincent, J.A. (1995) Inequality and Old Age. London: UCL Press Ltd. 
Whitehead, S.M. (2001) Man: The invisible gendered subject?  In S.M. Whitehead and 
F.J. Barrett (ed) The Masculinities Reader. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Wilkinson, H.  (2002) Including people with dementia in research: Methods and 
motivations.  In H. Wilkinson (ed) The Perspectives of People with Dementia: Research 
methods and motivations. London: Jessica Kingsley. 
Williams, B. and Healy, D (2001) Perceptions of illness causation among new referrals 
to a community mental health team: Explanatory model or exploratory map Social 
Science and Medicine 53. 4.  465-476. 
Woods, B (2001) Discovering the person with Alzheimers disease: Cognitive, 
emotional and behavioural aspects Aging & Mental Health, 5. Supplement 1. S7-S16. 
Woodward, K. (1997) Introduction.  In K. Woodward (ed) Identity and Difference. 
London: Sage. 
Yeo, G (2001) Ethnicity and dementia Journal of the American Geriatric Society 49. 10. 
1393-1394. 
Appendix D Conceptual baggage/sensitising concepts  
The results of the initial free-flowing process through which I extracted 41 
concepts from my personal concept bank: 
oppression, marginalisation, social exclusion/inclusion, resistance, 
incompetency/incapacity, frailty, othering/marking, alterity/double 
consciousness, internalised oppression/false consciousness, 
mediating structures, subjectivity/reflexivity, ageism/sexism/ 
racism/classism/heterosexism/ableism/ethnocentrism/sectarianism, 
feminisation of ageing, biomedicalization of ageing, social 
construction of reality/race in particular, apocalyptic demography, 
subjugated knowledges, epistemic privilege, diaspora, 
acculturation, adaptation/adjustment, ghettoisation, 
personhood/selfhood, confusion/disorientation, confabulation, 
misrecognition, aphasia/apraxia/agnosia, excess disability, 
cognitive superiority/hypercognitive culture, illness narrative, 
awareness contexts, explanatory models of illness, emic and etic 
perspectives, lived experience, social location, counter hegemonic, 
hegemony-ideology, intersectionality, interlocking oppressions, 
reductionism, embodiment 
The 35 concepts that I added while reading through the reflexive journal I had 
been keeping since starting this project in late September 2001: 
senility, structured dependency, political economy of ageing, 
disengagement, stigma, disease, disability, impairment, 
polyvocality, identity, labelling, cultural appropriation, critical, 
community, discursive/discourse, emancipation, participation, 
ontology, epistemology, normalisation, continuity, liberation, 
agency-structure, resilience, storytelling, institutionalisation, moral 
career, racialisation, essentialism, gatekeeping, insight, 
dominance-subordination, VOICE, liminality, positionality 
Appendix E - Possible interview questions (Dec 12/02) 
A.  Identity and social location (race/ethnicity, class, gender): 
 Tell me about your background (class, race/ethnicity, gender)  
o Birthplace 
o Ethnic ancestry  
o Cultural traditions 
o Growing up 
o Immigration 
o Relationships, marriages, births, deaths  
o Family, friends 
o Neighborhood, community 
 How did this lifestyle youve described change over the years, up to the point 
you started having problems with your memory? 
 What was life like before you started having memory problems?  
 When you think of yourself, what image comes to mind? 
o What words describe you as a person? 
o How do you think others see you? 
o If you were lost and someone was looking for you, how would they 
describe you to a police officer? 
o What walk of life would you say you come from? 
o What groups of people do you identify with? 
Using deck of image cards: 
 Who has the best deal in life?  Why? (set picture aside)  
 Who has the worst deal in life?  Why? (ditto) 
 Who is most like you?  Why? (ditto) 
 Who is least like you?  Why? (ditto) 
 Tell me some important things about who you are as a person. 
B.  Subjective experiences of dementia: 
What is it like to have memory problems? 
How does your being a (insert words used in answer to earlier questions) shape 
your experience of living with memory problems? 
How do you feel this compares to other peoples experiences?  
Using deck of image cards:  
What do you think having a memory problem is like for him/her? 
How is it the same for you?  How is it different for you? 
Appendix F  Social location diagrams (excerpts from reflexive 
journal) 
Below is a page from my reflexive journal (July 2002) 
documenting my brainwave  the idea of using the axes of 
privilege and oppression in lieu of a demographic face sheet to 
document their social locations.  I later expanded on this, using it 
as a tool to configure my sample. 
In the next set of excerpts from my reflexive journal (January 
2003), the diagrams on the left were created for the first four 
participants  Jim Heather (top left), Bosse Knudsen (top right), 
Joe Brown (bottom left) and Ester Hernandez (bottom right); 
and the diagram on the right was drawn for Angela Huggins.  
Also on the right is the line along which I plotted participants to 
ensure the sample represented a continuum of social locations 
from multiply marginalised to multiply privileged.            
Below are diagrams that I constructed for potential participants 
(March 2003) as I tried to determine which of these people might 
best fit the theoretical sampling criteria.  The diagram in the upper 
left hand corner was constructed for a woman in Peterborough 
who declined to participate; she was replaced by Nancy 
Matheson, who shared her multiply privileged status.  The 
diagram directly below this one was drawn for Gus Holden, 
another one of the multiply privileged participants and the one in 
the middle of the bottom row represents Julianna Molnar, an in-
between participant.   
Appendix G - Possible interview questions (April 14/03) 
A.  Identity and social location (race/ethnicity, class, gender): 
1. Tell me some important things about yourself. 
o What words describe you as a person? 
o Tell me a bit about your background (birthplace, ethnic 
identification, education, occupation, religion, family) 
o What should other people know about your life story? 
2. When you think of yourself, what image comes to mind? 
o How would others describe you to a stranger? 
o What groups of people (community) do you feel part of? 
o What walk of life would you say you come from? 
Deck of image cards:  
For people with moderate to severe cognitive impairment, communication 
difficulties, and those who are not self-aware/reflective; ask them to sort the 
images into piles or give them contrasting images  
 What do you think of her/him?   
 What do you think his/her life is like?  
 Who has the best/worst deal in life?  Why? 
 Who is the most/least like you?  Why?  
B.  Subjective experiences of dementia: 
1. What is it like to have trouble with your memory? (What would it be like to 
have trouble with your memory?) 
 In what ways has Alzheimers (being forgetful) affected your life?   
 How about your sense of yourself as a person?   
o Has that changed at all?  If so, in what way?     
 Tell me about forgetting.  (What would it be like to forget things)? 
 Describe to me a typical day. 
 How important to you is your memory? 
 Tell me about being old/getting older.   
2. How has being a (insert self-description) affected your life up to now? 
 How does this relate to having Alzheimers (being forgetful)?   
 What about being older?  Does being a (insert self-description) make a 
difference in any way?  If so, how?  If not, why not? 
3. Why do you think this is happening to you?    
4. How do you think what you are going through compares with other 
peoples experiences?  
o Is it the same? Different?  In what ways?  Why? 
PHOTOESSAY
From doctor to silly patient: seeing beyond
the disease label
Photographs and text by Wendy Hulko
IJE vol.34 no.1  International Epidemiological Association 2004; all rights reserved. International Journal of Epidemiology 2005;34:3639
Advance Access publication 27 August 2004 doi:10.1093/ije/dyh146
This photoessay is based on a grounded theory study of the
relationships between older peoples experiences of dementia and
the intersections of race, ethnicity, class, and gender, undertaken
from September 2002 to August 2003 in Ontario, Canada. The
research methods included interviews, participant observation,
photography, and focus groups with eight older people with
dementia, who were selected through theoretical sampling. Ethical
approval was obtained from the relevant research and ethics
committees; pseudonyms were self-selected by participants; and
consent was negotiated throughout the research process, including
consent to take photos at home and during the observation
sessions, and to use them in publications arising from the research.
Presented here are the words and images of the two research
participants who are former physicians (a cardiovascular
surgeon and an internal medicine specialist). The selected
verbatim quotes below, taken from individual interviews with
Julianna Molnar and Jim Heather, indicate a strong capacity
for self-reflection and an awareness of societal attitudes towards
silly patients. Their reflections may encourage other medical
practitioners to see beyond the label of dementia.
The photographs that follow show Julianna Molnar and
Jim Heather during the course of the research projecttwo
active, engaged older people with dementia. These visual
portrayals of everyday life with dementia may seem at odds
with images of frailty and incompetence that are most often
used to depict silly patients, such as those diagnosed with
dementia.
Department of Sociology, Social Policy and Criminology, University of
Stirling, UK and School of Social Work and Human Service, The University
College of the Cariboo, Canada
Receiving instruction at the weekly art class for seniors
FROM DOCTOR TO SILLY PATIENT 37
I didnt know about AlzheimersI was a different type of medical doctorI know well that at a certain age, there are certain
things that are forgotten and your brain not working as it used to. For, at a certain level, at a certain level, I think its normal
but I dont feel good about it. Julianna Molnar
and um Im concerned about [my wife] um having the same feeling, you know is this going to be steep or shallow or what
is it going to be and how is it going to affect both of us and what, whats, what um can we do or you know, you really feel that
youve got no attack, from our point of view, to prevent whats going to happen. Jim Heather
Telling stories about family photographs displayed at home
Working on another painting for the art show
38 INTERNATIONAL JOURNAL OF EPIDEMIOLOGY
I dont want to be completely stupid [laughs slightly]But my memory is still good enough that I canI can.I can keepI
can maintainI cant say that its not worth it to live. Julianna Molnar
I suggested that I felt that uh despite being on the board [of the local hospital] for three years, that I didnt want to be just a
lamppost sort of standing in the, standing in the way of everyone. Jim Heather
Arranging a visit with Romanian neighbor (with Hungarian interpreter)
Chairing a staff meeting at the clinic (with spouse)
It doesnt feel good that I cant remember certain things and I dont remember certain things that happened to me or when I
was young. My memory has gotten worse quite a bit but Im aware. But Im aware. Julianna Molnar
FROM DOCTOR TO SILLY PATIENT 39
Wendy (researcher): Thank you. I really appreciate your taking the time to talk with me and to share your experiences.
Jim Heather: No I think that that was vital to get some idea of, more of what uh we silly patients are doing. So, uh, all the
very best.
Taken together, these representationsin words and imagesof two former physicians living with dementia, and reflecting upon
their changed social status, reinforce the need to see beyond the disease label to the actual person.
Learning about a tool created to fix an airplane (with eldest son) 
Appendix I  August 13, 2002 
Dementia and Intersectionality 
Proposed Research Project 
PhD student with experience in the dementia field in 
Canada would like to speak with persons with 
dementia from diverse ethnic, racialized, class and 
gender groups between September 2002 - May 2003 
Methods: 
 Qualitative (grounded theory) research 
 three short (20-30 min) interviews and two two hour 
observation sessions with persons with dementia 
 Focus groups with significant others  
Ethical Issues: 
 University/agency ethical approval to be obtained 
 Consent from participants to be negotiated throughout; 
proxy consent if advisable  
 All views and observations to be kept confidential 
 Anonymity of participants to be ensured 
If you know anyone who would be interested in sharing 
their experiences of dementia, please contact: 
Wendy Hulko, MSW, PhD candidate 
Applied Social Science, University of Stirling, Scotland 
e-mail: wendy.hulko@stir.ac.uk  
phone (as of Aug 30): (705) 748-0564 (Peterborough)   
mailto:wendy.hulko@stir.ac.uk
Appendix J 
How does  
who you are as a person 
shape living with  
memory problems? 
A research project by Wendy Hulko, MSW 
Department of Applied Social Science 
University of Stirling, Scotland 
Information sheet for research participants 
Appendix J 
Each person is one of a kind because of: 
 whether we are a man or a woman 
 the languages we speak, food we eat, and clothes we 
 where we come from 
 how old we are 
 how other people see us 
 the schooling, jobs, and money we have or had 
 how easy or hard life is for us 
I would like to know these things about you, as they relate 
to having memory problems.  This research project is to 
try and find out what life is like for people with memory 
problems.  This will happen by talking to you and other 
people in similar situations.  This may not benefit you 
personally but I hope it will help other people to know what 
it is like to have memory problems.  My university is 
paying for this work.  I will write about it and share what I 
learn with you, your family, and the public.  I hope to 
become a university professor when I finish this work. 
Please read this information about this work.  Think it over 
and talk to other people if you like.  Then decide whether 
you want to be part of it or not.  Even if you say yes now, 
you can change your mind later.  You dont have to give a 
reason for your answer.  Your decision will not affect any 
help you are getting.  If you do say yes, I will ask you as 
we go along if you feel okay with it.  You can stop at 
anytime. 
Appendix J 
What will happen? 
  I will talk with you for half an hour on three different 
days.  
   I will make notes and use a machine to tape our 
talks.  This will be in a place where you feel most at ease. 
  Well talk about who you are as a person and what 
it is like to have memory problems.  I will show you photos 
to go with the questions. 
 I would like to see a photo of you or an object that is 
special to you.  This will help me know you better as a 
person.  I hope these things will help the questions make 
more sense. 
 I will come with you to an event or place that is 
important to you.  I will take pictures and make notes 
about what I see there.  We will talk about the pictures. 
  I will talk to someone that you tell me is important to 
how you see yourself as a person.  This will be in a group 
after we finish our work. 
  When all the work is done, I will let you know what I 
found out.  If you like, you can pick some photos of 
yourself for me to show to other people. 
 If you are upset after one of our meetings, you can 
call me or Dr. [name] to talk about it. 
Appendix J 
Your privacy 
To protect your privacy, a fake name that you make up will 
be attached to my notes about you.  This name will be 
used in anything that I make public.  Other details of the 
work that can be linked to you will be changed as well.  I 
will keep everything safe and private in a locked cabinet 
and in my computer. 
What happens next? 
I will answer any questions that you have in person or over 
the phone.  If you decide to be part of this work, we can 
meet to talk about it. 
You can reach me by mail, telephone or e-mail: 
Wendy Hulko 
[address of recruiting site] 
 Telephone:  
[number of Drs office at recruiting site] 
(416) 967 5900 ext. 238 (Alzheimer Society of Ontario) 
(705) 748 0564 (Peterborough office) 
 E-mail: wendy.hulko@stir.ac.uk  
Thank you for reading this leaflet. 
mailto:wendy.hulko@stir.ac.uk
Appendix K 
How does  
who you are as a person 
shape living with  
memory problems? 
A research project by Wendy Hulko, MSW 
Department of Applied Social Science 
University of Stirling, Scotland 
CONSENT FORM 
This consent form is only for participation in the research project 
named above. Please return one copy to Wendy.  Send it to the 
address on the back of this form or give it to Wendy in person.  
Keep the other copy for yourself.  A third copy of this form will be 
placed in your medical record to be kept private by [name of 
recruiting site]. 
Appendix K 
How does who you are as a person shape living with 
memory problems? 
Your name:  
Please circle yes or no for each statement below 
I looked at the purple information sheet and talked about it 
with Wendy and 
      (Fill in name of other person)  YES/NO 
I have an idea of what this work is about and it sounds 
okay to me          YES/NO 
I know that I can stop being part of this work at any time 
and do not have to say why     YES/NO 
I am aware that my decision will not affect any help that I 
am getting here or anywhere else    YES/NO 
I know that everything I tell Wendy and that she sees will 
be kept private, except if someone is hurting me YES/NO 
I realize that this work means three meetings and two 
visits to other places with Wendy over the next few months 
           YES/NO 
Appendix K 
I agree to Wendy using a machine to record our 
conversations         YES/NO 
I agree to Wendy observing me at a place that I select  
           YES/NO 
I agree to Wendy taking notes and pictures of me  
YES/NO 
I agree to Wendy using pictures that I choose in her work 
that she shares with the public     YES/NO 
I agree to take part in this work     YES/NO 
Your signature: 
Name and signature of Substitute Decision Maker or 
Witness: 
Today=s date:  
Appendix K 
[name and position of doctor] is supervising this 
study.  The Research Ethics Board has reviewed the 
ethical aspects, physician compensation issues and 
financial aspects of this study and has given its 
approval.  If you have any questions about your 
rights as a research participant, you may contact 
[name and phone number of Chair of the Research 
Ethics Board].  
If you are hurt while taking part in this study, free 
care will be given to you.  If this happens, please 
contact [name and phone number of Patient Care 
Manager]. 
For information about the study, and to be part of it, 
please speak with [name of supervising doctor] or 
contact: 
Wendy Hulko 
[address of recruiting site] 
c/o  Telephone: 
[phone number of doctors office at recruiting site] 
(416) 967 5900 ext. 238 (Alzheimer Society of Ontario) 
(705) 748 0564 (Peterborough office) 
 E-mail: wendy.hulko@stir.ac.uk 
mailto:wendy.hulko@stir.ac.uk
Appendix L  Working Hypotheses 
Based on initial coding (4/10/03 - 2:52:13 PM)  
1.  Social location does make a difference in terms of perspectives on 
memory problems (whether one problematizes it or not) and in turn how one 
adapts to it, ie whether accommodations are seen as necessary.   
5/1/03 - 4:09:41 PM I have been explaining this hypothesis to people in terms 
of Maslows hierarchy of needs for a few months now and even discussed this 
with Sue and Jim in February.  I was suprised, therefore, to realize that I had 
not written about this yet and thats how this addition to the memo came 
about.  The connection is that those who are more oppressed seem to focus 
on physiological and safety needs in relation to dementia, while those who are 
more privileged talk about belonging and self-esteem needs.  Im not sure if 
anyone has written explicitly about how social location impinges on ones 
ability to progress up Maslows hierachy of needs (the pyramid) and need to 
check this out, as well as getting the original reference for Maslows hierarchy.  
This idea has not lost strength as Ive progressed with my research; my 
hypotheses are becoming more complex, yet this simple framework still fits 
and has grab [GT terms].  Almost everyone recognizes Maslows hierachy 
when I mention it and understands the connection to my research when I 
explain my research findings to date.        
2.  How much privilege and/or disadvantage one has had affects how others 
respond to them with the more privileged folks being othered more often and 
more marginalized folks being treated 'normally' more often.  Resilience 
mediates marginalization due to dementia.  That said, social location also 
determines the people one interacts with and the range of activities one 
engages in, with these being more limited and more dementia related (less 
normal) for the less privileged people.  Although the MP men (JH and GH) say 
they have withdrawn from people and activities, they still seem to have fuller 
social lives and more opportunities for non-dementia related interactions that 
have the potential to support other aspects of their identities.        
The third hypothesis was edited on 4/15/03 - 7:23:20 PM  
3.  Normal aging is the theory of dementia espoused by all participants, 
except the MP men - JH who was a physician and GH who was a university 
administrator.  The adoption of the normal ageing theory does not represent a 
passive acceptance of ageist societal norms, rather it is a strategy used to 
ensure ones at least partial inclusion and to avoid being labeled abnormal, 
which would likely lead to institutionalization or other forms of social exclusion.  
Normalizing dementia/memory problems protects against the risks of being 
found incompetent, namely losing ones independence and home, for those 
who are marginalized already.  By contrast, the brain disease theory seems to 
be important for the MP men to believe in as a way of explaining their inability 
to do what they used to do; their sense of their own mastery or capability 
while not openly acknowledged is such that its as if the only thing that could 
set them back in any way would be a disease, not age itself.  Aging is more 
positively valued for men than for women, other factors being the same, with 
an older man holding more esteem than an older woman, therefore aging is 
not a bad thing perhaps, but disease is.  The other folks recognize that old 
people are devalued because they forget things for example so they buy into 
this stereotype as way of fitting in.  
5/1/03 - 4:23:28 PM  
4.  Definition of dementia - a bio-psycho-social phenomenon that mainly 
affects older people.   
Biological - (causative) degree of impairment, symptomatology 
Psychological - (mediating) psychic resources, personality characteristics, 
self-awareness, adaptation and resilience 
Social - (mediating) socio-cultural environment, ones social location, 
structural factors 
 Appendix M  Attributes Table for Research Participants    
Pseudonym Group Age Gender Race Ethnicity  Social class Cognitive 
status 
Jim Heather MP 74 Man White New Zealander Professional/
Upper Class 
AD  mild 
to moderate 
Joe Brown IB 76 Man Black African-
Canadian 
Working/ 
Lower Class 
Dementia  
mild to 
moderate 
Bosse 
Knudsen 
IB 76 Woman White Danish/ 
Scandinavian 
Middle Class AD - 
moderate 
Ester 
Hernandez 
MM 76 Woman Asian Filipina/ 
South Asian 
Working/ 
Lower Class 
moderate to 
severe 
Angela 
Huggins 
MM 74 Woman Mixed Trinidadian/ 
West Indian 
Middle Class AD mild Barrie 
(T.O.) 
Julianna 
Molnar 
IB 83 Woman White Hungarian 
Jewish  
Middle Class AD mild T.O. 
Gus Holden MP 73 Man White Anglo-
Canadian 
Professional/
Upper Class 
AD mild Ptbo 
Nancy 
Matheson 
MP 87 Woman White Anglo-
American 
Professional/
Upper Class 
AD mild to 
moderate 
MP  Multiply privileged; closer to privilege than disadvantage on three or more axes   
IB  In-between; closer to privilege on two axes and closer to disadvantage on two axes  
MM  Multiply marginalized; closer to disadvantage than privilege on three or more axes 
Ptbo  Peterborough  
T.O.  Toronto  
Appendix N  emblematic photos of participants 
Jim Heather 
Pictured with his eldest son, learning about a new tool to fix an 
airplane (first observation session)  
Joe Brown 
Pictured at his local hangout (the donut shop), reading the Metro 
(free daily paper) and drinking a pop (first observation session).    
Ester Hernandez 
Pictured singing and dancing along with the Tagalog interpreter in 
her home (second interview) 
Bosse Knudsen 
Pictured with her husband at the seniors church group, smiling 
and being a people person (second observation session) 
Angela Huggins 
Pictured with her daughter and granddaughter outside the site of 
their new home (second observation session)     
Julianna Molnar 
Pictured painting at seniors art class (first observation session) 
Gus Holden 
Pictured checking for frost damage on opening day at the family 
cottage (second observation session) 
Nancy Matheson 
Pictured with her eldest daughter during her 87th birthday party at 
her daughters home (second observation session) 
Appendix O 
How does who you are as a person 
shape living with memory problems? 
A research project by Wendy Hulko, MSW, PhD Candidate 
University of Stirling, St. Josephs Health Centre, Alzheimer Society of Ontario 
wendy.hulko@stir.ac.uk 
Results of the project so far (July 28, 2003): 
 Views on memory loss range from it being not a big deal to hellish. 
 Experiences of memory problems are affected by a persons background 
and lifestyle:  
o For many people, it simply does not matter.  These tend to be the 
people who have had to deal with discrimination in their lives due to 
their race, ethnicity, class, and/or gender.   
o Those for whom it makes a big difference are people who have had 
more advantages in life as a result of their race, ethnicity, class, 
and/or gender.   
o Some people are more focused on basic and safety needs, while 
others are more concerned with self-esteem and belonging needs.  
This depends on the amount of advantage and discrimination one 
has had in life. 
 Most people say their memory loss is a normal part of the aging process.   
o This seems to be a strategy to avoid being seen as different and to 
still be considered normal. 
o The more privileged men say the opposite - that it is a brain 
disease.   
 There are differences between women and mens experiences. 
o Women tend to accept their memory problems, believing that one 
should grin and bear it; that theres no sense in worrying, 
complaining, or feeling sorry for yourself.   
o Men seem to believe they should be able to control their memories 
and are striving to conquer the disease.   
o Women hide their difficulties, do not tell other people, and joke 
about what is happening to them. 
o Men tend to be more upfront about their memory problems.           
 Being part of the research was a positive experience for everyone. 
o People enjoyed the opportunity to talk about what they are going 
through and to hear about the experiences of others. 
Thank you for being part of this project 
mailto:wendy.hulko@stir.ac.uk
	thesis corrected version May 12 05
	Chapter - 1 Introduction
	1.1 Context and relevance to the field
	1.2 Starting point and theoretical perspectives
	1.3 Research question and aims 
	1.4 Structure of the thesis
	Chapter - 2 Theories of Ageing and Dementia
	2.1 Introduction
	2.2 Theorising about aging and older people
	2.2.1 Critical gerontology
	2.3 Inequalities in later life 
	2.3.1 Social and economic determinants of health 
	2.3.2 Theories on inequalities in later life
	2.3.2.1 Cumulative advantage/disadvantage 
	2.3.2.2 Selective survival 
	2.3.2.3 Inequalities as persistent  
	2.3.2.4 Multiple jeopardies
	2.3.2.5 Culture as resource 
	2.3.2.6 Interlocking oppressions
	2.4 Dementia theorising
	2.4.1 Dementia as a brain disease
	2.4.2 Questions of normalcy and critiques of the biomedicalisation of dementia
	2.4.3 Dementia as a psycho-neurological condition: the inclusion of the mind
	2.4.4 Dementia as a disability and the connection to mental health and illness
	2.4.5 The influence of sociology: dementia as a social construction
	2.5 Implications for future theoretical developments
	Chapter - 3 The Dynamics of Privilege and Oppression
	3.1 Locating (my)self 
	3.2 The everyday articulations of identity and oppression
	3.2.1 Definitions of identity and oppression and their interconnections
	3.2.2 Cultural Studies: hybridities and diasporas
	3.2.3 The articulation of subjectivities and oppression as a matrix of domination 
	3.3 Meanings of health, illness, and disability
	3.3.1 The relationship between meanings of illness and coping
	3.3.2 Culture and illness - mental and physical
	3.3.3 Spiritual/religious explanations of illness
	3.3.4 Folk narratives, power and discrimination
	3.4 Applicability to dementia and future directions
	Chapter - 4 Subjective Experiences of Dementia
	4.1 Experiences of dementia
	4.1.1 Knowledge sources
	4.1.2 Who is telling these stories of dementia
	4.1.3 What these stories tell us about identities - problematised and intersecting
	4.1.3.1 Religion
	4.1.3.1 Whose voices are still silent/silenced? 
	4.1.4 How experiences might differ  striving for normalcy 
	4.2  Identity factors and dementia
	4.2.1 Race and ethnicity 
	4.2.2 Class and gender
	4.2.3 Other identity factors - sexual orientation, rurality, literacy
	4.3 Conclusions 
	Chapter - 5 Exploring Dementia: Methodology and research methods
	5.1 Purpose and aims of the research
	5.2 Research design 
	5.2.1 Grounded theory  from conception to completion
	5.2.2 A note on literature reviews in grounded theory
	5.2.3 Operationalising Intersectionality 
	5.2.4 Sensitising concepts
	5.3 Research methods 
	5.3.1 Methodological issues in dementia research
	5.3.2 Interviews and participant observation with people with dementia  
	5.3.2.1 A note on tools 
	5.3.3 Feedback sessions and focus groups with significant others 
	5.3.4 Data analysis procedures
	5.3.5 Sampling decisions
	5.4 Ethical considerations
	5.5 Rigour, trustworthiness and limitations 
	5.6 Emergent categories
	5.7 Conclusions
	Chapter - 6 Engaging with the Dementia Subject 
	6.1 Introduction
	6.2 Social location
	6.3 Reluctance to discuss dementia 
	6.4 The insight question
	6.5 Participants evaluations of the research 
	6.6 Conclusions
	Chapter - 7 Experiencing Dementia
	7.1 Introduction
	7.2 Life with memory problems - from not a big deal to hell
	7.3 Preoccupations or spheres of activity
	7.3.1 Maslows hierarchy of needs as an heuristic device
	7.3.2 Marginalization and physiological and safety needs
	7.3.3 Privilege and love and belonging and self-esteem needs
	7.3.4 Self-actualization through dementia
	7.4 Narrowing and expanding social worlds 
	7.4.1 Mediating factors
	7.5 Gender differences
	7.5.1 Women - accepting and masking 
	7.5.2 Men - controlling and being upfront 
	7.6 Conclusions
	Chapter - 8 Othering Dementia
	8.1 Introduction
	8.2 Othering as a political act
	8.3 Othering practices
	8.3.1 Techniques of othering
	8.4 Awareness of othering
	8.5 Internalized shame  we silly patients
	8.6 Resilience as a mediating factor
	8.7 Conclusions
	Chapter - 9 Theorising Dementia
	9.1 Introduction
	9.2 Everyday theorising
	9.3 Theory from the ageing enterprise 
	9.3.1 Theories of dementia
	9.4 Theory straight from the horses mouth
	9.4.1 Dementia as a brain disease
	9.4.2 Dementia as normal aging
	9.4.3 Acceptance and rejection of the bio-medical paradigm
	9.5 The strategic use of normal aging theory
	9.6 Reconciling emic and etic perspectives
	9.7 Conclusions
	Chapter - 10 Conclusions
	10.1 Introduction
	10.2 Grounded theory on dementia and intersectionality
	10.3 Dementia as a bio-psycho-social phenomenon  
	10.4 Implications for research, practice, and policy
	10.4.1 Research
	10.4.2 Practice
	10.4.3 Policy
	PhD refs May 05
	Appendix A
	Appendix B
	How does who you are as a person 
	shape living with memory problems?
	A research project by Wendy Hulko, MSW, PhD Candidate
	Gender: 
	 assigned at birth
	 based on our sex parts
	 man or woman  
	Appendix C
	Appendix D
	Appendix E
	Appendix F corrected
	Appendix G
	Appendix H
	Appendix I
	Proposed Research Project
	Appendix J
	Appendix K
	CONSENT FORM
	Appendix L
	Appendix M
	Appendix N
	Appendix O
	How does who you are as a person
	A research project by Wendy Hulko, MSW, PhD Candidate
	Results of the project so far (July 28, 2003):
