Microsoft Word - Thesis_PR_Corrected.docx
warwick.ac.uk/lib-publications  
A Thesis Submitted for the Degree of PhD at the University of Warwick 
Permanent WRAP URL: 
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/157199 
Copyright and reuse:                     
This thesis is made available online and is protected by original copyright.  
Please scroll down to view the document itself.  
Please refer to the repository record for this item for information to help you to cite it. 
Our policy information is available from the repository home page.  
For more information, please contact the WRAP Team at: wrap@warwick.ac.uk  
http://go.warwick.ac.uk/lib-publications
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/157199
mailto:wrap@warwick.ac.uk
The influence of the plant circadian clock on nodulation 
in Medicago truncatula 
   Proyash Roy 
     Thesis 
Submitted to the University of Warwick 
for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
School of Life Sciences 
Supervisor: Miriam Gifford 
April 2021 
Table of Contents  
List of abbreviation v 
List of figures and tables vii 
Acknowledgement ix 
Declaration x 
Abstract xi 
Chapter 1: Introduction 1 
1.1. Legume-rhizobia interactions and biological nitrogen fixation 1 
1.2. Nodule development requires specific molecular interactions and 
physiological changes in a spatial and temporal manner 
1.3. Inverted Repeat Lacking Clade (IRLC) legumes enforce Terminal 
Bacteroid Differentiation (TBD) 
1.4. IRLC legume genomes contain large numbers of Nodule-specific 
Cysteine-Rich (NCR) peptide-encoding genes 
1.5. NCRs primarily, but not only, act as mediators of TBD 10 
1.6. Rapid gene family expansion and variation in spatio-temporal expression 
patterns enable NCR functional diversity 
1.7. NCR activity targets the rhizobial cell cycle and other crucial rhizobial 
cellular pathways 
1.8. The role of NCRs in the legume-rhizobia arms race 17 
1.8.1. NCRs can act as determinants of host-symbiont compatibility  18 
1.8.2. Bacterial defense against NCR actions 20 
1.9. Plant regulation of NCRs via binding of unique and conserved motifs in 
NCR promoter regions 
1.10. The plant circadian clock 25 
1.11. Aims and rationale of this project 28 
Chapter 2: Materials and Methods 31 
2.1. Plant growth and sampling 31 
2.1.1. Plant material  31 
2.1.2. Seed germination 31 
2.1.3. Growth conditions 32 
2.1.4. Root cross section preparation 32 
2.1.5. Time course sampling and plant phenotyping 33 
2.2. Bacterial culture and plant inoculation 33 
2.2.1. Rhizobial inoculation 33 
2.2.2. Hairy root transformation with A. rhizogenes 34 
2.3. Molecular Methods 34 
2.3.1. Cloning and preparation of expression vectors 34 
2.3.2. RNA extraction and sequencing 35 
2.3.3. cDNA synthesis and quantitative PCR (qPCR) 36 
2.3.4. Confocal microscopy 37 
2.4. Bioinformatics and statistics 37 
2.4.1. RNA sequence data analysis 37 
2.4.2. Clustering, gene ontology and promoter analysis 39 
2.4.3. Reciprocal BLASTp and homology search 39 
2.4.4. Statistical analysis of phenotypic data 40 
2.4.5. Statistical analysis of rhythmic leaf movement assay data 40 
Chapter 3: Rhythmic gene expression within nodules supports 
the presence of a functional nodule clock involved in diurnal 
coordination of nodule metabolism 
3.1. Introduction 41 
3.1.1. Regulation of plant immunity by the circadian clock 41 
3.1.2. The plant circadian clock could also be modified by invading 
pathogens 43 
3.1.3. Nodulation in legumes could be under circadian influence 43 
3.1.4. Aims and objectives  45 
3.2. Results and Discussion 47 
3.2.1. Experimental overview of the time-course analysis 47 
3.2.2. About two thirds of M. truncatula genes are expressed in nodules 48 
3.2.3. Core clock components exhibit characteristic rhythmicity in 
nodules 50 
3.2.4. MtLHY expression amplitude varies in different tissues 54 
3.2.5. Around 5% of all genes are rhythmically expressed in nodules 55 
3.2.6. Rhythmic processes in the nodule are putatively coordinated in a 
manner similar to other known rhythmic processes in different 
plants and tissues 
3.2.7. The Evening Element (EE) motif is enriched in dusk-peaking 
genes  66 
3.2.8. NCRs that oscillate mostly belong to the dusk-peaking cluster 67 
3.3. Discussion 70 
Chapter 4: The effect of LHY disruption on nodulation, 
growth and root development of M. truncatula 74 
4.1. Introduction 74 
4.2. Results 76 
4.2.1. Analysis of gene expression levels using quantitative PCR confirms 
reduced expression of LHY gene in two lhy mutants  76 
4.2.2. lhy mutants show reduced nodulation and reduced vegetative 
growth 77 
4.2.3. Plant rhythmic leaf movements are affected by mutation in lhy  81 
4.2.4. Expression patterns of circadian clock genes suggest non-
persistent rhythmicity at molecular level in lhy mutants 83 
4.3. Discussion and future directions 85 
Chapter 5: The rhythmic regulation of rhizobial genes in 
nodules 
5.1. Introduction 87 
5.1.1. A circadian clock is present in certain photosynthetic bacteria 87 
5.1.2. Presence of circadian rhythms in non-photosynthetic bacteria 89 
5.1.3. The influence of the host circadian clock on the colonizing 
microbial community 91 
5.1.4. Aims and objectives 92 
5.2. Results 93 
5.2.1. Almost the entire rhizobial genome is expressed in bacteroids 93 
5.2.2. Several rhizobial genes show rhythmic expression in bacteroids 95 
5.3. Discussion and future directions 100 
Chapter 6: Utilization of cell-type specific promoters to study 
cell type specific gene expression in Medicago truncatula 103 
6.1. Introduction 103 
6.2. Results  108 
6.2.1. Generation of a cortex specific expression vector for use in M. 
truncatula 108 
6.2.2. pAtCO2 and pAtPEP exhibit cortex specific activity in M. 
truncatula 109 
6.3. Discussion and future directions 112 
Chapter 7: General Discussion 113 
7.1. Background to the research questions and experimental designs 113 
7.2. Circadian regulation of NCR genes in nodules via the Evening 
Element 116 
7.3. LHY could be redundant for growth but important for nodulation 119 
7.4. Scopes for further studies   121 
7.5. Concluding Remarks 123 
8. Supplementary Data 124 
9. References 125 
List of abbreviation 
AMPs  Anti-Microbial Peptides 
ARF  AUXIN RESPONSE FACTOR  
CaML  CALMODULIN-LIKE 
CCA1  CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1  
CCaMK  CALCIUM-CALMODULIN DEPENDENT PROTEIN KINASE 
DE  Differential Expression 
DEFL  DEFensin-Like 
DMI  DOESNT MAKE INFECTION  
DNA  Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid 
DNF  DEFECTIVE IN NITROGEN FIXATION  
EC  Evening Complex 
EE  Evening Element 
ELF  EARLY FLOWERING 
EPS  ExoPolySaccharide 
ERF  ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 
ERN  ERF REQUIRED FOR NODULATION 
FACS  Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting 
Fix-  Not Nitrogen fixing 
Fix+  Nitrogen fixing 
FT  FLOWERING LOCUS T 
GFP  Green Fluorescent Protein 
GI  GIGANTEA 
GO  Gene Ontology 
GRPs  Glycine Rich Peptides  
Grx  Glutaredoxin 
GUS  -GLUCURONIDASE 
HrrP   HOST RANGE RESTRICTION PEPTIDASE 
HrrP+  HrrP expressing 
IPD3  INTERACTING PROTEIN OF DMI3 
IRLC  Inverted Repeat Lacking Clade  
KEGG  Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes 
LB  Luria-Bertani 
LHY  LATE-ELONGATED HYPOCOTYLE 
LNK  NIGHT LIGHT-INDUCIBLE AND CLOCK REGULATED 
LPS  LipoPolySaccharide 
LS  Lomb Scargle 
LUX  LUX ARRHYTHMO  
LYK3  LYSM DOMAIN-CONTAINING RECEPTOR-LIKE KINASE 
MAMPs  Microbe Associated Molecular Patterns  
MFM  Modified Fahreus Media  
MsrA  METHIONINE SULFOXIDE REDUCTASE A 
N  Nitrogen 
NCR  Nodule-specific Cysteine-Rich 
NFP  Nodulation Factor Perception 
NFR  Nodulation Factor Receptor 
NFS  Nitrogen Fixation Specificity  
NIN  NODULE INCEPTION 
Nod  Nodulation 
NORK  NODULATION RECEPTOR KINASE 
NSP  Nodulation Signaling Pathway 
NSS  N-terminal Signal Sequence  
PCR  Polymerase Chain Reaction 
PD  Plasmodesmata 
PDCBs  Plasmodesmata Callose-Binding proteins 
PDLPs  Plasmodesmata-Located Proteins 
pI  Isoelectric point 
PRR  PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR 
qPCR  quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction 
RIN  RNA Integrity Number 
RLM  Rhythmic Leaf Movement 
RNA  RiboNucleic Acid 
ROS  Reactive Oxygen Species 
RVE  ReVEille 
SPC  Signal Peptidase Complex  
SYMRK  SYMBIOSIS RECEPTOR KINASE  
TBD  Terminal Bacteroid Differentiation  
TF  Transcription Factor 
TOC1  TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1  
TPM  Transcripts Per Million 
Trx  Thioredoxin 
TY  Tryptone Yeast 
UTR  Un-Translated Region 
List of figures and tables 
Chapter 1: 1 
Figure 1.1: Overview of legume-rhizobia symbiosis. 1 
Figure 1.2: Steps in rhizobial colonization. 2 
Figure 1.3: Simplified model of the molecular signaling in the nodulation pathway of M. 
truncatula. 4 
Figure 1.4: Simplified phylogenetic tree of the leguminosae family. 5 
Figure 1.5: Schematic of the different zones in the nodule. 6 
Figure 1.6: Simplified precursor structure of NCR peptides with defensins for 
comparison. 8 
Figure 1.7: Schematic diagram showing genomic position of over hundred NCR genes 
in chromosome 4 of M. truncatula. 13 
Figure 1.8: NCR247 modulates rhizobial activity via regulation of bacterial DNA 
replication, protein synthesis and metabolism. 16 
Figure 1.9: Expression of particular plant NCRs and bacterial proteins alters the fate of 
rhizobial bacteroids in the nodule. 19 
Figure 1.10: Conserved motifs in NCR promoters. 23 
Figure 1.11: Circadian clock associated motifs. 24 
Figure 1.12: Overview of the main processes regulated (directly and indirectly) by the 
circadian system in plants. 25 
Figure 1.13: Simplistic model of the plant circadian clock in Arabidopsis thaliana. 26 
Chapter 2: 31 
Table 2.1: List of PCR primers used to amplify promoter sequences (pAtCO2 and 
pAtPEP). 34 
Table 2.2: List of primers used for qPCR to quantify the relative abundance of different 
circadian gene transcripts. 37 
Chapter 3: 41 
Figure 3.1: Overview of experimental design and gene expression analysis pipeline. 47 
Figure 3.2: Total RNA quality analysis on Bioanalyzer. 48 
Figure 3.3: Quality control information of the raw reads (post trimming) for each time-
point. 49 
Figure 3.4: Number of transcripts with different ranges of reads count (per time-point 
averaged over 13 time-points). 49 
Figure 3.5: Expression pattern of key circadian clock genes in M. truncatula nodules over 
a time-course. 53 
Figure 3.6: Expression of MtLHY in leaves, roots and nodules over a time-course. 54 
Figure 3.7: A hierarchical clustering tree representing the significantly enriched (top 20) 
biological processes in 1,363 rhythmic transcripts, grouped by similar functions in the 
GO hierarchy. 
Figure 3.8: A heat map based on hierarchical clustering shows the expression of 2,832 
rhythmic transcripts. 58 
Figure 3.9: Expression pattern of gene transcripts within each cluster, shown as a 
centroid boxplot for each cluster. 60 
Figure 3.10: Cluster-specific enriched biological processes. 62 
Figure 3.11: Overview of the processes that are regulated at the transcriptional level in 
nodules over time. 
Figure 3.12: Rhythmic expression of NCR genes. 65 
Table 3.1: Orthologous clock genes in Medicago truncatula 51 
Table 3.2: Frequency of the EE (AGATATTT) or EE-like (AGACATTT) motifs in 
different clusters. 68 
Table 3.3: Frequency of the EE (AGATATTT) or EE-like (AGACATTT) motifs in 
NCR gene promoters. 69 
Chapter 4: 74 
Figure 4.1: Schematic representation and quantification of LHY gene location and 
expression. 76 
Figure 4.2: Loss of LHY expression affects plant growth and nodulation. 78 
Figure 4.3: Reduced LHY expression affects plant growth and nodulation. 79 
Figure 4.4: lhy mutation affects circadian leaf movements. 82 
Figure 4.5: Comparison of of LHY (Medtr7g118330), PRR5c (Medtr8g024260) and 
ELF4 (Medtr3g070490) between WT and lhy-1 mutant plants. 84 
Table 4.1: Summary of all data collected in mutant phenotyping experiment. 80 
Chapter 5: 87 
Figure 5.1: KaiA and KaiB antagonize each other to control the KaiC phosphorylation 
state 
Figure 5.2: Number of SM1022 rhizobial genes with different ranges of read counts per 
time-point, averaged over 13 time-points. 94 
Figure 5.3: Overview of rhythmic rhizobial gene functions. 95 
Figure 5.4: A heat map based on hierarchical clustering illustrates the expression of 58 
rhythmic rhizobial genes. 96 
Figure 5.5: Expression pattern of genes within each of four timed expression clusters. 97 
Chapter 6: 103 
Figure 6.1: Lateral root and nodule organogenesis are initiated differently but share 
overlapping pathways. 104 
Figure 6.2: Expression of GUS under cell-type specific promoters. 106 
Figure 6.3: Preparation of promoter:reporter construct. 108 
Figure 6.4: Hairy root transformation of M. truncatula. 110 
Figure 6.5: Confocal microscopy of cross-sections of transformed root shows cortex-
specific expression for AtCO2 and AtPEP promoters. 111 
Chapter 7: 113 
Figure 7.1: Graphical summary of the results and insights presented in this thesis. 121 
Acknowledgements 
First and foremost, my heartfelt gratitude to my wonderful supervisor, Dr Miriam 
Gifford, not only because of her support and guidance during my PhD but also for her 
boundless encouragement during my PhD application period. Even after some failed 
attempts, she kept me inspired that finally enabled me to achieve the Commonwealth 
Scholarship to pursue a PhD degree in the UK. Throughout my PhD, whenever I 
struggled with my research and felt very low, she came up with an encouraging solution, 
kept me going, and at the same time took care of my mental and academic wellbeing. I 
can easily write a couple of pages of eulogy admiring her but to put it in one sentence, I 
have never dreamt of a better supervisor than Miriam in any related aspect.  
I would like to especially thank two persons, Dr Beatriz Lagunas and Dr Liam 
Walker, who guided me in my early days at the lab; patiently responded to my many silly 
queries and helped me to adapt to a new research environment of a new country. I am 
also enormously grateful to Dr Emeka Okechukwu for those numerous tips and insightful 
discussions that eased many aspects of my research and social life. I wish to thank all the 
past and present Gifford lab members, but especially, Joseph Blackwell, Jack Simcox, 
Nadine Aschauer, Beth Richmond for directly helping me in some of my experiments; 
Cantug Bar, Helen Wilkinson for many thoughtful chats and help; Monique Rowson for 
her contagious exuberance () and finally, Dr Mingkee Achom whose PhD work led the 
foundation for my research. 
I would like to record my thanks to my advisory panel members, Dr Graham Teakle 
and Dr Charlotte Allender for their careful reviews and valuable feedbacks throughout 
my project. I am thankful to Dr Laura Baxter, Dr Emma Picot, Dr Alonso Pardal and 
Luke Richards for helping me with different bioinformatic analyses. I am very grateful to 
Gary Grant who was always very helpful, even when I made any last-minute requests, that 
made my life easier in setting up different experiments at the Phytobiology facility. I will 
also keep my friend, Saadlee Shehreen, in this thanksgiving; not that she helped me a lot 
in my PhD, but without her generous help during my undergraduate I might have not 
been in a position to start a PhD 
I like to try but it is impossible to thank someone enough who left her country, 
parents, job, and all other belongings to accompany me in a new country with different 
culture and language. My loving wife, Mitaly Sikder, I acknowledge and thank you to the 
fullest sense of these words for your persistence and support; and be assured that you 
share a substantial amount of credit for whatever I have already (or going to) achieved in 
life.  
Finally, but most importantly, I will thank and dedicate this work to my parents, 
Seema Roy and Pabitra Kumar Roy. It is my mother whom I believe is responsible for 
installing a logical mind inside me in my childhood, and my father taught me how to be 
circumspective and practical. My inherent reticence never allowed me to properly express 
my gratitude towards them, but deep-down in my heart, I believe they understand how I 
feel about them, and they must be very proud of my achievements 
           Declaration 
This thesis is submitted to the University of Warwick in support of my application 
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. It has been composed by me and has not been 
submitted in any previous application for any degree.  
All the research and analyses were carried out by the author; however, the Rhythmic 
Leaf Movement (RLM) assay and the qPCR analysis (presented in Section 4.2.3 and 4.2.4) 
were done in conjunction with two masters student, Jack Simcox and Joseph Blackwell, 
respectively and had been used as part of their masters thesis.  
A substantial part of Chapter 1: Introduction has already been published as 
a review article (Roy P et al., 2020) in Genes (doi.org/10.3390/genes11040348).  The 
findings presented in Chapter 3 and 4 have also been deposited in the form of a research 
manuscript in BioRxiv (doi.org/10.1101/2021.03.22.435813) that is also currently under 
review in a reputed journal.
Abstract 
Leguminous plants (or legumes) are well-known for their symbiotic relationship 
with nitrogen (N) fixing soil bacteria (rhizobia). Through providing a niche to rhizobia in 
specialized root organelles called nodules and in exchange for plant sugars and nutrients, 
leguminous plants gain access to the nitrogen fixed by the bacteria. As a result, nodulating 
plant species can grow in N-depleted soil while most non-legume crop plants require N-
fertilizers to reach significant yields. A family of peptides, called Nodule-specific Cysteine-
Rich (NCR) peptides, play important roles in rhizobial differentiation and nodulation in 
certain legumes (e.g., Medicago truncatula) belonging to the Inverted-Repeat Lacking Clade 
(IRLC). Interestingly, a subset of these NCR gene promoters contain the Evening 
Element (EE), a cis-regulatory motif which acts as a binding site for a number of plant 
circadian transcription factors including LATE-ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY). 
In order to characterize a potential LHY-NCR-nodulation mechanism, a free-running 
time-course experiment was carried out where M. truncatula A17 nodules, roots and leaves 
were sampled over 48 hours. Gene expression analysis through RNA sequencing revealed 
around 5% of all M. truncatula genes were diurnally oscillating in nodules, including 45 
NCRs genes. More than half of these NCRs were highly expressed in the evening period 
and a significant number of them contain EE motif in their promoters. This supports the 
hypothesis that these NCRs are negatively regulated by the morning expressed circadian 
transcription factor, LHY. Furthermore, we have shown that the loss of LHY function 
leads to reduced nodulation and plant growth. In line with a regulatory role for the clock 
in nodule metabolic activity, when we clustered different rhythmically expressed plant and 
rhizobial genes in nodules into four time-of-day groups, we found that modulation of 
metabolism occurs in waves. This elaborated our understanding of the function of known 
rhythmic processes (inc. photosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism) and identified novel 
functional links. In parallel to the LHY-NCR gene expression study, two cortex-specific 
GFP expression vectors were prepared and analyzed that could be useful for cell-type 
specific gene expression in future since the cortex is a site of nodule development. 
Application of our data is likely to enable us to maximize symbiotic N-fixation and 
potentially help us to employ such features in non-legume crop plants, bringing 
considerable benefits.
 - 1 - 
1. Introduction 
1.1. Legume-rhizobia interactions and biological nitrogen fixation 
Nitrogen is one of the key limiting nutrients that affect plant growth and crop 
production (Vance, 2001). Most plants, except those in the Fabaceae/Leguminosae family 
and the actinorhizal species, are highly dependent on nitrogen (N) availability in the soil, 
typically supplied through fertilizers in an agricultural situation. Leguminous plants, 
however, employ a 
symbiotic strategy with 
nitrogen fixing soil bacteria 
(known as rhizobia; 
actinorhizal plants form 
similar symbiosis with 
Frankia spp.) that are housed 
in specialized root organs 
(nodules) (Figure 1.1). This 
enables them to grow in 
nitrogen-depleted soil 
without N-fertilizers. Most 
of the major crops used in 
agriculture (e.g. rice, wheat, 
corn) are non-legumes and 
non-actinorhizal, thus 
require N-fertilizers (in the 
form of ammonium nitrate, 
urea etc.). Application of N-
fertilizers not only increases 
the cost of crop production 
but it also brings 
environmental issues due to 
the large amount of 
greenhouse gas emission 
Figure 1.1: Overview of legume-rhizobia symbiosis. 
Free-living rhizobia in the soil can sense plant-derived 
flavonoids/isoflavonoids and in turn secret Nodulation 
(Nod) factors. Root hair cells recognize Nod factors and 
initiate a process that results in the formation of a root 
organ called nodules (pink) where rhizobia colonize. 
Within nodules, rhizobia go through a specific 
differentiation process and gain the ability to convert 
atmospheric gaseous nitrogen into a biologically 
accessible form (e.g., NH4+) that plant can utilise. In 
return, plant also provides shelter, sugars and other 
nutrients to the symbiont. 
 - 2 - 
during their manufacture and use (Zhang W et al., 2013). Although nodulation is restricted 
to legumes and actinorhizal plants, some of the genes required for this process are 
conserved in many plant species (Mu and Luo, 2019). Thus, if we understand the 
molecular mechanism of nodulation we could transfer this process to non-legume crops 
using crop breeding or more advanced synthetic biology approaches, with considerable 
economic and environmental benefits (Vicente and Dean, 2017).  
1.2. Nodule development requires specific molecular interactions and 
physiological changes in a spatial and temporal manner 
In N-depleted soil, many legume plants release varieties of flavonoids and 
isoflavonoids through their roots into the soil. These serve as chemoattraction signals for 
the rhizobial species that, in response, move into close proximity of plant roots, and 
secrete signaling molecules known as Nod (Nodulation) factors (Long, 1996) (Figure 1.1 
& 1.2a). Upon recognizing Nod factors through specific receptors (e.g., NOD FACTOR 
PERCEPTION (NFP) and LysM DOMAIN-CONTAINING RECEPTOR-LIKE 
KINASE (LYK3) in Medicago truncatula), legume plants trap rhizobia in a root hair curl 
(Figure 1.2b). The root hair curl is formed as a result of Nod factor-induced localized 
growth inhibition at root hair tips. This results in an asymmetric growth of the root hair, 
creating a pocket (hair curl) where rhizobia can be entrapped (Esseling et al., 2003). 
Rhizobia then enters the root hair cell through an opening generated, presumably, by a 
host mediated localized cell wall degradation (Xie et al., 2012). In the next step, an 
                        (a)                                   (b)                              (c)                                  (d) 
Figure 1.2: Steps in rhizobial colonization. (a) Rhizobia enter root tissue through the 
root hair but it is not yet clear whether rhizobia first attach to the root epidermis and then 
to the root hair or attach directly to the root hair (Poole et al., 2018). (b) Nod factors 
bind to specific receptors localised in root hairs, leading to asymmetric root hair growth 
which ultimately entraps the bacteria in a root hair curl. (c) An infection thread is initiated 
from the root hair curl that directs bacteria towards the cortex where a nodule primordia 
is forming. (d) The nodule primordia is ultimately colonized by rhizobia and develops 
into mature nodule. Figure adapted from Oldroyd (2013). 
 - 3 - 
infection thread (Figure 1.2c) is formed in the root hair through cytoskeletal 
rearrangement where rhizobia actively divide and grow towards underlying cortical cells 
(Timmers et al., 1999, Gage, 2004). At the same time as when root hair curling and the 
infection thread are developing, the first two layers of underlying cortical cells start to 
divide and de-differentiate to give rise to a nodule primordia that is eventually infected 
and colonized by rhizobia from the infection thread (Figure 1.2d).  
The structural differences between different rhizobial Nod factors and between 
host-specific receptors primarily determine host-symbiont compatibility and underpin 
development of species-specific interactions (Oldroyd, 2013). In M. truncatula, two 
receptors, NFP and LYK3, have been identified that interact with Nod factors secreted 
by compatible rhizobia (e.g., Sinorhizobium meliloti for M. truncatula) (Smit et al., 2007, Rey 
et al., 2013). The exact mechanism of how these Nod Factor Receptors (NFRs) work is 
yet to be fully understood but they are reported to co-localize and interact with some 
downstream signaling proteins (Moling et al., 2014) (Figure 1.3). One such protein is 
NORK (NODULATION RECEPTOR KINASE; also termed as DOESNT MAKE 
INFECTION 2 (DMI2) that is homologous to SYMBIOSIS RECEPTOR KINASE 
(SYMRK) in Lotus japonicus) that is essential for regulation of nuclear Ca2+ oscillations 
upon Nod factor perception (Charpentier and Oldroyd, 2013). This Ca2+ oscillation is 
dependent on specific ion channels (e.g., DMI1 in M. truncatula) (Charpentier et al., 2008). 
The Ca2+ oscillation results in the phosphorylation of a Ca2+/CALMODULIN 
DEPENDENT PROTEIN KINASE (CCaMK), known as DMI3 in M. truncatula, that in 
turn also phosphorylates IPD3 (INTERACTING PROTEIN OF DMI3) (Jin et al., 
2018). DMI3 and IPD3 usually form a complex and when phosphorylated they induce 
the expression of a number of important nodulation related genes that includes NIN 
(NODULE INCEPTION), ERN1 and ERN2 (ETHYLENE RESPONSE FACTOR 
REQUIRED FOR NODULATION 1/2) etc. NIN is a transcription factor and is found 
to be highly conserved among nodulating plant species including the non-legume 
Parasponia andersonii (van Velzen et al., 2018). NIN plays an important role in initiating 
cytokinin signaling (discussed in Chapter 6) which is vital for nodule formation (Verni et 
al., 2015). The ERN1/ERN2 complex also plays a vital role in the formation of the  
infection thread (Kawaharada et al., 2017). The induction of these genes together with 
other important known (e.g., NODULATION SIGNALING PATHWAY 1 and 2 
(NSP1 and 2)) and yet unknown genes enables epidermal cells to be infected by rhizobia 
 - 4 - 
and then for subsequent formation of the infection thread and development of the nodule 
primordia in the cortex to occur (Figure 1.3).  
In developing nodules, symbiotic host cells become enlarged as they undergo 
repeated endoreduplications (multiple rounds of genome duplication without cytokinesis) 
to accommodate thousands of rhizobial cells (Gonzalez-Sama et al., 2006, Kondorosi et 
al., 2000). Rhizobia that colonize the host cells become surrounded by a host-derived 
membrane, forming an organelle-like structure called the symbiosome. Within 
symbiosomes, rhizobia undergo metabolic changes, and in particular legumes they also 
undergo morphological changes, resulting in differentiation into their symbiotic forms 
Figure 1.3: Simplified 
model of the molecular 
signaling in the 
nodulation pathway of M. 
truncatula. Nod factor 
perception by NFPs results 
in a cascade of 
phosphorylation reactions 
that results in a Ca2+ spiking 
in the nucleus. The 
oscillation in Ca2+ level leads 
to phosphorylation of the 
DMI3-IPD3 complex which 
then induces the expression 
of many nodulation related 
genes. The induction of 
these genes facilitates 
rhizobial infection and the 
formation of an infection 
thread. Concurrently, they 
induce specific cortical cells 
to divide and form a nodule 
primordium where other 
nodulation associated genes 
are expressed. These genes 
then act to inhibit multiple 
infection thread formation 
and function in nodule 
development. Green and 
orange colours represent 
epidermal and cortical cells, 
respectively. Figure adapted 
from Walker (2019) 
 - 5 - 
(bacteroids) that are able to fix atmospheric dinitrogen into a form that is biologically 
accessible for the plant (Prell and Poole, 2006, Udvardi and Poole, 2013). 
1.3. Inverted Repeat Lacking Clade (IRLC) legumes enforce Terminal Bacteroid 
Differentiation (TBD) 
Depending on the legume host, nodules can be of different types in terms of their 
structure and development (Franssen et al., 1992). Legume species belonging to the 
Inverted Repeat Lacking Clade (IRLC) (Figure 1.4), characterized by the lack of a 25-kb 
inverted DNA repeat in the plastid genome (e.g., Pisum sativum, Medicago truncatula), form 
Figure 1.4: Simplified phylogenetic tree of the leguminosae family. Among the 
three well-studied legume subfamilies (Papilionoideae, Mimosoideae and 
Caesalpinioideae) nodulation is very common in Papilionoideae, then Mimosoideae, 
whereas only few members of Caesalpinioideae subfamily form nodules. 
Papilionoideae is the largest among the subfamilies (~13,800 spp.) and can be 
delineated into different evolutionary clades (e.g., IRLC). Different plants species 
that are mentioned in this thesis are underlined. The tree is adapted from Gepts et 
al. (2005); it was not exactly scaled but different important diverging nodes are 
indicated with black circles and corresponding historical time periods are mentioned.  
 - 6 - 
indeterminate nodules with a persistent meristem (Lavin et al., 1990). As reviewed by Pan 
and Wang (2017), indeterminate nodules can be spatially divided into successive 
developmental zones (Figure 1.5): the uninfected meristematic zone (ZI), that actively 
produces new nodule cells; the infection zone (ZII), where rhizobia infect host cells; the 
interzone (IZ), where both host and bacterial cells undergo profound changes and 
become significantly enlarged; the fixation zone (ZIII), where fully differentiated 
bacteroids fix nitrogen; and the senescence zone (ZIV), where both bacteroids and host 
cells die.  
Within indeterminate nodules of IRLC legumes, rhizobia are subjected to tight host 
control that results in terminal bacteroid differentiation (TBD). This is an irreversible 
change characterized by genome amplification, inhibition of cell division, cell elongation, 
increased membrane permeability and almost complete loss of bacterial reproductive 
ability (Mergaert et al., 2006).  
Figure 1.5: Schematic of the different zones in the nodule. From the meristem 
(ZI) there are four distinct zones in indeterminate nodules whose ploidy level 
increases: the infection zone (ZII), the interzone (IZ), the nitrogen fixation zone (ZIII) 
and the senescence zone (ZIV). Zonal changes are also marked by specific expression 
of different important enzymes and small peptides (e.g., NCRs) that are discussed in 
detail later in the chapter. The image in the drawing shows a nodule for illustrative 
purposes, with shading indicating levels of leghemoglobin. Figure from Roy P et al. 
(2020). 
 - 7 - 
Nodule functioning is different in non-IRLC legumes, e.g., Glycine max, Lotus 
japonicus - most non-IRLC species form determinate nodules that are round shaped and 
have short-lived meristematic activity. Bacteroids in determinate nodules do not show 
features of TBD and are capable of multiplying as free-living bacteria when isolated from 
nodules (Franssen et al., 1992, Mergaert et al., 2006, Pan and Wang, 2017). 
Endoreduplication occurs in both determinate and indeterminate nodules and 
results in symbiotic polyploid nodule cells (usually 64C or 128C, where C denotes haploid 
DNA content), however, rhizobial endoreduplication mostly occurs in the indeterminate 
nodules of IRLC legumes (Mergaert et al., 2006, Maroti and Kondorosi, 2014) and is 
comparatively rare or less significant outside the IRLC. For example, in Medicago truncatula, 
endoreduplication of Sinorhizobium meliloti results in an amplification of genome content 
up to 24C, compared with 1C/2C in free-living bacteria (Mergaert et al., 2006). 
Interestingly, whilst the non-IRLC legume Mimosa pudica forms indeterminate nodules 
with a persistent meristem when infected by Cupriavidus taiwanensis, bacteroids are not 
terminally differentiated (Marchetti et al., 2011). Therefore, TBD might not be related to 
nodule ontogeny or phenotype but rather to the genetic (e.g., IRLC vs non-IRLC) and/or 
nodule-specific molecular (e.g., expression of certain group of peptides) profile of the 
host. 
1.4. IRLC legume genomes contain large numbers of Nodule-specific Cysteine-
Rich (NCR) peptide-encoding genes 
TBD in IRLC legumes is mediated, at least in part, by a family of small Nodule-
specific Cysteine-Rich (NCR) peptides (Mergaert et al., 2003, Van de Velde et al., 2010), 
that are expressed by the host almost exclusively in nodule cells with the exception of 
only five (out of 334 that were analyzed) being reported to be expressed outside nodules 
(Guefrachi et al., 2014). All IRLC legumes analyzed so far express NCRs, although the 
number of genes varies significantly, from 7 to ~700, depending on the host species 
(Montiel et al., 2017). As reviewed in Roy P et al. (2020), NCRs are cysteine rich, defensin-
like (DEFL) plant peptides that are derived from their non-functional precursors upon 
proteolytic cleavage of an N-terminal Signal Sequence (NSS). The NSS directs the peptide 
through the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and once cleaved by Signal Peptidase Complex 
 - 8 - 
(SPC), mature NCRs are secreted outside ER to interact with the bacteroids (Tavormina 
et al., 2015). NCR peptides are diverse and are only highly similar to each other in two 
regions - the NSS region (Nallu et al., 2014) and 4 or 6 regularly spaced cysteine residues 
within the coding sequence (Figure 1.6a). Mature NCRs consist of around 20-50 amino 
acids including the 4 or 6 cysteines that potentially form 2 or 3 disulphide bridges. The 
number of cysteines distinguishes them from plant defensins that are usually 45-70 amino 
acid long and have 8 cysteine residues (forming 4 disulphide bridges) (Figure 1.6b) (Farkas 
et al., 2018, Carvalho and Gomes, 2009, Mergaert et al., 2003). Other distinguishing 
features between these small peptides are that defensins are expressed ubiquitously, not 
being nodule-specific, and are all cationic (isoelectric point, pI, ~ 9.0) (Carvalho and 
Gomes, 2009). In contrast, based on their pI, NCRs can be divided into cationic, anionic 
and neutral groups (Mergaert et al., 2003). Like defensins, certain cationic NCRs (e.g., 
NCR247, NCR335) exhibit strong in vitro antimicrobial activity (Farkas et al., 2018, Van 
de Velde et al., 2010). However, among the NCRs detected inside bacteroids by Durgo et 
al. (2015), most are anionic or neutral. The specificity of expression location (nodules for 
NCRs; almost everywhere for defensins) and differing molecular properties (e.g., pI, 
charge) suggest that NCRs are probably involved in diverse functions relating to 
nodulation, whereas defensins are involved in general defense in a non-organ specific 
manner. 
Figure 1.6. Simplified precursor structure of NCR peptides with 
defensins for comparison. (a) NCRs in indeterminate legumes such as 
Medicago truncatula and Aeschynomene are characterized by the presence of a 
signaling peptide at the 5 end and 4 or 6 cysteines at conserved positions. 
(b) Defensins similarly have a 5 signal peptide but have eight cysteine 
residues; NSS: N-terminal Signal Sequence. Figure from Roy P et al. (2020). 
 - 9 - 
To date, NCR peptides have not been reported outside IRLC legumes, with one 
exception of Aeschynomene spp., belonging to comparatively ancient Dalbergoid lineage of 
legumes. The nodules of Aeschynomene spp. are neither determinate nor indeterminate; they 
have a central zone of infected tissue which originates from the consecutive divisions of 
one or multiple cortical cells, initially infected though a non-transcellular, infection thread-
independent process (Bonaldi et al., 2011). Therefore these nodules do not have an 
uninfected primordium and both bacterial and host cell differentiate simultaneously from 
the start. However, they do express NCR-like peptides that are cysteine-rich and highly 
nodule specific, and show signs of TBD, as bacteroids are enlarged, polyploid and 
irreversibly differentiated. Interestingly, NCR-like peptides in Aeschynomene spp. are 
different (in terms of sequence similarity) from their counterparts in IRLC legumes, 
suggesting two independent evolutionary events with convergent and common roles in 
regulating bacteroids (Czernic et al., 2015). To clarify, NCRs in IRLC legumes and the 
NCR-like peptides from Aeschynomene spp. were most likely originated and then evolved 
independently as their respective harbouring species belong to different evolutionary 
lineages. However, since NCR-like peptides in Aeschynomene spp. were shown to be 
implicated in bacterial differentiation which is analogous to the function of NCRs, it can 
be hypothesised that the products of two independent evolutionary events converged into 
one common function. 
TBD is likely to be beneficial for host legumes for a number of reasons - firstly, it 
has been shown by Oono and Denison (2010) that swollen bacteroids are better at 
conferring host benefits (enhanced N-fixation and better plant growth per unit of nodule 
mass) compared to their non-swollen counterparts in different host species. Therefore, 
terminally differentiated and elongated bacteroids could be considered to be more useful 
for their hosts. Secondly, the loss of bacterial reproductive capability could be a way to 
control bacterial number with the consequence of a better cost-gain trade-off for the host. 
Finally, as reviewed by Mergaert et al. (2017), activity of symbiotic AMPs such as NCRs 
can result in introduction of transient membrane pores or an increase of permeability of 
the bacterial membrane that might allow better metabolic exchange between partners. To 
what extent, if any, the terminal differentiation process offers an advantage over non-
NCR expressing, non-IRLC legumes is not yet known, but if understood it would be 
highly relevant for understanding legume-rhizobial co-evolution. Such knowledge is likely 
 - 10 - 
to be enormously useful in achieving our ultimate goal of introducing N-fixing capability 
in non-legume crop plants. 
1.5. NCRs primarily, but not only, act as mediators of TBD 
A number of findings have implicated NCRs as the key mediators of terminal or 
irreversible bacteroid differentiation and amplification of the bacterial genome. Van de 
Velde et al. (2010) ectopically expressed eight different M. truncatula NCR genes in Lotus 
japonicus, an NCR-lacking non-IRLC legume. They reported that expression of at least one 
of them, NCR035, resulted in bacteroids with enhanced membrane permeability, cell 
elongation and compromised reproductive ability; all reminiscent of TBD. Moreover, in 
vitro treatment of free-living S. meliloti with a sub-lethal concentration of certain NCR 
peptides inhibited cell division and induced bacteroid-like characteristics (Van de Velde 
et al., 2010, Penterman et al., 2014). In general, the extent of bacteroid differentiation in 
terms of changes in bacterial morphology depends on the size and complexity of the NCR 
gene family (Montiel et al., 2017, Montiel et al., 2016). A comparative study amongst ten 
IRLC legumes showed that the higher the number of expressed NCRs, the greater the 
degree of bacteroid elongation (Montiel et al., 2017). The extent of bacteroid elongation 
also correlates with their morphotype (shape), varying from swollen to elongated and 
elongated-branched, depending on the NCR profile of host species. For example, in 
Glycyrrhiza uralensis where only 7 NCR genes are known to be expressed, the infecting 
rhizobia differentiate into slightly swollen (compared to free-living bacteria) bacteroids, 
whereas with about 700 NCR genes, M. truncatula harbours elongated and branched 
bacteroids (Montiel et al., 2017, Montiel et al., 2016).  
Particular NCRs have precise and non-redundant functions in different phases of 
rhizobial differentiation (Horvath et al., 2015, Kim et al., 2015b). Two M. truncatula 
mutants, dnf7 and dnf4 (defective in nitrogen fixation 7 and 4), both have a similar phenotype 
with small and white nodules incapable of fixing nitrogen. dnf7 mutation disrupts the 
NCR169 gene, whereas dnf4 abolishes NCR211 functions (Horvath et al., 2015, Kim et 
al., 2015b, Lang and Long, 2015). The transcriptomic profiles of both mutants are also 
very similar (Lang and Long, 2015). In wild type plants, both NCR169 and NCR211 share 
an overlapping expression pattern where NCR211 is largely expressed in the infection and 
interzone and NCR169 is exclusively expressed in the interzone and mature fixation zone 
 - 11 - 
(Figure 1.5) (Horvath et al., 2015, Kim et al., 2015b). Moreover, both NCRs localize to 
the peribacteroid space, the region between symbiosome membrane and bacteroids (Pan 
and Wang, 2017). However, the extent of bacteroid differentiation is different in these 
mutants. While bacteroids in dnf7 mutants (without NCR169) never reach terminal 
differentiation, bacteroids in dnf4 mutants (without NCR211) die prematurely in the 
fixation zone just before or soon after reaching terminal differentiation (Kim et al., 2015b, 
Horvath et al., 2015). These observations suggest that NCR169 has a critical role in 
terminal differentiation while NCR211 might be important for survival of differentiated 
bacteroids in the symbiosome. In both dnf7 and dnf4 mutants, bacteria do differentiate to 
some extent, therefore it is unlikely that NCR169 and NCR211 interfere in the cell cycle. 
Also, their function might not be the elimination of incompatible bacteria because they 
are required for bacteroid survival and TBD. A pull-down assay suggests that NCR169 
(as well as NCR28 and NCR290) might physically interact with NCR247, a cationic NCR 
with antimicrobial effect and unusually high pI (10.39) (Farkas et al., 2014). As discussed 
by Mergaert (2018), some NCRs could function counteractively by binding one another 
to compensate or reduce the harmful effects of other NCRs or to facilitate/modify their 
functions. For example, an anionic or neutral NCR might bind to cationic NCRs to 
antagonize their antimicrobial activity.  
Proteins involved in the maturation process of NCR peptides are also important 
for effective symbiosis. This is illustrated in the case of M. truncatula dnf1 mutants where 
a component of the nodule specific peptidase complex Defective in Nitrogen Fixation 1 
(DNF1), that cleaves the NSS from pre-mature NCR peptides, is non-functional. In the 
absence of functional DNF1, a number of NCRs tested by Van de Velde et al. (2010) 
were found to be trapped inside the endoplasmic reticulum, effectively blocking bacteroid 
differentiation.  
It has been found that different plant- and bacteria-derived thioredoxin (Trx) and 
glutaredoxin (Grx) systems are necessary for nitrogen-fixing symbiosis (reviewed in 
Alloing et al. (2018)). For example, one plant-derived thioredoxin (Trx-s1) has been found 
to be induced in the nodule infection zone and to interact with several NCR peptides. 
While inactivation of Trx-s1 in the host plant negatively affects TBD, the ectopic 
expression of this enzyme in the endosymbiont partially enhances TBD in Trx-s1 
inactivated plants (Ribeiro et al., 2017). It is likely that these redox enzymes play a crucial 
 - 12 - 
role in maintaining the appropriate cellular redox state including that of the multiple 
cysteine residues in NCR peptides, thus regulating the functions of NCRs. Therefore not 
only NCRs, but also other cellular components that regulate NCR activity, are essential 
for establishing and maintaining effective symbiosis. 
1.6. Rapid gene family expansion and variation in spatio-temporal expression 
patterns enable NCR functional diversity 
The genome structure of the Papilionoideae subfamily that contains most 
nodulating legume species was strongly shaped by a whole genome duplication event 
around 58 million years ago (MYA) (Young et al., 2011). The origin of the IRLC group 
can be dated back to ~39 MYA, but exactly when and how the NCR gene family appeared 
is still far from clear (Sprent, 2007, Young et al., 2011). One hypothesis suggests a recent 
origin of NCR genes that then rapidly expanded (possibly by gene duplications) and 
diversified in certain species (e.g., M. truncatula) (Montiel et al., 2017). This is supported 
by several observations - firstly, NCRs or genes that resemble NCRs from the IRLC and 
dalbergoid clades, respectively, are lineage specific (orphan) genes that lack orthologs, 
even in other closely related lineages (Mergaert et al., 2003, Czernic et al., 2015); this 
suggests an evolutionary recent origin. As NCRs are antimicrobial peptide (AMP)-like, 
and many AMPs are orphan genes like NCRs, it could be that NCRs evolved from a 
primitive AMP gene upon duplication and rearrangement. Secondly, NCR numbers vary 
highly (7 to ~700) among IRLC legumes, implying species-specific expansion. Mature 
NCR peptides from orthologous genes of different M. truncatula accessions contain 
signatures of both purifying (conservation) and diversifying selection, where other DEFLs 
are under purifying selection only (Nallu et al., 2014). NCR gene loci that are under 
purifying selection might share common functions, whereas those under diversifying 
selection could be rapidly evolving towards novel functions. Thus NCRs seem to be an 
example of subneofunctionalization (He and Zhang, 2005), where members of duplicated 
gene families acquire new functions simultaneously. Finally, M. truncatula, that encodes 
over 700 NCR peptides (the highest number currently known), harbours relatively more 
locally duplicated genes (e.g., 3.1 fold higher than soybean) and a high number of 
transposons, located close to many NCR genes (Young et al., 2011, Satge et al., 2016, Roy 
P et al., 2020). NCR genes are spread over the M. truncatula genome, found in all the 
chromosomes often in small clusters (Alunni et al., 2007) (Figure 1.7). Together, this 
 - 13 - 
genomic landscape suggests a process of transposon-mediated long-distance duplication, 
followed by local duplication and diversification of NCRs in this species. Such duplication 
events might have affected not only NCRs, but other symbiosis-related gene families (e.g., 
leghemoglobins, flavonoid signaling genes etc.) in M. truncatula, as their numbers are 
particularly high (Young et al., 2011). Among these symbiosis related gene families, some 
are also strongly linked to nodule function, e.g., Glycine Rich Peptides (GRPs) and 
Calmodulin-like proteins (CaMLs) (Pecrix et al., 2018). In general, all of these genes are 
found in clusters across the genome, similar to the case with NCRs, suggesting duplication 
events were associated with their evolution (Alunni et al., 2007, Young et al., 2011, Pecrix 
et al., 2018).  
Like many other genes, the expression of many NCR genes is regulated by DNA 
demethylation and histone modification (Satge et al., 2016, Nagymihaly et al., 2017). 
However, one particular DNA demethylase gene, DEMETER (DME) was found to be 
expressed preferentially in differentiating nodule cells (Figure 1.5) (Satge et al., 2016), 
possibly involved in the regulation of many NCRs. Also, expression of some NCR genes 
is associated with reduction in the suppressive histone (H) mark H3K27me3 
(trimethylation of H3 lysine-27) and increase in the activating H3K9ac (acetylation of H3 
lysine-9) (Nagymihaly et al., 2017), which could form part of the same methylation 
regulatory mechanism. As mentioned earlier, many NCRs are neighbored by transposons 
that are usually silenced by DNA methylation. Interestingly, DNA demethylation that 
activates NCRs can also result in activation of these transposons (Satge et al., 2016). 
Therefore, the accumulation of these epigenetic modifications, transposon mediated 
movement or duplication events might have a role in the evolution or expansion in 
Figure 1.7: Schematic diagram showing genomic position of 111 NCR genes 
in chromosome 4 of M. truncatula. Each vertical line corresponds to an NCR 
gene. Some of the NCR gene clusters (several NCR genes in very close proximity) 
are marked with black arrows. Centromere position is marked by black circle. Figure 
generated using NCR gene IDs and ShinyGo v0.61 tool available online at: 
www.bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/go 
10 Mbp 
 - 14 - 
expression and functional diversity of NCRs. Our understanding of these evolutionary 
events should increase with analysis of sequences from whole genome sequencing and 
molecular characterization of additional IRLC legumes.  
 The functional diversity of NCRs is further highlighted by the observation that not 
all NCRs are expressed at the same time and in the same place. In fact, different NCRs 
are activated in successive but overlapping locations, both spatially, in different nodule 
zones during development, and temporally (Roux et al., 2014, Marx et al., 2016, Guefrachi 
et al., 2014) (Figure 1.5). A study taking advantage of laser capture microdissection 
coupled to RNA sequencing showed that only a few NCRs were expressed in the distal 
part of the ZII (infection site) whereas others were expressed in the proximal part of the 
ZII as well as in the IZ, and the ZIII (Roux et al., 2014). Peak expression was observed 
at the IZ (with 411 expressed NCRs), where bacteroids undergo rapid differentiation. No 
NCRs were detected in ZI and NCR expression was minimal in the ZIII (fixation zone) 
(Roux et al., 2014, Guefrachi et al., 2014). These findings suggest that NCRs are mostly 
expressed in response to invading rhizobia and deactivated when bacterial differentiation 
is complete, supporting their role in TBD. Marx et al., (2016) examined the expression 
over time of NCRs. They collected nodule samples at 10, 14 and 28 days post rhizobial 
inoculation and upon proteomic analysis of these samples, they divided NCRs into early, 
intermediate and late, based on their relative temporal abundance (Marx et al., 2016). Early 
stage-expressed NCRs might be involved in enhancing rhizobial membrane permeability 
that allows other NCRs to enter the bacterial cytosol. Intermediate and late-expressed 
NCRs could target rhizobial metabolism to advance differentiation into N-fixing 
bacteroids (Marx et al., 2016). Although NCRs are generally thought to be very specific 
to nodules, at least two NCRs (NCR122 and 218) were reported to be expressed at a 
similar level in both nodules and uninfected roots, and three others (NCR077, NCR235 
and NCR247) were found to show somewhat reduced nodule specificity as some lower 
levels of expression were also detected in uninfected roots (Guefrachi et al., 2014), 
implying they might play other roles (so far unknown) beyond that of the regulation of 
nodulation. 
 - 15 - 
1.7. NCR activity targets the rhizobial cell cycle and other crucial rhizobial 
cellular pathways 
Much of the information within the proposed mechanism by which NCRs regulate 
bacterial activity is informed by the study of NCR247 (Farkas et al., 2014, Penterman et 
al., 2014), the best characterized NCR so far (Figure 1.8). The general model is that NCR 
peptides alter rhizobial cell cycle progression by targeting cell cycle components 
(Mergaert, 2018). One such regulator is the CtrA protein that acts late in the cell cycle to 
repress the initiation of replication and promote cell division (Collier, 2012, Pini et al., 
2015). The loss of CtrA function is associated with the formation of swollen, polyploid 
bacteria that resembles bacteroids inside nodules. Therefore, it is possible that NCR 
peptides exert control by limiting CtrA function (Pini et al., 2015). In vitro application of 
NCR247 downregulates ctrA gene expression and also most CtrA-regulated genes in S. 
meliloti (Penterman et al., 2014). Moreover, CtrA transcript levels drop steadily along with 
bacterial differentiation (Roux et al., 2014), and in mature bacteroids the CtrA protein is 
almost absent (Pini et al., 2013). In addition, mutations in bacterial genes that inhibit CtrA 
(e.g., cbrA, cpdR or divJ) result in abnormal bacteroid differentiation, leading to formation 
of non-functional nodules (Mergaert, 2018, Pini et al., 2013). While all of these findings 
implicate CtrA as a potential regulatory node for NCR mediated effects, the actual mode 
of action is still not clear. NCR247 not only affects CtrA but also inhibits the expression 
of two other important rhizobial cell cycle regulators, DnaA and GcrA. DnaA is 
important for the initiation of prokaryotic DNA replication and it activates GcrA. Once 
activated, GcrA represses DnaA and upregulates CtrA to facilitate cell division 
(Penterman et al., 2014, Collier, 2012). While inhibition of GcrA (an activator of CtrA) 
fits the proposed mechanism, forcing the bacteroid to stop cell division, the presumed 
downregulation of DnaA is not so straightforward to explain, as the continuation of DNA 
replication is required for TBD. However, a study in Caulobacter crescentus, a model bacterial 
species that is used to study the regulation of the cell cycle, suggests that CtrA and DnaA 
both compete for binding to the origin of replication to repress or initiate DNA 
replication, respectively (Taylor et al., 2011). Therefore, it could be that when CtrA levels 
are significantly reduced, even low levels of DnaA can still initiate DNA replication, 
enabling endoreduplication to take place. At the same time, DnaA activity is also regulated 
post-transcriptionally (Collier, 2012, Penterman et al., 2014), therefore a lower transcript 
level does not necessarily represent a lower protein level or reduced activity. NCR247 is 
 - 16 - 
also known to interact with another conserved bacterial cell cycle protein, FtsZ (Farkas 
et al., 2014), which is involved in the formation of the Z-ring and subsequent cell division 
(Ma et al., 1996, Lan et al., 2007). NCR247 is thought to disrupt septum specific 
localization of FtsZ protein through inhibiting the polymerization of FtsZ by binding to 
its monomers (Farkas et al., 2014, Penterman et al., 2014).  
A number of other bacteroid cellular components have been found to interact 
physically with NCR247, including the chaperonin GroEL, ribosomal proteins, ATP 
synthase subunits, members of the nitrogenase complex and several TCA-cycle related 
enzymes (Farkas et al., 2014, Mergaert, 2018). The NCR247-GroEL interaction is 
particularly interesting as one of the five S. meliloti groEL genes (groEL1) is essential for 
functional symbiosis (Bittner et al., 2007). In general, GroEL interacts with hundreds of 
proteins, facilitating their proper folding, thus binding might modify the NCR247 
interaction network that can alter bacterial metabolism. The interactions of NCR247 with 
ribosomal proteins and metabolic enzymes could be a means to modulate bacterial protein 
synthesis and metabolic activity, respectively (Penterman et al., 2014). It can be predicted 
Figure 1.8. NCR247 modulates rhizobial activity via regulation of bacterial 
DNA replication, protein synthesis and metabolism. NCR247 appears to 
modulate a wide range of microbial pathways by repressing different cell cycle 
regulators (e.g., CtrA, DnaA, GcrA) or binding to a range of bacterial proteins (e.g., 
GroEL, FtsZ, ribosomal proteins) as well as other plant NCRs (e.g., NCR028, 
NCR169, NCR290). Figure adapted from Roy P et al. (2020). 
 - 17 - 
that other NCRs also affect bacterial cellular pathways and have similarly broad effects. 
However, functional characterization of such other NCRs is essential in order to 
understand to what extent this is a widespread regulatory role, particularly since, unlike 
most other NCRs, NCR247 is not exclusively nodule-specific (mentioned earlier), having 
low levels of expression in roots and stems. Therefore, NCR247 could have functions 
outside nodulation (e.g., providing general immunity like defensins) and might not be fully 
representative of this family of genes. 
1.8. The role of NCRs in the legume-rhizobia arms race 
Legume-rhizobia symbiosis is typically depicted as an altruistic mutualism between 
two partners. However, a closer inspection of NCR-mediated TBD of rhizobia reveals a 
scuffling situation where IRLC legumes subjugate their bacterial partner into a semi-
viable, sterile state. To counter this, endosymbionts also upregulate different stress and 
defense related genes to minimize or escape from host-imposed controls. Potentially, the 
higher the number of NCRs and the more diverse the NCRs are in the host, the greater 
the control over symbionts. However, ultimately, the outcome of the nitrogen fixation 
symbiosis depends on the host legume-endosymbiont balance to control each others 
functions (as reviewed by Roy P et al., 2020). 
So far, one observation suggests that some rhizobial strains might have evolved 
mechanisms to avoid terminal differentiation entirely when interacting with IRLC 
legumes. Glycyrrhiza uralensis (liquorice), an IRLC legume able to trigger terminal 
differentiation with some rhizobial species (e.g., Rhizobium galegae bv. orientalis) (Montiel 
et al., 2017), fails to enforce terminal differentiation when infected by Sinorhizobium fredii 
strain HH103 (Crespo-Rivas et al., 2016). Although HH103 escapes terminal 
differentiation, it still fixes nitrogen for liquorice, resembling non-IRLC legume 
bacteroids. Remarkably, S. fredii HH103 also shows no or minimal sensitivity when treated 
in vitro with NCR247 and NCR335. HH103 bacteroids isolated from liquorice exhibit 
altered lipopolysaccharide (LPS) content on their outer membrane, a key molecule in 
legume-rhizobia interactions (Downie, 2010). However, when HH103 infects non-IRLC 
legumes, Glycine max or Cajanus cajan, such modification of LPS is not observed (Crespo-
Rivas et al., 2016). LPS modifications, could therefore be a possible bacterial defense 
mechanism against NCR-mediated control. Furthermore, although G. uralensis expresses 
 - 18 - 
NCR peptides, only 7 have been identified in the G. uralensis genome to date (Montiel et 
al., 2017), suggesting that it might not have the genomic potential to dominate over a 
broad range of rhizobial species. In many cases (discussed in section 1.7.1), counter-active 
measures between host and rhizobia result in incompatibility, even after successful 
initiation of nodulation. Therefore, in the arms race between legume and rhizobia, a fine-
tuned balance has to be met in order to both initiate and maintain functional N-fixing 
symbiosis. 
1.8.1. NCRs can act as determinants of host-symbiont compatibility  
As mentioned earlier, early interaction and symbiotic compatibility between 
legumes and rhizobia is first informed by the initial perception of rhizobial nodulation 
(Nod) factors by the host through its Nod-factor receptors (Oldroyd, 2013, Lagunas et 
al., 2015). Host legumes also recognize other bacterial effectors or surface proteins, e.g., 
LPS or microbe associated molecular patterns (MAMPs), and elicit immune responses 
against prospective symbionts. The success of symbiotic interactions depends on the 
extent of these immune responses and rhizobial susceptibility to them (Cao et al., 2017). 
Even if these initial checkpoints have been successfully passed, symbiotic incompatibility 
can still occur at the later phases of nodule development and NCR peptides might play 
an important role at those points. Insight into this came from the discovery of two NCR-
encoding genes, NFS1 (NITROGEN FIXATION SPECIFICITY 1; Medtr8g073380) and 
NFS2 (Medtr8g465280), that determine the fate of rhizobial colonization depending on 
which allelic variants of those genes are present and the identity of bacterial strain that is 
infecting. This has been demonstrated in two M. truncatula accessions, Jemalong A17 and 
DZA315.16, that, respectively, produce non-N-fixing (Fix-) or N-fixing (Fix+) nodules, 
with particular S. meliloti strains (A145 and Rm41) (Wang et al., 2018). Further studies 
have revealed that NFS1 and NFS2 alleles from A17 cause early senescence of bacteroids, 
whereas alleles from DZA315.16 do not have such an effect. The A17 alleles also act 
dominantly over DZA315.16 alleles in heterozygous plants, suggesting that A17 alleles 
might encode for peptides that kill those particular rhizobial strains, resulting in an 
incompatible interaction. However, other S. meliloti strains are not susceptible to NFS1 
and NFS2-mediated killing, regardless of which alleles are present. Other than this strain-
specific antimicrobial effect, NFS1 and NFS2 might not be essential for N-fixing 
symbiosis since elimination of the genes altogether results in functional symbiosis (Wang 
 - 19 - 
et al., 2018, Yang et al., 2017, Wang et al., 2017). The sensitivity of particular bacterial 
strains to NFS1 and NFS2 might be due to the chemical structure of the bacterial 
exopolysaccharides (EPS). Interestingly, the EPS of incompatible strains are significantly 
less succinylated than the EPS of the compatible strains. Moreover, expression of EPS-
compatible strain biosynthesis genes in an incompatible strain resulted in compatibility 
(Simsek et al., 2007, Simsek et al., 2013). Therefore, the presence of abundant negatively 
charged succinate groups in the bacterial EPS of the compatible strains (along with 
alteration in LPS, as discussed earlier) could act as a protection mechanism against the 
antimicrobial effect of particular NCR peptides, potentially disrupting their recognition 
or binding. This idea is further supported by the finding that expression of 
exopolysaccharides in S. meliloti is associated with better protection from NCR247 
(Arnold et al., 2018). Nonetheless, the example of NFS1 and NFS2 highlights one 
mechanism for how host NCRs dictate the outcome of symbiotic interactions (Figure 
1.9).  
Figure 1.9. Expression of particular plant NCRs and bacterial proteins alters the 
fate of rhizobial bacteroids in the nodule. Research has identified the importance of 
NCRs not only that have defensin-like roles to kill rhizobia (e.g. NFS1 and NFS2 in M. 
truncatula A17) but that are required for bacterial survival and differentiation (e.g. 
NCR169, NCR211). Bacterial-expressed genes and defense proteins are similarly 
required for proper differentiation and bacterial survival, but also their capability to 
reproduce. When all required plant and bacterial proteins are expressed, rhizobia are 
able to fully differentiate and are capable of nitrogen fixation. Figure adapted from Roy 
P et al. (2020). 
 - 20 - 
1.8.2. Bacterial defense against NCR actions 
A number of rhizobial stress-related genes are upregulated when S. meliloti is treated 
with in vitro synthesised peptides NCR247 or NCR335. Most prominent among them are: 
an RNA polymerase -factor, RpoH1; a heat shock protein, IbpA and a methionine 
sulfoxide reductase A, MsrA1 (Tiricz et al., 2013). Upregulation of RpoH1 is particularly 
interesting as rpoH1 mutants die prematurely in the symbiosome, reflecting that RpoH1-
related responses are important for bacteroid survival (Mitsui et al., 2004). Since host plant 
cells infected by rhizobia introduce various oxidative/nitrosative stresses to bacteria 
(Syska et al., 2019), the function of an antioxidant enzyme such as MsrA (Fu et al., 2017) 
and other rhizobial catalases and superoxide-dismutases appears to be important for 
proper bacteroid differentiation (Jamet et al., 2003). The two-component regulatory 
systems ExoS-ChvI and FeuP-FeuQ, and their regulons that are involved in EPS and 
cyclic glucan production, respectively (Belanger et al., 2009, Griffitts et al., 2008), are also 
rapidly induced in rhizobia upon treatment with NCR247 (Penterman et al., 2014). Many 
pathogens also use two-component systems to sense AMP activity (Otto, 2009) and 
rhizobial mutants disrupted in ExoS-ChvI and FeuP-FeuQ functions fail to promote 
infection thread development and functional symbiosis (Belanger et al., 2009, Cheng and 
Walker, 1998). Such observations suggest that these two-component systems might be 
utilized by rhizobia to sense and promote resistance against NCR peptides in nodules. 
Apart from these broad-spectrum stress-related responses, rhizobia have some 
unique strategies that seem to enable them to counteract the effects of NCRs. For 
example, two orthologous membrane transporter proteins, BacA in S. meliloti and BclA 
from Bradyrhizobium spp., are critical for symbiosis in NCR-producing legumes 
(Glazebrook et al., 1993, Haag et al., 2011, Guefrachi et al., 2015). bacA and bclA bacterial 
mutants initiate nodulation normally but die early in the symbiosome of NCR-producing 
legumes. It has been found that bacA mutants persist longer inside nodules of M. truncatula 
mutants deficient in NCR functions (e.g., dnf1) (Haag et al., 2011). BacA and BclA are 
similar to ABC transporters and are likely to involve in the import of a number of different 
peptides (LeVier and Walker, 2001). Therefore, it is hypothesised that these transporters 
act by importing NCR peptides into the cytosol, effectively removing them from the cell 
surface (the site of action for many AMPs). Since the homologs of bacA and bclA are 
widely present in all rhizobia, and even in some non-symbiotic bacteria (Glazebrook et 
 - 21 - 
al., 1993, Guefrachi et al., 2015, Mergaert, 2018), it is possible that their role in symbiosis 
might be supplementary to their non-symbiotic (yet mostly unknown) functions. In 
addition, because the presence or absence of these transporters determines whether 
symbionts would be able to persist in certain legumes, these transporters might have 
played an important role in symbiotic co-evolution, in determination of legume-rhizobia 
partner specificities.  
Some rhizobia might have evolved a more efficient way of resisting NCRs. S. meliloti 
strain B800, carrying an accessory plasmid (pHRB800), has been found to form Fix+ 
nodules in M. truncatula accession A17, but Fix- nodules in accession A20 (Crook et al., 
2012). A closer inspection reveals that the plasmid contains an M16A family zinc-
metallopeptidase-encoding gene that can degrade many NCRs of different pI, in vitro, 
although with varying efficiency (up to 15 folds among 10 NCRs tested) (Price et al., 
2015). When this gene is present in rhizobia it affects N-fixation (e.g., formation of 
defective, non-N-fixing nodules) with several M. truncatula accessions (ecotypes), but the 
same bacterial strain without the gene has no effect on N-fixation with corresponding 
hosts. Therefore, the gene is designated as a HOST RANGE RESTRICTION 
PEPTIDASE (hrrP) as its presence limits the effective N-fixing host range of rhizobia. 
To clarify more, if this gene was not existent, more rhizobia would form proper N-fixing 
symbiosis, hence it restricts the host range. Interestingly, HrrP-expressing (HrrP+) 
bacteria proliferate better in both functional (A17 accession) and non-functional (A20 
accession) M. truncatula nodules compared to hrrP mutants. This is likely because HrrP 
diminishes the host NCR arsenal completely or to some extent (Price et al., 2015). It is, 
however, not clear whether NCRs are the natural substrate of HrrP or if it simply degrades 
many NCRs, as they are analogous to the so far unknown substrate(s). It is also not clear 
how some hosts (e.g., A17) induce HrrP+ bacteria to fix nitrogen to a normal level (Price 
et al., 2015). Variability of NCR genes among different M. truncatula accessions (Nallu et 
al., 2014) and possible differences in their expression patterns could be an answer to this. 
Nevertheless, from the perspective of an individual bacterium, having hrrP is an 
advantage, no matter whether they fix nitrogen or not, since their reproductive capability 
is less compromised compared to HrrP-lacking strains (Pan and Wang, 2017). 
Phylogenetic analysis has revealed that some distantly related Sinorhizobium isolates contain 
very similar hrrP alleles, while some closely related strains have comparatively divergent 
hrrP sequences. Interestingly, hrrP sequences are surrounded by transposable elements 
 - 22 - 
that are likely to be from the genus Rhizobium in origin. Moreover, various Rhizobium 
species harbour hrrP homologs in their chromosomes. Therefore, it is proposed that 
Sinorhizobium might have acquired hrrP from Rhizobium through a relatively recent 
horizontal gene transfer event, and that then the gene has spread among various 
Sinorhizobium strains (Price et al., 2015), being selected within these strains for its positive 
benefits for the bacteria.  
1.9. Plant regulation of NCRs via binding of unique and conserved motifs in 
NCR promoter regions 
In order to ask what might regulate NCR expression, either temporally or spatially, 
Nallu et al. (2013) carried out analysis of NCR promoter regions. They identified five 
conserved motifs (Figure 1.10) ranging from 41 to 50bp in length in many NCR promoter 
regions that were densely clustered in the 400bp upstream region of putative translation 
start site. According to the authors, these motifs were not identified in the promoter 
region of the other 33,131 annotated genes (excluding NCRs) in the M. truncatula genome 
(vMt2.0) or in the promoters, introns or 3-UTR region of 88 DEFL analyzed by them. 
Therefore, these motifs seem to be unique to NCR genes and contain binding sites for 
different transcription factors (TFs), such as, ID1 (a zinc finger TF), AUXIN 
RESPONSE FACTOR (ARF), DOF protein, MADS box proteins, NICE2 etc. A similar 
promoter analysis was carried out previously in the Gifford lab (Achom, 2019) with the 
upstream 500bp region of NCR genes using Mt4.0 genome. The analysis was carried out 
on 185 NCR gene promoters that were expressed in a microarray experiment conducted 
using NimbleGen array (only 185 NCRs were found to be expressed since the array did 
not contain probes for many NCR genes). Six overrepresented motifs (termed as motif 1 
to 6; Figure 1.10) were found that overlapped with those mentioned by Nallu et al. (2013) 
but were comparatively shorter (8-12 bp) and did not match the binding sites for the 
transcription factors described in Nallu et al. (2013). Instead, binding sites for plant 
regulatory proteins, LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY)/CIRCADIAN 
CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1)/REVEILLE (RVE) genes and Homeobox leucine-
zipper protein ATHB15/16 were found within two of those six conserved motifs 
identified. LHY, CCA1 and RVEs are transcription factors that are homologous to each 
other and play central roles in the regulation of many genes involved in maintaining plant 
circadian rhythms.  
 - 23 - 
Figure 1.10: Conserved motifs in NCR promoters. (A-E) Five conserved motifs identified 
by Nallu et al. (2013). The motif analysis information was taken from the supplementary 
information provided in Nallu et al. (2013). Position specific probability matrix on the top of 
each figure shows the probability for any nucleotide to be in that position; the nucleotide with 
highest probability was shown with representative colour (A: red, C: blue, G: yellow, T: green) 
in the graph and in the top line of multilevel consensus sequence. The middle or bottom lines 
in the consensus sequence represent other possible nucleotide with respectively lower 
probability (F) Six shorter motifs that were identified by Achom (2019) analyzing 185 NCR 
promoters (that were expressed in a microarray experiment) are listed in the table and their 
position is marked by black boxes within the longer motifs found by Nallu et al.  
 - 24 - 
The binding site for LHY/CCA1/RVEs, AGATATTT or its reverse complement, 
AAATATCT, is known as the Evening Element (EE) and is found in the promoter region 
of many evening expressed genes (Adams et al., 2018). A motif sequence (denoted as 
motif-2) that is very similar to EE, was found in 133 (72%) out of 185 promoter analyzed 
by Achom (2019) (Figure 1.10d & 1.11a). Motif-2 is very similar to EE, except that- firstly, 
it has two additional highly conserved AG residues at the 5 end; and secondly, some 
diversification has been seen around a highly conserved T residue which is replaced by 
a C in about half of the promoters where motif-2 was found. The two flanking A 
residues were also replaced by G on many occasions (Figure 1.11a). The putative 
significance of these differences is further discussed in Chapter 7 (General Discussion). 
Nonetheless, the presence of EE-like or related motif in many NCR promoters suggests 
the regulation of NCR genes could be, at least in part, regulated by the circadian clock 
(Figure 1.11b). Since NCRs are almost exclusively expressed in nodules, it can be 
hypothesised that the plant circadian system plays an important role in regulating 
nodulation, as it does for many other physiological processes.  
Figure 1.11: Circadian clock associated motifs. (a) The binding site for CCA1 
and RVE proteins (retrieved from PlantPAN 2.0); similar motif sequence (Motif-2) 
was found in the upstream region of NCR genes (Achom, 2019). Motif-2 has two 
additional highly conserved residues, AG at the 5 end, and some diversification at 
the middle as described in the text. (b) Presence of conserved clock motifs in the 
promoter region of NCR genes suggests circadian clock-associated or rhythmic 
regulation for many NCR genes. 
 - 25 - 
1.10. The plant circadian clock 
Circadian systems are common endogenous mechanisms that allow living 
organisms to anticipate and then coordinate themselves with regular, diurnal day-night 
cycles and related natural changes. The circadian system functions not to merely respond 
to different environmental changes but it can enable organisms to predict and prepare for 
them. As sessile organisms, plants need to anticipate and adapt with regular environmental 
changes more efficiently than animals, and the plant circadian system helps enable this 
regulation (Sanchez and Kay, 2016). In fact, a myriad of different known and unknown 
genes (about 30-40% in A. thaliana) are already identified that are associated with plant 
Figure 1.12: Overview of the main processes regulated (directly and 
indirectly) by the circadian system in plants. Traditionally, it has been thought 
that the plant clock becomes entrained by receiving environmental stimulus (e.g., 
light, temperature) and then regulates different output pathways in a unidirectional 
way. However, recent data suggests that the clock receives feedback from output 
pathways, and this modifies its sensitivity to entraining stimuli, for example, by 
regulating the expression of photoreceptors. Different metabolic and hormone 
signaling pathways, biotic and abiotic stress responses etc. communicate with the 
central oscillator in a dynamic and bidirectional way (represented by bidirectional 
arrows), and there is also crosstalk amongst these output pathways (coloured 
arrows). The circadian clock acts as a hub for all the environmental stimuli and 
internal feedback and enables coordination of suitable growth and developmental 
responses. Figure adapted from Greenham and McClung (2015) 
 - 26 - 
circadian clock functions or its regulation (Covington et al., 2008). Together these genes 
process environmental stimulus or signal (e.g., light) as inputs and modulate a number 
of plant responses as outputs. The central oscillator also takes feedbacks from output 
pathways and adjust responses accordingly. In general, the plant circadian clock sits at the 
centre of plant regulatory network and associated with almost every physiological or 
metabolic processes, directly or indirectly (Figure 1.12) (Singh and Mas, 2018). 
One of the first molecular models of the plant clock was proposed by Alabadi et al. 
(2001) based on the study on the model plant, Arabidopsis thaliana (Figure 1.13). At the 
centre of this model are two Myb transcription factors, CIRCADIAN CLOCK 
ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1) and LATE ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY) and 
another transcription factor named TIMING OF CAB EXPRESSION 1 (TOC1) (Lu et 
Figure 1.13: Simplistic model of the plant circadian clock in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Different components are represented here from left to right accordingly 
based on their expression peak during the day. White and grey backgrounds 
represent day and night-time respectively. Arrows and bars denote up- and down- 
regulation, respectively. Figure adapted from Singh and Mas (2018) 
 - 27 - 
al., 2009). The expression of CCA1 and LHY peaks in the morning and they mutually 
repress TOC1. In the evening, when the CCA1 and LHY levels are at a minimum, TOC1 
expression is able to increase. TOC1 then is able to negatively regulates the transcription 
of CCA1 and LHY (Gendron et al., 2012, Huang et al., 2012). In addition, both CCA1 
and LHY can bind to their own and each others promoter and down-regulate their 
transcription (Adams et al., 2015). Together, these three transcription factors form a 
negative feedback loop. A number of other components are connected to this and form 
additional loops. Members of the PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATOR (PRR) protein 
family, PRR9, PRR7 and PRR5, are expressed sequentially during the day and 
downregulate CCA1 and LHY transcription. These proteins are homologous to TOC1 
which is also known as PRR1 (Nakamichi et al., 2010).  
PRR9 expression is repressed by a protein complex known as the evening 
complex (EC) composed of a Myb-like transcription factor, LUX ARRHYTHMO 
(LUX) and two nuclear-localised proteins, EARLY FLOWERING 3 (ELF3) and ELF4. 
As the name suggests, EC expression peaks in the evening and is repressed by CCA1 and 
LHY. In an opposite fashion, the EC promotes the expression of CCA1 and LHY in an 
indirect manner (Nusinow et al., 2011, Nagel and Kay, 2012).  
Another important protein associated with the plant circadian clock, is a nuclear 
protein named GIGANTEA (GI) which is associated with diverse plant specific 
physiological processes, e.g., flowering time regulation, hypocotyl elongation, light 
signaling and many metabolic processes. GI expression peaks around dusk and is 
repressed by CCA1, LHY and TOC1, however, GI promotes the expression of CCA1 
and LHY by a currently unknown mechanism. GI might not be considered as a core 
component of circadian clock, but it possibly acts as a hub that connects the central 
oscillators to important biochemical and physiological processes (Mishra and Panigrahi, 
2015). In recent years, additional clock components and loops have been identified. 
Among them, a group of morning-expressed genes, known as REVEILLEs (RVEs) 
might have important clock functions. As mentioned previously, RVE genes are 
homologous to CCA1 and LHY. However, unlike CCA1 and LHY that are repressors, 
RVE8 induces some afternoon and evening expressed genes, including PRR5, TOC1, 
LUX and ELF4 (Hsu et al., 2013, Hsu and Harmer, 2014). In addition, an F-box protein 
known as ZEITLUPE (ZTL) is essential for sustaining normal circadian period as it 
 - 28 - 
controls the degradation of TOC1. ZTL mRNA is constitutively transcribed but ZTL 
protein levels oscillate through a mechanism where GI plays important roles (Kim et al., 
2007). Another small family of genes were recently described, termed as NIGHT LIGHT-
INDUCIBLE AND CLOCK REGULATED or LNK, that are morning-expressed and 
found to be involved in the control of circadian rhythms, photomorphogenic responses 
and flowering amongst other processes, possibly by controlling a subset of 
afternoon/evening peaking clock (e.g., PRR5, ELF4) and flowering time genes (e.g., 
FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT)) (Rugnone et al., 2013).  
1.11. Aims and rationale of this project 
Outside of the model plant A. thaliana, plant circadian clock functioning has been 
comparatively less studied. However, homologs of Arabidopsis clock genes have been 
found in other angiosperms, including legumes, e.g., soybean (Glycine max), pea (Pisum 
sativum), common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) and Medicago truncatula, etc. and shown to have a 
similar expression pattern compared to A. thaliana (Song et al., 2010). Therefore, the 
function of the plant clock is likely to be widely present and well-conserved amongst 
legumes. Ueoka-Nakanishi et al. (2012) has shown that the promoter activity of A. thaliana 
CCA1 and PRR5 genes has been retained in heterologous L. japonicus tissues. This 
suggests that not only the coding regions but also the promoter regions of these clock 
genes might be functionally conserved.  
In A. thaliana, circadian gene expression varies from organ to organ in terms of 
period and amplitude. The clock responsiveness to light quality is also different in 
different organs (Bordage et al., 2016). As far we understand, the leaf circadian system is 
much more sensitive to external stimuli (e.g., light) than other organs, and plays a 
governing role on the circadian regulation of other organs. Different plant microbe 
interactions (both mutualistic and pathogenic) and plants immunogenic responses were 
reported to be regulated to some extent by the plant clock (Lu et al., 2017, Roden and 
Ingle, 2009, Hubbard et al., 2018) (discussed later in Chapter 3 & 5). However, since much 
of our understanding of the plant clock has been generated from the studies on A. thaliana 
rather than legumes, we have extremely limited understanding of whether the nodule 
development and functioning or the plant-rhizobia interactions, in general, are influenced 
by clock, and if that is the case, then, to what extent.  
 - 29 - 
Since almost every physiological process in plants is directly or indirectly regulated 
to some extent by the clock, it is highly likely that the circadian system also plays a role in 
controlling nodulation and most likely the activity of the bacteria harboured in nodules. 
Preliminary supporting evidence in favour of the assumption that the plant clock controls 
nodule activity comes from the finding that many NCR genes contain clock-associated 
cis-regulatory motifs in their promoter (Achom, 2019). 
In this thesis, firstly, a time-course experiment was carried out with a view to 
investigating the influence of the circadian clock on gene regulation within nodules of the 
model legume, M. truncatula. Secondly, M. truncatula lines where expression of the key clock 
component LHY was reduced/knocked out were compared to wild type plants to 
determine the extent of effect of clock disruption on nodulation, growth, and 
development. Finally, bacteroid gene expression within nodules (from time-course 
experiments) were analyzed to ask if there is any (or a set of) bacterial gene(s) whose 
expression is rhythmic and might be influenced by the circadian rhythm of the plant. In 
addition, the potential use of two cell-type specific promoters from A. thaliana for 
conducting cell-type specific gene expression studies in M. truncatula in future was 
determined, since studying cell type gene expression can help to elucidate developmental 
regulatory mechanisms. The experiments, results and findings are presented in four results 
chapters in this thesis as outlined below.  
In Chapter 3, findings are presented and discussed from a time-course experiment 
where mature nodules were collected at different times during the day and analyzed to ask 
if there is nodule-localised rhythmic gene expression. Using RNA sequencing and 
functional characterization approaches, a set of genes including several NCRs that are 
rhythmically expressed, were determined. Analyzing the expression pattern of different 
rhythmic genes also provided valuable insights into which different physiological and 
metabolic processes are enhanced or repressed at specific periods during the day or night.  
In Chapter 4, the phenotype (shoot growth, leaf movement, nodule mass) of the 
two M. truncatula lhy mutant lines was evaluated and discussed. These findings show that 
nodulation and growth-related processes in the nodule are impaired when clock 
functioning is disrupted.  
 - 30 - 
Chapter 5 provides insights into the rhythmicity of rhizobial gene expression in the 
bacteroids inside nodules. A number of bacterial genes have been identified that are likely 
to be diurnally regulated. These findings open up future studies to better understand clock 
regulation in prokaryotic systems, particularly those that are in a mutualistic relationship 
with a more complex multicellular organism.  
In Chapter 6, two A. thaliana promoters that confer cell type specific expression in 
A. thaliana were transformed into M. truncatula in order to generate tools to study cell-type 
specific gene expression. The results show that these Arabidopsis promoters can direct 
gene expression in the cortical cells of M. truncatula. Therefore, these constructs could be 
used to generate stable transgenic lines harbouring a cortex specific marker gene (e.g., 
fluorescent protein) expression, enabling gene expression to be studied in cortical cells- 
the location from which most nodule tissue arises. 
Analysis of the combination of transcriptomic and phenotypic data that are 
presented in this thesis supports that, like many other physiological processes, nodulation 
and rhizobial activity is also regulated by the plants endogenous circadian clock. This new 
data and related insights gained from it will enable further studies to better understand 
the influence of circadian clock in legume-rhizobia symbiosis.
 - 31 - 
2. Materials and Methods 
2.1. Plant growth and sampling 
2.1.1. Plant material  
Medicago truncatula cv. Jemalong A17 seeds were obtained from the Genetic 
Resources Unit, IGER, Aberystwyth (www.igergru.ibers.aber.ac.uk). Wild type M. 
truncatula R108 and two Tnt1 retrotransposon insertion lines, NF17115 and NF16461 
(Mtlhy1 and Mtlhy2, respectively) in the R108 background were procured from the Noble 
Research Institute, Ardmore, Oklahoma, USA. NF17115 and NF16461 was chosen as 
they harbour Tnt1 insertion in the promoter and 5th exon of MtLHY (along with 
insertions at other random positions), respectively.  
2.1.2. Seed germination 
All the different lines of M. truncatula seeds used (A17, R108 and the two transposon 
insertion lines mtlhy1 and mtlhy2) were germinated in the same way. To begin, the seeds 
were extracted by crushing the seed pods carefully with a plasterers hawk on a corrugated 
rubber mat. Seeds that came out of the pods without any apparent damage were picked 
by tweezers into a 50mL falcon tube. Seeds were then chemically scarified by treating with 
concentrated sulfuric acid (~1-2 mL per 100 seeds), usually for 10-20 minutes, until 2-3 
dark spots appeared on the surface of most seeds. After removing excess sulfuric acid, 
seeds were thoroughly washed 3-5 times with sterile water. Scarified seeds were sterilized 
by treating with 7% sodium hypochlorite solution for 5 minutes with gentle shaking. After 
sterilisation, seeds were sown one by one on 1.5% phyto-agar in square (12 x 12cm) petri 
dishes and then the plates were sealed using 3M MicroporeTM tape. About 36 seeds (6 x 
6) were sown per plate and a wet (with sterile dd H2O) seed germination/growth pouch 
was kept inside the petri dish to maintain humidity. Petri dishes containing scarified and 
sterilised seeds were then wrapped with aluminium foil (to keep seeds in dark) and kept 
in 4C. After 3-6 days of cold treatment, wrapped petri dishes were transferred into a 
Sanyo MLR-352 growth chamber set at 25C. At this temperature, seeds are usually 
germinated and become ready for sowing or transformation within 2-3 days.  
 - 32 - 
2.1.3. Growth conditions 
Germinated seedlings that were healthy (actively growing with green cotyledons) 
and more than 2 cm long were planted on FP11 (11 x 11 cm) pots, filled with sterilised 
perlite with 1-2cm top layer of sterile vermiculite. For time series experiments, plants were 
grown for 40 days after potting in Sanyo 2279 growth cabinet in 12/12 hours light/dark 
photoperiod at an irradiance of 200 mol m2 s1 and temperature of 24C during day and 
21C at night. For mutant phenotyping experiments, FP9 (9 x 9 cm) pots were used, and 
plants were grown for 5 weeks at 24/21C (16/8 hours day/night cycle) in a temperature-
controlled glasshouse compartment. For rhythmic leaf movement (RLM) assays, plants 
were grown for 2 weeks only in a Sanyo MLR-352 cabinet in 12/12 hours day/night 
photoperiod at 24  C before transferring them to constant light. In all the cases, pots were 
kept on suitable trays and watered 2-3 times per week when the surface of the pot medium 
was dry, with modified Broughton and Dilworth (1971) nutrient solution (1 mM 
CaCl22H2O, 1 mM KH2PO4, 75 M FeNa EDTA, 1 mM MgSO4.7H2O, 0.25 mM K2SO4, 
6 M MnSO4.H2O, 1 M ZnSO4.7H2O, 0.5 M CuSO4.5H2O, 0.05 M CoSO4.7H2O, 20 
M H3BO3, and 0.1 M Na2MoO4.2H2O), adjusted to pH ~6.5 with KOH.  
To prepare seedlings for hairy root transformation, the Agrobacterium rhizogenes 
inoculated seedlings were grown in square petri dishes (12 x 12cm) on 1.5% phytoagar-
solidified Modified Fahreus Media (MFM) (0.5 mM MgSO4.7H20, 0.7 mM KH2PO4, 0.8 
mM Na2HPO4.2H2O, 5 mM NH4NO3, 20 M ferric citrate, 8 M MnSO4.H2O, 4 M 
CuSO4.5H2O, 7.34 M ZnSO4.7H2O, 16 M H3BO3, 4.13 M Na2MoO4 and 1 mM CaCl2; 
pH 6.5) for 7 days at 25C. Ten seedlings were grown side by side in each plate. Plates 
were wrapped with black polythene so that the cotyledons were able to access light, but 
the radicles were not, mimicking the natural above- and below-ground light conditions. 
2.1.4. Root cross section preparation 
Fresh root parts of interest were cut (in about 5mm pieces) using a clean razor 
blade. At around same time, a 5% agar suspension was prepared and poured onto a petri 
dish. When the temperature of the agar suspension went down to ~58C, cut root pieces 
were dipped vertically into the suspension. The suspension was then placed at 4C to 
rapidly solidify it. Then, using a sharp scalpel, around 1 cm2 agar blocks were cut around 
 - 33 - 
each immobilized root section. It was ensured that the root sections remain at the centre 
of the blocks. Next, using a vibratome (Series 1000 classic), 100-200 m thick sections of 
agar block were sliced. Root cross-sections within each agar slice were viewed under a 
light microscope to select the best cross-sections for confocal microscopy. 
2.1.5. Time course sampling and plant phenotyping 
In the time-course experiment, 6-7 plants were uprooted from pots for sample 
collection at each time-point. All the nodules that were fully grown (>3mm in length), 
actively fixing nitrogen (pink in colour) were picked from roots using fine-tipped tweezers 
and collected into 2mL sterile, RNase free tubes that were suspended in liquid-N. Leaves 
(4-5 trifoliates) and part of the root system without any nodules, were also collected in 
separate 2mL tubes in liquid-N. Samples were then kept in -80C for RNA extraction. 
 For mutant phenotyping experiments, plants were removed from pots and the 
fresh shoot weight of each plant was measured. Next, they were transferred to a 60C 
oven and left overnight; shoot dry weight was measured the next day. From the root 
system the nodules were picked using tweezers and fresh nodule weight was measured 
collectively per genotype/treatment. 
2.2. Bacterial culture and plant inoculation 
2.2.1. Rhizobial inoculation 
The highly efficient N-fixing rhizobial symbiont for M. truncatula, Sinorhizobium 
meliloti 1022 was grown on agar with TY media (tryptone 5g/L, yeast extract 3g/L, 
CaCl22H2O 0.87g/L, pH adjusted to 6.8-7.0) at 28C for 2 days. From the solid culture, 
S. meliloti 1022 was inoculated into 10 mL liquid TY medium and grown for ~24 hours 
with gentle shaking at 28C. Rhizobial cells were then harvested by centrifuging at 3200g 
for 10 minutes. The supernatant was discarded, and the pellet resuspended in sterile water 
and diluted to an optical density (OD600) of ~0.05. 500 L of freshly prepared rhizobial 
solution was used to inoculate each M. truncatula seedling the day after potting by pipetting 
onto the vermiculite layer in close proximity to the seedlings.  
 - 34 - 
2.2.2. Hairy root transformation with A. rhizogenes 
First, A. rhizogenes strain ARqua1 was transformed with pre-prepared expression 
vectors (see 2.3.1) through the electroporation method (Andreason, 1993) using Bio-Rad 
MicroPulser electroporator and 0.1 cm-gap electroporation cuvettes. Then, transformed 
A. rhizogenes was grown in 10 mL of liquid LB media (Trypton 10 g/L, Yeast extract 5 
g/L, NaCl 3 g/L and pH adjusted to 7.5, with 50 g/mL streptomycin for selection) 
overnight at 28C. Next, 250 L of overnight grown culture was spread on solid LB agar 
media with 50 g/mL streptomycin and grown for 2 days at 28 C, so that a homogenous 
layer of bacteria was formed. To transform plants with A. rhizogenes, ~3 mm of the root 
tips of 3 days old seedlings were cut with a sterile scalpel, and then the cut-roots were 
rubbed against the layer of bacteria so that a visible tiny ball of culture became attached 
to the cut-tips. A. rhizogenes treated seedling were then grown for a week as described 
earlier in section 2.1.3. 
2.3. Molecular Methods 
2.3.1. Cloning and preparation of expression vectors 
For expression vector preparation, TOPO and Gateway cloning methods were 
followed. First, the desired promoter regions (pAtCO2 and pAtPEP) were amplified 
through Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) from the genomic DNA of Arabidopsis 
thaliana, using high fidelity Phusion DNA polymerase and primers (listed in Table 2.1). 
Genomic DNA was extracted from A. thaliana ecotype Columbia-0 using Chelex 100 
resin (from Sigma-Aldrich) and following the protocol developed by HwangBo et al. 
Table 2.1: List of PCR primers used to amplify promoter sequences (pAtCO2 
and pAtPEP). 
 - 35 - 
(2010). Amplified PCR products were further purified using the QIAquick PCR 
purification kit. The PCR products were then cloned into pENTR (entry vector) and 
transformed into One Shot chemically competent Escherichia coli. Transformed E. coli 
were then grown in liquid LB media overnight at 37C with 25 g/mL kanamycin for 
selection. Next, the pENTR vector was extracted from 3 mL of overnight grown culture 
using the QIAprep spin miniprep kit as manufacturers instructions. In the next step, an 
LR reaction was performed to incorporate the cloned promoter fragment into the 
Gateway-compatible pBGWFS7.0 destination vector that has both streptomycin and 
spectinomycin resistance and recombination insertion site immediately upstream of a 
eGFP-GUS coding sequence. For the LR reaction, 25 ng of entry vector was mixed with 
50 ng of destination vector and ddH2O added to make the final volume up to 3.5 L. 
Then, 0.5 L of LR ClonaseTM II enzyme (InvitrogenTM) was added and incubated for 1 
hour at 25C. After incubation, the total reaction mixture (~4 L) was used to transform 
competent E. coli that were then grown on LB media with both streptomycin and 
spectinomycin at 50 g/mL concentration for the selection of colonies. To confirm 
whether the promoter sequences were properly integrated into the vector in terms of 
orientation and position, the vectors were extracted from transformed E. coli and 
evaluated by analyzing Sanger sequencing reads (prepared through GATC sequencing 
service). For plant transformation, the A. rhizogenes ARqua1 strain was transformed with 
the vectors (as mentioned in section 2.2.2). Plasmid vectors were kept at -20C, or for 
long time storage vectors containing E. coli were kept as glycerol stocks (150 L overnight 
grown culture in 850 L 15% v/v glycerol) at -80C. 
2.3.2. RNA extraction and sequencing 
Frozen plant material was first ground using a mortar and pestle. Before use the 
mortar, pestle, and other tools (inc. spatula) were autoclaved and washed with RNase 
AWAYTM and placed in liquid-N during grinding to keep the temperature as low as 
possible. RNA extraction was carried out from ~100 mg of ground sample using the 
Monarch Total RNA Miniprep Kit that included a DNase treatment step. Extracted 
RNA samples were then analyzed for their concentration and quality using readings 
obtained on a NanoDrop spectrophotometer. The minimal quantity and quality threshold 
considered for samples was 50 ng/L of RNA with both A260/280 and A260/230 ratios 
above 2.0. Samples were also analyzed for their RNA integrity using a Bioanalyzer 2100 
 - 36 - 
RNA 6000 Pico Total RNA kit (Agilent Technologies). A minimum RNA Integrity 
Number (RIN) of 8.5 were maintained for all the samples to confirm good RNA integrity. 
RNA samples were then sent to Novogene (UK) company ltd. for RNA library 
preparation and sequencing. First, the rRNA was removed using a Ribo-Zero kit, then 
the libraries prepared following an Illumina TruSeqTM RNA library preparation protocol, 
both according to manufacturers instructions. Once the library had been prepared and 
passed the quality control tests (to confirm appropriate library concentration, insert size), 
it was Ilumina-sequenced for unstranded, 150 bp-long, paired-end (PE) sequencing.  
2.3.3. cDNA synthesis and quantitative PCR (qPCR) 
cDNA was synthesized using ~600 ng of total RNA and ProtoScript II cDNA 
synthesis kit and random primer mix from New England Biolabs following the 
manufacturers instructions. cDNA was stored at -20C until used for qPCR. Primers 
(listed in Table 2.2) for qPCR were designed using Primer3Plus (Steve Rozen, 2000) with 
the following parameters: primer melting temperature between 59 and 64 C (60 C 
optimum), product size 50- 200 bp and a GC content between 45-55% (50% optimum). 
Primer efficiency was evaluated by using linear calibration curve and melting curve (also 
known as dissociation curve) analysis. Linear calibration curves were obtained from serial 
dilutions (10-1 to 10-6) of cDNAs in equal fraction. Linear regression analysis of Ct versus 
log(dilution) was used to derive the efficiency as, m = -(1/log E), where m is the slope of 
the regression line fit derived from standard curve and E is the efficiency of the primer 
(Schmittgen and Livak, 2008). The efficiency for all the qPCR primers (listed in Table 2.2) 
was over 1.85 and a single peak was seen in all the melt-curves, suggesting good efficiency 
and specificity of the primers. 
qPCR was performed in 96 well plates using SYBR Green JumpStart Taq ReadyMix 
(Sigma-Aldrich) as manufacturers instructions. A reaction mixture of 60 L (containing 
5 L of cDNA) was prepared for each sample and then split and loaded into 3 separate 
wells (each containing 20 l) to make three technical replicates to account for technical 
errors. Thermocycler conditions were as follows: 95 C for the initial 10 min; 95 C for 
30 sec then 60 C for 1 min for 40 cycles; and finally one cycle (to generate measurements 
to plot a melting curve) at 95 C for 1 min, 55 C for 30 sec and 95 C for 30 sec. 
Expression of genes of interest was normalized against the reference gene, -Tubulin 
 - 37 - 
(Medtr7g089120) (Kakar et al., 2008) using the Ct method, a derivation of the Ct 
(Livak and Schmittgen, 2001). 
2.3.4. Confocal microscopy 
Root cross-sections were placed onto a microscope slide. Then, 2-3 drops of the 
cell wall-staining dye, propidium iodide (100 g/mL) were applied onto the cross-sections 
and then covered with coverslips and taken to the microscope. Confocal microscopy was 
carried out using a Zeiss LSM 880 microscope. To detect GFP, the 488 nm laser was 
used, and fluorescence emission was visualised in the 500-550 nm range. For propidium 
iodide/cell wall visualisation, the same laser was used but fluorescence was visualized at 
the 600-700 nm range. 
2.4. Bioinformatics and statistics 
2.4.1. RNA sequence data analysis 
Raw sequencing data was received from Novogene in the form of a pair of .fq.gz 
files for each sample. The depth of sequencing was at least 34 million reads per sample, 
Table 2.2: List of primers used for qPCR to quantify the relative abundance 
of different circadian gene transcripts. 
 - 38 - 
containing reads from both plant and rhizobial sources. The .fq.gz files were uploaded 
onto the galaxy EU server (usegalaxy.eu). Different freely accessible software packages, 
available on the galaxy server, were used for most of the data processing. First, the quality 
of raw sequencing data was analyzed by FastQC (Andrews, 2010). The replicate-2 for 21h 
time-point and replicate-3 for 15h time-point contained excessively high level of 
duplicated reads that were also inconsistent with other samples/replicates; suggesting 
something went wrong during library preparation. These data were not trustable and 
could not be repaired using available techniques, therefore, discarded from further 
processing and analysis. Next, contaminating adapter and poor quality sequences (based 
on phred33 quality scores) were removed by Trimmomatic v36.4 (Bolger et al., 2014) 
using a custom made fasta file containing Illumina adaptor sequences (adaptors.fa) and 
executing following settings: illuminaclip:adaptors.fa:2:30:10:2, slidingwindow:4:20 and 
minlen:40. Next, clean, trimmed and paired reads were used to generate raw transcript 
read-counts and TPM (transcripts per million) normalized read-counts using Salmon 
quant v0.14.1 (Patro et al., 2017) and using the M. truncatula reference transcript sequences 
(Mt4.0v1), downloaded from Phytozome database (phytozome.jgi.doe.gov). Read counts 
were further normalized as log2 transcripts per million (logTPM) using functions in Excel.  
To determine rhizobial transcript read-counts, clean reads (trimmed to remove 
adaptor or poor-quality sequences) were mapped to the S. meliloti 1022 genome 
(downloaded from NCBI database; accession: PRJNA636618) using Hisat2 v2.1.0 (Kim 
et al., 2015a), using the default parameters to generate BAM alignment files. Raw gene 
read counts were generated from BAM files using FeatureCounts v1.6.4 (Liao et al., 2013) 
with gene annotations (also retrieved from NCBI assembly database; accession: 
ASM1331577v1) and the following settings: feature type (-t): gene, gene identifier (-g): 
gene_id and all other parameters set to default. Raw counts were normalized as log2 
transcripts per million (logTPM) values using Excel functions.  
To identify diurnally oscillating M. truncatula or S. meliloti transcripts, logTPM 
expression data were analyzed with the R MetaCycle v1.2.0 package in R (v3.6.1) (R-Core-
Team, 2018), with following settings: minper: 20, maxper: 28, cycMethod: LS (Lomb-
Scargle).  
 - 39 - 
2.4.2. Clustering, gene ontology and promoter analysis 
The expression levels of oscillating transcripts with a p-value less than 0.05 were 
clustered by first importing the mean logTPM expression values from three replicates into 
R. Then the expression values for each gene in different time-points were Z-normalized 
(mean substruction followed by division with standard deviation). For clustering and to 
generate cluster related heatmap and plots, the following R packages were used: 
pheatmap, factoextra, ggplot2, ggplots, RColorBrewer.  
For plant gene ontology (GO) analysis, both Phytomine (available online at: 
phytozome.jgi.doe.gov/phytomine/begin.do) and ShinyGO V0.61 tools (available at: 
bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/go/) were used and the outputs were compared. Clustering of 
top hit (top 10 or 20 hits based on FDR corrected p-values) GO terms was carried out 
using the ShinyGO Tree tool. For rhizobial GO analysis, the R package topGO was 
used. The word frequency analysis was carried out using the R packages: tm, 
SnowballC, wordcloud. For all R packages mentioned above, the latest available 
versions were used. 
To identify specific motifs in the gene promoters of different cluster, first, the 
promoter sequences of corresponding genes were extracted from the reference genome 
(Mt4.0v1) using the following galaxy server bedtools: FlankBed, GetFastaBed. Then, 
the presence of query motifs was identified using FIMO (Find Individual Motif 
Occurrence) tool from MEME suite (Bailey et al., 2009) (available online at: meme-
suite.org/tools/fimo).  
2.4.3. Reciprocal BLASTp and homology search 
M. truncatula clock gene homologues were primarily identified by carrying out a 
reciprocal BLASTp search against the NCBI M. truncatula non-redundant (nr) protein 
sequence database using A. thaliana clock protein sequences. Hits were sorted using 
maximum bit-score followed by expect (E) value. This homologous gene list was then 
compared with the homology data in the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and 
Genomes) Orthology database and only those hits that were also listed in KEGG database 
were retained for further analysis. Homology was also analyzed using the Phytozome 
 - 40 - 
database (available at: phytozome.jgi.doe.gov) to detect the level of similarity between 
homologous protein sequences using the Smith-Watermann alignment algorithm (Smith 
and Waterman, 1981).  
2.4.4. Statistical analysis of phenotypic data 
Phenotypic data were analyzed in excel using Data analysis add-in options. Firstly, 
the descriptive statistics (e.g., mean, variances, SEM) of each group of samples were 
determined. Depending on the level of variance (determined by F-test; assuming equal 
variance when F-test result is insignificant and vice versa), two sample t-tests assuming 
equal or unequal variances were performed to determine if there was any statistical 
significance between samples. Data boxplots were also generated using excel chart 
functions.  
2.4.5. Statistical analysis of rhythmic leaf movement assay data 
For RLM assays, 2 weeks old plants were moved to constant light conditions at the 
same irradiance as their normal daylight, and then imaged periodically using time-series 
cameras every ten minutes over the course of a week. Using ImageJ, images were grey 
scaled, the areas around the full extent of growth of the second true leaves were defined 
and integrated density (product of area and mean grey value) of each leaf were calculated 
per frame. After normalising the values (to their mean over the time-points) they were 
analyzed evaluated for periodicity using BioDare2 (https://biodare2.ed.ac.uk) and 
rhythmic leaf movement visualised graphically. 
3. Rhythmic gene expression within nodules supports the 
presence of a functional nodule clock involved in diurnal 
coordination of nodule metabolism 
3.1. Introduction 
The importance of an endogenous circadian clock in plant growth and development 
is now well-established and documented by the numerous studies based on the model 
plant A. thaliana. Many core clock genes that encode for transcription factors target 
numerous other genes with distinctive functions (Kim et al., 2017). In A. thaliana, as many 
as one-third of all expressed genes were reported to be under clock regulation (Michael 
and McClung, 2003, Covington et al., 2008), and as much as 89% of the transcripts were 
found to be rhythmically regulated under different environmental cycling conditions (e.g., 
light-dark or warm-cool) (Michael et al., 2008b). Clock-regulated genes were also reported 
to be over-represented in all major hormone signaling and several stress response 
pathways (Covington et al., 2008). Recent studies also link circadian regulation to plant 
health and innate immunity (reviewed by Lu et al. (2017)). Immuno-regulation plays an 
important role in controlling susceptibility to different pathogens and in allowing 
beneficial microbes (e.g., rhizobia) to colonize (Pel and Pieterse, 2013, Zamioudis and 
Pieterse, 2012). Therefore, it is likely that the circadian clock regulates nodulation in the 
legumes, at least to some extent, by modifying both the plants immunogenic response 
towards infecting rhizobia and the extent to which plant root development can be 
modulated to activate nodule formation. 
3.1.1. Regulation of plant immunity by the circadian clock 
Light has long been known to influence different plant defense mechanisms 
including Systemic Acquired Resistance (SAR) and the Hypersensitive Reactions (HR). 
Several photoreceptors and photosynthetic genes are also found to be part of the plant 
immune system (Hua, 2013, Karpinski et al., 2003). Since light is the major zeitgeber (an 
external cue that can entrain the biological clock) for the circadian system and given that 
most defense assays were carried out under diurnal light-dark conditions, it can be difficult 
to differentiate among defense responses that were triggered not by light but by the 
endogenous clock. However, a growing body of evidence supports that not only light, but 
the circadian clock independently coordinates different defense responses in a diurnally 
regulated manner, enabling the anticipation of regular attacks from different pest and 
pathogens. For instance, Bhardwaj et al. (2011) inoculated A. thaliana leaves with the 
gram-negative bacterium Pseudomonas syringae at different times during the days. The plants 
were initially grown in 16h/8h light/dark cycles for 3 weeks and then moved to 
continuous light conditions and kept there for a day and then infections were carried out 
at different time-points. The researchers observed that the susceptibility of the plant to P. 
syringae varies temporally during the day, being relatively highly resistant to infection at 
around the subjective morning and most susceptible around the subjective midnight. They 
also found that this temporal variation in resistance was disrupted in two different clock 
mutants (cca1 and elf3) that display arrhythmic circadian outputs. Several other studies in 
different clock mutants also supports the requirement of proper clock functioning in plant 
immunity (Lu et al., 2017).  
One of the most straightforward ways to restrict pathogenic invasion might be by 
regulating stomatal opening. Stomatal opening act as a gateway for some pathogens to 
gain access to plant tissues, nutrients, and space for colonization (Melotto et al., 2006). 
Plant stomata remain mostly open during the day and closed at night, a process which is 
tightly controlled by the circadian clock in anticipation of the daily changes in light and 
moisture content in the air. This is consistent with the finding that A. thaliana plants that 
are spray-inoculated (not through injury) with P. syringae exhibit greater resistance during 
night when stomata remain mostly closed (Korneli et al., 2014).  
Apart from regulating physical barriers like stomata, the plant circadian clock can 
activate induced defense pathways (that is usually activated upon an injury or pathogenic 
attack) to restrict pathogens. A number of defense-related genes oscillate in a circadian 
manner and have been found to be regulatory targets of the core clock genes, e.g., CCA1, 
TOC1, PRRs. Many of these target genes are involved in two major plant immune 
response pathways, PTI (PAMP-Triggered Immunity) and ETI (Effector-Triggered 
Immunity) (Lu et al., 2017)). Increasing numbers of studies have shown that the major 
plant hormones (e.g., auxins, cytokinins, gibberellins, abscisic acids, ethylene) are all 
involved in the regulation of plant-pathogen interactions. There is crosstalk between all 
these hormonal signaling pathways and circadian regulation (Atamian and Harmer, 2016, 
Robert-Seilaniantz et al., 2011). The biosynthesis and regulation of two important, well-
known, counteracting plant defense hormones, SA (Salicylic Acid) and JA (Jasmonic 
Acid), are also influenced by the circadian clock (Goodspeed et al., 2012, Goodspeed et 
al., 2013). Furthermore, the production and homeostasis of ROS (Reactive Oxygen 
Species) are regulated in a diurnal manner (Lai et al., 2012). Considering all these, the 
influence of circadian regulation in plant immunity is clear, although, the detailed 
mechanism of defense-related regulation of the clock is yet far from understood.  
3.1.2. The plant circadian clock could also be modified by invading pathogens 
According to our understanding of pathogen-plant interactions, pathogen success 
involves regulation of plant pathways to enable their colonisation. One means to achieve 
successful infection could be for the pathogen to modulate or disrupt the circadian 
regulation in their favour. To support this, infection with P. syringae can shorten the 
circadian period, as measured by promoter activity of the CCA1 gene (Zhang C et al., 
2013). Infection by the oomycete Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis (Hpa) can disrupt the 
rhythmicity of CCA1 expression (Wang et al., 2011). While pathogen mediated changes 
in the clock activity are common, these changes are also associated with programmed cell 
death of the infected tissue. Therefore, it is not clear whether the altered clock activity is 
orchestrated by the pathogen, or it just an indirect effect of the molecular measures 
employed by the host to restrict infection spreading. So far there is no conclusive evidence 
for pathogen-mediated direct alteration of the circadian clock, however, some pathogens 
might have indirect means of modifying the clock. For example, in A. thaliana, P. syringae 
infection can activate the synthesis and/or signaling of auxin and abscisic acids. These 
hormones are tightly regulated by the clock but their activity can also reciprocally modify 
clock activity. In fact, as discussed in Chapter 1, the central oscillator takes feedback from 
output pathways to adjust itself. Therefore, any changes in hormonal activity or other 
physiological modifications caused by pathogens, can hypothetically alter circadian-related 
activities. 
3.1.3. Nodulation in legumes could be under circadian influence 
Circadian regulation is so multifaceted that every aspects of plant physiology is, 
directly or indirectly, under this influence. It is, therefore, very unlikely that nodule 
formation process in legume plants would not be affected or controlled to some extent 
by the clock. Some support in this regard comes from the study by Dalla Via et al. (2015) 
where they found some clock-related genes including several PRR genes were 
differentially expressed in common bean (Phaseolus vulgaris) upon Nod Factor and EPS 
(Exopolysaccharide) perception. This suggests that a root circadian clock could be 
adjusted at the very early stages of symbiotic interaction. It has been reported long ago 
(Minchin and Pate, 1974) that the nitrogen fixation rate in the nodules of Pisum sativum is 
responsive to the daily changes in light and temperature. It usually increases throughout 
the day, reaching a maximum in the evening and then decreases at night. In soybean 
(Glycine max), an important transcription factor for nodule growth and fitness, known as 
bHLHm1 (basic Helix-Loop-Helix membrane-1) or previously known as SAT1 
(Symbiotic Ammonium Transporter 1), has been found to be diurnally regulated with 
higher expression during the night (Chiasson et al., 2014). These observations indeed 
support a link between the circadian clock and the nodulation process. As described 
earlier, the clock regulates various aspects of the plant immune response towards 
pathogenic invaders. This is interesting in regard to nodulation since one hypothesis 
suggests that the symbiotic interactions originate from pathogenic interactions (reviewed 
in Lagunas et al. (2015)). Like pathogens, initial perception of beneficial microbes triggers 
plant immunity, but beneficial ones usually downregulate immunogenic responses at later 
stages (Pel and Pieterse, 2013, Zamioudis and Pieterse, 2012). Sometimes, specific defense 
response can also inhibit usual rhizobial symbiosis. For example, Lopez-Gomez et al. 
(2011) has demonstrated that administration of a Microbe-Associated Molecular Pattern 
(MAMP), known as flg22, can induce immune responses that inhibit rhizobial symbiosis 
in L. japonicus. The key point here is that both the pathogenic and symbiotic interactions 
can activate specific immunogenic responses and, in turn, both interactions can be shaped 
and modified by the host immune system. Now, if pathogenic interactions are adjusted 
by the endogenous clock (as discussed in previous section), then it is highly likely that the 
symbiotic responses are also conditioned by it.  
3.1.4. Aims and objectives  
Our understanding of circadian regulation is far from comprehensive, but outside 
A. thaliana, it is even less developed. However, important clock genes are conserved in 
both monocots and dicots including legumes and have been reported to be associated 
with critical agronomic traits such as growth and flowering time (Song et al., 2010, Bendix 
et al., 2015, Li et al., 2019). In particular, clock gene homologs (e.g., MtLHY, MtPRRs, 
MtELFs) were already identified in the model legume, M. truncatula, that could be very 
useful in studying the circadian regulation of legume-rhizobia symbiosis (Young et al., 
2011, Song et al., 2010). As mentioned earlier in Chapter 1, not only the coding regions 
but the promoter activity (and thus regulation) of these circadian genes might also be 
conserved (Ueoka-Nakanishi et al., 2012). The rhythmic behaviour of the clock genes are 
slightly different in different tissues and cell layers in terms of their period, amplitude, 
responsiveness to light quality etc, therefore, the clock might have become adapted to the 
functions of different tissues (Bordage et al., 2016). It has been shown that root circadian 
rhythms are regulated by shoot or shoot-meristem derived signals (Takahashi et al., 2015). 
Since nodules are connected to roots, if there is a functioning clock in nodules then that 
could be, to some extent, regulated by root clock or distantly by shoot clock. Therefore, 
it would be interesting to look at the regulation of clock genes in nodules.  
The clock influences almost all the physiological processes investigated to date and 
likely to play roles in nodulation as well. However, there is a lack of information about 
the role of circadian clock during legume-rhizobia symbiotic interactions. As discussed in 
Chapter 1, many nodule specific NCR genes contain Evening Element (EE), a clock-
associated cis-regulatory motif, in their promoters which implies a possible link between 
nodulation and circadian regulation. Different roles of these NCR genes are now evident, 
but they were first characterized for their antibacterial activities (Mergaert et al., 2003). 
Since many defense related genes are regulated in a diel manner, some of these NCR genes 
could be rhythmically expressed to keep the infecting population of rhizobia or pathogens 
in balance, in tune with other plant growth and development processes that occur over 
the day and night.  
To the best of our knowledge, clock functioning in the nodules of legumes has not 
been studied extensively and there is no known study that analyzes the gene expression 
profile of legume nodules over a period of 24 hours. The paucity of nodule-specific clock 
related gene expression data, together with our observation that many NCR gene 
promoters contain the EE motif, led us to test for circadian regulation of gene expression 
in nodules. In the next section, the experimental design of a time-series experiment and 
the associated results are presented and discussed. The experiment enabled us to find out 
the genes that are expressed in a diurnal pattern under constant environmental conditions 
and to get a tentative idea on how the expression of different genes could be influenced 
by the circadian clock in mature nodules of M. truncatula. Special attention was given to 
determine, firstly, the expression pattern of the key circadian clock genes, secondly, the 
overall pattern of rhythmic gene expressions or in other words identifying processes that 
are rhythmically regulated, and finally, to find out whether any NCR genes were involved 
in rhythmic regulation. 
3.2. Results and Discussion 
3.2.1. Experimental overview of the time-course analysis 
In order to determine how gene expression in nodules changes over time, M. 
truncatula plants were grown in diurnal light-dark cycles for 40 days in order to entrain the 
circadian clock (Figure 3.1). The plants were then transferred to constant light and 
temperature conditions to examine the persistence of rhythms. Nodules, leaves and roots 
were sampled every 3h for the first 24 hours then every 6h for another 24 hours (a total 
of 13 time-points) in constant light and temperature. RNA was extracted from samples 
of nodules, and RNA integrity was evaluated; RNA Integrity Number (RIN) for all the 
Figure 3.1: Overview of experimental design and gene expression analysis. 
Samples were collected in free-running condtions at 13 time-points over 48 hours. 
The periods between time-point 12 to 24 and 36 to 48 represent subjective nights, 
marked with a grey background. 
samples were above 8.5, suggesting good RNA quality and integrity as confirmed by 
electrophoresis and electropherogram analysis (Figure 3.2). The RNA samples were 
sequenced, generating 150bp, paired end RNA sequencing data (see Chapter 2 for 
methods). In total, three replicate experiments were set; therefore, there were three 
replicate samples for each timepoint (except for 15h and 21h timepoints for which two 
replicates were used as clarified in section 2.4.1). All the replicate samples were collected, 
processed and analyzed separately (using same protocol) to evaluate and confirm the 
reproducibility of our results. In general, the RNA expression dataset was analyzed to ask 
if there were any periodic changes in gene expression in the nodules. qPCR was carried 
out to check the expression of the important clock gene MtLHY (the M. truncatula 
homolog for both CCA1 and LHY; further characterised in Chapter 4), in all the samples 
from leaves, roots and nodules. This enabled comparison of the rhythmic behaviour of 
the MtLHY gene in different tissues. 
3.2.2. About two thirds of M. truncatula genes are expressed in nodules 
Upon receiving the raw sequencing data, the quality control information was 
analyzed and the raw data were processed to maintain high standards (as shown in Figure 
3.3). Once the sequenced reads had been processed and normalized, they were mapped 
to the M. truncatula transcriptome (Mt4.0v1) (see Chapter 2 for methods). After this, read-
counts and TPM normalized expression levels for 61,510 transcripts were generated. 
About  one-third (33.5%) of these transcripts  contain  no  read or less than one read on  
Fragment size (nt) 
28S 18S 16S 
Figure 3.2: Total RNA quality analysis on Bioanalyzer. (a) Electrophoresis (first 12 
timepoints from replicate 1) shows four distinct bands; two for plant rRNA subunit 28S 
and 18S, another two for bacterial rRNA subunits 23S and 16S. Green bars indicate the 
lower marker (25 nt) (b) Electropherogram of a representative sample shows distinct 
peaks for the rRNA subunits and signals for RNAs smaller than 200 nt.  
 Figure 3.3: Quality control 
information of the raw reads 
(post trimming) for each 
time-point. Quality data 
presented here are from 
replicate-1, but are 
representative of reads from 
other replicates as well. For 
(a,b,d) each line denotes a 
sample. (a) The mean phred 
quality scores across each base 
position in the read. High quality 
scores (above 35) were observed 
throughout, even at the very end 
of 150bp long reads. (b) The 
number of reads with average 
phred scores show that most of 
the reads had high mean score 
(>35) with no reads with a phred 
score below 20. (c) Analysis of 
sequence count shows there are 
a high number of duplicated 
reads which is not uncommon in 
RNA-seq data. The consistency 
in the duplication rate in all the 
samples (T1-T13) was 
supportive of good data quality. 
T denotes time-point, e.g., 
T1_paired represents pair of 
fastq files from time-point 1 
(0h). (d) The distributions of 
GC content exhibit a similar 
pattern across all the samples.  
(b) (a) 
(c) (d) 
average per time-point over the 13 time-points, suggesting that the corresponding genes 
had no or negligible expression. Another ~6,000 transcripts had very low expression 
levels (comparative to other expressed transcripts; less than 5 reads on average). Around 
29% of genes (~18,000 transcripts) had relatively medium level expression (5 to less than 
100 reads). The remainder of the genes (27%), have a moderate to high expression level 
of more than 100 reads per time-point on average. These percentages were very consistent 
over the three experimental replicates, with a very small standard deviation between values 
(Figure 3.4). 
3.2.3. Core clock components exhibit characteristic rhythmicity in nodules 
In order to ask if circadian clock oscillations are conserved in nodules, first, a 
number of different circadian clock components in M. truncatula that are orthologous to 
A. thaliana clock proteins were identified thorough reciprocal BLASTp (protein BLAST) 
search and homology analysis using Phytozome database and A. thaliana clock protein 
sequences as starting sequences (Table 3.1). The ortholog list was then also cross checked 
with KEGG Orthology (KO) database; the ones that were not founded in KO database 
were discarded. Interestingly, in terms of homology, A. thaliana CCA1 (At2g46830) and 
LHY (At1g01060) are represented by a single gene, Medtr7g118330, in M. truncatula. This 
suggests that this single gene is likely to confer the functions of both CCA1 and LHY in 
M. truncatula. This is not unusual since some other plant species (e.g., rice, garden pea) 
also contain a single close homolog for both CCA1 and LHY (Song et al., 2010). The 
homolog in M. truncatula can be considered as either CCA1 or LHY but it is comparatively 
more similar to A. thaliana LHY (AtLHY) and is therefore annotated as LHY (MtLHY). 
Figure 3.4: Number of 
transcripts with 
different ranges of 
reads count (per time-
point averaged over 13 
time-points) represents 
the percentage of 
transcripts with different 
levels of expression. 
Error bars are 
representative of the 
standard deviation across 
three biological replicate 
experiments. 
Table 3.1: Orthologous clock genes in Medicago truncatula. Orthologous M. truncatula clock genes were identified through reciprocal BLASTp 
(protein BLAST) searching and analysis using the Phytozome database using A. thaliana clock protein sequences as starting sequences. Reciprocal 
BLASTp was carried out with the NCBI blastp suite; bit scores, percentage query coverages and Expect (E) values are reported for forward and 
reciprocal queries. The Smith-Watermann (SW) score were retrieved from the Phytozome v12.1.6 database; SW scores, forward and reciprocal 
similarity are reported. In cases where a reciprocal high degree of similarity was identified, multiple potential homologues are listed. Multiple 
homologues are named as a,b,c, respectively, based on their level of similarity to Arabidopsis ortholog, with a being the highest. 
Some clock genes from A. thaliana (e.g., TOC1, ELF3, PRRs) have multiple close 
homologs in M. truncatula that are similar to each other. For example, AtTOC1 shares 
about 60% and 56% similarity, respectively, at protein level with two M. truncatula genes, 
medtr4g108880 and medtr3g037390; both of them annotated as MtTOC1 in M. truncatula 
genome. 
The RNAseq expression data of the key circadian genes (listed in Table 3.1) was 
individually evaluated. In general, the expression of all studied clock components in 
nodules had shown a similar periodicity and expression pattern compared to A. thaliana. 
The expression of LHY was highest at beginning of the day, at the 0th and 24th hour (h) 
time-point, and then declined throughout the day. It was at its lowest level at subjective 
evening or early night (15th, 42nd h). For rest of the night, LHY expression had risen 
continuously to reach its peak in the next subjective morning (24th, 48th h) (Figure 3.5a). 
Two close paralogs of MtLHY, Medtr5g076960 and Medtr6g477860, that are MYB-
transcription factors and orthologs of AtRVE1 and AtRVE7, respectively, showed 
similar expression pattern as MtLHY (Figure 3.5b). However, MtRVE1 expression 
declined much more quickly during the day and reached its lowest point at around mid-
day (6th, 30th h). Exhibiting an almost opposite expression pattern, TOC1 expressions were 
lowest in early morning (3rd, 30th h) and highest at the evening (12th, 36th h) (Figure 3.5a). 
There are two TOC1 paralogs in M. truncatula as depicted by TOC1a and TOC1b. Both the 
TOC1 paralogs had shown similar rhythmic pattern, but TOC1a oscillated with a much 
higher amplitude compared to TOC1b. 
The expression of evening complex (EC) components ELF4, ELF4 and LUX were 
similar to that of TOC1s (Figure 3.5c). In A. thaliana, TOC1 peaks a little earlier than the 
EC components (Sanchez and Kay, 2016). This could be the case here as well, but since 
there is, at least a 3 hour gap between each sample (6h in the second cycle), it was not 
resolvable. Among EC components, ELF4 had the highest expression magnitude and 
LUX was expressed in low levels. Among the five PRR homologs (listed in Table 3.1), 
two (PRR5b, PRR7b) had no or negligible expression. The other three peaked sequentially 
(PRR5c, PRR5a, PRR7a) at different times during the day which matched the expression 
of different PRR gene in A. thaliana (Figure 3.5d). While the expression of PRR5a, PRR7a 
peaked around the subjective afternoon, PRR5c peaked in the morning (3rd, 30th h). 
MtPRR5c is similar at the sequence level to AtPRR9 which is also expressed earlier than 
other PRRs  in A. thaliana (Nakamichi et al., 2010). The expression of another important 
(c) Evening Complex (EC) 
(a) The core oscillator 
(d) Pseudo-response regulators (PRRs) 
(b) RVEs and GIGANTEA (GI) 
Figure 3.5: RNAseq expression 
data of key circadian clock 
genes in M. truncatula nodules 
over a time-course. (a) The core 
oscillator: LHY and TOC1 form 
the core oscillatory loop via a 
negative feedback mechanism; (b) 
RVEs and Gigantea (GI): RVEs 
and GI are important clock 
components that synchronize the 
central clock with output 
pathways.; (c) Evening Complex 
(EC): The EC is formed of three 
proteins, ELF3, ELF4 and LUX, 
whose expression peaks in the 
evening; (d) Pseudo-response 
regulators (PRRs): PRR genes 
are homologous to TOC1 and are 
expressed mainly during the day to 
form additional regulatory loops. 
(a-d) White and grey background 
represents subjective day and 
night. Plants were grown in 
12/12h day/night cycle, but 
samples were taken from plants 
grown in constant light 
conditions; 0, 24h and 12, 36h 
time-points mark the beginning of 
the day and night, respectively). 
Error bars indicate standard 
deviation of the mean (n=3 
biological replicates, except for 
15h and 21h where n=2).  
 - 54 - 
clock gene, GI, peaked around the afternoon (9th h), in a similar manner to its expression 
in other plants. 
In summary, the clock genes are expressed and oscillate in an expected way in M. 
truncatula nodules which is similar to their rhythmic expression (as discussed in Chapter 
1) in other species (mainly A. thaliana, since most studies were carried out in it). The 
expression and persistence of typical rhythmic behaviour of these clock genes suggests 
the existence of a nodule clock that might regulate many rhythmic processes during 
nodulation and N-fixation. 
3.2.4. MtLHY expression amplitude varies in different tissues 
In order to determine whether clock genes are expressed in a similar manner in 
different organs, the expression of MtLHY in leaves, roots and nodules was quantified by 
quantitative PCR (qPCR) (Figure 3.6) using RNA samples from the same time-course 
Figure 3.6: Expression of MtLHY in leaves, roots and nodules over a time-
course. The expression values are generated through qPCR and are relative to beta-
tubulin (Medtr7g089120). White and grey background represents subjective day and 
night. Error bars are representative of the standard deviation of the mean of three 
biological replicates. 
 - 55 - 
RNAseq experiment mentioned above. The rhythmicity of MtLHY expressions was 
found to be very similar in these tissues, however, the amplitude differed. In leaves, the 
amplitude was highest and was comparatively decreased in roots and nodules. 
Interestingly, a slight phase-shift to a later peak was observed in leaves in the second cycle 
(24th-48th h). In the first cycle (0th-24th h), the expression of MtLHY was highest at the 
beginning of the day and declined steadily during the day, reaching a minimum in the 
evening (12th h). However, the next peak was observed around midday (30th h, a tentative 
phase shift of 6h). The expression minimum in the second cycle was reached at around 
midnight (42h), which was later than the evening minimum in the first cycle. Although, 
due to spacing of sampling time it is difficult to determine whether the phase shift was 
precisely 6h or different, but according to available data it is likely that the second peak 
was delayed in leaves. On the other hand, in root samples LHY expression reached its 
maximum and minimum point, respectively, at the beginning of the day and at around 
evening in both cycles. In nodules, the expression peak was also observed at the beginning 
of the day in both cycles, but the decline was comparatively slower, and the lowest 
expression was reached closer to midnight. These observations suggest that MtLHY 
rhythmicity is much higher in leaves and more sensitive to light as the phase-shift was 
potentially due to the greater responsiveness of leaf tissue to continuous light conditions. 
In both roots and nodules, the overall expression levels were much lower than leaves 
although the expression peaks at the same time at dawn. There was however a lag in 
decline, more prominently in nodules than roots. However, in general, both the diurnal 
expression pattern of MtLHY together with its expression variation across different 
organs is in line with known role and specificity of this gene (Endo et al., 2014, Bordage 
et al., 2016, Takahashi et al., 2015). The data, nonetheless, supports the existence of clock 
function in nodules. 
3.2.5. Around 5% of all genes are rhythmically expressed in nodules 
We used MetaCycle (see Chapter 2 for methods) to identify rhythmically expressed 
transcripts out of 61,510 transcripts (50,894 genes) for which the expression data were 
generated through RNA sequencing analysis. A total of 1,363 rhythmic transcripts (from 
1,296 genes) were identified with p-value <0.01; p-values were found using a Lomb-
Scargle periodogram. All of the key clock/circadian genes that (Table 3.1) were expressed 
(Table 3.1 & Figure 3.5) found within this range (p <0.01). A Gene Ontology (GO) 
 - 56 - 
enrichment analysis was carried out on annotations from these 1,296 genes. The results 
showed that most of these genes are associated with transport and localization, 
carbohydrate metabolism, circadian rhythm, and some other biological processes 
(Figure 3.7). This seems reasonable as photosynthetic CO2 fixation that occurs during the 
day drives the synthesis of sucrose and their subsequent transport to amyloplast for starch 
accumulation. During the night, starch molecules are hydrolyzed and resulting sugar 
molecules are transported to various sink organs and used for energy production and 
plant growth (Kim et al., 2017). Many rhythmic genes detected in our analysis are, 
therefore, likely to be activated in a diurnally regulated, timely manner to coordinate 
Response to stimulus 
Regulation 
Circadian rhythm 
Transport and localization 
Carbohydrate metabolism 
Figure 3.7: A hierarchical clustering tree representing the significantly enriched 
(top 20) biological processes in 1,363 rhythmic transcripts, grouped by similar 
functions in the GO hierarchy. Processes with many shared genes are clustered 
together. Enrichment p-values (FDR adjusted) are shown for each biological process. 
p-values are also presented by blue dots where larger dots represent more significant 
p-values. The clustering was generated using the ShinyGO v0.61 tool (Ge et al., 2019), 
available online at: http://bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/go.  
 - 57 - 
different carbohydrate related catabolic, anabolic or other regulatory processes involving 
movement and localization of different biomolecules. 
Many genes that are regulated by circadian rhythm in an indirect or distant manner 
(for example, the genes whose promoters are not bound by a core circadian TF (e.g., 
LHY, TOC1), but regulated by some other oscillating components), might oscillate but 
with smaller amplitudes. Such genes might not be detected with stringent cycling 
parameters, such as a p-value of less than 0.01. To increase the chance of identifying a 
wide range of levels of oscillation in nodules, all transcripts with oscillating p <0.05 were 
considered and a total of 2,832 rhythmic transcripts (2,703 genes; 5.31% of all genes) were 
found (See supplementary Table S1 & S3). GO enrichment analysis with these transcripts 
also resulted in very similar enrichments (as with p <0.01) with some additional but related 
ontologies that includes biosynthetic process, macromolecule modification, 
phosphorylation and few others. Since this extended list of rhythmic transcripts (p<0.05) 
seemed to capture more biological processes, we decided to use these transcripts for 
further analysis.  
To understand the rhythmic behaviour of these oscillating transcripts, the logTPM 
expression values for all transcripts were subjected to Z-score normalization that enables 
mean-centered expression values to be generated that are well suited for the comparison 
of different rhythmic transcripts with varying expression levels. Next, hierarchical 
clustering with the elbow method was used to tentatively organize these 2,832 transcripts 
into four major clusters to identify genes and related biological processes that seem to 
peak at specific times during the photoperiod, and thus might function together. Based 
on the timing of their expression peaks, the four clusters were name as dawn (cluster 1), 
midday (cluster 2), dusk (cluster 3) and night (cluster 4) (Figure 3.8). 
 - 58 - 
The vast majority of oscillating genes were in the night (1,458 genes) and dawn (811 
genes) categories. On first inspection, the expression pattern of these two clusters might 
seem very similar, both peaking around the 21-24h time-points (Figure 3.9 a & d). 
However, at 0h time-point the expression of the night cluster genes was much lower than 
the dawn genes. In addition, the night genes peaked a little earlier (at around 21h) than 
dawn genes (at around 24h).  In general, most genes within the night group were actually 
expressed most highly in the late night. Since a total of 2,269 transcripts (out of 2,832) 
-2 0 2 
Expression levels 
0 3 6 9 12 15 21 18 24 30 36 42 48 
Time [hours] 
Cluster 1: Dawn 
811 transcripts  
Cluster 4: Night 
1,458 transcripts  
Cluster 3: Dusk 
321 transcripts  
Cluster 2: Mid-day 
242 transcripts  
Figure 3.8: A heat map based on hierarchical clustering shows the expression of 
2,832 rhythmic transcripts. Four major clusters (1 to 4) are represented respectively by 
red, yellow, blue and green colours/curly brackets. Based on the timing of their expression 
peak they are also named as Dawn, Midday, Dusk and Night clusters. In the heatmap, 
the intensity of blue and yellow colour represents higher and lower expression (Z-
normalized log2TPM expression values), respectively. 
 - 59 - 
belong to the night-peaking and dawn-peaking cluster category, therefore, it seems that 
most oscillating genes accelerate their expression during the night period (Figure 3.9 a & 
d). The midday and dusk clusters contain 242 and 321 transcripts, respectively, and exhibit 
distinctive expression patterns (Figure 3.9 b & c). While analyzing RNA sequencing 
expression data, it should be always taken into consideration that the expression values 
for the first half (0-24h) were more accurate (timing-wise) than the second half (24-48h) 
due to the shorter sample spacing in the first day. In addition, by the second day, plants 
could be already trying to adapt to the new continuous light conditions and thus gene 
expression timing is altered, as seen in other studies (Webb et al., 2019). 
All the major circadian genes analyzed, were in respective clusters that matched 
their expected expression peaks. The morning-expressed LHY and RVE7 were found in 
cluster-1 (dawn). Evening complex components (ELF3, ELF4 and LUX) and TOC1 
were found in either cluster 3 (dusk; ELF3, LUX, TOC1) or cluster 4 (night, ELF4). 
Different PRR genes were found in either cluster 2 (midday; PRR5c) or 3 (dusk; PRR5a, 
PRR7a), as they are expressed sequentially throughout the day (as described earlier in 
Section 3.2.3). One gene that did not appear in the expected cluster is RVE1 that is in 
cluster 4 (night) which is predominantly a morning-expressed gene However, RVE1 
expression dropped sharply to reach its minimum earlier than other morning genes (as 
shown in Figure 3.5b). The timing of minimal expression resembled that of night-peaking 
genes which could be a reason for its unexpected clustering location. In general, the 
presence of most key circadian genes in expected clusters adds confidence to our 
experimental data and clustering analysis. This also suggests that although there might be 
some specific differences due to cell and organ type, in general the nodule clock operates 
in a similar way to the clock in roots or leaves, which is consistent with its role as a core 
regulator of growth and development.  
 - 60 - 
0 3 6 91215182124 30 36 42 48
Time [hours]
Cluster 4

0 3 6 91215182124 30 36 42 48
Time [hours]
Cluster 2
 0           6         12        18        24        30        36        42       48  
0 3 6 91215182124 30 36 42 48
Time [hours]
Cluster 1
0 3 6 91215182124 30 36 42 48
Time [hours]
Cluster 3
Cluster 1: Dawn 
811 transcripts, including- 
LHY, RVE2 
2 NCRs 
Cluster 2: Mid-day 
242 transcripts, including- 
GI, PRR5c 
5 NCRs 
Cluster 3: Dusk 
321 transcripts, including- 
ELF3, PRRs, LUX 
24 NCRs 
Cluster 4: Night 
1,458 transcripts, including- 
ELF4, RVE1 
14 NCRs 
 0           6         12        18        24        30        36        42       48  
 0           6         12        18        24        30        36        42       48  
Figure 3.9: Expression pattern of gene transcripts within each cluster, shown as a 
centroid boxplot for each cluster. (a) Cluster-1 (red) genes peak at 0 and 24h time-
points that represent the beginning of the day (dawn); (b) Cluster-2 (yellow) genes peak 
around 6 and 30h (around midday); (c) Cluster-3 (blue) transcripts peak at 9h and around 
36h (around dusk); (d) The Cluster-4 (green) gene expression pattern looks similar to 
cluster-1, but at 0h expression is much lower compared to cluster-1 and expression also 
peaks slightly earlier (21h) in the next experimental day, hence these are categorized as 
night genes. (a-d) White and black bars underneath each plot indicate subjective day and 
night, respectively. Expression values for each gene are log2 normalised and relative to its 
mean expression over time. Box, line and dots at each time-point shows the distribution 
of expression values (dots are outliers) for corresponding time-point and cluster.  
 0           6         12        18        24        30        36        42       48  
 - 61 - 
3.2.6. Rhythmic processes in the nodule are putatively coordinated in a manner 
similar to other known rhythmic processes in different plants and tissues 
To identify different cluster specific biological processes and to investigate different 
aspect of nodule functions that might be under circadian regulation, a cluster specific GO 
enrichment analysis was carried out (Figure 3.10). Additionally, gene descriptions for all 
the rhythmic genes in four clusters were obtained from the Phytomine database  
and analyzed to look for pathway and protein domain enrichments. 
The dawn cluster was found to be enriched for various ion transport and 
localization related GO terms (Figure 3.10a). Specially, this cluster contains more than a 
dozen of different anion transporters (e.g., five sulphate/bicarbonate/oxalate exchanger 
and transporter- Medtr7g022870, Medtr7g022870, Medtr5g061860, Medtr3g073730, 
Medtr6g086170). Plant anions transporters are well known for their role in cell signaling, 
osmoregulation, compartmentalization of metabolites, etc (Barbier-Brygoo et al., 2011). 
In general, this cluster contains about hundred genes that are associated with cellular 
localizations. Therefore, genes in this cluster could be associated with the movement and 
compartmentalization of compounds formed during the night. This cluster was also 
enriched for secondary metabolic pathways related to the biosynthesis of different 
flavonoids and flavonoid derivatives (e.g., formononetin derivatives like medicarpin, 
maackiain biosynthesis). Flavonoids and isoflavonoids are polycyclic, polyphenolic 
compounds that belong to a wider group of phytoalexins and are well known for their 
antibacterial activities (Cushnie and Lamb, 2005). Interestingly, as reviewed in chapter 1, 
different flavonoids and isoflavonoids induce rhizobia to secrete Nod factors and initiate 
symbiotic interactions. The exploitation of pre-existing secondary metabolites with a 
traditional role in defense into molecules with a role in beneficial plant-microbe 
interactions could be a reflection of the evolution of the mutualism continuum (Mierziak 
et al., 2014). However, the expression of flavonoid biosynthesis genes (e.g., two 
Isoflavone Reductase-Like Protein, Medtr5g020760 and Medtr5g020800) in the nodule 
suggests a role for these molecules beyond the initial manipulation of rhizobia to initiate 
nodulation. Since they have antimicrobial properties and were reported to be mostly 
produced in the infection zone (Chen et al., 2015b), they could be involved in maintaining 
a  homogenous  rhizobial  population  whilst  also  protecting  nodules  from  potential 
 - 62 - 
(a) Cluster 1 (Dawn) (b) Cluster 2 (Midday) 
(c) Cluster 3 (Dusk) (d) Cluster 4 (Night) 
Figure 3.10: Cluster-specific enriched biological processes. (a) Cluster 1 (dawn) is enriched 
for ion transport and localization related genes; (b) Photosynthesis-related genes are enriched 
in the midday cluster; (c) Cluster 3 (dusk) contains genes that are important for developmental 
processes, especially nodulation; (d) Cluster 4 (night) is mostly enriched for carbohydrate related 
metabolic processes. The hierarchical clustering was generated using the ShinyGO v0.61 tool 
(Ge et al., 2019), available at: http://bioinformatics.sdstate.edu/go.  
 - 63 - 
pathogens. Oscillation in flavonoid gene expression has also been reported in other plants, 
such as, in A. thaliana leaves (Deikman and Hammer, 1995) and ginkgo leaves which are 
a raw material for extraction of flavonoids for pharmaceutical use (Ni et al., 2018).  In 
both plants, the expression of responsible genes was maximal around dawn. These 
observations and our findings are in line with the finding that A. thaliana leaves exhibit 
higher resistance to P. syringae infection in the morning (Bhardwaj et al., 2011). With the 
knowledge that flavonoid and isoflavonoid biosynthesis in nodules might follow a 
rhythmic pattern, it is tempting to hypothesize that the rhythmic pattern of leaves defense 
might be shared by nodules as well, potentially to stop pathogenic microbes from entering 
with rhizobia. Finally, the dawn cluster was also enriched for zinc finger domain proteins, 
indicating the expression of nucleic acid binding proteins that might regulate transport 
and flavonoid metabolism. 
The midday cluster that peaked around 3-6th h and then at 30th h was mostly highly 
enriched for light harvesting, photoperiodism and photosynthesis related genes (Figure 
3.10b) including five light-harvesting complex I CHLOROPHYLL A/B BINDING genes 
(Medtr2g008610, Medtr4g015570, Medtr4g094605, Medtr5g097280 and Medtr6g060175) 
PHYTOCHROME INTERACTING FACTOR 45 (PIF45, Medtr3g449770) etc. This 
suggests a light signal sensing and transduction activity in nodules during the period of 
the day with the highest levels of light, although nodules are underground organ where 
light access is limited. The Mid-day cluster-2 also contains eight WALLS ARE THIN 
(WAT)-1-related genes that encode for different glycoside hydrolases and nodulin genes 
associated with cell wall biosynthesis. Arabidopsis WAT1 is a tonoplast located protein 
and a homolog of Medicago nodulin21 which is required for secondary cell wall 
deposition. This gene also affects flavonoid biosynthesis and chlorophyll a/b content 
(Ranocha et al., 2010), which could link it to the coordinated expression of other 
photosynthetic genes. Transmembrane transport genes were also enriched in this cluster 
that might be involved in the movement of carbon assimilated molecules related to 
nitrogen fixation activity. In general, the abundance of different plastid-localized, 
thylakoid membrane-associated and photosystem I or II related genes, in cluster-2 
suggests enrichment of photosynthesis-related activities for genes peaking around 
midday.  
 - 64 - 
The dusk cluster (cluster 3) was dominated by nodulation-related GO terms (Figure 
3.10c). This cluster contains a large number of NCRs (n = 24) that are highly nodule-
specific genes (discussed later). Besides, more than thirty anatomical development and 
morphogenesis associated genes were also found in this cluster, suggesting nodule growth 
might be enhanced around dusk which is in line with our understanding that plants grow 
comparatively faster in the evening and at night (McDonald, 2011). Carbohydrate 
catabolic processes, glycogen and starch degradation pathways (including genes like -
AMYLASE, Medtr5g013620; -GLUCOSIDASE, Medtr4g122980; etc.) were also 
enriched in this cluster. Starch degradation in particular has been reported to be regulated 
by the circadian clock (Graf et al., 2010) and our analysis suggests that the starch 
degradation peaks in the evening or during the early part of the night in nodules, and is 
possibly used for nodule growth.  
The night cluster (cluster 4) contains about half of all oscillating genes (1,458 
transcripts) and they mostly peaked few hours before dawn. This cluster was also enriched 
for carbohydrate metabolism, transport and growth-related processes and genes involved 
in the glycogen degradation pathway (including six different glucosidase and several 
amylases). This suggests that starch degradation and growth continue during the night as 
well. GO-terms associated with phosphate metabolic processes (over 100 genes) and 
pathways related to nitrogen-metabolism were all enriched in this cluster. Orthologs of 
A. thaliana plasmodesmata (PD) callose-binding proteins (PDCBs; Medtr4g109490, 
Medtr5g044530) and plasmodesmata-located proteins (PDLPs; Medtr8g104990) were 
found in this cluster. This is in line with our current understanding that PD transport is 
to some extent circadian regulated, usually enhanced during day and declined at night. 
Callose (-1,3-glucans) deposition around plasmodesmata is one of the mechanisms by 
which plant block PD transport (Brunkard and Zambryski, 2019). The PDCBs and PDLP 
found in this cluster might be associated with this callose accumulation and regulation of 
PD transport at night. Pathway enrichment showed that the late-night peaking cluster 
contained ureide biosynthesis genes (e.g., URICASE/URATE OXIDASE, 
Medtr1g048370). Ureides are synthesised in nodules then transported through the xylem 
vessels to the leaf tissue where they are typically used up for ammonia metabolism (Gibon 
et al., 2004). Although classically, indeterminate nodule producing IRLC legumes like M. 
truncatula have been classified as amide-type (rather than ureide-type), ureide compounds 
have also been identified in this plant species, suggesting that this part of the metabolism 
 - 65 - 
still occurs in these species during or related to N fixation activity (Sprent, 2007). The 
presence of the PHENYLALANINE AMMONIA-LYASE LIKE protein (PAL-like, 
Medtr1g094780), involved in the phenylpropanoid pathway, could be related to the 
synthesis of flavonoids, whose biosynthesis peaks slightly later, in cluster 1 as described 
above. Nitrogen metabolism genes in this cluster include many glutamate metabolic genes, 
nitrate/nitrite transporters, nitrate-transporting ATPases, and amino acid transporters. 
Many of these gene including GLUTAMINE SYNTHETASE (Medtr3g065250) were 
also found in the dawn cluster. Altogether, these data indicate that the nitrogen fixation 
that occurs throughout the day and that peaks around the evening (Minchin and Pate, 
1974) enhances nitrogen metabolism, and production and transport of N-containing 
compounds (e.g., glutamine, asparagine) mostly during the night and possibly until dawn. 
NODULE INCEPTION (NIN; Medtr5g099060), an essential nodulation regulatory 
gene, was also relatively highly expressed during the night in this cluster, which again 
highlights the night phase as a period of enhanced nodule activity.
Figure 3.11: Overview of the processes that are regulated at the transcriptional 
level in nodules over time. Different major events that correspond to dawn, midday, 
dusk and night clusters are coloured red, yellow, blue and green, respectively (as Figure 
3.8). Nitrogen metabolism (in grey) probably starts in the evening and occurs 
throughout the night; shown separately in between processes that are active between 
dusk and night. Hours 0 and 12 are indicated. 
 - 66 - 
3.2.7. The Evening Element (EE) motif is enriched in dusk-peaking genes  
As discussed in Chapter 1, a motif analysis previously carried out in our lab (Achom, 
2019) revealed that a CCA1 binding motif [AGATATTT; known as Evening Element 
(EE)] or its close variant (AGACATTT; EE-like) is conserved in the promoters of many 
NCR genes. EE motif is common in rhythmically expressed gene promoters, specifically 
in the genes that are highly expressed in the evening (Adams et al., 2018). In order to ask 
whether this is also the case in our data, the promoter region of all the rhythmic genes (n 
= 2,703) were scanned for EE or EE-like motif occurrence using the FIMO tool, available 
in MEME suite (see Chapter 2 for methods).  
The EE motif was observed 168 times in 157 rhythmic gene promoters whereas 
the EE-like motif was found only 59 times in 56 genes. Consistent with existing literature 
(Michael et al., 2008b, Adams et al., 2018), the EE motif was enriched in the dusk cluster 
with a prevalence of about 21% compared to equal or less than 5% in all other clusters 
(Table 3.2). This represents an enrichment of about 4 folds (hypergeometric test; p = 
4.71e-25) compared to the overall presence of EE motif in all the rhythmic genes. No 
such enrichment was observed for the EE-like motif as it was found to be almost evenly 
distributed (1.5-2.5%) among all the clusters. Therefore, although the EE-like motif is 
very similar to the EE motif, it might not be a CCA1 or LHY binding site and might not 
be specifically related to the circadian clock.   
Table 3.2: Frequency of the EE (AGATATTT) or EE-like (AGACATTT) 
motifs in different clusters. EE motif is highly enriched in the dusk cluster. Such 
enrichment was not observed for the EE-like motif. The percentage values represent 
the prevalence of each motif among the genes belong to particular cluster.  
 - 67 - 
3.2.8. NCRs that oscillate mostly belong to the dusk-peaking cluster 
A list of 701 NCR genes (with gene locus ID) has been compiled from the 
supplementary information provided by Montiel et al. (2017) and de Bang et al. (2017) 
(Supplementary Table S3). Among the 61,510 transcripts analyzed in our study, 743 
transcripts were found to be potentially expressed from those 701 NCR genes. Most of 
these NCR genes (> 600) were highly expressed with more than 100 reads or logTPM 
expression values over 3.0 on an average per time-point. 45 NCR transcripts were found 
within the 2,832 oscillating transcripts (p < 0.05) with 20 of them having a p <0.01. 
More than half (n=24) of the 45 oscillating NCRs belong to cluster-3 (dusk-
peaking). As outlined above, cluster-3 contains only 321 transcripts in total which is much 
smaller cluster than cluster 1 or 4, and therefore in terms of percentage, cluster-3 contains 
more NCRs (7.5%) than any other clusters (0.25%, 2%, 1% respectively for cluster 1, 2, 
4) (Figure 3.12). This represents a 4.7-fold over and significant enrichment 
(hypergeometric test; p=3.67e-12) of these genes in this cluster. This corroborates with 
our hypothesis that MtLHY negatively regulates the expression of NCRs by binding to 
their promoters, thus their expression pattern was opposite to that of MtLHY over time. 
Similarly, other genes that are known to be regulated by CCA1/LHY (e.g., ELF3, TOC1, 
LUX etc.) are expressed highly at dusk when MtLHY expression is at a minimum. 
Cluster-4 contains fourteen NCRs which is similarly in line with our hypothesis of 
MtLHY-NCR regulation since MtLHY levels are still low for most of the night. Cluster-
1 and -2 contains only five and two oscillating NCRs, respectively. The regulation for 
these seven NCR transcripts cannot be explained by a MtLHY-NCR regulation 
hypothesis. Nonetheless, the findings that some NCRs did oscillate, and most oscillating 
NCRs were expressed highly at the evening or night support that NCR-mediated 
processes in nodules are regulated by MtLHY, at least to some extent.  
 - 68 - 
Previous analysis in our lab (unpublished data) revealed that about 10.7% of NCR 
gene promoters contain the EE motif (p= 0.0047 for enrichment against a randomized 
set of non-NCR gene promoterss) while about 21.8% of them have the EE-like motif 
(p=0.00004 for enrichment). Among the 45 rhythmic NCR promoters, 13 (~29%) harbor 
Figure 3.12: Rhythmic expression of NCR genes. (A-D) Expression of NCR genes 
in each cluster is shown by respective coloured lines. Dashed lines in the graphs show 
the expression of representative clock genes (bold black in text) belonging to the 
corresponding cluster. Thirteen rhythmic NCRs with EE motif are indicated with blue 
bold text. The expression range of each group of genes are shown with the coloured 
cloud. Expression values for each gene are log2 normalised and relative to its mean 
expression over time. Modified from Achom, Roy et al 2020. 
 - 69 - 
the EE motif which represent a significant enrichment of 2.7-fold (p = 0.0004) compared 
to the overall presence of this motif in NCR gene promoters. Interestingly, 10 out of 
those 13 rhythmic NCRs with an EE-motif in their promoter belong to dusk cluster. The 
EE-like motif is only present in 6 (~13%) oscillating NCR promoters which is lower and 
not significant compared to their relative high abundance in NCR gene promoters. 
Although many NCR gene promoters contain the EE-like motif, this motif is neither 
enriched in oscillating NCRs (Table 3.3) nor in other oscillating gene promoters (Table 
3.2). Therefore, the EE-like motif might be involved with some other unknown regulation 
or could be involved in the evolution of EE motif in NCR promoters, but is unlikely to 
be involved directly in CCA1/LHY-mediated circadian regulation. Nonetheless, the 
presence of EE and EE-like motifs (which might share same evolutionary history) in NCR 
promoters and the enrichment of EE motif in rhythmic NCRs further link MtLHY to the 
regulation of at least some NCR genes.  
Table 3.3: Frequency of the EE (AGATATTT) or EE-like (AGACATTT) motifs in 
NCR gene promoters. The EE motif is enriched in the oscillating NCR genes relative to 
their overall percentage among all NCR genes. No such enrichment was observed for the 
EE-like motif, although the EE-like motif is abundant in NCR promoters.   
 - 70 - 
3.3. Discussion 
The findings from the analysis of the time-course experiment in nodules has 
provided new insights regarding circadian regulation in mature nodules. Firstly, it has 
shown that the circadian clock operates within nodules in a similar (but not exact) manner 
to its regulation in other plants and other organs. Earlier studies in A. thaliana using 
genome-wide microarray reported a varying percentage of rhythmic transcripts under 
circadian control; ~6% by Harmer et al. (2000), ~10% by Covington and Harmer (2007) 
and about 16% by Edwards et al. (2006). However, after combining and reanalyzing these 
three datasets, Covington et al. (2008) suggested that about 30-40% genes might be under 
circadian control in A. thaliana seedlings. About 2,700 genes (~5.3%) were found to be 
under circadian regulation in M. truncatula nodules in our study which is much lower 
compared to A. thaliana. However, our data was from nodules and the number of 
oscillating genes could be much higher in other tissues, for example, in leaves where LHY 
expression was more pronounced and sensitive in response to external stimuli. It should 
also be kept in mind that the identification of rhythmic genes largely depends on the 
algorithms and parameters used for the detection. The above-mentioned studies in A. 
thaliana mainly used a method known as COSOPT, which is not very popular among 
researchers now-a-days for a number of reasons. It does not allow unevenly sampled data 
to be used, and it uses a curve-fitting approach that has problems in detecting rhythms 
that are not perfectly sinusoidal (Laloum and Robinson-Rechavi, 2020, Yang and Su, 
2010). In our study, the Lomb-Scargle (LS) algorithm was used since it can deal with 
unevenly spaced sampling time-points, the use of replicates and missing data (as 
mentioned in Chapter 2, replicate 2 for 21h and replicate 3 for 15h time-points were 
discarded, therefore, missing in our analysis). Also, the LS method is conservative in 
detecting rhythmic genes and it usually outputs a comparatively smaller number of 
rhythmic genes but with low false positive results (Glynn et al., 2006, Laloum and 
Robinson-Rechavi, 2020). This could be another reason for seeing a comparatively small 
number of rhythmic genes. Nonetheless, while the analysis method used in our study 
could potentially fail to detect some other rhythmic genes, nonetheless a stringent small 
number of genes with a low false-positive rate, adds confidence to the data presented 
here. 
 - 71 - 
One or multiple homologs of all key clock genes (e.g., LHY, TOC1, PRRs, ELFs, 
GI) has been found to be expressed in a rhythmic manner, suggesting these genes are 
functionally active in nodules. However, the comparison of MtLHY expression in 
different tissues suggests that the clock functioning might be slightly different in nodules 
compared to that of leaves and roots. The expression pattern of LHY in nodules was 
similar to the root expression in terms of its maximum and minimum expression levels 
(Figure 3.6). This is reasonable since nodules are root organs and some of the nodule 
developmental processes overlap with that of lateral roots (Bishopp and Bennett, 2019) 
(discussed later in Chapter 6). However, compared to the roots, LHY levels in nodules 
went down slowly (from its maximum at the dawn) during the day and reached its lowest 
point slightly after the root minimum. This suggests that nodules maintain a slightly higher 
level of LHY during the day relative to the root LHY level. The significance of this is not 
clear at this moment but further comparative studies (nodules vs roots or other organs) 
including analysis of LHY targets could be used to further investigate clock function in 
nodules. The overall level of LHY expression in leaves was much higher and the 
rhythmicity was more responsive to changing entraining signals (e.g., transfer from diurnal 
light/dark to constant light condition), compared to roots or nodules. These observations 
are consistent with the organ-specific variations in the clock functioning in A. thaliana 
(Bordage et al., 2016, Takahashi et al., 2015). The comparison of the expression of other 
clock and clock-regulated genes in different tissues of M. truncatula using qPCR or through 
generating different tissue-specific RNAseq gene expression datasets are likely to shed 
more light in this regard. 
The oscillation patterns of rhythmic genes in nodules corroborates our common 
understanding about different processes that are regulated by the clock. For example, 
photosynthesis-associated genes were enriched amongst genes peaking at midday (the 
midday cluster) and starch degradation related genes were mostly found in the dusk-
peaking cluster. As a nodule is an underground organ that has been evolved for a very 
specific purpose  housing rhizobial bacteria that enable N-fixation, it is unlikely that 
rhythmic expression of photosynthesis or carbohydrate metabolism plays a direct nodule-
specific role. However, nodules are connected to the plant and must send/receive many 
molecules, and thus the detection of these commonly rhythmic processes in nodules is in 
line with their role as a metabolic factory for the plant. Similarly, almost all plant organs 
(flowers, fruits, roots, seeds; not only leaves) are found to have some degree of 
 - 72 - 
photosynthetic activity (Brazel and Maoilidigh, 2019). Therefore, appropriate 
detection of these universal plant rhythms in nodules is in line with our understanding of 
plant physiology.  
Many nodulation-related GO terms were found to be enriched amongst rhythmic 
genes and a high percentage of rhythmic NCRs were found in the dusk cluster. These 
findings highlight the evening period as an important time for nodule-specific activities, 
which is in line with the fact that the nitrogen fixation rate is highest at the evening 
(Minchin and Pate, 1974). In addition, the amount of different N-containing compounds, 
specifically the concentrations of asparagine and glutamine that are used in N-transport, 
continuously increases during the night (Minchin and Pate, 1974). This again corroborates 
our finding that many nitrogen metabolism and transport related genes (e.g., nitrate 
transporter, amino acid transporter, glutamine synthetase) were found in the night and 
dawn clusters, meaning their expression increased during night and peaked around late 
night or dawn. Overall, our cluster-specific gene enrichment analysis in the context of 
existing literature suggest that nodules become highly active in fixing nitrogen around 
dawn. The fixed nitrogen is then transported and metabolised into other N-containing 
compounds mostly throughout the night.  
Finally, and most remarkably, the identification of several rhythmic NCRs and their 
enrichment in the dusk cluster supports our hypothesis that MtLHY could be involved in 
the regulation of NCRs and in the nodulation process in general. This was further 
supported by the finding of enrichment of the EE motif (LHY binding site) in oscillating 
NCRs, particularly those that peaked at dusk. As discussed earlier in the chapter, plant 
immunity to pathogenic invaders varies throughout the day in a circadian manner. NCRs 
are known for their antimicrobial activities; therefore, they could be expressed in a high 
amount to provide an extra layer of defense in the nodule at times when plant general 
immunity is at a minimum; for example, Bhardwaj et al. (2011) found that A. thaliana 
leaves are most susceptible to infection at midnight. More insights could be gained 
through studies focused on these rhythmic NCRs to understand their functional role in 
nodulation. In regard to the MtLHY-NCR hypothesis, it is important to keep in mind that 
the EE motif serves as a binding site for some other proteins, including RVEs. RVEs are 
homologous to LHY and have a similar expression pattern to LHY (as shown in Figure 
3.5). Therefore, the hypothesized link of MtLHY to NCRs could be only one layer of 
 - 73 - 
interaction and RVEs might play important roles in this regulation. Therefore, studies 
involving the use of specific technologies to characterize protein-DNA binding (e.g., 
Chromatin Immunoprecipitation with massively parallel DNA-sequencing or ChIP-Seq) 
are needed to confirm if there is a true protein-DNA interaction between MtLHY and 
NCRs, and then (or if not), what other proteins interact with this conserved EE motif in 
NCR promoters. 
 To conclude, our data provide a wealth of information and insights into nodule-
specific circadian regulation of molecular processes. Similar experiments with other tissue 
or nodule samples from different developmental stages to generate comparative data 
would improve our understanding of the links between LHY and NCRs, as well as the 
extent of tissue specific and development-related spatial and temporal regulation related 
to the circadian clock.  
 - 74 - 
4. The effect of LHY disruption on nodulation, growth and 
root development of M. truncatula 
4.1. Introduction 
The findings presented and discussed in Chapter 3 showed that many genes (about 
5%) are under circadian regulation in nodules. Many metabolic and physiological 
processes within nodules are therefore likely to be regulated in a time-dependent manner. 
The comparison of rhythmic behaviour of the key circadian gene MtLHY in different 
organs (Figure 3.6) provides further evidence in support of the existence of a robust 
nodule clock which could be slightly different (in terms of rhythmic amplitudes, periods 
and sensitivity to entraining signals) in the nodule compared to other organs. It was 
suggested that the root clock is possibly entrained by shoot-derived signals (Bordage et 
al., 2016). Takahashi et al. (2015) demonstrated that the rhythms in roots can be altered 
by shoot apex excision or micrografting.  In a similar way, the nodule clock can also be 
entrained by shoot or root clock and, in general, any disruption in clock functioning might 
affect nodulation (e.g., increased or decreased nodule number) and other plant 
developmental processes. Disrupting key clock genes is one way to characterize this. 
In A. thaliana, mutations in either CCA1 or LHY genes were reported to be 
associated with short-period rhythms, measured by the promoter activity of 
CHLOROPHYLL A/B BINDING (CAB) protein. When both CCA1 and LHY were 
defective, the period became even shorter (19.73  0.12 h, compared to 24.77  0.07 h 
in cca1 mutant and 26.41  0.16 h in wild type) (Lu et al., 2009). Plants harbouring 
defective lhy genes had shown an increased expression of the important flowering gene, 
FLOWERING LOCUS T (FT), and an accelerated flowering phenotype (Park et al., 
2016). Loss of CCA1 or LHY gene expression also results in reduced iron (Fe) uptake 
and photosynthetic efficiency, and reciprocally, overexpression of CCA1 results in 
opposite effects, with better growth in Fe-deficient conditions (Xu et al., 2019).  
It has been found that clock genes also play important roles in the control of seed 
dormancy. Interestingly, cca1 and lhy mutants were associated with reduced seed dormancy 
(high germination rate) whereas the gi (gigantea) mutant showed strong seed dormancy 
(low germination) (Penfield and Hall, 2009). It had been demonstrated that the 
 - 75 - 
transcriptional clock is halted in an evening-like state in dry Arabidopsis seeds where 
different evening-expressed genes, e.g., TOC1, GI, LUX, were found in high levels and 
CCA1 and LHY levels were negligible. Upon imbibition, the seed clock restarts and 
potentially plays critical role in breaking seed dormancy (Penfield and Hall, 2009). This 
evidence clearly suggests that proper clock functioning plays an important role in different 
stages of plant development, from seed germination to flowering. Clock mutant A. 
thaliana plants were also reported to have an altered microbiome population structure in 
their rhizosphere (discussed later in Chapter 5) (Hubbard et al., 2018). Therefore, the 
plant clock might play roles in shaping different types of plant-microbe interactions (e.g., 
mutualistic or pathogenic) too. 
The effect of clock gene mutations has not been extensively studied in legumes. 
Some insights have come from a few studies carried out in legume crop plants (e.g., peas, 
soybeans). In garden peas (Pisum sativum), a gi mutant allele was shown to alter the 
expression of different other clock genes, prevent the induction of FT and confer a late-
flowering phenotype (Hecht et al., 2007). On the other hand, elf4 mutant pea plants exhibit 
early flowering (Liew et al., 2009). Comparison among wild type (WT) and domesticated 
varieties of soybean suggests that different clock components are associated with different 
important agronomic traits like sensitivity to day/night cycle, maturation time and yield 
(Li and Lam, 2020). For example, mutations in PRR3 genes have been associated with 
early maturation and flowering of soybean plants (Li and Lam, 2020, Lu et al., 2020).  
Apart from some of these observations in legume crops, we know much less about 
clock functioning in legumes. In particular, there have not been many studies in the 
legume models, e.g., M. truncatula, L. japonicus. In this study, we evaluated the phenotypes 
(inc. shoot growth, nodule mass, leaf movement) of two lhy mutant lines obtained from a 
collection of transposon insertion lines from the Noble Research Institute, USA and 
compared them with WT plants. We also asked if the expression of some key clock genes 
was rhythmic in constant environmental conditions in lhy mutant plants in order to 
evaluate whether lhy mutation alters rhythmicity of other clock components. The results 
presented in the next sections offer valuable insights into the effect of clock 
malfunctioning on the development of the legume-rhizobial interaction and plant growth, 
and open-up new research possibilities for understanding the impact of the plant clock 
on symbiosis.
 - 76 - 
4.2. Results 
4.2.1. Analysis of gene expression levels using quantitative PCR confirms reduced 
expression of LHY gene in two lhy mutants  
In order to disrupt LHY expression, two mutant lines were obtained from the 
Noble Research Institute (Tadege et al., 2008b). The lines contain Tnt1 retrotransposon 
insertions, respectively, in the promoter region (lhy-1) and at the end of 5th exon (lhy-2) of 
MtLHY gene (Figure 4.1a). The obtained mutant lines were genotyped in our lab 
previously and only the plants that were homozygous for Tnt1 insertions at LHY locus 
were propagated for seed stock generation (Achom, 2019). To determine the level of lhy 
expression in mutants, qPCR was carried out using leaf samples from each mutant, 
compared to the parental R108 line. Leaf samples were collected from 4-5 plants at two 
different times, early in the morning (~3h past dawn) and at the evening when LHY 
expression is at its highest and lowest, respectively. Two sets of primers were used - the 
Figure 4.1: (a) Schematic representation of LHY gene (not exactly scaled) and the 
approximate location of Tnt1 insertions (triangles) at lhy-1 and lhy-2 lines. Exons 
are presented as grey rectangles and introns as spaces/dashed line. qPCR primer positions 
are shown as green arrows. (b) Quantification of LHY expression using primers 
based on sequence between 2nd and 3rd exons. (c) Quantification of lhy expression 
using primers based on sequence between 5th and 6th exons. qPCR did not work in 
lhy-2 with this primer pair since the binding site was disrupted by Tnt1 insertion. The 
expression values are relative to beta-tubulin (Medtr7g089120). Error bars represent the 
standard deviation of the mean between three technical replicates. 
(b)  (c) 
  WT    lhy-1   lhy-2    WT    lhy-1   lhy-2    WT     lhy-1   WT       lhy-1 
 lhy-1  lhy-2 
 - 77 - 
first pair designed based on the sequence between the 2nd and 3rd exon boundaries (Figure 
4.1a & b) and also used for the quantification of LHY expression in WT leaves, roots and 
nodules (Chapter 3) and the second pair designed between the 5th and 6th exon boundaries 
(Figure 4.1b) based on the Tnt1 insertion site (lhy-2).  
As expected, the qPCR data showed high expression of LHY in the morning and 
negligible expression at the evening (Figure 4.1b & c). LHY expression was several fold 
higher in WT plants compared to either mutants. Between the mutants, lhy-1 plants had 
higher LHY expression than lhy-2 (Figure 4.1b). Since the lhy-1 has a Tnt1 insertion in the 
promoter region, in theory, it could express functional and intact LHY transcript, but the 
promoter disruption affected the expression which was significantly lower than WT 
(Figure 4.1b & c). In the lhy-2 line, a partially or non-functional transcript is likely to be 
produced since the Tnt1 insertion disrupts the coding region. Since LHY binds to its own 
promoter and is mainly regulated by feedback mechanism (as discussed in Chapter-1), 
functional LHY is essential for its proper expression. This could be the reason for further 
lower lhy expression in lhy-2 compared to lhy-1. When the second primer pair (designed 
based on 5th and 6th exons) was used (Figure 4.1c), no expression could be detected in lhy-
2, this confirms that this part of coding region was disrupted by Tnt1 insertion. 
4.2.2. lhy mutants show reduced nodulation and reduced vegetative growth 
To evaluate the effect of lhy mutation on nodulation, the lhy mutant seedlings along 
with WT (R108) were inoculated with Sinorhizobium meliloti 1022 and grown for five weeks 
in low nitrogen conditions. At the end of the five weeks, plants were uprooted and fresh 
shoot, root and nodule weights were measured. Rhizobial-inoculated WT plants had a 
significantly greater shoot and root compared to both mutant lines. The nodule size and 
overall weight are also significantly higher for the WT plants (Figure 4.2, 4.3 and Table 
4.1). Such a difference was not however observed in mock-inoculated plants that had not 
been inoculated with rhizobia. All mock-inoculated plants (WT vs mutants) had shown 
similar shoot sizes and had not exhibited much growth since they were in low nitrogen 
conditions, without beneficial rhizobial inoculation, therefore, no nodulation. 
Interestingly, a higher percentage (Table-4.1) of lhy-2 plants had died in both treatments 
(significantly higher in mock treatment; Fisher Exact test, p-value: 0.0252;). The death rate 
of lhy-1  is also  higher  in  mock  treatment but not significant. Therefore, mutant plants
 - 78 - 
Figure 4.2: Loss of LHY expression affects plant growth and nodulation. Plants grown on perlite-vermiculite pots have 
a similar phenotype in the absence of rhizobial inoculation (top row). lhy mutant lines have reduced growth compared to their 
WT counterpart when grown with rhizobial inoculation (middle row). Nodules in mutant plants were comparatively smaller in 
size but similar in appearance (bottom row). N-fixation efficiency of nodules was not evaluated in the study. 
 - 79 - 
Figure 4.3: Reduced LHY expression affects plant growth and nodulation. (a) & (b) 
Fresh and dry shoot weights from S. meliloti 1022 (SM1022) and mock-inoculated plants. 
Data from three replicate experiments are shown separately in each representative box. 
Compared to mock-inoculated plants, rhizobial-inoculated plants were significantly larger. 
Amongst them, WT plants were significantly larger than the mutants. (c) Fresh root weights 
were also significantly higher in rhizobial-inoculated WT plants compared to other plants, 
however no significant difference was found between any other conditions or lines, 
suggesting that lhy root growth is similar between conditions. (d) Average nodule weight per 
plant suggests that nodulation was also affected in lhy mutant plants. Error bar represent 
95% CI from three replicate experiments. One asterisk (*) indicates p < 0.05; two (**) or 
three (***) indicates p < 0.01 and 0.001, respectively. 
(a) (b) 
(c) (d) 
lhy-1 
lhy-2 
  WT                lhy-1              lhy-2  
 - 80 - 
SM1022 inoculated 
Wild type lhy-1 lhy-2 
Seedlings sown 40 48 48 
Plants sampled 36 (90%) 46 (96%) 40 (83%) 
Plants died 
(before sampling) 
4 (10%) 2 (4%) 8 (17%) 
Fresh shoot weight (g) 0.698  0.121 0.348  0.076 0.343  0.076 
Dry shoot weight (g) 0.099  0.016 0.051  0.010 0.047  0.009 
Fresh root weight (g) 0.16  0.038 0.076  0.023 0.090  0.023 
Fresh nodule weight (g) 0.026  0.011 0.011  0.002 0.011  0.001 
 Mock treated 
 Wild type lhy-1 lhy-2 
Seedlings sown 40 48 48 
Plants sampled 37 (93%) 39 (81%) 35 (73%) 
Plants died 
(before sampling) 
3 (7%) 9 (19%) 13 (27%) 
Fresh shoot weight (g) 0.062  0.119 0.044  0.082 0.047  0.081 
Dry shoot weight 0.012  0.002 0.009  0.002 0.008  0.001 
Fresh root weight 0.098  0.015 0.086  0.015 0.073  0.012 
Fresh nodule weight n/a n/a n/a 
Table 4.1: Summary of all data collected in mutant phenotyping experiment. 
 - 81 - 
(specially, lhy-2 line) might have some growth associated impairment which is relatively 
more expressive (considering less survival rate) in mock treatment  
In terms of root growth, the difference between mock and rhizobial-inoculated 
plants was less pronounced (in comparison to the difference in shoot growth) (Figure 
4.3c). There was no significant difference in root growth for either of the mutant plants 
between mock and rhizobial inoculated, however, WT plants had a significantly larger 
root system in the presence of rhizobia compared to without rhizobia, or compared to 
the lhy mutants in both inoculated/mock-inoculated conditions. Therefore, it can be 
concluded that proper LHY functioning is important for both shoot and root growth. 
These observations potentially indicate that reduced or disrupted lhy expression affects 
nodule formation, resulting in reduced nodule mass which ultimately causes reduced plant 
growth.   
4.2.3. Plant rhythmic leaf movements are affected by mutation in lhy  
Like most other plants M. truncatula leaves display rhythmic nastic movement in a 
circadian manner where leaflets are in a horizontal (open) position under light and are in 
a vertical (closed) position in the dark (Chen et al., 2012). To determine whether Rhythmic 
Leaf Movements (RLM) are affected by lhy mutation, the rhythmicity of the lhy mutants 
were examined by measuring visible leaf area as a measure of opening and closing of 
leaves (Figure 4.4). This was measured for 2 week old lhy-1, lhy-2 and WT (R108) plants 
(when the second true leaf has fully opened) over a 120 hour period. True rhythmicity 
can be seen in plants if they maintain RLM in constant light (free-running conditions), 
thus plants were initially grown in diurnal light-dark cycles, then transferred to constant 
light conditions before measurements were taken. The leaf area of the second true leaf 
was measured for consistency across plants (See Chapter 2, Section 2.5.5 for 
methodological details). 
Analysis of RLM data suggests, for the WT plants (n=7) there was a mean 
periodicity of ~25h over 120 hours. However, in the case of lhy-1 (n=14) and lhy-2 (n=12) 
plants there was a periodicity of about 18h and 12h, respectively, for first 48 hours, then 
both lhy mutants became more or less arrhythmic over the latter 48 hours. These findings 
suggest that LHY plays an important role in maintaining regular leaf movement, at least 
in free-running conditions.  
 - 82 - 
Figure 4.4: lhy mutation affects circadian leaf movements. Leaf opening and closing 
was monitored by measuring the visible leaf area from the top of the rosette of each 
plant and measurements over different time-points were normalized to the mean. The 
rhythmicity of lhy-1 (a) & lhy-2 (b) (white line) leaves initially has a shorter period and 
lower amplitude; black arrows (placed tentatively based on the visual observation of the 
data) indicate the time when average leaf area is its lowest (closed) at a particular rhythmic 
cycle. (c) Leaves of WT plants in open (top) and closed (bottom) position. After 48 
hours the lhy mutants (a & b) became generally arrhythmic. WT R108 (black line) leaves, 
in general, maintained a rhythmic movement in a circadian manner over 120 hours in 
constant light. 
lhy-1 
lhy-2  
 - 83 - 
4.2.4. Expression patterns of circadian clock genes suggest non-persistent 
rhythmicity at molecular level in lhy mutants 
To evaluate the effect of LHY expression on the expression of other key clock 
genes, a time series experiment similar to that used earlier in this thesis (discussed in 
Chapter 3) was carried out with the lhy-1 mutant line. Nodule samples were collected at 
different time-points (after every 3 hours) over 48 hours after transfer to constant light 
and temperature conditions (after being grown in light/dark cycling conditions); three 
biological replicates were sampled. However, instead of carrying out RNA sequencing, 
qPCR was used to analyse the expression of LHY, ELF4 and PRR5c in the nodules of 
lhy-1 mutant plants over 48 hours in free running conditions. The qPCR values were 
calculated relative to -tubulin and therefore not a measure of absolute expression of the 
corresponding genes. Instead, these values were compared with corresponding WT RNA 
sequencing data values (from the previous time series experiment presented in Chapter 3) 
to determine if there is any difference in the rhythmic behaviour of these genes in the lhy-
1 mutant compared to WT (R108) (Figure 4.5). It would be better if WT M. truncatula 
R108 plants could be grown alongside the mutants as control for comparison, but we did 
not have enough WT R108 seeds then to set an entire time-course. 
In constant conditions, the clock genes lost their rhythmic characteristics after the 
first cycle (the first 24 hours) in lhy-1 mutant plants. In the first 12 hours, the expression 
of all three tested genes (LHY, PRR5c, ELF4) in mutants roughly followed the expression 
patterns in WT plants. However, with the passage of time, clock gene expression in lhy-1 
started to deviate more from WT. In the second subjective cycle (second 24 hours), the 
three clock genes in lhy-1 plants had comparatively flatter and non-rhythmic expression 
trends. These observations suggest that the Tnt insertion in the LHY gene affects its own 
expression, and that reduced LHY expression dampens the rhythmicity of other clock 
genes. It is therefore also likely to disturb the expression of other rhythmic components 
at the gene expression and thus cellular and physiological level.  
 - 84 - 
(c) ELF4 expression in WT 
Figure 4.5: Comparison of LHY (Medtr7g118330), PRR5c (Medtr8g024260) and ELF4 
(Medtr3g070490) expressions in nodules of WT (a,b,c) vs lhy-1 mutant (d,e,f) plants. Under free 
running conditions the expression of lhy (d), PRR5c  (e) and ELF4 (f) became almost arrhythmic after 
the first 24 hour period in lhy-1 plants where in WT the genes maintained characteristic dirunal rhythms 
(a,b,c), though with lower amplitude in the second 24 hour subjective cycle. The expression values for 
WT (A17 ecotype) are from RNAseq experiment and are presented in Transcripts Per Million (TPM) 
units, whereas expression in lhy-1 (generated on R108 background) is from qPCR data relative to  
tubulin levels. These graphs are, therefore, not a comparison of absolute expression or level but they 
can be used to roughly compare the rhythmic behaviours (e.g., periods, phases) of these key clock genes 
between lhy-1 and WT A17 plants. Grey shading designates subjective night. Error bars represent 
standard deviation of the mean from the three replicate experiments. 
(a) LHY expression in WT  
(b) PRR5c expression in WT 
(d) LHY expression in lhy-1  
(e) PRR5c expression in lhy-1 
(f) ELF4 expression in lhy-1 
 - 85 - 
4.3. Discussion and future directions  
The phenotypic observations and molecular data that are presented in this chapter 
strongly suggest that both the reduction (lhy-1) or loss (lhy-2) of fully functional MtLHY 
affects nodulation, plant growth and many rhythmic processes in M. truncatula. These 
range from the molecular (e.g., expression of other clock genes) to the 
physiological/developmental level (e.g., nyctinastic leaf movements). Since many genes 
are rhythmically expressed in nodules and the circadian clock is assumed to play an 
important role in those rhythmic processes (as discussed in Chapter 3), diminished LHY 
activity resulting in reduced nodulation makes sense. The retarded growth phenotype of 
lhy plants could simply be a consequence of decreased nitrogen assimilation from reduced 
nodulation. However, there might be other factors that could directly or indirectly affect 
plant growth when a properly functioning circadian clock is absent. For example, 
circadian clock-regulated nyctinastic leaf movements are also important for plant growth 
and development. It was reported that the overall plant growth was reduced in M. 
truncatula plants where leaf movements were disrupted due to mutations in PETIOLULE-
LIKE PULVINUS (PLP) genes (Zhou et al., 2012). This is likely because plants can 
optimize light intensity on the leaf surface to maximise energy capture through nastic leaf 
movements. Therefore, the growth impairment in our experiment could be partly because 
of the altered leaf movements in the lhy mutant plants. There were no apparent or visual 
differences between leaf or shoot morphology (e.g., size, colour, branching) that could 
affect growth and development in lhy mutants, however, this could be investigated in more 
detail in future. 
In general, the molecular and phenotypic alterations that were identified in our 
study corroborate existing literature on clock effects on plant growth and development. 
Our data is also consistent with a recently published study (Kong et al., 2020) that also 
reported that the loss of function of the MtLHY resulted in decreased nodule number, 
irregular leaf movements and overall reduction in plant biomass. In addition, Kong et al. 
(2020) reported that lhy mutants showed an early flowering phenotype whereas the 
constitutive overexpression of functional LHY gene (through introducing a p35S:MtLHY 
construct in WT plants) caused delayed flowering and longer hypocotyl growth. These 
findings are in line with the data from A. thaliana that suggest MtLHY plays a role similar 
to CCA1/LHY of A. thaliana in terms of flowering and growth (Lu et al., 2009, Wang 
and Tobin, 1998). Constitutive overexpression of LHY, however, did not result in any 
 - 86 - 
significant changes in nodule development or their number (Kong et al., 2020). Although 
flowering time and the effect of LHY overexpression were not evaluated in our study, 
one can expect to see similar findings as reported by Kong et al. (2020) due to the similar 
nature of the conditions used.  
Having said this, the mutant lines that Kong et al. used were not same as ours, as 
far as we can tell based on the information that they report. They used two Tnt1 insertion 
lines, named NF6569 and NF16126, that were obtained (similarly to us) from the Noble 
Research Institute, USA. According to their paper, both these lines harbour Tnt1 insertion 
in the fifth exon of MtLHY (Medtr7g118330). However, when we assessed the Tnt1 
insertion sites using the respective Noble Research Institute database (https://medicago-
mutant.noble.org/mutant/database.php), we did not find any insertion at any position in 
the entire MtLHY gene for those two Tnt1 lines. This has created confusion about 
whether Kong et al. used the appropriate mutants, although their genotyping data and 
related PCR primer sequences were consistent with the data that we have presented for 
NF17115 (lhy-1) and NF16461 (lhy-2). There could therefore be a typographical error in 
their paper since our major findings are similar in general, but this is an unresolved issue.   
Our findings together with those of Kong et al. (2020) open up possibilities for new 
and exciting research on the effect of the plant clock on symbiosis. Since we have 
confirmed that nodulation is affected by the loss of LHY expression, it would be 
interesting to monitor nodule initiation and further development in WT vs. lhy mutants 
using microscopy and study gene expression at different stages of nodule growth in order 
to determine when and where LHY disruption affects nodulation. Also, based on our 
hypothesis on Chapter 3, the regulation of different NCRs should be evaluated in the lhy 
mutants to determine whether LHY directly regulates a set of NCRs or if the rhythmic 
NCRs are regulated by some other clock components. Phenotyping experiments similar 
to those discussed in this chapter, should be set up with other M. truncatula clock gene 
mutants (e.g., TOC, PRRs, GI) to determine whether the effects we have identified in this 
study relate solely to the function of MtLHY or relate to the clock in general. To conclude, 
this chapter presents novel and exciting groundwork including some new insights into the 
role of MtLHY, as (potentially) corroborated by published data, which could be used for 
further research to understand more about the circadian regulation of nodulation in 
legumes.  
 - 87 - 
5. The rhythmic regulation of rhizobial genes in nodules. 
5.1. Introduction 
In a successful legume-rhizobia symbiosis, rhizobia undergo different metabolic 
and physiological changes within host symbiosomes and differentiate into N-fixing 
bacteroids (as discussed in Chapter 1). Therefore, it can be assumed that the gene 
expression profile of fully differentiated bacteroid is different than that of undifferentiated 
bacteroids or free-living rhizobia. This is supported by the study in Aeschynomene spp. 
(Lamouche et al., 2019b, Lamouche et al., 2019a), where several transcriptomic and 
metabolomic changes were observed between differentiated and undifferentiated 
bacteroids. The transcriptomic analysis further suggests that oxygenic and redox 
regulations play important role in bacterial gene expression (Lamouche et al., 2019a). It is 
likely that the expression of many bacteroid genes are influenced by the host. As shown 
in Chapter 3, many plant genes are likely to be under circadian regulation and are 
rhythmically expressed in nodules. It is plausible that some rhizobial genes are also 
rhythmically regulated inside nodules. In indeterminate nodules where bacteroids are 
terminally differentiated and comparatively tightly regulated by the host, plant circadian 
control may have a particularly important role in regulation of bacterial gene expression.  
5.1.1. A circadian clock is present in certain photosynthetic bacteria 
The existence of circadian clocks is well described in plants, animals and other 
eukaryotic systems. However, although circadian systems are apparently ubiquitous, they 
have rarely been reported in prokaryotes except for some photosynthetic bacteria 
(reviewed in Sartor et al. (2019)). It has been previously thought that a circadian system 
might not be present in prokaryotic organisms that have reproductive times shorter than 
the diurnal cycle. This idea was referred to as the circadian-infradian rule which 
presumed that a cell can incorporate circadian regulation only if it reproduces in a 
circadian (~24 hours cycle) or infradian (more than 24 hours cycle) fashion (Hillman, 
1976). However, several studies on photosynthetic cyanobacteria, in particular on 
Synechococcus elongatus, provided strong evidence of a robust circadian clock existing within 
prokaryotic systems with a generation times of 5-10 hours (Kondo et al., 1994, Liu et al., 
1995, Nakajima et al., 2005, Sartor et al., 2019), as outlined below. 
 - 88 - 
In Synechococcus spp., three essential circadian clock proteins, namely- KaiA, KaiB and 
KaiC, have been described (Figure 5.1) that can directly or indirectly regulate the 
expression of almost entire bacterial genome (Liu et al., 1995, Nakahira et al., 2004). This 
is much higher in terms of the proportion of genes under circadian control than any other 
eukaryotic model system. Among the Kai proteins, KaiC is considered to be the most 
important one and it is phosphorylated and dephosphorylated in a circadian manner 
(Tomita et al., 2005). It was first proposed that the core circadian loop is maintained by 
the negative-feedback regulation of the kaiBC operon by Kai proteins (Nakahira et al., 
2004). However, later it was found 
that the temperature compensated, 
free-running, circadian cycling of 
the phosphorylation state of KaiC 
is tightly maintained even when 
both transcription and translation 
of kaiBC operon were inhibited 
(Tomita et al., 2005). This suggest 
that the core oscillatory loop is not 
formed by transcription-translation 
feedback regulation of the kaiBC 
operon but by the phosphorylation 
cycle of KaiC itself.  Interestingly, 
KaiC is capable of both 
autophosphorylation and 
autodephosphorylation where 
KaiA promotes the 
autophosphorylation of KaiC 
(Iwasaki et al., 2002) during the day 
and KaiB antagonizes the effect of KaiA at night (Figure 5.1) (Kitayama et al., 2003, Xu 
et al., 2003). These findings suggest that an autonomous, self-sustaining oscillation of 
KaiC phosphorylation could be generated in the presence of KaiA and KaiB only, without 
requiring other kinases or phosphatases. In fact, the oscillatory phosphorylation of KaiC 
was retained when all of these proteins were ectopically expressed in E. coli. In E. coli, the 
oscillation of KaiC phosphorylation was observed only when both KaiA and KaiC were 
Figure 5.1: KaiA and KaiB antagonize each 
other to control the KaiC phosphorylation 
state. During the day, KaiA enhances the 
autophosphorylation of KaiC and the 
concentration of phosphorylated KaiC reaches 
its maximum at dusk. At night, KaiB 
antagonizes KaiA, the dephosphorylation of 
KaiC takes place rapidly and the concentration 
of dephosohorylated KaiC become maximum 
at dawn.  
 - 89 - 
present and it was not dependent on KaiC expression levels, as the total KaiC expression 
did not show any rhythmic pattern over time (Chen et al., 2015a).  
Rhythmic processes have been identified in photosynthetic purple bacteria too. For 
example, in Rhodobacter sphaeroides, an acyl-CoA dehydrogenase encoding gene (aidB) 
oscillates transcriptionally with a period of around 20.5h under aerobic conditions or with 
a much shorter period of 10-12h under anaerobic conditions (Min et al., 2005). However, 
these rhythms do not meet the criteria of a circadian rhythm as they are much shorter 
than 24h. Nonetheless, the R. sphaeroides genome contains orthologs of kaiB and kaiC 
genes (lacking kaiA). Furthermore, the kaiBC operon in R. sphaeroides contains a PAS (Per 
ARNT Sim) domain protein. PAS domain-containing proteins are often found to be 
associated with circadian clocks in different species. For example, in A. thaliana three clock 
associated proteins, ZEITLUPE (ZTL), FLAVIN-KELCH-FBOX-1 (FKF1), and LOV-
KELCH-PROTEIN-2 (LKP2), contain an N-terminal PAS domain (Vogt and Schippers, 
2015). The PAS domain acts as a versatile sensor and can detect different chemical and 
physical signals that are essential in circadian regulations (Mglich et al., 2009). Based on 
these observations, it can be assumed that even if there is no typical circadian program in 
R. sphaeroides, it partially possesses some of the clock components and this provides 
evidence for the existence of endogenous temporal programs in prokaryotes.   
All of the findings mentioned above demonstrate a number of facts. Firstly, 
circadian regulation can persist in single-cell organisms that reproduce continuously in 
less than 24 hours. Secondly, circadian clocks are not only present in certain prokaryotes 
but they can also be transplanted successfully into other prokaryotic systems that lack 
circadian activity as described by Chen et al. (2015a). Finally, key clock components are 
not exclusively present in species with known circadian regulation mechanisms, but also 
found in other species (discussed further, later). This suggests that these genes are 
evolutionarily significant and might be involved in other known or as yet unknown 
rhythmic processes.  
5.1.2. Presence of circadian rhythms in non-photosynthetic bacteria 
As mentioned earlier, the existence of a robust circadian regulation has not yet been 
reported in non-photosynthetic bacteria. However, rhythmicity in growth characteristics 
 - 90 - 
has been reported a long time ago in E. coli (Halberg and Conner, 1961, Sturtevant, 1973a) 
and Klebsiella pneumoniae (Sturtevant, 1973b). Despite this, these rhythms failed to persist 
in a temperature-compensated or free-running manner, therefore, could not be treated as 
a true circadian rhythm.  
Recently it has been demonstrated that Enterobactor aerogenes, a commensal from 
human gastrointestinal track, exhibits rhythmic patterns of swarming and motility 
(Paulose et al., 2016). In the presence of melatonin, an indole hormone abundantly present 
in the human gut, a synchronized, temperature-compensated rhythm of luciferase (fused 
to a flagellar motor protein) activity with a period of 25h was observed. This is, so far, the 
only reported rhythmic activity in non-photosynthetic prokaryotic species that meets the 
criteria of a classically defined circadian rhythm. However, the key components behind 
this rhythmicity and other related regulation (if any) are yet to be understood. Also, in this 
study (Paulose et al., 2016) it was noted that only 31-44% of the bacterial culture 
harbouring the luciferase reporter construct had shown rhythmicity, implicating 
conditional characteristics of the rhythm. Nonetheless, this observation presents, at least 
one example of how bacterial time-keeping machinery could be conditioned by a host 
derived signal, in this case, melatonin.  
 Interestingly, kai gene homologs have been found in non-photosynthetic bacteria 
(Dvornyk et al., 2003, Loza-Correa et al., 2010). Of particular note, the homologs of kaiC 
have been identified in three other major bacterial taxa outside cyanobacteria, namely- 
Proteobacteria, Thermotogae and Chloroflexi. kaiB genes was found in almost all 
cyanobacteria and a few proteobacteria while the kaiA gene was only found in 
cyanobacteria. Therefore, it was hypothesized that the kaiC gene is comparatively 
primitive in origin and kaiA is originated in cyanobacteria most recently. kaiB might also 
have originated in cyanobacteria and then been laterally transferred to other bacterial 
species (Dvornyk et al., 2003). The presence of kai gene homologs in different bacterial 
species other than cyanobacteria raises the possibility that these bacteria may have some 
kind of endogenous rhythm that is yet to be detected. Also, the observation of kaiC 
homologs in different species that do not contain homologs for kaiA and kaiB suggests 
that kaiC gene function might not be solely controlled by those two kai genes. In fact, a 
very recent study (Kawamoto et al., 2020) reported that kaiBC promoter activity can 
 - 91 - 
oscillate in a dampened manner with a low-amplitude and a period of about 24-26h, even 
in the absence of the KaiA protein in Synechococcus elongatus. This dampened transcriptional 
rhythm is regulated by a transcription-translational feedback loop and requires the 
formation of KaiB-KaiC complex but is not dependent on the phosphorylation cycle of 
KaiC. This finding provides some insight helping to explain the observation of rhythmic 
behaviour in some bacterial species (e.g., different purple bacteria) that have kaiB and 
kaiC but lack a kaiA homolog. A closer inspection into other species that contain kaiC 
homologs only could shed light onto the regulation of kaiC and on other potential 
rhythmic activities in non-photosynthetic prokaryotes.  
5.1.3. The influence of the host circadian clock on the colonizing microbial 
community 
As mentioned earlier in the case of the gut commensal E. serogenes, the host derived 
signal can modify or introduce rhythmic activities in symbiotic prokaryotes (Paulose et 
al., 2016). There is multiple evidence that alteration in the microbiome population can 
also change the clock activity of the host (reviewed in Sartor et al. (2019)). Such 
interactions have been seen in the plant kingdom as well where the plant circadian clock 
was shown to influence the interacting microbial community. For example, Hubbard et 
al. (2018) reported that the cultivation of different A. thaliana clock mutants can lead to 
alteration in the rhizosphere bacterial community compared to the rhizosphere microbial 
composition of wild type plants. Furthermore, when wild type plants were grown in soil 
that mimic the microbial composition of the soil used to cultivate clock mutants, they 
show growth related impairments (e.g., smaller leaf rosette, delayed germination) 
compared to the controls. These observations suggest that the plant circadian clock not 
only influences the rhizosphere microbial community but also that proper clock 
functioning is needed for selection of a rhizosphere microbiome that is optimally 
composed for plant growth and development. These findings are interesting but not 
unexpected since different rhythmic processes in plants (e.g., photosynthesis, 
carbohydrate metabolism and partitioning) are likely to provide a rhythmic host 
microenvironment for the colonizing microorganisms. Therefore, the host together with 
microorganisms that are better adapted to that rhythmic host microenvironment play 
important role in shaping plant-microbial communities, bringing mutual benefits.  
 - 92 - 
5.1.4. Aims and objectives 
In the case of symbiotic interactions like legume-rhizobia associations, optimizing 
synchronization between the carbon metabolic cycle of plants and the nitrogen 
metabolism of the intracellular bacteroids and other processes is crucial. Rhizobia are 
members of proteobacteria and contain a kaiC homolog. However, no notable circadian 
or rhythmic processes have so far been identified in free-living rhizobia. This is an 
underexplored area. More studies on rhizobial gene expression and regulation, specifically 
in bacteroids when they are under host control, might help to determine if there is a free-
running rhythm in bacteroids and how this is influenced by host circadian clock.   
As described in Chapter 3, to examine the plant host transcriptome, time-course 
experiment samples were harvested. As well as enabling plant RNA expression (in 
nodules) to be quantified, the samples also contained rhizobial mRNAs. The library 
preparation protocol used allowed these rhizobial mRNAs to be sequenced and 
quantified. Therefore, the data from the time-course RNA-sequencing experiment 
enabled us to determine the changes in rhizobial gene expression inside nodules over time 
in free-running environmental conditions. In this chapter the rhizobial gene expression 
data was analyzed with a view to identifying genes (if any) that are rhythmically expressed 
in a circadian manner. Regulation or modification at post-transcriptional or protein level 
(e.g., changes in phosphorylation state of KaiC) could not be assessed, but this data 
provides a new understanding of bacteroid gene expression at the transcriptional level 
throughout the day within mature nodules of M. truncatula.  
 - 93 - 
5.2. Results 
5.2.1. Almost the entire rhizobial genome is expressed in bacteroids 
In all our experiments, we used Sinorhizobium meliloti SM1022 (also known as Ensifer 
meliloti SM1022) strain to inoculate M. truncatula roots to form nodules. The rationale 
behind using this particular strain was that S. meliloti SM1022 is a comparatively highly 
efficient N-fixing strain and usually results in a high number of nodules (Terpolilli et al. 
(2013) and data from within the Gifford lab, Lagunas et al. In Prep). High nodule number 
allowed us to grow relatively fewer number of plants per time-points to have enough 
samples for downstream processing and analysis, enabling an efficient experiment to be 
designed and carried out. As well as measuring plant gene expression over a time-course 
(Chapter 3), the expression of bacterial genes was also quantified. 
To analyse rhizobial gene expression from the obtained sequence data, the recently 
sequenced genome and annotations of S. meliloti SM1022 were downloaded from the 
NCBI database as a reference (accession: PRJNA636618). The SM1022 genome consists 
of a 3.7 million bp chromosome and two plasmids, pA and pB, that are around 1.4 and 
1.6 million bp long, respectively. In total, the genome contains 6,328 gene loci and 6,058 
protein coding sequences. Using the RNA-seq data analysis pipeline described in Chapter 
2, transcriptomic expression data values for 6,328 rhizobial genes was generated.  Unlike 
plant genes, for which around one-third of was not expressed in nodules, almost all of the 
rhizobial genes show some level of expression in bacteroids (Figure 5.2). Only 0.44% of 
genes (~28 on average from 3 replicates) had average read counts (over 13 time-points) 
of less than 5. Over 88% genes had average read counts above 50, representing moderate 
to high level of expression. 
 - 94 - 
The observations that almost all the bacterial genes were expressed and many of 
them were highly expressed, were not unexpected for two reasons. Firstly, bacterial 
genomes are usually very compact and are not subjected to many levels of epigenetic 
control and silencing (e.g., chromatin remodelling). Secondly, there is a highly 
concentrated bacterial population inside nodules and they go through several folds of 
endoreduplication cycle to become mature bacteroids. Therefore, the gene copy number 
in bacteroids is very high, which can be responsible for comparatively more mRNAs (or 
read counts) even from a lowly expressed gene. However, since we have not compared 
gene expression between bacteroids and free-living rhizobia in this study it was not 
possible to determine whether most genes are generally highly expressed in bacteroids. 
This could be carried out as part of future work.  
Figure 5.2: Number of SM1022 rhizobial genes with different ranges of read 
counts per time-point, averaged over 13 time-points. Graph showing that 
most rhizobial genes were highly expressed. Error bars represent standard 
deviation from three replicate experiments.  
 - 95 - 
5.2.2. Several rhizobial genes show rhythmic expression in bacteroids 
In order to identify rhythmic genes, we used metacycle and Lomb-Scargle 
periodogram, as used to identify rhythmic plant genes. We identified 58 rhythmic genes 
with a p-value <0.05 where 7 of them had p-value <0.01 (See supplementary Table S2 & 
S4). Use of a gene ontology analysis did not identify any particular ontology enrichment, 
possibly because of a small set of query genes (n=58) and the fact that the S. meliloti 1022 
genome has been recently sequenced and many ontology terms are yet to be annotated to 
their respective genes. 
However, a word frequency 
analysis using the brief gene 
definitions of 58 genes 
uncovered a high frequency of 
transporter terms, which 
(despite this being a non-
systematic analysis) could be 
informative (Figure 5.3). 
Several of the genes annotated 
with transporter in their term 
were different ABC (ATP-
binding cassette) transporters 
and permeases. In addition, 
there were several synthase, 
dehydrogenase and transferase 
genes that are likely to be 
involved in different metabolic processes. This observation suggests that, similar to plants, 
some bacterial genes might be regulated in a rhythmic manner to facilitate the transport 
of different metabolites at specific times during the day.  
Next, oscillating genes were tentatively organized into different groups using a 
hierarchical clustering method, similar to that used in Chapter 3 (Figure 5.4).  
Figure 5.3: Overview of rhythmic rhizobial gene 
functions. Word-cloud showing the most frequent 
words in the brief gene definition of the oscillating 
rhizobial genes. 
 - 96 - 
Relative expression 
Time [hours] 
 0    3    6   9   12   15  18  21  24  30  36  42  48  
Cluster 1: Dawn 
5 genes  
Cluster 4: Night 
31 genes  
Cluster 2: Day 
7 genes  
Cluster 3: Dusk 
15 genes  
Figure 5.4: A heat map based on hierarchical clustering illustrates the 
expression of 58 rhythmic rhizobial genes. Four major clusters (1 to 4) are 
represented respectively by yellow, blue, green and red colours on the left of the heat 
map. Based on the timing of their expression peak they are also named as Dawn, 
Day, Dusk and Night clusters, respectively. In the heatmap, the intensity of blue 
and white colour represents higher and lower expression, respectively. 
 - 97 - 
Remarkably, amongst this small group of 58 genes, four clear patterns of expression 
could be differentiated, showing that there were four groups that were expressed and 
peaked at different times during the 24h cycle (Figure 5.5). More than half of the genes 
(n=31) were highly expressed during the subjective night (Cluster 4) (Figure 5.5d). This 
was also the case for rhythmic plant genes, of which around half of were highly expressed 
at night. Therefore there could be a connection between plant and bacterial rhythmic 
activity to coordinate related metabolic activities and exchange of different metabolites.  
 0         6       12       18       24      30       36       42       48   0         6       12       18       24      30       36       42       48  
 0         6       12       18       24      30       36       42       48   0         6       12       18       24      30       36       42       48  
(a) Cluster 1: Dawn (b) Cluster 2: Day 
(c) Cluster 3: Dusk (d) Cluster 4: Night 
Figure 5.5: Expression pattern of genes within each of four timed expression 
clusters. A centroid plot is shown for each cluster. (a) Cluster-1 (yellow) genes peak 
at 0h and just before 24h, representing the beginning of the day (dawn); (b) Cluster-
2 (blue) genes peak around 9h and 30h time-points and are comparatively more 
highly expressed during the subjective day period, hence are categorized as day genes; 
(c) Cluster-3 (green) gene expression is similar to cluster-2 as the genes peak around 
9-12h in the first cycle but then they peak distinctively around 36h in the second cycle. 
In general, the expression of these genes peaks slightly later than cluster-2 (day) genes 
(as seen in the heatmap, Figure 5.4) and they are therefore termed as dusk genes; (d) 
Cluster-4 (red) genes are highly expressed during the subjective night and expression 
reaches its minimum at subjective mid-day (6h, 30h), hence these are categorized as 
night genes. White and black bars underneath each plot indicate subjective day and 
night, respectively. Expression values for each gene are log2 normalised and relative 
to its mean expression over time.  
 - 98 - 
There are 5 genes (Cluster 1) that were highly expressed at the beginning of the day 
(Figure 5.5a). For the rest of the genes, expression continually increases during the day 
and decreases during the night. These genes formed two clusters: Cluster 2 and 3. Cluster-
2 genes were comparatively more highly expressed for most of the day and peaked slightly 
before the evening whereas Cluster-3 genes peaked around the evening period; therefore, 
they were termed Day and Dusk genes, respectively (Figure 5.4 & 5.5b-c). 
In Chapter 3, different cluster or time-of-day specific physiological processes (e.g., 
photosynthetic activity at mid-day period) could be attributed to different rhythmic plant 
gene clusters. However, this is difficult to do for rhythmic bacterial genes as they are very 
small in numbers and none of the four clusters was found to be enriched in any particular 
type of genes. Nonetheless, the rhythmic genes identified in this study could be candidates 
for some further studies to better understand the prokaryotic clocks outside 
Cyanobacteria enabling comparison with them.  
As mentioned above, many transporter or transporter-associated genes (more than 
a dozen) were found to be rhythmically expressed. There were six ABC transporters or 
ABC transporter-associated proteins (one each in midday and dusk clusters, four in night 
cluster) among those transporter genes. ABC transporters are active transporters that can 
move molecules against a gradient using ATP energy. Bacterial ABC transporter plays 
important roles in bacterial survival by actively taking up or exporting different molecules 
to maintain osmotic pressure, virulence and antagonise toxins or antibiotics, etc 
(Davidson et al., 2008). As discussed in Chapter 1, some rhizobial species might use 
proteins similar to ABC transporters (e.g., BacA, BclA) to counteract NCR mediated 
toxicity on cell surface by importing NCR peptides inside the cell. The ABC transporter 
related proteins that were highly expressed at dusk and night might have some role against 
NCR regulation, given that most rhythmic NCRs were also found in dusk and night 
clusters. 
  In addition, several metabolic enzymes, for example, three acyltransferases, three 
dehydrogenases, two reductases, two phosphotransferases etc., were found to be 
rhythmically regulated. These enzymes are found across the different clusters, with no 
enrichment for a particular function in any one cluster. It could be assumed that the 
different metabolic processes within bacteroids, as well as the transport of raw materials 
 - 99 - 
and synthesised products of rhizobial metabolism are controlled in a circadian time-
dependent manner. It is also likely that different rhythmic processes in bacteroids are in 
sync with host rhythmic processes. For example, as discussed in Chapter 3, nitrogen 
fixation rate in nodules peaks at evening and different nitrogen metabolic and transport 
related activities are enhanced during night. A higher number of dusk (n=15) and night 
(n=31) peaking genes among the rhythmic rhizobial genes (n=58) indicates a possible link 
between these bacterial genes and different nitrogen metabolic processes in nodules. 
The cell division gene, ftsZ (QKN14772), was found to be rhythmic, peaking at 
dusk. FtsZ is important in the formation of the Z-ring at the prospective site of cell 
division (Margolin, 2005). Furthermore, a DNA primase (dusk peaking), a Y-family DNA 
polymerase (night peaking) and a DNA helicase (night peaking) were found among the 
diurnally rhythmic genes. These findings raise the interesting prospect that bacterial cell 
division or endoreduplication related processes could be regulated in a circadian manner 
and enhanced upon the advent of night period.  
Five DUF (Domain of Unknown Function) containing and several hypothetical 
proteins were also found in different clusters among the rhythmic genes (with so specific 
cluster enrichment). These proteins might also be involved in important processes that 
could be investigated in future when more functional prediction data is available.  
 - 100 - 
5.3. Discussion and future directions 
Circadian rhythms might not be very common in prokaryotic organisms but 
different rhythmic activities relating to cell division, growth and external stimuli are 
abundant in prokaryotes (Sartor et al., 2019). In the rhizosphere and particularly during 
symbiotic interactions, these rhythmic activities need to be synchronised with host 
rhythms for optimal benefits to both microbe and plant. For example, in legume-rhizobia 
symbiosis, rhizobia utilise different photosynthates that are produced and consumed in a 
time-dependent manner by the plant. Our data in Chapter 3 suggest that N-fixation and 
N-transport are also enhanced at particular period. Therefore, rhizobia are likely to adapt 
with/to these rhythmically changing conditions, in particular, when they are inside plant 
cells. It is also likely that legumes impose tight control on different bacterial metabolic 
processes by regulating gene expression or by regulating the activity of different enzymes 
post-translationally as reviewed in Walker et al. (2020). Like the oscillation of KaiC 
phosphorylation state in cyanobacteria, the active state of other proteins could be 
rhythmically regulated at posttranslational level in bacteroids. To partially support this, 
several rhythmic bacterial genes identified in our analysis encode different redox and 
transferase enzyme that are usually associated with the regulation of other key 
enzymes/transporters or different metabolites, etc. Even though we could not detect any 
rhythmic process in bacteria, partly because of small number of rhythmic genes, the 
presence of these redox enzymes supports the likelihood of a metabolic cycle in bacteroids 
that coordinate with plant rhythms. As found in Chapter 3, over fifty percent of rhythmic 
plant genes are highly expressed at night, which could be related to the high metabolic 
activity and rapid growth of plants during night (Michael et al., 2008a). Around half of all 
rhythmic rhizobial genes identified here were also highly expressed during night. This 
might be an indication that different rhythmic processes between host and symbionts are 
synchronised.  
The important nodulation gene in plant, NIN, has been found to rhythmically 
expressed in nodule. However, there was no rhizobial genes that is directly associated with 
or known to be important for nodulation (e.g., nod, nif, fix genes) among the rhythmically 
expressed genes. These genes were indeed highly expressed (compared to other expressed 
genes in bacteroids) but not rhythmically regulated at transcriptional level. However, like 
 - 101 - 
KaiC in cyanobacteria, the product of those nodulation related genes can be regulated at 
post-transcriptional level by different bacterial or plant derived enzymes as mentioned 
previously. There is no evidence yet that the kaiC homolog in S. meliloti is rhythmically 
regulated. In line with this we found that the S. meliloti kaiC homolog was also not amongst 
the rhythmic genes. Therefore, kaiC is unlikely to be rhythmically regulated in bacteroids, 
at least, not at the transcriptional level.  
Several DNA replication and cell division associated genes were rhythmically 
expressed in bacteroids. These genes are likely to be manipulated by certain legume hosts 
(e.g., Medicago) that force rhizobia to undergo several cycle of endoreduplication, a 
process that keeps the rhizobial population in check while maximising N-fixation (Roy P 
et al., 2020). Along with FtsZ (as mentioned previously), an ATP-dependent 
metallopeptidase FtsH family protein (QKN15441.1) was found in the dusk cluster. FtsH 
is also very important for proper bacterial cell division and growth (Jayasekera et al., 2000). 
The existence of these cell division related genes among the circadially oscillating genes 
suggest that part of the bacterial reproductive machinery could be under host circadian 
control. However, it should be considered that the generation time of free-living S. meliloti 
is usually 2h but could be up to 6h depending on different conditions (Dai et al., 2018). 
In line with an oscillation in different DNA replication and cell division related genes with 
a period of 2-6 hours, regulated based on actual generation time, would make sense. These 
oscillations are therefore not likely to be under circadian control, but they were identified 
as circadian in our analysis. It could be that some reproductive genes are indeed diurnally 
regulated in mature bacteroid and were appropriately detected in our study. Alternatively, 
there is a possibility that these genes oscillate with a shorter period but identified with 
incorrect periodicity because of the comparatively longer sampling intervals of 3h (in the 
first 24h) or 6h (in the last 24h) in our experiment. To clarify this further, a sample interval 
of 3-6h is sufficient to detect circadian rhythms but to appropriately identify a rhythm 
with shorter period, sampling intervals need to shorten as well. Any rhythm with a small 
period is likely to be undetected or detected with incorrect periodicity due to the lack of 
data in between sampling intervals. As mentioned, the data presented in this chapter was 
generated from the time-course experiment broadly described in Chapter 3. The time-
course experiment was primarily designed to identify rhythmic plant genes that are under 
endogenous circadian clock regulation in mature nodules. The metagenomic RNA 
sequencing protocol allowed us to gain some valuable insights about the rhizobial gene 
 - 102 - 
expression too. However, while analyzing this data it should be kept in mind that for 
better detection of bacterial rhythmic activity, a smaller sampling interval would be even 
more valuable.  
 The gene expression in a small proportion of rhizobia growing in the infection 
zone and interzone of nodules that are not fully differentiated would be expected to be 
different from that of mature bacteroids. However, in our study the whole nodules were 
collected and ground to extract RNA, therefore, gene expression difference in different 
stages of bacteroids could not be determined. In general, our data shows bacterial gene 
expression in mature nodules as a whole but is mostly representative of fully differentiated 
bacteroids because of their high number and greater gene copies. Future studies involving 
microdissection of different nodule zones to extract bacteroid RNAs from different 
stages of nodule development would likely to provide even more insights into rhizobial 
gene regulation within nodules. It would be interesting to determine the expression of 
rhythmic genes in free-living rhizobia. In addition, some of the rhythmic genes could be 
knocked-out to determine how that impacts rhizobial colonization, differentiation and N-
fixation etc. In conclusion, the data generated in our study is very preliminary, but it 
provides exciting grounds for some future studies.  
6. Utilization of cell-type specific promoters to study cell 
type specific gene expression in Medicago truncatula.  
6.1. Introduction 
In a similar way to the development of lateral root formation, the onset of nodule 
organogenesis and further development are coordinated in a highly cell-type specific 
manner. As discussed in Chapter 1, nodulation can be considered to begin with the cross-
talk between flavonoid-secreting plant root hair cells and soil rhizobia secreting Nod 
factors. The initial perception of Nod factors leads to a calcium ion spike in epidermal 
cells that results in root hair curling and de novo cell divisions in the underlying inner-
cortical cells, giving rise to a nodule-primordium (Oldroyd, 2013). When the inner cortical 
cells become mitotically activated after Nod factor recognition, rhizobia are still at the 
epidermis. Interestingly, Nod factors are immobile signal molecules (Goedhart et al., 
2000) but their perception triggers cell divisions in the inner-most cortical cell layer, 
however the outer cortical cells which are closest to the perceived signal respond relatively 
later, showing complexity even amongst cells of the same type (cortical cells) (Xiao et al., 
2014). However, there must be coordination of cell division in underlying cell layers, 
combined with the development of an infection thread to enable bacterial entry.  Precisely 
how initial perception of rhizobia in the epidermis and related early signaling results in 
coordinated cell divisions and nodule organogenesis in a temporally and spatially 
restricted manner is yet to be fully understood. 
Root nodules are often considered to be modified lateral roots as the development 
of both organs share overlapping developmental processes (Schiessl et al., 2019). 
However, there are key differences between these two processes. Unlike nodules, lateral 
roots are initiated from the cell divisions of predefined pericycle cells termed as founder 
cells. These founder cells are assumed to be primed by periodically oscillating auxin levels. 
However, no evidence has been found so far that nodules are originated from predefined 
cortical founder cells. Nodule organogenesis is initiated by CRE-1 (CYTOKININ 
RESPONSE-1) mediated cytokinin signaling that induces the expression of the key 
transcription factor NIN (NODULE INCEPTION). Both CRE-1 and NIN are 
indispensable for the induction of nodulation (Verni et al., 2015). While cytokinin 
signaling is important for nodulation, it suppresses lateral root formation. This is also 
supported by the observation that cre1 mutants produce fewer nodules with an increased 
number of lateral roots (Gonzalez-Rizzo et al., 2006). Auxin accumulation has been 
observed at the sites of both nodule and lateral root primordia, therefore it is an important 
regulator of both the processes, but initial cytokinin signaling is essential specifically for 
nodule initiation. The initial cytokinin signaling possibly blocks the polar transport of 
auxin underneath the site of rhizobial perception causing a localized auxin accumulation 
that directs nodule development (Kohlen et al., 2017).  
Despite their different modes of initiation, both lateral root development and 
nodulation have some commonalities and shared regulatory components (Schiessl et al., 
2019) (Figure 6.1). In fact, observations from two recent studies supports the idea that 
the nodule organogenesis in legumes might have evolved by hijacking some key regulatory 
components from lateral root development (Soyano et al., 2019, Schiessl et al., 2019).  
Figure 6.1: Lateral root and nodule organogenesis are initiated differently but 
share overlapping pathways. (a) Lateral root development begins with pericycle cell 
division as a result of signaling that varies due to periodic auxin maxima. (b) In contrast, 
a nodule primordia is formed via cortical cell divisions resulting from the perception of 
altered cytokinin signaling. For both (a) and (b), initial signaling converges on the 
expression of LBD16 that induces different auxin biosynthesis genes (e.g., YUCCAs) and 
further cell divisions enabling organ development. ARF, Auxin Response Factor; NF-Y, 
Nuclear Factor-Y (although they also have many distinct components of regulation); 
adapted from Bishopp and Bennett (2019). 
(a) (b) 
A transcription factor known as LBD16 (Lateral organ Boundaries Domain 16) has 
been reported to be required for both nodule and lateral root formation (Figure 6.1). In 
Arabidopsis, LBD16 is expressed in pericycle cells in response to auxin and leads to lateral 
root initiation. Soyano et al. (2019) reported the expression of LBD16 in dividing cortical 
cells of nodule primordia in Lotus japonicus. Interestingly, they identified a NIN-binding 
site (NBS) in the intron of LBD16 which is conserved along with its flanking region in 
many legume species; but not observed in non-legume LBD16 orthologs. Furthermore, 
this NBS containing LBD16 intron is sufficient for its cortex-specific expression when 
minimal promoter elements are available (Soyano et al., 2019). However, an intact, full-
length LBD16 promoter is required for expression in pericycle. It is not yet clear at this 
point how the binding of NIN at an intronic region alter the expression specificity of 
associated gene. Nonetheless, these observations suggest the possibility that an 
evolutionary origin of NBS in the intronic region of the LBD16 gene of an ancestral 
legume somehow enabled it to ectopically express LBD16 in cortical cells. Such an event 
would have allowed a pericycle specific pathway to be introduced in the cortex that could 
be initiated by cytokinin/NIN instead of auxin and lead to a new organ development.  
These observations and findings inspire further studies to understand how different 
regulatory components are coordinated in different types or layers of cells at different 
phases of nodule/lateral root organogenesis. This would be useful so we can find out 
which set of genes are differentially expressed in particular cells or tissues (e.g., epidermis, 
cortex, pericycle) in response to the perception of rhizobial inoculation. Most 
transcriptomic profiling studies so far have been based on whole organ study (e.g., entire 
root or root sections) where signals from particular cells or tissue types are usually 
abrogated by signals from different part of the organ. However, modern technologies 
enable us to generate cell-type specific data. One of the well-known ways of isolating 
subpopulations of particular tissue cells is laser-capture microdissection (LCM) (Casson 
et al., 2005, Portillo et al., 2009, Casson, 2008). Another alternative is the use of 
Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting (FACS) where fluorescently labelled target cells can 
be isolated in a high-throughput manner (Birnbaum et al., 2005, Carter et al., 2013, 
Gifford et al., 2008).  
For FACS there is a requirement to label cell types for sorting and it is possible to 
express different fluorescent proteins such as green fluorescent protein (GFP) or red 
fluorescent protein (RFP/dsRed) in target cells by means of cell-type specific promoters. 
A number of cell and tissue specific transgenic stable lines are already established for the 
model plant A. thaliana. However, such lines are not available or rare in the case of model 
legumes. Generation of cell-type specific fluorescent protein expression lines in any model 
legume plant would therefore enable the study of cortical, epidermal and/or other 
localized responses in legumes. Furthermore, this data could enable comparison with 
whole root expression data. Such transgenic lines would also be very useful for 
microscopic analysis, specially, in confocal microscopy to study developmental changes 
in different cell types over time (Genre, 2008). 
Several root cell-type specific promoters have been identified in the model plant A. 
thaliana (Lee et al., 2006) and some other species (e.g., tomato (Bucher et al., 2002)). Some 
of these promoters that are specific for different root cell layers (e.g., epidermis, cortex, 
endodermis, pericycle, vascular tissues) have been ectopically tested for their efficiency in 
model legumes, Lotus japonicus (Gavrilovic et al., 2016) and Medicago truncatula (Sevin-Pujol 
et al., 2017) (Figure 6.2). In both those studies, -GLUCURONIDASE (GUS) gene 
coding sequence was cloned under a promoter of interest and then plants transformed 
Figure 6.2: Expression of GUS under cell-type specific promoters. (A) 
Epidermis-specific expression directed by the pLeEXT1 promoter derived 
from an extensin-like gene in tomato; (B) & (C) Cortex-specific expression 
under two promoters, pAtCO2 and pAtPEP respectively, derived from A. 
thaliana; e: epidermis, c: cortex, en: endodermis, p: pericycle; Scale bar: 100 m; 
figure adapted from Sevin-Pujol et al. (2017). 
A B C 
transiently with the hairy root transformation protocol (Ron et al., 2014, Boisson-Dernier 
et al., 2001, Stougaard et al., 1987). Findings from these two particular studies (Sevin-
Pujol et al., 2017, Gavrilovic et al., 2016), partly presented in Figure 6.2, provide valuable 
insights about some prospective promoters that could be considered for generating cell 
specific stable fluorescent lines.  
In the work presented here, the specificity of two cortex associated promoters from 
A. thaliana, pAtCO2 and pAtPEP, was evaluated for use in M. truncatula using GFP as 
reporter gene instead of GUS. This is because GFP is relatively convenient to detect under 
confocal or fluorescent microscope as no further pre-processing such as staining is usually 
required. In addition, cells expressing GFP are easier to sort and isolate through FACS. 
If the specificity of these promoters is successfully reproduced in transient 
transformation, they could be used to generate cortex specific GFP-expressing stable 
transgenic lines. We were more interested to generate cortex specific lines since nodule 
primordia begin from this cell-type and therefore cortex specific gene expression analysis 
might shed some light on the initiation of the nodulation process. Nonetheless, if we 
succeed that will also inspire generating other cell-type specific lines and comparative gene 
expression analysis. 
 - 108 - 
6.2. Results  
6.2.1. Generation of a cortex specific expression vector for use in M. truncatula 
In order to generate cortex specific GFP expression lines, two promoters 
originating from Arabidopsis, known as AtCO2 and AtPEP, were chosen as their cortex 
specificity were ectopically checked in other species (Ron et al., 2014, Gavrilovic et al., 
2016, Sevin-Pujol et al., 2017). AtCO2 and AtPEP corresponds to two Arabidopsis genes, 
At1g62500 and At1g09750, respectively. The entire upstream intergenic regions of these 
genes were amplified through PCR from A. thaliana (ecotype: Columbia-0) genomic 
DNA. The amplified products (Figure 6.3a) were then cloned into the pENTRTM entry 
vector primarily and then finally to pBGWFS7.0 expression plasmid (Figure 6.3b) using 
 1        2        3        4         5 
pAtPEP 
pAtCO2 500bp 
2.0 kb 
1.5 kb 
Figure 6.3: Preparation of promoter:reporter construct. (a) Gel electrophoresis of 
PCR-amplified promoter regions of AtPEP and AtCO2 genes. pAtPEP and pAtCO2 are 
1,679bp and 552bp long, respectively, as confirmed by their respective positions in the 
gel. 100bp plus DNA ladder was used in lane-3. (b) Schematic map (generated with 
SnapGene v4.3) of expression vector pAtCO2:GFP-GUS, showing the respective 
position of the pAtCO2 promotor (in blue), EGFP (in bright green) and GUS (in orange) 
coding sequences. The streptomycin (SmR) and basta resistance (BlpR) genes are shown 
in light green. BlpR (under nopaline synthase promoter (NOS) and within T-DNA 
borders) enables the selection of transformed plant material, and SmR enables bacterial 
selection in selective medium; ori: origin of replication, LB/RB: left/right border of T-
DNA repeat, attB1/2: recombination sites 1 and 2 for Gateway BP reaction.  
 - 109 - 
GatewayTM cloning method (see Chapter 2). The pBGWFS7.0 plasmid vector is specially 
designed for promoter analysis, where a GFP-GUS fusion protein could be expressed 
under promoter of interest (Karimi et al., 2002). The fusion protein could be detected by 
either GFP fluorescence or -glucuronidase enzyme activity. The vector confers both 
streptomycin and spectinomycin resistance is bacteria and basta (glufosinate) resistance 
in host plants. Once the vector constructs were successfully produced, they were 
incorporated into Agrobacterium rhizogenes ARqua1 strain through electroporation and later 
used for hairy root transformation.  
6.2.2. pAtCO2 and pAtPEP exhibit cortex specific activity in M. truncatula 
To examine promoter activity in a time-efficient manner, young M. truncatula 
seedlings were subjected to hairy root transformation which is an easy and rapid way to 
evaluate the efficiency of vector constructs (Boisson-Dernier et al., 2001, Ron et al., 2014). 
In this procedure, a high percentage of newly formed, highly branched roots (hence, 
named as hairy; Figure 6.4a) become transformed that can be analyzed for reporter gene 
(or other transformant) activity. Since the entire transformation procedure does not take 
much time (~2 weeks after inoculation), it is reasonable to use it before proceeding with 
stable transformation which could take up to a year for Medicago spp. 
To carry out hairy root transformation, the root-tip of 3 days old seedlings were cut 
and inoculated with A. rhizogenes harbouring the vector containing the promoter:reporter 
of interest, then  grown for 7 days. To facilitate root growth and branching and to improve 
the probability of transformation, no selective reagent (e.g., basta) was applied. After a 
week, seedlings were examined under a stereomicroscope fitted with a GFP filter. 
Transformed roots were identified based on the fluorescence conferred by the EGFP 
reporter gene (Figure 6.4).  
From a total of 43 plants that were tested for pAtCO2 harbouring constructs, 35 
(81%) plants had, at least, one branch/section of root showing GFP fluorescence. For 
pAtPEP, 34 out of 40 (85%) plants were fluorescent. Although the percentage of 
successful transformations were high, it could have been even higher since the 
AtCO2/AtPEP promoters might not have all be active in all transformed roots/root 
parts. Fluorescence was observed in both the meristematic and the older part of the 
 - 110 - 
transformed roots for both the promoter transformations. Therefore, the promoters 
might not be specifically expressed in any one part of the root, e.g., growing or mature, 
as they were seen to direct the expression of GFP all over the roots in an inconsistent and 
sparse manner (Figure 6.4b). 
Figure 6.4: Hairy root transformation of M. truncatula. (a) 
Hairy roots (black arrow heads) of transformed plants, 7 days 
post inoculation. (b) Stereomicroscopy with a GFP filter 
reveals newly formed, transformed roots, expressing GFP 
(green fluorescence under GFP filter). Fluorescence was 
observed sparsely and in an inconsistent manner at different 
parts of transformed roots with both promoter 
transformations. (c) GFP fluorescence was not observed in 
the plants treated with mock solution containing no 
agrobacterium. Scale bars: in (a) 1cm and in (b) & (c) 1mm 
 - 111 - 
In order to evaluate the cell-type specificity of the promoters, GFP-expressing root 
branches were identified and cut under a stereomicroscope with GFP filter on. To be 
specific, five pieces (~0.5cm long) of transformed branches from five different plants for 
each promoter were taken and cross-sectioned using a vibratome. Finely and evenly cut 
cross-sections (thickness of ~200 microns) were stained with propidium iodide (PI) and 
then examined through confocal microscopy. The confocal microscopy images showed 
high levels of cortex-specific expression of the EGFP reporter gene for both the 
promoters (Figure 6.5). No significant visual difference was observed between the activity 
of two promoters in terms of the number of cortical cells expressing GFP or their 
fluorescence intensity (Figure 6.5).  
Figure 6.5: Confocal microscopy of cross-sections of transformed root shows 
cortex-specific expression for AtCO2 and AtPEP promoters. (A) & (C) 
Overlay of propidium iodide fluorescence (red) and GFP emission (green). (B) & 
(D) GFP fluorescence image only. At 7th day post inoculation (10 days old seedling), 
GFP fluorescence was observed almost exclusively in the cortical cells and in a very 
few epidermal cells, marked with white arrowheads. Scale bar: 100m. 
 - 112 - 
6.3. Discussion and future directions 
While this study and published literature support the cortex specificity of the 
AtCO2 and AtPEP promoters, several questions are yet to be properly addressed. First, 
at which developmental stages are these promoters more active? Does their expression 
differ between growing and mature parts of root? Sevin-Pujol et al. (2017) reported that 
pAtCO2 activity was stronger in meristem or diving cortical cells than in any other parts 
of the root, whereas the pAtPEP activity was stronger in older parts of roots, but absent 
in meristem. Such conclusion could not be made in our study since the GFP expressions 
were observed all over the roots for both promoters. Second, whether the cell type 
specificity changes over time as the plant grows? Lagunas B. (2018) had reported that the 
Arabidopsis expansin gene promoter, pAtExp7, showed high epidermal activity at 4 days 
of root development but by the 7th day the cell-type specificity was lost.  This could be 
the case for these cortex specific promoters as well which needs to be checked in future 
works. Finally, fluorescent proteins like GFP can diffuse from cell to cell to some extent 
by different means (e.g., through plasmodesmata). How would that affect downstream 
applications like FACS? This problem could be resolved by designing vector constructs 
that confine reporter gene expression to particular cellular location or organelle (e.g., 
Golgi body, endoplasmic reticulum). This could be achieved by adding a short N-terminal 
signal peptide sequence to the reporter gene (Katja Kapp, 2009). The vector constructs 
could be further improved by incorporating another fluorescent reporter (e.g., dsRED) 
under a constitutive promoter (e.g., pAtUbi) within the vector construct (e.g., pCambia 
vector used by Sevin-Pujol et al.) That would be useful to detect root parts that were 
transformed but showing no activity in regard to the promoters of interest, e.g., AtCO2 
and AtPEP in our case. Although several questions remain unanswered, the works 
presented here, in line with existing literature, reconfirm the potential of these promoters 
for preparing cell-type specific GFP expressing stable transgenic lines as a tool for 
generating cell-type specific omics data and subsequent analysis.  
 - 113 - 
7. General Discussion 
7.1. Background to the research questions and experimental design 
The NCR family has received huge attention in the legume research community 
because of their unique presence in IRLC legumes, exclusive expression in nodules and 
their critical roles in enforcing terminal bacteroid differentiation (as reviewed by Mergaert 
(2018), Roy P et al. (2020), Pan and Wang (2017)). The presence of NCR like peptides in 
non-indeterminate, nodule-forming, non-IRLC legumes (e.g., Aeschynomene spp.) was also 
correlated with relatively higher bacteroid differentiation and elongation (Czernic et al., 
2015). Comparative studies and examples (Montiel et al., 2016, Montiel et al., 2017) from 
different IRLC legumes suggest that legume hosts with a greater number of NCRs apply 
tighter control over bacterial metabolism, becoming more dominant over them. The 
employment of NCRs could be an early evolutionary step towards a future, independent 
N-fixing plant organ (Coba de la Pea et al., 2017, Roy P et al., 2020). Some support in 
favour of this hypothesis comes from studying an amoeba, Paulinella chromatophora, which 
harbours an early-stage photosynthetic organelle called a chromatophore. The 
chromatophore is thought to be derived from cyanobacterium about one hundred million 
years ago. It has been found that P. chromatophora guides several small peptides that are 
less than 90 amino acid long to its chromatophores. Most of these peptides came from 
the ancestral amoebal host, not from cyanobacteria; therefore, are likely to be involved in 
the early stages of the integration of chromatophore (Singer et al., 2017). This highlights 
that the small symbiotic peptides like NCRs that are expressed by the host can play 
important functions in developing a permanent endosymbiosis. Not to mention that such 
incorporation of endosymbionts into a permanent organelle would be highly complicated 
in multicellular organisms compared to single cell organisms like amoeba. Interestingly, 
symbiotic peptides like NCRs have also been found outside plants, for instance, in the 
interaction between aphids and their bacterial endosymbiont Buchnera aphidicola. The 
aphid-Buchnera endosymbiosis was originated at least 200 MYA, and has now arrived at a 
stage of obligate mutualism where Buchnera no longer lives freely outside the host. These 
-proteobacteria are maternally transferred through host generations (Shigenobu and 
Stern, 2013). The aphids restrict endosymbionts to specialized symbiotic cells called 
bacteriocytes (comparable to symbiosomes) where at least seven cysteine-rich peptides 
 - 114 - 
have been found to be expressed (Shigenobu and Stern, 2013, Uchi et al., 2019). Though, 
the precise functions of these bacteriocyte specific cysteine-rich (BCR) peptides are yet to 
be determined, their bacteriocyte-specific expression suggests a role in regulating the 
symbiosis. These insights and related evidence suggest a potential developing role for the 
NCR peptides in governing rhizobial differentiation, dominating over the bacterial 
partners and maximising their benefits. Therefore, understanding the regulation of these 
NCR genes has become very interesting from a legume-rhizobia research perspective.  
Preliminary data to support the research questions and the experimental plans in 
this thesis came from a previous PhD work in our laboratory (Achom, 2019). In that 
study, the promoter regions of 166 NCR genes that were differentially expressed at 2hr 
or 6hr after nitrogen treatment in nodulating roots vs non-nodulating roots were analyzed 
to understand the basis of their regulation. Their regulation was of interesting since 
differential expression for NCRs in temporally spaced samples was not typically expected. 
As briefly described in Chapter 1, six conserved motifs were found in NCR promoters, 
and one of them contains the EE or EE-like motif (AGA[T/C]ATTT). The EE motif 
can be bound by several circadian regulators, including CCA1, LHY, RVE7, RVE8 in A. 
thaliana, and their homologs in other species (Chow et al., 2019).  
The finding of the EE element in the promoters of a subset of NCR genes whose 
expression varied over time-points established a hypothetical link between the regulation 
of NCRs and the plant circadian clock. As discussed in Chapter 3, the circadian clock is 
also known to modulate the response of the plant to pathogens (Lu et al., 2017) and itself 
can be modified by the invaders (Wang et al., 2011). Therefore, it seemed reasonable that 
the circadian clock might also be involved in plant-rhizobial interactions and nodulation; 
hence, this thesis set out to study the circadian gene regulation specifically in nodules, 
through the use of and analysis of a time-series RNAseq experiment. We used a 
metagenomic approach for RNAseq library preparation that allowed us to not only 
quantify the expression of plant genes (Chapter 3) but also the bacteroid gene expression 
(Chapter 5) within nodules. 
The robustness of our analysis and the authenticity of our data are supported by, 
firstly, the identification of all major clock genes (listed in Table 3.1) within a p<0.01 
threshold; secondly, the appropriate presence of the major clock genes in specific time-
 - 115 - 
of-day clusters where they were expected to be found; finally, genes that are associated 
with common rhythmic processes (e.g., photosynthesis) are also found within the clusters 
that peaked as expected. Metagenomic RNA sequencing is comparatively expensive and 
considering our budget constraint we decided to sample and sequence fewer time-points 
for the second subjective day (24h-28h) (see Figure 3.1 for experimental overview). 
Therefore, we had 13 unevenly spaced time-points (9 time-points with 3h interval and 4 
time-points with 6h interval for first and second day, respectively). A better experimental 
design would employ 17 evenly spaced time-points with 3h interval over 48 hours. 
However, there are algorithms that can detect rhythms in unevenly sampled data (LS 
method; discussed in Section 3.3), making this experimental design feasible for both 
budget and analysis. More time-points would likely to have enabled us to detect more 
rhythmic genes (from both plant and bacteroid) that potentially remained undetected due 
to their relatively smaller amplitudes. However, overall our new data enabled us to gain 
significant new insights, ranging from specifically detecting a set of oscillating NCR genes 
to generating a general understanding of the rhythmic behaviour of key clock genes and 
other rhythmic processes in nodules. 
In order to evaluate whether clock disruption has any effect on legume-rhizobia 
interaction or nodulation, we conducted a comparative phenotyping study with two 
independent mutants with transposon insertions in MtLHY (Chapter 4). CCA1 and LHY 
are the most well-studied clock genes in A. thaliana to date and considered as the core 
component of central oscillator (Adams et al., 2018, Park et al., 2016). However they had 
not been studied in legumes when this work started. In M. truncatula, a single homolog of 
both CCA1 and LHY was found which was annotated as MtLHY. In theory, mtlhy 
mutation was likely to affect the expression of other clock genes, which later became 
evident after analysis of transcriptome data. We obtained the two mtlhy mutant lines, 
NF17115 and NF16461, from the Noble Research Institute harbouring a Tnt1 
retrotransposon insertion in the promoter or 5th exon of LHY gene, respectively.  
In addition to harbouring a Tnt1 insertion at LHY locus, these mutants also 
harbour Tnt1 insertion at different positions across the genome. We selected and 
propagated the plants that contain homozygous Tnt1 insertions at LHY locus, and used 
the two independent lines to confirm the LHY characterization. However, other 
insertions at different positions randomly segregate amongst the plants. In future work, 
 - 116 - 
the lhy mutant lines will be backcrossed to the parental R108 line and re-selected to reduce 
the presence of other Tnt1 insertions. In general, Tnt1 is considered as stable and 
inheritable and has been used for developing insertional mutagenesis libraries in different 
plant species, e.g., soybean, potato (Cui et al., 2013, Tadege et al., 2008a). Recently, some 
evidence has been found that the retrotransposon can be activated and create new 
insertions during tissue culture procedure (Zhang et al., 2018). Although we have not 
done any tissue culture with the mutant lines (thus there is a low chance of new insertions), 
the pre-existing insertions at random locations (originated during the mutant line 
development) are undesirable. However, we had to accept these limitations since there is 
currently no other lhy mutant lines available for M. truncatula. The effect of these other 
insertions was not characterized; they might have no or negligible effect unless they 
disrupt some other vital genes. These insertions in the mutant genome might account for 
some variability seen in the phenotyping experiment (Chapter 4, Figure 4.3). However, 
we tried to address the issues with biological variability by setting up three replicate 
experiments using both independent lhy lines and using more than ten plants per mutant 
line in each replicate experiment. This strengthened our data and enabled us to make 
conclusions based on robust evidence. Since we now know that LHY plays a role in 
nodulation, implicating a role for the clock in controlling symbiosis, it would be interesting 
to examine the roles of other clock genes in nodules, such as TOC1 and ELF4. 
In parallel to the main research project, the development of two cortex specific 
reporter gene expression vectors was carried out (chapter 6), to develop tools for 
conducting future cell-type specific gene expression study. Such vectors were already 
available driving expression of the GUS reporter gene (Sevin-Pujol et al., 2017, Gavrilovic 
et al., 2016). Based on the available knowledge, we aimed to prepare cortex specific GFP 
reporter line as GFP-expressing cells are usually easier to isolate through FACS and it is 
from the cortex that most nodule tissue forms. This technical work could be very useful 
in future to study cortex-specific gene expression at different experimental conditions in 
M. truncatula. 
7.2. Circadian regulation of NCR genes in nodules via the Evening Element 
Probably the most remarkable finding presented in this thesis was the identification 
of diurnally regulated NCR genes, most of which were highly expressed during the 
 - 117 - 
evening period. The EE motif was enriched in the rhythmic NCRs compared to non-
rhythmic NCRs, offering a mechanism to explain this regulation. Furthermore, among 
the 13 rhythmic NCRs that contain EE in their promoter, 10 of them belong to the dusk-
peaking cluster (Section 3.2.8). Put together, this supports our hypothesis that some NCRs 
are regulated by the plant clock, specifically, by LHY (as discussed in Chapter 3). 
However, this must be followed up with functional characterization of these rhythmic 
NCRs in the future in order to elaborate on the importance of their rhythmic expression.  
We have found 45 rhythmic NCR genes out of 701 putative NCR genes studied. 
Therefore, about 6.5% of all NCR were rhythmic whereas about 5% of all genes were 
found to be rhythmic in nodules. In this regard, it cannot be said that NCRs are, in general, 
rhythmic in nature. However, in M. truncatula NCRs represent a moderately large family 
of peptides that are known or hypothesized to play diverse roles in the nodulation process 
(Roy P et al., 2020). It could be that those rhythmic NCRs are involved in a particular 
function. One hypothesis could be that they play roles in defense response. It had been 
demonstrated that the plants general resistance to pathogenic invaders varies in a 
circadian manner and usually is low around midnight (Bhardwaj et al., 2011). As discussed 
in Chapter 1, NCR peptides are well-known for their antimicrobial actions. The set of 
NCRs that are highly expressed at the evening period could be associated with providing 
an extra layer of protection to the nodules, when plants general immunity is in decline. 
Further analysis of these rhythmic NCRs, taking account of their peptide and promoter 
sequences might shed some light on their roles and regulations. 
As reviewed in Chapter 1, Roux et al. (2014) determined the spatial expression of 
NCR genes in different nodule zones. Among the 521 NCR genes they analyzed (out of 
701 NCR gene in our list), 53% were highly expressed in the nodule interzone (IZ). 
Interestingly, the interzone was also increasingly enriched for rhythmic NCRs (24 out of 
45, ~69%) and for rhythmic NCRs with an EE (10 out of 13; 77%). Therefore, the 
interzone area of the nodule, where bacteroids start to express N-fixation genes and go 
through an extensive differentiation process, seemed to be particularly important for the 
rhythmic NCRs along with the expression of several important late nodulins by host cells 
(Mergaert et al., 2020). It is important to remember that our data is representative of the 
whole nodule, but the NCR dynamics and expression pattern can vary in different sections 
of the nodule. If any NCRs are particularly rhythmic in a specific nodule zone but not in 
 - 118 - 
other zones, the overall expression of that NCR could be diluted down and remain 
undetected when studied at the whole nodule level, which is the rationale for carrying out 
cell type analysis to understand plant responses (Walker et al., 2017). In addition, our data 
was from mature nodules, but NCR functioning and expression dynamics could be 
different in the early stage of nodule development. Therefore, the NCRs that were 
identified in our studied might not be the only ones that are rhythmic, and there could be 
some other NCRs that are rhythmically regulated in different spatial and temporal 
conditions.  
The presence of an EE-like motif (AGACATTT) in many NCR gene promoters 
was an interesting but loosely understood finding. The T residue in the 4th position of 
the EE motif, AGATATTT, is the most conserved position and highly required for 
CCA1/LHY and RVE1 binding in A. thaliana (Franco-Zorrilla et al., 2014). The T to C 
transition is, therefore, likely to disrupt or weaken LHY binding. This also disrupts the 
GATA sequence within the EE motif. The GATA motif has been reported to be 
associated with different light and nitrate dependent processes (Reyes et al., 2004). It could 
be that the NCR promoters containing an EE-like motif diversified from an ancestral 
promoter that had the EE motif and was involved in important circadian regulation. It is 
possible that the circadian regulation of NCRs became less required in recent time, and 
thus EE motif lost its conserveness. Alternatively, the reverse could be the case where the 
EE containing NCR promoters originated from an EE-like ancestor to enable new 
circadian regulation of nodulation. Also, the motif that Achom (2019) originally found 
(Motif-2; Figure 1.11) contains two additional highly conserved AG residues at the 5 
end of the motif. The significance of this additional bases could not be explained by our 
current knowledge on different motifs and associated binding factors. However, it should 
be in our consideration that our understanding on different motifs and TFs are largely 
based on the studies on A. thaliana. Since there are differences among the homologous 
protein sequences among different species, it is likely that there would be some differences 
among their binding sites as well. This additional AG could be a M truncatula associated 
modification in evening element, that could be important for the binding of MtLHY or 
MtRVEs. These are, of course, initial hypotheses and need to be examined by extensive 
analysis of different protein-DNA interactions through specialized techniques (e.g., ChIP-
seq) incorporating different M. truncatula accessions, other IRLC species and legumes.  
 - 119 - 
7.3. LHY could be redundant for growth regulation but important for nodulation 
Similarly to the case in M. truncatula, a single homolog for both CCA1 and LHY 
was found in several plant species (e.g., rice, garden pea, papaya) (Song et al., 2010, Takata 
et al., 2010). In some other species, multiple homologs for LHY gene have been found 
(e.g., soybean, duckweed, cottonwood) (Wang et al., 2021, Song et al., 2010, Takata et al., 
2009). A brief phylogenetic analysis done in our lab (Achom et al., 2021) has demonstrated 
that the plants in Brassicaceae family (e.g., rapeseed, arabidopsis) usually contain both 
CCA1 and LHY homologs, whereas legumes mostly contain a single LHY gene (e.g., M. 
truncatula) or several very closely related LHY paralogs (e.g., soybean has four LHY 
homologs) (Wang et al., 2021). The divergence of CCA1 and LHY from an ancestral 
CCA1/LHY genes assumed to happen in Brassicaceae through an angiosperm polyploidy 
event known as -polyploidy. Another polyploidy event known as salicoid polyploidy 
probably gave rise to multiple LHY homologs in many plants belong to eurosids-I 
angiosperm lineage (Takata et al., 2010) Among other plants, this lineage includes 
legumes, other nodulating plant species (e.g., actinorhizal plants) and non-nodulating but 
symbiotic N-fixing plants, for example, Populus trichocarpa (Takata et al., 2010, Takata et 
al., 2009, Doty et al., 2016). Now, our understanding on these different orthologs of 
CCA1/LHY is far from comprehensive, therefore, at this point it is very difficult to 
interpret whether these duplications and diversifications of CCA1 and LHY genes had 
any association with nodulation. However, it could be roughly assumed that the CCA1 
gene might not be involved in the evolution of nodulation since its emergence in 
Brassicaceae did not result in nodulation related phenomenon. On the other hand, LHY 
could have some distant roles in establishment of N-fixing symbiosis (too early to say 
though) since it had been duplicated and diversified in plants, including those that form 
N-fixing symbiosis. However, even if there is a connection, it must not be very direct 
since many plants have LHY orthologs regardless of whether they fix N or not. It is also 
important to consider that there are other closely related homologous clock components 
(e.g., different RVEs) that share sequence similarity and overlapping expression profiles 
with CCA1/LHY. All these genes encode proteins that contain a MYB/SANT domain 
with a highly conserved motif, SHAQKFF, that binds to the EE motif in the promoter 
of many evening expressed genes (Linde et al., 2017). All these different but related genes 
might share some level of functional redundancy among them. Therefore, it is difficult to 
assign a particular function to a specific gene. Further large-scale phylogenetic studies 
 - 120 - 
incorporating all these related clock genes across many species from different plant 
families might shed light on whether the evolution of LHY had any connection with N-
fixing symbiosis. 
As mentioned in Chapter 4, CCA1 and LHY have partial redundancy and the ability 
to compensate each others functions (Lu et al., 2009). In A. thaliana, loss of function of 
either CCA1 or LHY resulted in shorter rhythm and early flowering phenotypes. 
Interestingly, loss of functional CCA1 was shown to be associated with shorter hypocotyl 
growth. On the other hand, although increased expression of LHY resulted in longer 
hypocotyl, loss of LHY was not associated with growth impairment (Mizoguchi et al., 
2002).  This is in line with our the data presented in Chapter 4, where we found no obvious 
difference between lhy mutants and WT plants in control conditions (mock treatment). 
Another study in our lab (unpublished; not presented in this thesis), showed that there 
was no significant difference in lhy mutants vs WT plants in terms of hypocotyl growth 
when grown in soils containing N and all the essential nutrients. The lhy mutants have 
shown growth impairment only when they were forced to form nodules in low N 
conditions. These observations and related literature suggest that MtLHY might not be 
critical or indispensable for growth and development in favourable conditions. Therefore, 
it is likely that the loss of LHY affects nodule development primarily rather than 
impacting growth. Having said so, LHY functions are also likely to be partially redundant; 
other homologous clock components (e.g., RVEs) might compensate for some of its 
functions as lhy mutants did form functional nodules (although low in number). In 
general, the importance of this gene cannot be overlooked since it is a part of the central 
circadian oscillating loop and the loss of LHY functions disrupted the rhythmicity of 
other clock components in free-running conditions (as shown in Chapter 4), therefore, 
likely to disrupt many other physiological processes as well.  
Clock disruption was reported to be associated with altered rhizophere microbiome 
community that was implicated in reduced plant growth (Hubbard et al., 2018). It would 
be interesting to ask if our lhy mutants are altered in their responses to pathogen attack in 
future studies. It is relevant to mention that both loss of function and overexpressing A. 
thaliana lhy mutants had shown increased susceptibility to pathogens like Pseudomonas 
syringae and Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis (Zhang C et al., 2013). In this thesis, we have 
shown that lhy-mediated clock disruption was associated with reduced nodule growth (in 
 - 121 - 
terms of mass) which is supported by a recent study as well (Kong et al., 2020). Since it 
has been found that the plant clock is involved in the immunogenic response against 
pathogens (as discussed in Section 3.1.1), it can be predicted that it also plays some roles 
in symbiotic interaction. The reduced nodulation phenotype in lhy mutants could, 
therefore, be potentially because of disturbed clock functioning that impairs the 
communication between the symbiotic partners. Although the exact mode of action is 
not yet clear, our results confirm that the loss of LHY functions negatively impact nodule 
development and as a result, also indirectly affects overall plant growth and development.  
Figure 7.1: Graphical summary of the results and insights presented in this thesis. 
The characteristic rhythmic expression of the clock genes in nodules support the existence 
of a robustly functioning nodule clock. The clock is likely to regulate various diurnally 
regulated rhythmic processes within nodule. The disruption in clock through loss of LHY 
functioning results in reduced nodulation and growth. Most strikingly, our results suggest 
that the circadian clock regulates the expression of several NCRs, thus play important 
role in NCR mediated activities and the overall nodulation process. 
 - 122 - 
7.4. Scope for further studies   
In this work, RNAseq was used to generate a large transcriptomic dataset that 
enabled the gene expression profile of mature nodules to be studied; that included 
determination of the expression of both plant and rhizobial genes. Similarly to in many 
other species, most gene expression analysis in M. truncatula so far as been carried out 
using microarrays and many of these datasets were deposited in the M. truncatula Gene 
Expression Atlas (MtGEA) (He et al., 2009). Since we used RNAseq, our data are more 
comprehensive and likely to provide new insights compared with pre-existing data. 
During our analysis we mainly focused on the rhythmically expressed genes. However, 
the data can be further analyzed and compared with similar datasets from other tissues or 
different experimental conditions to identify genes that are differentially expressed in 
nodules in different environmental conditions or different rhizobial inoculation. For 
example, in our work we used a high efficiency rhizobial strain S. meliloti 1022 but almost 
all other studies used comparatively less efficient S. meliloti strains, e.g., 1021 or 2011 
(Terpolilli et al., 2008). Therefore, our data can also be compared with those that used 
less efficient strains to identify genes that are responsible for developing an efficient N-
fixing partnership between the host and the microsymbiont.  
Apart from identifying several rhythmic NCRs, our dataset also provides gene 
expression information for all other known and putative NCR genes. It would be 
interesting to categorise the NCRs in different groups based on their level of expression, 
isoelectric point, size and evaluate if there is any association among the groups, since 
several of these features are known to be important for NCR function (Roy P et al., 2020). 
Based on these analyses, some candidate NCRs genes (e.g., the ones with high expression 
or rhythmicity) could be selected for further analysis. For example, corresponding mutant 
lines can be obtained to study the phenotypic and molecular effects of the disruption of 
NCR function.  
As discussed in Chapter 5, circadian rhythms are not very common in prokaryotic 
species except cyanobacteria. However, in this study we have detected some rhizobial 
genes with circadian-like rhythmicity. It would be interesting to evaluate whether these 
genes are rhythmically expressed in free-living bacteria or they are only rhythmic at the 
 - 123 - 
bacteroid stage. The influence of host gene on bacterial gene expression is a vastly 
unexplored area and so analyzing this gene expression dataset could be a starting point 
for some future studies after selecting candidate genes for functional characterization or 
studying reporter gene expression lines under candidate gene promoters.  
7.5. Concluding Remarks 
Nodulation is a process that requires different cells to work in coordination to turn 
on/off different cellular and developmental programmes in a spatial and temporal 
manner. It is a complex process that involved numerous known and yet poorly 
characterized genes, proteins, and other cellular components. Realizing its potential in 
achieving sustainable development goals, different research groups across the world have 
made a lot of discoveries in the last two decades that have advanced our understanding 
of legume-rhizobia interaction, nodulation and symbiotic nitrogen fixation (Roy S et al., 
2020). To best of our knowledge, our study is one of the first (after Kong et al., 2020) to 
propose a direct molecular link between the circadian system and nodule metabolism and 
first to show some evidence for a possible LHY-NCR link. The preliminary data, insights, 
and the tools (cortex-specific vectors) developed in this study set the platform for some 
exciting, impactful, future-studies, that might further help to improve our understanding 
on beneficial plant-microbe symbiosis to achieve environment friendly, sustainable 
agriculture.  
 - 124 - 
8. Supplementary Data 
The supplementary information provided in the following tables can be accessed 
through this link,  
https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1Y5TzUjXOYIjAMys97s-V7WZWReTHxIio?usp=sharing  
(Please, carefully copy and paste the entire link in the address bar of your web browser 
and remove any space that could be introduced during copying. If there is any problem 
in accessing the files, please email at p.roy@warwick.ac.uk) 
Table S1: List of rhythmic plant genes. 
Table S2: List of rhythmic rhizobial genes. 
Table S3: List of NCR genes. 
Table S4: Metacycle analysis and expression values (logTPM) for plant genes. 
Table S5: Metacycle analysis and expression values (logTPM) for rhizobial genes. 
 - 125 - 
9. References 
ACHOM, M. 2019. The role of Nodule Cysteine Rich secreted peptides in controlling 
nodulation. PhD Thesis, University of Warwick. 
ACHOM, M., ROY, P., LAGUNAS, B., BONYADI-POUR, R., PARDAL, A. J., 
BAXTER, L., ... & GIFFORD, M. L. (2021). The plant circadian clock gene LHY 
influences Medicago truncatula nodulation. bioRxiv. 
ADAMS, S., GRUNDY, J., VEFLINGSTAD, S. R., DYER, N. P., HANNAH, M. A., 
OTT, S. & CARR, I. A. 2018. Circadian control of abscisic acid biosynthesis and 
signaling pathways revealed by genome-wide analysis of LHY binding targets. New 
Phytologist, 220, 893-907. 
ADAMS, S., MANFIELD, I., STOCKLEY, P. & CARR, I. A. 2015. Revised Morning 
Loops of the Arabidopsis Circadian Clock Based on Analyses of Direct Regulatory 
Interactions. PLoS One, 10, e0143943. 
ALABADI, D., OYAMA, T., YANOVSKY, M. J., HARMON, F. G., MAS, P. & KAY, 
S. A. 2001. Reciprocal regulation between TOC1 and LHY/CCA1 within the 
Arabidopsis circadian clock. Science, 293, 880-3. 
ALLOING, G., MANDON, K., BONCOMPAGNI, E., MONTRICHARD, F. & 
FRENDO, P. 2018. Involvement of Glutaredoxin and Thioredoxin Systems in the 
Nitrogen-Fixing Symbiosis between Legumes and Rhizobia. Antioxidants (Basel), 7. 
ALUNNI, B., KEVEI, Z., REDONDO-NIETO, M., KONDOROSI, A., 
MERGAERT, P. & KONDOROSI, E. 2007. Genomic organization and 
evolutionary insights on GRP and NCR genes, two large nodule-specific gene 
families in Medicago truncatula. Mol Plant Microbe Interact, 20, 1138-48. 
ANDREASON, G. L. 1993. Electroporation as a technique for the transfer of 
macromolecules into mammalian cell lines. Journal of tissue culture methods, 15, 56-62. 
ANDREWS, S. 2010. FastQC: A quality control tool for high throughput sequence data. 
ARNOLD, M. F. F., PENTERMAN, J., SHABAB, M., CHEN, E. J. & WALKER, G. 
C. 2018. Important Late-Stage Symbiotic Role of the Sinorhizobium meliloti 
Exopolysaccharide Succinoglycan. J Bacteriol, 200. 
ATAMIAN, H. S. & HARMER, S. L. 2016. Circadian regulation of hormone signaling 
and plant physiology. Plant Molecular Biology, 91, 691-702. 
BAILEY, T. L., BODEN, M., BUSKE, F. A., FRITH, M., GRANT, C. E., CLEMENTI, 
L., REN, J., LI, W. W. & NOBLE, W. S. 2009. MEME Suite: tools for motif 
discovery and searching. Nucleic Acids Research, 37, W202-W208. 
BARBIER-BRYGOO, H., DE ANGELI, A., FILLEUR, S., FRACHISSE, J.M., 
GAMBALE, F., THOMINE, S. AND WEGE, S., 2011. Anion 
channels/transporters in plants: from molecular bases to regulatory networks. 
Annual review of plant biology, 62, 25-51. 
BELANGER, L., DIMMICK, K. A., FLEMING, J. S. & CHARLES, T. C. 2009. Null 
mutations in Sinorhizobium meliloti exoS and chvI demonstrate the importance of 
this two-component regulatory system for symbiosis. Mol Microbiol, 74, 1223-37. 
BENDIX, C., MARSHALL, CARINE M. & HARMON, FRANK G. 2015. Circadian 
Clock Genes Universally Control Key Agricultural Traits. Molecular Plant, 8, 1135-
1152. 
BHARDWAJ, V., MEIER, S., PETERSEN, L. N., INGLE, R. A. & RODEN, L. C. 
2011. Defence Responses of Arabidopsis thaliana to Infection by Pseudomonas syringae 
Are Regulated by the Circadian Clock. PLOS ONE, 6, e26968. 
 - 126 - 
BIRNBAUM, K., JUNG, J. W., WANG, J. Y., LAMBERT, G. M., HIRST, J. A., 
GALBRAITH, D. W. & BENFEY, P. N. 2005. Cell type-specific expression 
profiling in plants via cell sorting of protoplasts from fluorescent reporter lines. 
Nat Methods, 2, 615-9. 
BISHOPP, A. & BENNETT, M. J. 2019. Turning lateral roots into nodules. Science, 366, 
953-954. 
BITTNER, A. N., FOLTZ, A. & OKE, V. 2007. Only one of five groEL genes is 
required for viability and successful symbiosis in Sinorhizobium meliloti. J Bacteriol, 
189, 1884-9. 
BOISSON-DERNIER, A., CHABAUD, M., GARCIA, F., BECARD, G., 
ROSENBERG, C. & BARKER, D. G. 2001. Agrobacterium rhizogenes-transformed 
roots of Medicago truncatula for the study of nitrogen-fixing and endomycorrhizal 
symbiotic associations. Mol Plant Microbe Interact, 14, 695-700. 
BOLGER, A. M., LOHSE, M. & USADEL, B. 2014. Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer 
for Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics, 30, 2114-2120. 
BONALDI, K., GARGANI, D., PRIN, Y., FARDOUX, J., GULLY, D., NOUWEN, 
N., GOORMACHTIG, S. & GIRAUD, E. 2011. Nodulation of Aeschynomene 
afraspera and A. indica by Photosynthetic Bradyrhizobium Sp. Strain ORS285: The 
Nod-Dependent Versus the Nod-Independent Symbiotic Interaction. Molecular 
Plant-Microbe Interactions, 24, 1359-1371. 
BORDAGE, S., SULLIVAN, S., LAIRD, J., MILLAR, A. J. & NIMMO, H. G. 2016. 
Organ specificity in the plant circadian system is explained by different light inputs 
to the shoot and root clocks. New Phytologist, 212, 136-149. 
BRAZEL, A. J. & MAOILIDIGH, D. S. 2019. Photosynthetic activity of 
reproductive organs. Journal of Experimental Botany, 70, 1737-1754. 
BRUNKARD, J.O. & ZAMBRYSKI, P., 2019. Plant cell-cell transport via 
plasmodesmata is regulated by light and the circadian clock. Plant physiology, 181(4), 
1459-1467. 
BUCHER, M., BRUNNER, S., ZIMMERMANN, P., ZARDI, G. I., AMRHEIN, N., 
WILLMITZER, L. & RIESMEIER, J. W. 2002. The Expression of an Extensin-
Like Protein Correlates with Cellular Tip Growth in Tomato. Plant Physiology, 128, 
911-923. 
CAO, Y., HALANE, M. K., GASSMANN, W. & STACEY, G. 2017. The Role of Plant 
Innate Immunity in the Legume-Rhizobium Symbiosis. Annu Rev Plant Biol, 68, 
535-561. 
CARTER, A. D., BONYADI, R. & GIFFORD, M. L. 2013. The use of fluorescence-
activated cell sorting in studying plant development and environmental responses. 
Int J Dev Biol, 57, 545-52. 
CARVALHO, A. D. O. & GOMES, V. M. 2009. Plant defensinsProspects for the 
biological functions and biotechnological properties. Peptides, 30, 1007-1020. 
CASSON, S., SPENCER, M., WALKER, K. & LINDSEY, K. 2005. Laser capture 
microdissection for the analysis of gene expression during embryogenesis of 
Arabidopsis. Plant J, 42, 111-23. 
CASSON, S. A., SPENCER, M.W., LINDSEY, K. 2008. Laser-Capture Microdissection 
to Study Global Transcriptional Changes During Plant Embryogenesis. In: 
SUAREZ, M. F., BOZHKOV, P.V. (ed.) Plant Embryogenesis. Methods in Molecular 
Biology. Humana Press. 
CHARPENTIER, M., BREDEMEIER, R., WANNER, G., TAKEDA, N., SCHLEIFF, 
E. & PARNISKE, M. 2008. Lotus japonicus CASTOR and POLLUX Are Ion 
 - 127 - 
Channels Essential for Perinuclear Calcium Spiking in Legume Root 
Endosymbiosis. The Plant Cell, 20, 3467-3479. 
CHARPENTIER, M. & OLDROYD, G. E. D. 2013. Nuclear Calcium Signaling in 
Plants. Plant Physiology, 163, 496-503. 
CHEN, A. H., LUBKOWICZ, D., YEONG, V., CHANG, R. L. & SILVER, P. A. 
2015a. Transplantability of a circadian clock to a noncircadian organism. Sci Adv, 
CHEN, D. S., LIU, C. W., ROY, S., COUSINS, D., STACEY, N. & MURRAY, J. D. 
2015b. Identification of a core set of rhizobial infection genes using data from 
single cell-types. Front Plant Sci, 6, 575. 
CHEN, J., MOREAU, C., LIU, Y., KAWAGUCHI, M., HOFER, J., ELLIS, N. & 
CHEN, R. 2012. Conserved genetic determinant of motor organ identity in 
Medicago truncatula and related legumes. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 109, 11723-8. 
CHENG, H. P. & WALKER, G. C. 1998. Succinoglycan is required for initiation and 
elongation of infection threads during nodulation of alfalfa by Rhizobium meliloti. J 
Bacteriol, 180, 5183-91. 
CHIASSON, D. M., LOUGHLIN, P. C., MAZURKIEWICZ, D., 
MOHAMMADIDEHCHESHMEH, M., FEDOROVA, E. E., OKAMOTO, M., 
MCLEAN, E., GLASS, A. D. M., SMITH, S. E., BISSELING, T., TYERMAN, S. 
D., DAY, D. A. & KAISER, B. N. 2014. Soybean SAT1 (Symbiotic Ammonium 
Transporter 1) encodes a bHLH transcription factor involved in nodule growth 
and NH4+ transport. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111, 4814-4819. 
CHOW, C. N., LEE, T. Y., HUNG, Y. C., LI, G. Z., TSENG, K. C., LIU, Y. H., KUO, 
P. L., ZHENG, H. Q. & CHANG, W. C. 2019. PlantPAN3.0: a new and updated 
resource for reconstructing transcriptional regulatory networks from ChIP-seq 
experiments in plants. Nucleic Acids Res, 47, D1155-d1163. 
COBA DE LA PEA, T., FEDOROVA, E., PUEYO, J. J. & LUCAS, M. M. 2017. The 
Symbiosome: Legume and Rhizobia Co-evolution toward a Nitrogen-Fixing 
Organelle? Front Plant Sci, 8, 2229. 
COLLIER, J. 2012. Regulation of chromosomal replication in Caulobacter crescentus. 
Plasmid, 67, 76-87. 
COVINGTON, M. F. & HARMER, S. L. 2007. The circadian clock regulates auxin 
signaling and responses in Arabidopsis. PLoS Biol, 5, e222. 
COVINGTON, M. F., MALOOF, J. N., STRAUME, M., KAY, S. A. & HARMER, S. 
L. 2008. Global transcriptome analysis reveals circadian regulation of key pathways 
in plant growth and development. Genome Biol, 9, R130. 
CRESPO-RIVAS, J. C., GUEFRACHI, I., MOK, K. C., VILLAECIJA-AGUILAR, J. 
A., ACOSTA-JURADO, S., PIERRE, O., RUIZ-SAINZ, J. E., TAGA, M. E., 
MERGAERT, P. & VINARDELL, J. M. 2016. Sinorhizobium fredii HH103 
bacteroids are not terminally differentiated and show altered O-antigen in nodules 
of the Inverted Repeat-Lacking Clade legume Glycyrrhiza uralensis. Environ 
Microbiol, 18, 2392-404. 
CROOK, M. B., LINDSAY, D. P., BIGGS, M. B., BENTLEY, J. S., PRICE, J. C., 
CLEMENT, S. C., CLEMENT, M. J., LONG, S. R. & GRIFFITTS, J. S. 2012. 
Rhizobial plasmids that cause impaired symbiotic nitrogen fixation and enhanced 
host invasion. Mol Plant Microbe Interact, 25, 1026-33. 
CUI, Y., BARAMPURAM, S., STACEY, M. G., HANCOCK, C. N., FINDLEY, S., 
MATHIEU, M., ZHANG, Z., PARROTT, W. A. & STACEY, G. 2013. Tnt1 
retrotransposon mutagenesis: a tool for soybean functional genomics. Plant 
physiology, 161, 36-47. 
 - 128 - 
CUSHNIE, T. P. & LAMB, A. J. 2005. Antimicrobial activity of flavonoids. Int J 
Antimicrob Agents, 26, 343-56. 
CZERNIC, P., GULLY, D., CARTIEAUX, F., et al. 2015. Convergent Evolution of 
Endosymbiont Differentiation in Dalbergioid and Inverted Repeat-Lacking Clade 
Legumes Mediated by Nodule-Specific Cysteine-Rich Peptides. Plant Physiol, 169, 
1254-65. 
DAI, X., SHEN, Z., WANG, Y. & ZHU, M. 2018. Sinorhizobium meliloti, a Slow-Growing 
Bacterium, Exhibits Growth Rate Dependence of Cell Size under Nutrient 
Limitation. mSphere, 3. 
DALLA VIA, V., NARDUZZI, C., AGUILAR, O. M., ZANETTI, M. E. & BLANCO, 
F. A. 2015. Changes in the Common Bean Transcriptome in Response to Secreted 
and Surface Signal Molecules of Rhizobium etli. Plant Physiol, 169, 1356-70. 
DAVIDSON, A.L., DASSA, E., ORELLE, C. & CHEN, J., 2008. Structure, function, 
and evolution of bacterial ATP-binding cassette systems. Microbiology and molecular 
biology reviews, 72(2), 317-364. 
DEIKMAN, J. & HAMMER, P. E. 1995. Induction of Anthocyanin Accumulation by 
Cytokinins in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Physiol, 108, 47-57. 
DOWNIE, J. A. 2010. The roles of extracellular proteins, polysaccharides and signals in 
the interactions of rhizobia with legume roots. FEMS Microbiol Rev, 34, 150-70. 
DOTY, S.L., SHER, A.W., FLECK, N.D., KHORASANI, M., BUMGARNER, R.E., 
KHAN, Z., KO, A.W., KIM, S.H. & DELUCA, T.H., 2016. Variable nitrogen 
fixation in wild Populus. PLoS One, 11(5), e0155979 
DURGO, H., KLEMENT, E., HUNYADI-GULYAS, E., SZUCS, A., KERESZT, A., 
MEDZIHRADSZKY, K. F. & KONDOROSI, E. 2015. Identification of nodule-
specific cysteine-rich plant peptides in endosymbiotic bacteria. Proteomics, 15, 2291-
DVORNYK, V., VINOGRADOVA, O. & NEVO, E. 2003. Origin and evolution of 
circadian clock genes in prokaryotes. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
100, 2495-2500. 
EDWARDS, K. D., ANDERSON, P. E., HALL, A., SALATHIA, N. S., LOCKE, J. C., 
LYNN, J. R., STRAUME, M., SMITH, J. Q. & MILLAR, A. J. 2006. 
FLOWERING LOCUS C mediates natural variation in the high-temperature 
response of the Arabidopsis circadian clock. Plant Cell, 18, 639-50. 
ENDO, M., SHIMIZU, H., NOHALES, M. A., ARAKI, T. & KAY, S. A. 2014. Tissue-
specific clocks in Arabidopsis show asymmetric coupling. Nature, 515, 419-422. 
ESSELING, J. J., LHUISSIER, F. G. P. & EMONS, A. M. C. 2003. Nod Factor-Induced 
Root Hair Curling: Continuous Polar Growth towards the Point of Nod Factor 
Application. Plant Physiology, 132, 1982-1988. 
FARKAS, A., MAROTI, G., DURGO, H., GYORGYPAL, Z., LIMA, R. M., 
MEDZIHRADSZKY, K. F., KERESZT, A., MERGAERT, P. & KONDOROSI, 
E. 2014. Medicago truncatula symbiotic peptide NCR247 contributes to bacteroid 
differentiation through multiple mechanisms. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 111, 5183-
FARKAS, A., PAP, B., KONDOROSI, . & MARTI, G. 2018. Antimicrobial Activity 
of NCR Plant Peptides Strongly Depends on the Test Assays. Front Microbiol, 9, 
2600. 
FRANCO-ZORRILLA, J. M., LPEZ-VIDRIERO, I., CARRASCO, J. L., GODOY, 
M., VERA, P. & SOLANO, R. 2014. DNA-binding specificities of plant 
transcription factors and their potential to define target genes. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 111, 2367-2372. 
 - 129 - 
FRANSSEN, H. J., VIJN, I., YANG, W. C. & BISSELING, T. 1992. Developmental 
aspects of the Rhizobium-legume symbiosis. In: SCHILPEROORT, R. A. & 
DURE, L. (eds.) 10 Years Plant Molecular Biology. Dordrecht: Springer Netherlands. 
FU, X., ADAMS, Z., LIU, R., HEPOWIT, N. L., WU, Y., BOWMANN, C. F., 
MOSKOVITZ, J. & MAUPIN-FURLOW, J. A. 2017. Methionine Sulfoxide 
Reductase A (MsrA) and Its Function in Ubiquitin-Like Protein Modification in 
&lt;em&gt;Archaea&lt;/em&gt. mBio, 8, e01169-17. 
GAGE, D. J. 2004. Infection and invasion of roots by symbiotic, nitrogen-fixing rhizobia 
during nodulation of temperate legumes. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev, 68, 280-300. 
GAVRILOVIC, S., YAN, Z., JURKIEWICZ, A. M., STOUGAARD, J. & 
MARKMANN, K. 2016. Inoculation insensitive promoters for cell type enriched 
gene expression in legume roots and nodules. Plant Methods, 12, 4. 
GENDRON, J. M., PRUNEDA-PAZ, J. L., DOHERTY, C. J., GROSS, A. M., KANG, 
S. E. & KAY, S. A. 2012. Arabidopsis circadian clock protein, TOC1, is a DNA-
binding transcription factor. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 3167. 
GENRE, A. 2008. Confocal microscopy and plant cell biology: A perfect match. Plant 
Biosystems - An International Journal Dealing with all Aspects of Plant Biology, 142, 348-
GEPTS, P., BEAVIS, W. D., BRUMMER, E. C., SHOEMAKER, R. C., STALKER, H. 
T., WEEDEN, N. F. & YOUNG, N. D. 2005. Legumes as a Model Plant Family. 
Genomics for Food and Feed Report of the Cross-Legume Advances through 
Genomics Conference. Plant Physiology, 137, 1228-1235. 
GIBON, Y., BLSING, O. E., PALACIOS-ROJAS, N., PANKOVIC, D., 
HENDRIKS, J. H. M., FISAHN, J., HHNE, M., GNTHER, M. & STITT, M. 
2004. Adjustment of diurnal starch turnover to short days: depletion of sugar 
during the night leads to a temporary inhibition of carbohydrate utilization, 
accumulation of sugars and post-translational activation of ADP-glucose 
pyrophosphorylase in the following light period. The Plant Journal, 39, 847-862. 
GIFFORD, M. L., DEAN, A., GUTIERREZ, R. A., CORUZZI, G. M. & BIRNBAUM, 
K. D. 2008. Cell-specific nitrogen responses mediate developmental plasticity. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 105, 803-808. 
GLAZEBROOK, J., ICHIGE, A. & WALKER, G. C. 1993. A Rhizobium meliloti 
homolog of the Escherichia coli peptide-antibiotic transport protein SbmA is 
essential for bacteroid development. Genes Dev, 7, 1485-97. 
GLYNN, E. F., CHEN, J. & MUSHEGIAN, A. R. 2006. Detecting periodic patterns in 
unevenly spaced gene expression time series using LombScargle periodograms. 
Bioinformatics, 22, 310-316. 
GOEDHART, J., HINK, M. A., VISSER, A. J., BISSELING, T. & GADELLA, T. W., 
JR. 2000. In vivo fluorescence correlation microscopy (FCM) reveals accumulation 
and immobilization of Nod factors in root hair cell walls. Plant J, 21, 109-19. 
GONZALEZ-RIZZO, S., CRESPI, M. & FRUGIER, F. 2006. The Medicago truncatula 
CRE1 Cytokinin Receptor Regulates Lateral Root Development and Early 
Symbiotic Interaction with Sinorhizobium meliloti. Plant Cell, 18, 2680-93. 
GONZALEZ-SAMA, A., DE LA PENA, T. C., KEVEI, Z., MERGAERT, P., LUCAS, 
M. M., DE FELIPE, M. R., KONDOROSI, E. & PUEYO, J. J. 2006. Nuclear 
DNA endoreduplication and expression of the mitotic inhibitor Ccs52 associated 
to determinate and lupinoid nodule organogenesis. Mol Plant Microbe Interact, 19, 
173-80. 
GOODSPEED, D., CHEHAB, E. W., MIN-VENDITTI, A., BRAAM, J. & 
COVINGTON, M. F. 2012. Arabidopsis synchronizes jasmonate-mediated 
 - 130 - 
defense with insect circadian behaviour. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 
109, 4674-4677. 
GOODSPEED, D., LIU, J. D., CHEHAB, E. W., SHENG, Z., FRANCISCO, M., 
KLIEBENSTEIN, D. J. & BRAAM, J. 2013. Postharvest circadian entrainment 
enhances crop pest resistance and phytochemical cycling. Curr Biol, 23, 1235-41. 
GRAF, A., SCHLERETH, A., STITT, M. & SMITH, A. M. 2010. Circadian control of 
carbohydrate availability for growth in Arabidopsis plants at night. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences, 107, 9458-9463. 
GREENHAM, K. & MCCLUNG, C. R. 2015. Integrating circadian dynamics with 
physiological processes in plants. Nature Reviews Genetics, 16, 598-610. 
GRIFFITTS, J. S., CARLYON, R. E., ERICKSON, J. H., MOULTON, J. L., 
BARNETT, M. J., TOMAN, C. J. & LONG, S. R. 2008. A Sinorhizobium meliloti 
osmosensory two-component system required for cyclic glucan export and 
symbiosis. Molecular Microbiology, 69, 479-490. 
GUEFRACHI, I., NAGYMIHALY, M., PISLARIU, C. I., VAN DE VELDE, W., 
RATET, P., MARS, M., UDVARDI, M. K., KONDOROSI, E., MERGAERT, P. 
& ALUNNI, B. 2014. Extreme specificity of NCR gene expression in Medicago 
truncatula. BMC Genomics, 15, 712. 
GUEFRACHI, I., PIERRE, O., TIMCHENKO, T., ALUNNI, B., BARRIERE, Q., 
CZERNIC, P., VILLAECIJA-AGUILAR, J. A., VERLY, C., BOURGE, M., 
FARDOUX, J., MARS, M., KONDOROSI, E., GIRAUD, E. & MERGAERT, P. 
2015. Bradyrhizobium BclA Is a Peptide Transporter Required for Bacterial 
Differentiation in Symbiosis with Aeschynomene Legumes. Mol Plant Microbe 
Interact, 28, 1155-66. 
HAAG, A. F., BALOBAN, M., SANI, M., KERSCHER, B., PIERRE, O., FARKAS, A., 
LONGHI, R., BONCOMPAGNI, E., HEROUART, D., DALL'ANGELO, S., 
KONDOROSI, E., ZANDA, M., MERGAERT, P. & FERGUSON, G. P. 2011. 
Protection of Sinorhizobium against host cysteine-rich antimicrobial peptides is 
critical for symbiosis. PLoS Biol, 9, e1001169. 
HALBERG, F. & CONNER, R. L. Circadian organization and microbiology: Variance 
spectra and a periodogram on behaviour of Escherichia coli growing in fluid culture.  
Proc Minn Acad Sci, 1961. 227-239. 
HARMER, S. L., HOGENESCH, J. B., STRAUME, M., CHANG, H.-S., HAN, B., 
ZHU, T., WANG, X., KREPS, J. A. & KAY, S. A. 2000. Orchestrated 
Transcription of Key Pathways in Arabidopsis by the Circadian Clock. Science, 290, 
2110-2113. 
HE, J., BENEDITO, V. A., WANG, M., MURRAY, J. D., ZHAO, P. X., TANG, Y. & 
UDVARDI, M. K. 2009. The Medicago truncatula gene expression atlas web server. 
BMC Bioinformatics, 10, 441. 
HE, X. & ZHANG, J. 2005. Rapid subfunctionalization accompanied by prolonged and 
substantial neofunctionalization in duplicate gene evolution. Genetics, 169, 1157-64. 
HECHT, V., KNOWLES, C. L., VANDER SCHOOR, J. K., LIEW, L. C., JONES, S. 
E., LAMBERT, M. J. & WELLER, J. L. 2007. Pea LATE BLOOMER1 is a 
GIGANTEA ortholog with roles in photoperiodic flowering, deetiolation, and 
transcriptional regulation of circadian clock gene homologs. Plant Physiol, 144, 648-
HILLMAN, W. S. 1976. Biological Rhythms and Physiological Timing. Annual Review of 
Plant Physiology, 27, 159-179. 
HORVATH, B., DOMONKOS, A., KERESZT, A., SZUCS, A., ABRAHAM, E., 
AYAYDIN, F., BOKA, K., CHEN, Y., CHEN, R., MURRAY, J. D., UDVARDI, 
 - 131 - 
M. K., KONDOROSI, E. & KALO, P. 2015. Loss of the nodule-specific cysteine 
rich peptide, NCR169, abolishes symbiotic nitrogen fixation in the Medicago 
truncatula dnf7 mutant. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 112, 15232-7. 
HSU, P. Y., DEVISETTY, U. K. & HARMER, S. L. 2013. Accurate timekeeping is 
controlled by a cycling activator in Arabidopsis. Elife, 2, e00473. 
HSU, P. Y. & HARMER, S. L. 2014. Wheels within wheels: the plant circadian system. 
Trends Plant Sci, 19, 240-9. 
HUA, J. 2013. Modulation of plant immunity by light, circadian rhythm, and temperature. 
Curr Opin Plant Biol, 16, 406-13. 
HUANG, W., PEREZ-GARCIA, P., POKHILKO, A., MILLAR, A. J., 
ANTOSHECHKIN, I., RIECHMANN, J. L. & MAS, P. 2012. Mapping the core 
of the Arabidopsis circadian clock defines the network structure of the oscillator. 
Science, 336, 75-9. 
HUBBARD, C. J., BROCK, M. T., VAN DIEPEN, L. T. A., MAIGNIEN, L., EWERS, 
B. E. & WEINIG, C. 2018. The plant circadian clock influences rhizosphere 
community structure and function. The ISME Journal, 12, 400-410. 
HWANGBO, K., SON, S. H., LEE, J. S., MIN, S. R., KO, S. M., LIU, J. R., CHOI, D. 
& JEONG, W. J. 2010. Rapid and simple method for DNA extraction from plant 
and algal species suitable for PCR amplification using a chelating resin Chelex 100. 
Plant Biotechnology Reports, 4, 49-52. 
IWASAKI, H., NISHIWAKI, T., KITAYAMA, Y., NAKAJIMA, M. & KONDO, T. 
2002. KaiA-stimulated KaiC phosphorylation in circadian timing loops in 
cyanobacteria. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 99, 15788-15793. 
JAMET, A., SIGAUD, S., VAN DE SYPE, G., PUPPO, A. & HEROUART, D. 2003. 
Expression of the bacterial catalase genes during Sinorhizobium meliloti-Medicago sativa 
symbiosis and their crucial role during the infection process. Mol Plant Microbe 
Interact, 16, 217-25. 
JAYASEKERA, M.M., FOLTIN, S.K., OLSON, E.R. & HOLLER, T.P., 2000. 
Escherichia coli requires the protease activity of FtsH for growth. Archives of 
biochemistry and biophysics, 380(1), 103-107. 
JIN, Y., CHEN, Z., YANG, J., MYSORE, K. S., WEN, J., HUANG, J., YU, N. & 
WANG, E. 2018. IPD3 and IPD3L Function Redundantly in Rhizobial and 
Mycorrhizal Symbioses. Frontiers in Plant Science, 9. 
KAKAR, K., WANDREY, M., CZECHOWSKI, T., GAERTNER, T., SCHEIBLE, W.-
R., STITT, M., TORRES-JEREZ, I., XIAO, Y., REDMAN, J. C., WU, H. C., 
CHEUNG, F., TOWN, C. D. & UDVARDI, M. K. 2008. A community resource 
for high-throughput quantitative RT-PCR analysis of transcription factor gene 
expression in Medicago truncatula. Plant Methods, 4, 18. 
KARIMI, M., INZ, D. & DEPICKER, A. 2002. GATEWAY vectors for 
Agrobacterium mediated plant transformation. Trends in Plant Science, 7, 193-195. 
KARPINSKI, S., GABRYS, H., MATEO, A., KARPINSKA, B. & MULLINEAUX, P. 
M. 2003. Light perception in plant disease defence signaling. Curr Opin Plant Biol, 
6, 390-6. 
KATJA KAPP, S. S., MARIUS K. LEMBERG, BERNHARD DOBBERSTEIN 2009. 
Post-targeting functions of signal peptides. In: ZIMMERMANN, R. (ed.) Protein 
Transport into the Endoplasmic Reticulum. Landes Biosciences. 
KAWAHARADA, Y., JAMES, E. K., KELLY, S., SANDAL, N. & STOUGAARD, J. 
2017. The Ethylene Responsive Factor Required for Nodulation 1 (ERN1) 
Transcription Factor Is Required for Infection-Thread Formation in Lotus 
japonicus. Mol Plant Microbe Interact, 30, 194-204. 
 - 132 - 
KAWAMOTO, N., ITO, H., TOKUDA, I. T. & IWASAKI, H. 2020. Damped circadian 
oscillation in the absence of KaiA in Synechococcus. Nat Commun, 11, 2242. 
KIM, D., LANGMEAD, B. & SALZBERG, S. L. 2015a. HISAT: a fast spliced aligner 
with low memory requirements. Nature Methods, 12, 357-360. 
KIM, J. A., KIM, H. S., CHOI, S. H., JANG, J. Y., JEONG, M. J. & LEE, S. I. 2017. 
The Importance of the Circadian Clock in Regulating Plant Metabolism. Int J Mol 
Sci, 18. 
KIM, M., CHEN, Y., XI, J., WATERS, C., CHEN, R. & WANG, D. 2015b. An 
antimicrobial peptide essential for bacterial survival in the nitrogen-fixing 
symbiosis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112, 15238-15243. 
KIM, W. Y., FUJIWARA, S., SUH, S. S., KIM, J., KIM, Y., HAN, L., DAVID, K., 
PUTTERILL, J., NAM, H. G. & SOMERS, D. E. 2007. ZEITLUPE is a circadian 
photoreceptor stabilized by GIGANTEA in blue light. Nature, 449, 356-60. 
KITAYAMA, Y., IWASAKI, H., NISHIWAKI, T. & KONDO, T. 2003. KaiB functions 
as an attenuator of KaiC phosphorylation in the cyanobacterial circadian clock 
system. Embo j, 22, 2127-34. 
KOHLEN, W., NG, J. L. P., DEINUM, E. E. & MATHESIUS, U. 2017. Auxin 
transport, metabolism, and signaling during nodule initiation: indeterminate and 
determinate nodules. Journal of Experimental Botany, 69, 229-244. 
KONDO, T., TSINOREMAS, N., GOLDEN, S., JOHNSON, C., KUTSUNA, S. & 
ISHIURA, M. 1994. Circadian clock mutants of cyanobacteria. Science, 266, 1233-
1236. 
KONDOROSI, E., ROUDIER, F. & GENDREAU, E. 2000. Plant cell-size control: 
growing by ploidy? Curr Opin Plant Biol, 3, 488-92. 
KONG, Y., HAN, L., LIU, X., WANG, H., WEN, L., YU, X., XU, X., KONG, F., FU, 
C., MYSORE, K. S., WEN, J. & ZHOU, C. 2020. The nodulation and nyctinastic 
leaf movement is orchestrated by clock gene LHY in Medicago truncatula. Journal of 
Integrative Plant Biology, 62, 1880-1895. 
KORNELI, C., DANISMAN, S. & STAIGER, D. 2014. Differential Control of Pre-
Invasive and Post-Invasive Antibacterial Defense by the Arabidopsis Circadian 
Clock. Plant and Cell Physiology, 55, 1613-1622. 
LAGUNAS, B., SCHAFER, P. & GIFFORD, M. L. 2015. Housing helpful invaders: the 
evolutionary and molecular architecture underlying plant root-mutualist microbe 
interactions. J Exp Bot, 66, 2177-86. 
LAGUNAS B., W. L., HUSSAIN R.M.F., HANDS-PORTMAN I., WOOLLEY-
ALLEN K., GIIFORD M.L. 2018. Histological Profiling Over Time to Optimize 
Root Cell Type-Specific Reporter Lines for Cell Sorting. In: RISTOVA D., B. E. 
(ed.) Root Development. Methods in Molecular Biology. New York, NY: Humana Press. 
LAI, A. G., DOHERTY, C. J., MUELLER-ROEBER, B., KAY, S. A., SCHIPPERS, J. 
H. & DIJKWEL, P. P. 2012. CIRCADIAN CLOCK-ASSOCIATED 1 regulates 
ROS homeostasis and oxidative stress responses. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 109, 
17129-34. 
LALOUM, D. & ROBINSON-RECHAVI, M. 2020. Methods detecting rhythmic gene 
expression are biologically relevant only for strong signal. PLOS Computational 
Biology, 16, e1007666. 
LAMOUCHE, F., CHAUMERET, A., GUEFRACHI, I., BARRIRE, Q., PIERRE, O., 
GURARD, F., GILARD, F., GIRAUD, E., DESSAUX, Y., GAKIRE, B., 
TIMCHENKO, T., KERESZT, A., MERGAERT, P. & ALUNNI, B. 2019a. 
From Intracellular Bacteria to Differentiated Bacteroids: Transcriptome and 
 - 133 - 
Metabolome Analysis in Aeschynomene Nodules Using the Bradyrhizobium sp. 
Strain ORS285 bclA Mutant. Journal of Bacteriology, 201, e00191-19. 
LAMOUCHE, F., GULLY, D., CHAUMERET, A., et al. 2019b. Transcriptomic 
dissection of Bradyrhizobium sp. strain ORS285 in symbiosis with Aeschynomene 
spp. inducing different bacteroid morphotypes with contrasted symbiotic 
efficiency. Environmental Microbiology, 21, 3244-3258. 
LAN, G., WOLGEMUTH, C. W. & SUN, S. X. 2007. Z-ring force and cell shape during 
division in rod-like bacteria. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 104, 16110-
16115. 
LANG, C. & LONG, S. R. 2015. Transcriptomic Analysis of Sinorhizobium meliloti and 
Medicago truncatula Symbiosis Using Nitrogen Fixation-Deficient Nodules. Mol Plant 
Microbe Interact, 28, 856-68. 
LAVIN, M., DOYLE, J. J. & PALMER, J. D. 1990. Evolutionary significance of the loss 
of the chloroplast-DNA inverted repeat in the leguminosae subfamily 
papilionoideae. Evolution, 44, 390-402. 
LEE, J. Y., COLINAS, J., WANG, J. Y., MACE, D., OHLER, U. & BENFEY, P. N. 
2006. Transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation of transcription factor 
expression in Arabidopsis roots. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 103, 6055-60. 
LEVIER, K. & WALKER, G. C. 2001. Genetic analysis of the Sinorhizobium meliloti BacA 
protein: differential effects of mutations on phenotypes. J Bacteriol, 183, 6444-53. 
LI, M., CAO, L., MWIMBA, M., ZHOU, Y., LI, L., ZHOU, M., SCHNABLE, P. S., 
OROURKE, J. A., DONG, X. & WANG, W. 2019. Comprehensive mapping of 
abiotic stress inputs into the soybean circadian clock. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, 116, 23840-23849. 
LI, M.-W. & LAM, H.-M. 2020. The Modification of Circadian Clock Components in 
Soybean During Domestication and Improvement. Frontiers in Genetics, 11. 
LIAO, Y., SMYTH, G. K. & SHI, W. 2013. featureCounts: an efficient general purpose 
program for assigning sequence reads to genomic features. Bioinformatics, 30, 923-
LIEW, L. C., HECHT, V., LAURIE, R. E., KNOWLES, C. L., VANDER SCHOOR, J. 
K., MACKNIGHT, R. C. & WELLER, J. L. 2009. DIE NEUTRALIS and LATE 
BLOOMER 1 contribute to regulation of the pea circadian clock. Plant Cell, 21, 
3198-211. 
LINDE, A. M., EKLUND, D. M., KUBOTA, A., PEDERSON, E. R. A., HOLM, K., 
GYLLENSTRAND, N., NISHIHAMA, R., CRONBERG, N., MURANAKA, T., 
OYAMA, T., KOHCHI, T. & LAGERCRANTZ, U. 2017. Early evolution of the 
land plant circadian clock. New Phytol, 216, 576-590. 
LIU, Y., TSINOREMAS, N. F., JOHNSON, C. H., LEBEDEVA, N. V., GOLDEN, S. 
S., ISHIURA, M. & KONDO, T. 1995. Circadian orchestration of gene expression 
in cyanobacteria. Genes Dev, 9, 1469-78. 
LIVAK, K. J. & SCHMITTGEN, T. D. 2001. Analysis of relative gene expression data 
using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods, 25, 
402-8. 
LONG, S. R. 1996. Rhizobium symbiosis: nod factors in perspective. Plant Cell, 8, 1885-
LOPEZ-GOMEZ, M., SANDAL, N., STOUGAARD, J. and BOLLER, T. 2012. 
Interplay of flg22-induced defence responses and nodulation in Lotus japonicus. 
Journal of experimental botany, 63(1), 393-401. 
LOZA-CORREA, M., GOMEZ-VALERO, L. & BUCHRIESER, C. 2010. Circadian 
clock proteins in prokaryotes: hidden rhythms? Front Microbiol, 1, 130. 
 - 134 - 
LU, H., MCCLUNG, C. R. & ZHANG, C. 2017. Tick Tock: Circadian Regulation of 
Plant Innate Immunity. Annu Rev Phytopathol, 55, 287-311. 
LU, S., DONG, L., FANG, C., et al. 2020. Stepwise selection on homeologous PRR 
genes controlling flowering and maturity during soybean domestication. Nature 
Genetics, 52, 428-436. 
LU, S. X., KNOWLES, S. M., ANDRONIS, C., ONG, M. S. & TOBIN, E. M. 2009. 
CIRCADIAN CLOCK ASSOCIATED1 and LATE ELONGATED 
HYPOCOTYL function synergistically in the circadian clock of Arabidopsis. Plant 
Physiol, 150, 834-43. 
MA, X., EHRHARDT, D. W. & MARGOLIN, W. 1996. Colocalization of cell division 
proteins FtsZ and FtsA to cytoskeletal structures in living Escherichia coli cells by 
using green fluorescent protein. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 93, 12998-3003. 
MARCHETTI, M., CATRICE, O., BATUT, J. & MASSON-BOIVIN, C. 2011. 
Cupriavidus taiwanensis bacteroids in Mimosa pudica Indeterminate nodules are not 
terminally differentiated. Appl Environ Microbiol, 77, 2161-4. 
MARGOLIN, W. 2005. FtsZ and the division of prokaryotic cells and organelles. Nat 
Rev Mol Cell Biol, 6, 862-71. 
MAROTI, G. & KONDOROSI, E. 2014. Nitrogen-fixing Rhizobium-legume symbiosis: 
are polyploidy and host peptide-governed symbiont differentiation general 
principles of endosymbiosis? Front Microbiol, 5, 326. 
MARX, H., MINOGUE, C. E., JAYARAMAN, D., RICHARDS, A. L., KWIECIEN, 
N. W., SIAHPIRANI, A. F., RAJASEKAR, S., MAEDA, J., GARCIA, K., DEL 
VALLE-ECHEVARRIA, A. R., VOLKENING, J. D., WESTPHALL, M. S., 
ROY, S., SUSSMAN, M. R., ANE, J. M. & COON, J. J. 2016. A proteomic atlas 
of the legume Medicago truncatula and its nitrogen-fixing endosymbiont Sinorhizobium 
meliloti. Nat Biotechnol, 34, 1198-1205. 
MCDONALD, K. 2011. Biologists discover an Evening protein complex that regulates plant growth 
[Online]. UCSanDiego. Available: 
https://ucsdnews.ucsd.edu/archive/newsrel/science/2011_07evening-
complex.asp [Accessed 19 Jan 2021 2021]. 
MELOTTO, M., UNDERWOOD, W., KOCZAN, J., NOMURA, K. & HE, S. Y. 2006. 
Plant Stomata Function in Innate Immunity against Bacterial Invasion. Cell, 126, 
969-980. 
MERGAERT, P. 2018. Role of antimicrobial peptides in controlling symbiotic bacterial 
populations. Nat Prod Rep, 35, 336-356. 
MERGAERT, P., KERESZT, A. & KONDOROSI, E. 2020. Gene Expression in 
Nitrogen-Fixing Symbiotic Nodule Cells in Medicago truncatula and Other 
Nodulating Plants. The Plant Cell, 32, 42. 
MERGAERT, P., KIKUCHI, Y., SHIGENOBU, S. & NOWACK, E. C. M. 2017. 
Metabolic Integration of Bacterial Endosymbionts through Antimicrobial 
Peptides. Trends Microbiol, 25, 703-712. 
MERGAERT, P., NIKOVICS, K., KELEMEN, Z., MAUNOURY, N., VAUBERT, D., 
KONDOROSI, A. & KONDOROSI, E. 2003. A novel family in Medicago 
truncatula consisting of more than 300 nodule-specific genes coding for small, 
secreted polypeptides with conserved cysteine motifs. Plant Physiol, 132, 161-73. 
MERGAERT, P., UCHIUMI, T., ALUNNI, B., EVANNO, G., CHERON, A., 
CATRICE, O., MAUSSET, A. E., BARLOY-HUBLER, F., GALIBERT, F., 
KONDOROSI, A. & KONDOROSI, E. 2006. Eukaryotic control on bacterial 
cell cycle and differentiation in the Rhizobium-legume symbiosis. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A, 103, 5230-5. 
 - 135 - 
MICHAEL, T. P., BRETON, G., HAZEN, S. P., PRIEST, H., MOCKLER, T. C., KAY, 
S. A. & CHORY, J. 2008a. A morning-specific phytohormone gene expression 
program underlying rhythmic plant growth. PLoS Biol, 6, e225. 
MICHAEL, T. P. & MCCLUNG, C. R. 2003. Enhancer trapping reveals widespread 
circadian clock transcriptional control in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol, 132, 629-39. 
MICHAEL, T. P., MOCKLER, T. C., BRETON, G., MCENTEE, C., BYER, A., 
TROUT, J. D., HAZEN, S. P., SHEN, R., PRIEST, H. D., SULLIVAN, C. M., 
GIVAN, S. A., YANOVSKY, M., HONG, F., KAY, S. A. & CHORY, J. 2008b. 
Network Discovery Pipeline Elucidates Conserved Time-of-DaySpecific cis-
Regulatory Modules. PLOS Genetics, 4, e14. 
MIERZIAK, J., KOSTYN, K. & KULMA, A. 2014. Flavonoids as important molecules 
of plant interactions with the environment. Molecules, 19, 16240-65. 
MIN, H., GUO, H. & XIONG, J. 2005. Rhythmic gene expression in a purple 
photosynthetic bacterium, Rhodobacter sphaeroides. FEBS Letters, 579, 808-812. 
MINCHIN, F. R. & PATE, J. S. 1974. Diurnal Functioning of the Legume Root Nodule. 
Journal of Experimental Botany, 25, 295-308. 
MISHRA, P. & PANIGRAHI, K. C. 2015. GIGANTEA  an emerging story. Frontiers 
in Plant Science, 6. 
MITSUI, H., SATO, T., SATO, Y., ITO, N. & MINAMISAWA, K. 2004. Sinorhizobium 
meliloti RpoH1 is required for effective nitrogen-fixing symbiosis with alfalfa. Mol 
Genet Genomics, 271, 416-25. 
MIZOGUCHI, T., WHEATLEY, K., HANZAWA, Y., WRIGHT, L., MIZOGUCHI, 
M., SONG, H.R., CARR, I.A. & COUPLAND, G., 2002. LHY and CCA1 are 
partially redundant genes required to maintain circadian rhythms in Arabidopsis. 
Developmental cell, 2(5), 629-641. 
MGLICH, A., AYERS, R.A. and MOFFAT, K., 2009. Structure and signaling 
mechanism of Per-ARNT-Sim domains. Structure, 17(10), pp.1282-1294. 
MOLING, S., PIETRASZEWSKA-BOGIEL, A., POSTMA, M., FEDOROVA, E., 
HINK, M. A., LIMPENS, E., GADELLA, T. W. & BISSELING, T. 2014. Nod 
factor receptors form heteromeric complexes and are essential for intracellular 
infection in medicago nodules. Plant Cell, 26, 4188-99. 
MONTIEL, J., DOWNIE, J. A., FARKAS, A., BIHARI, P., HERCZEG, R., BALINT, 
B., MERGAERT, P., KERESZT, A. & KONDOROSI, E. 2017. Morphotype of 
bacteroids in different legumes correlates with the number and type of symbiotic 
NCR peptides. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 114, 5041-5046. 
MONTIEL, J., SZCS, A., BOBOESCU, I. Z., GHERMAN, V. D., KONDOROSI, . 
& KERESZT, A. 2016. Terminal Bacteroid Differentiation Is Associated With 
Variable Morphological Changes in Legume Species Belonging to the Inverted 
Repeat-Lacking Clade. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions, 29, 210-219. 
MU, X. & LUO, J. 2019. Evolutionary analyses of NIN-like proteins in plants and their 
roles in nitrate signaling. Cell Mol Life Sci, 76, 3753-3764. 
NAGEL, D. H. & KAY, S. A. 2012. Complexity in the wiring and regulation of plant 
circadian networks. Curr Biol, 22, R648-57. 
NAGYMIHALY, M., VELUCHAMY, A., GYORGYPAL, Z., ARIEL, F., JEGU, T., 
BENHAMED, M., SZUCS, A., KERESZT, A., MERGAERT, P. & 
KONDOROSI, E. 2017. Ploidy-dependent changes in the epigenome of symbiotic 
cells correlate with specific patterns of gene expression. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 
114, 4543-4548. 
NAKAHIRA, Y., KATAYAMA, M., MIYASHITA, H., KUTSUNA, S., IWASAKI, H., 
OYAMA, T. & KONDO, T. 2004. Global gene repression by KaiC as a master 
 - 136 - 
process of prokaryotic circadian system. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 
of the United States of America, 101, 881-885. 
NAKAJIMA, M., IMAI, K., ITO, H., NISHIWAKI, T., MURAYAMA, Y., IWASAKI, 
H., OYAMA, T. & KONDO, T. 2005. Reconstitution of circadian oscillation of 
cyanobacterial KaiC phosphorylation in vitro. Science, 308, 414-5. 
NAKAMICHI, N., KIBA, T., HENRIQUES, R., MIZUNO, T., CHUA, N. H. & 
SAKAKIBARA, H. 2010. PSEUDO-RESPONSE REGULATORS 9, 7, and 5 are 
transcriptional repressors in the Arabidopsis circadian clock. Plant Cell, 22, 594-
NALLU, S., SILVERSTEIN, K. A., SAMAC, D. A., BUCCIARELLI, B., VANCE, C. 
P. & VANDENBOSCH, K. A. 2013. Regulatory patterns of a large family of 
defensin-like genes expressed in nodules of Medicago truncatula. PLoS One, 8, e60355. 
NALLU, S., SILVERSTEIN, K. A., ZHOU, P., YOUNG, N. D. & VANDENBOSCH, 
K. A. 2014. Patterns of divergence of a large family of nodule cysteine-rich peptides 
in accessions of Medicago truncatula. Plant J, 78, 697-705. 
NI, J., DONG, L., JIANG, Z., YANG, X., CHEN, Z., WU, Y. & XU, M. 2018. 
Comprehensive transcriptome analysis and flavonoid profiling of Ginkgo leaves 
reveals flavonoid content alterations in day-night cycles. PLoS One, 13, e0193897. 
NUSINOW, D. A., HELFER, A., HAMILTON, E. E., KING, J. J., IMAIZUMI, T., 
SCHULTZ, T. F., FARR, E. M. & KAY, S. A. 2011. The ELF4ELF3LUX 
complex links the circadian clock to diurnal control of hypocotyl growth. Nature, 
475, 398-402. 
OLDROYD, G. E. 2013. Speak, friend, and enter: signaling systems that promote 
beneficial symbiotic associations in plants. Nat Rev Microbiol, 11, 252-63. 
OONO, R. & DENISON, R. F. 2010. Comparing symbiotic efficiency between swollen 
versus nonswollen rhizobial bacteroids. Plant Physiol, 154, 1541-8. 
OTTO, M. 2009. Bacterial sensing of antimicrobial peptides. Contrib Microbiol, 16, 136-
PAN, H. & WANG, D. 2017. Nodule cysteine-rich peptides maintain a working balance 
during nitrogen-fixing symbiosis. Nat Plants, 3, 17048. 
PARK, M.-J., KWON, Y.-J., GIL, K.-E. & PARK, C.-M. 2016. LATE ELONGATED 
HYPOCOTYL regulates photoperiodic flowering via the circadian clock in 
Arabidopsis. BMC Plant Biology, 16, 114. 
PATRO, R., DUGGAL, G., LOVE, M. I., IRIZARRY, R. A. & KINGSFORD, C. 2017. 
Salmon provides fast and bias-aware quantification of transcript expression. Nature 
Methods, 14, 417-419. 
PAULOSE, J. K., WRIGHT, J. M., PATEL, A. G. & CASSONE, V. M. 2016. Human 
Gut Bacteria Are Sensitive to Melatonin and Express Endogenous Circadian 
Rhythmicity. PLOS ONE, 11, e0146643. 
PECRIX, Y., STATON, S. E., SALLET, E., et al. 2018. Whole-genome landscape of 
Medicago truncatula symbiotic genes. Nature Plants, 4, 1017-1025. 
PEL, M. J. C. & PIETERSE, C. M. J. 2013. Microbial recognition and evasion of host 
immunity. Journal of Experimental Botany, 64, 1237-1248. 
PENFIELD, S. & HALL, A. 2009. A Role for Multiple Circadian Clock Genes in the 
Response to Signals That Break Seed Dormancy in Arabidopsis. The Plant Cell, 21, 
1722-1732. 
PENTERMAN, J., ABO, R. P., DE NISCO, N. J., ARNOLD, M. F., LONGHI, R., 
ZANDA, M. & WALKER, G. C. 2014. Host plant peptides elicit a transcriptional 
response to control the Sinorhizobium meliloti cell cycle during symbiosis. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A, 111, 3561-6. 
 - 137 - 
PINI, F., DE NISCO, N. J., FERRI, L., PENTERMAN, J., FIORAVANTI, A., BRILLI, 
M., MENGONI, A., BAZZICALUPO, M., VIOLLIER, P. H., WALKER, G. C. 
& BIONDI, E. G. 2015. Cell Cycle Control by the Master Regulator CtrA in 
Sinorhizobium meliloti. PLoS Genet, 11, e1005232. 
PINI, F., FRAGE, B., FERRI, L., DE NISCO, N. J., MOHAPATRA, S. S., TADDEI, 
L., FIORAVANTI, A., DEWITTE, F., GALARDINI, M., BRILLI, M., 
VILLERET, V., BAZZICALUPO, M., MENGONI, A., WALKER, G. C., 
BECKER, A. & BIONDI, E. G. 2013. The DivJ, CbrA and PleC system controls 
DivK phosphorylation and symbiosis in Sinorhizobium meliloti. Mol Microbiol, 90, 54-
POOLE, P., RAMACHANDRAN, V. & TERPOLILLI, J. 2018. Rhizobia: from 
saprophytes to endosymbionts. Nature Reviews Microbiology, 16, 291. 
PORTILLO, M., LINDSEY, K., CASSON, S., GARCA-CASADO, G., SOLANO, R., 
FENOLL, C. & ESCOBAR, C. 2009. Isolation of RNA from laser-capture-
microdissected giant cells at early differentiation stages suitable for differential 
transcriptome analysis. Mol Plant Pathol, 10, 523-35. 
PRELL, J. & POOLE, P. 2006. Metabolic changes of rhizobia in legume nodules. Trends 
Microbiol, 14, 161-8. 
PRICE, P. A., TANNER, H. R., DILLON, B. A., SHABAB, M., WALKER, G. C. & 
GRIFFITTS, J. S. 2015. Rhizobial peptidase HrrP cleaves host-encoded signaling 
peptides and mediates symbiotic compatibility. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 112, 
15244-9. 
R-CORE-TEAM 2018. R: A language and environment for statistical computing. R 
Foundation for Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria. 
RANOCHA, P., DENANC, N., VANHOLME, R., FREYDIER, A., MARTINEZ, Y., 
HOFFMANN, L., KHLER, L., POUZET, C., RENOU, J. P., SUNDBERG, B., 
BOERJAN, W. & GOFFNER, D. 2010. Walls are thin 1 (WAT1), an 
Arabidopsis homolog of Medicago truncatula NODULIN21, is a tonoplast-localized 
protein required for secondary wall formation in fibers. Plant J, 63, 469-83. 
REY, T., NARS, A., BONHOMME, M., BOTTIN, A., HUGUET, S., BALZERGUE, 
S., JARDINAUD, M.-F., BONO, J.-J., CULLIMORE, J., DUMAS, B., GOUGH, 
C. & JACQUET, C. 2013. NFP, a LysM protein controlling Nod factor perception, 
also intervenes in Medicago truncatula resistance to pathogens. New Phytologist, 198, 
875-886. 
REYES, J. C., MURO-PASTOR, M. I. & FLORENCIO, F. J. 2004. The GATA family 
of transcription factors in Arabidopsis and rice. Plant physiology, 134, 1718-1732. 
RIBEIRO, C. W., BALDACCI-CRESP, F., PIERRE, O., LAROUSSE, M., 
BENYAMINA, S., LAMBERT, A., HOPKINS, J., CASTELLA, C., 
CAZARETH, J., ALLOING, G., BONCOMPAGNI, E., COUTURIER, J., 
MERGAERT, P., GAMAS, P., ROUHIER, N., MONTRICHARD, F. & 
FRENDO, P. 2017. Regulation of Differentiation of Nitrogen-Fixing Bacteria by 
Microsymbiont Targeting of Plant Thioredoxin s1. Curr Biol, 27, 250-256. 
ROBERT-SEILANIANTZ, A., GRANT, M. & JONES, J. D. G. 2011. Hormone 
Crosstalk in Plant Disease and Defense: More Than Just JASMONATE-
SALICYLATE Antagonism. Annual Review of Phytopathology, 49, 317-343. 
RODEN, L. C. & INGLE, R. A. 2009. Lights, rhythms, infection: the role of light and 
the circadian clock in determining the outcome of plant-pathogen interactions. 
Plant Cell, 21, 2546-52. 
RON, M., KAJALA, K., PAULUZZI, G., WANG, D., REYNOSO, M. A., 
ZUMSTEIN, K., GARCHA, J., WINTE, S., MASSON, H., INAGAKI, S., 
 - 138 - 
FEDERICI, F., SINHA, N., DEAL, R. B., BAILEY-SERRES, J. & BRADY, S. 
M. 2014. Hairy root transformation using Agrobacterium rhizogenes as a tool for 
exploring cell type-specific gene expression and function using tomato as a model. 
Plant Physiol, 166, 455-69. 
ROUX, B., RODDE, N., JARDINAUD, M. F., TIMMERS, T., SAUVIAC, L., 
COTTRET, L., CARRERE, S., SALLET, E., COURCELLE, E., MOREAU, S., 
DEBELLE, F., CAPELA, D., DE CARVALHO-NIEBEL, F., GOUZY, J., 
BRUAND, C. & GAMAS, P. 2014. An integrated analysis of plant and bacterial 
gene expression in symbiotic root nodules using laser-capture microdissection 
coupled to RNA sequencing. Plant J, 77, 817-37. 
ROY, P., ACHOM, M., WILKINSON, H., LAGUNAS, B. & GIFFORD, M. L. 2020. 
Symbiotic Outcome Modified by the Diversification from 7 to over 700 Nodule-
Specific Cysteine-Rich Peptides. Genes, 11, 348. 
ROY, S., LIU, W., NANDETY, R. S., CROOK, A., MYSORE, K. S., PISLARIU, C. I., 
FRUGOLI, J., DICKSTEIN, R. & UDVARDI, M. K. 2020. Celebrating 20 Years 
of Genetic Discoveries in Legume Nodulation and Symbiotic Nitrogen Fixation. 
The Plant Cell, 32, 15-41. 
RUGNONE, M. L., FAIGON SOVERNA, A., SANCHEZ, S. E., SCHLAEN, R. G., 
HERNANDO, C. E., SEYMOUR, D. K., MANCINI, E., CHERNOMORETZ, 
A., WEIGEL, D., MAS, P. & YANOVSKY, M. J. 2013. LNK genes integrate light 
and clock signaling networks at the core of the Arabidopsis oscillator. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A, 110, 12120-5. 
SANCHEZ, S. E. & KAY, S. A. 2016. The Plant Circadian Clock: From a Simple 
Timekeeper to a Complex Developmental Manager. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol, 
SARTOR, F., EELDERINK-CHEN, Z., ARONSON, B., BOSMAN, J., HIBBERT, L. 
E., DODD, A. N., KOVCS , T. & MERROW, M. 2019. Are There Circadian 
Clocks in Non-Photosynthetic Bacteria? Biology (Basel), 8. 
SATGE, C., MOREAU, S., SALLET, E., LEFORT, G., AURIAC, M. C., REMBLIERE, 
C., COTTRET, L., GALLARDO, K., NOIROT, C., JARDINAUD, M. F. & 
GAMAS, P. 2016. Reprogramming of DNA methylation is critical for nodule 
development in Medicago truncatula. Nat Plants, 2, 16166. 
SCHIESSL, K., LILLEY, J. L. S., LEE, T., TAMVAKIS, I., KOHLEN, W., BAILEY, 
P. C., THOMAS, A., LUPTAK, J., RAMAKRISHNAN, K., CARPENTER, M. 
D., MYSORE, K. S., WEN, J., AHNERT, S., GRIENEISEN, V. A. & 
OLDROYD, G. E. D. 2019. NODULE INCEPTION Recruits the Lateral Root 
Developmental Program for Symbiotic Nodule Organogenesis in Medicago 
truncatula. Current Biology, 29, 3657-3668.e5. 
SCHMITTGEN, T., LIVAK, K. 2008. Analyzing real-time PCR data by the comparative 
CT method. Nat Protoc 3, 11011108. 
SEVIN-PUJOL, A., SICARD, M., ROSENBERG, C., AURIAC, M.-C., LEPAGE, A., 
NIEBEL, A., GOUGH, C. & BENSMIHEN, S. 2017. Development of a GAL4-
VP16/UAS trans-activation system for tissue specific expression in Medicago 
truncatula. PLOS ONE, 12, e0188923. 
SHIGENOBU, S. & STERN, D. L. 2013. Aphids evolved novel secreted proteins for 
symbiosis with bacterial endosymbiont. Proc Biol Sci, 280, 20121952. 
SIMSEK, S., OJANEN-REUHS, T., STEPHENS, S. B. & REUHS, B. L. 2007. Strain-
ecotype specificity in Sinorhizobium meliloti-Medicago truncatula symbiosis is correlated 
to succinoglycan oligosaccharide structure. J Bacteriol, 189, 7733-40. 
 - 139 - 
SIMSEK, S., WOOD, K. & REUHS, B. L. 2013. Structural analysis of succinoglycan 
oligosaccharides from Sinorhizobium meliloti strains with different host compatibility 
phenotypes. J Bacteriol, 195, 2032-8. 
SINGER, A., POSCHMANN, G., MHLICH, C., VALADEZ-CANO, C., HNSCH, 
S., HREN, V., RENSING, S. A., STHLER, K. & NOWACK, E. C. 2017. 
Massive protein import into the early-evolutionary-stage photosynthetic organelle 
of the amoeba Paulinella chromatophora. Current Biology, 27, 2763-2773. e5. 
SINGH, M. & MAS, P. 2018. A Functional Connection between the Circadian Clock 
and Hormonal Timing in Arabidopsis. Genes (Basel), 9. 
SMIT, P., LIMPENS, E., GEURTS, R., FEDOROVA, E., DOLGIKH, E., GOUGH, 
C. & BISSELING, T. 2007. Medicago LYK3, an Entry Receptor in Rhizobial 
Nodulation Factor Signaling. Plant Physiology, 145, 183-191. 
SMITH, T. F. & WATERMAN, M. S. 1981. Identification of common molecular 
subsequences. J Mol Biol, 147, 195-7. 
SONG, Y. H., ITO, S. & IMAIZUMI, T. 2010. Similarities in the circadian clock and 
photoperiodism in plants. Curr Opin Plant Biol, 13, 594-603. 
SOYANO, T., SHIMODA, Y., KAWAGUCHI, M. & HAYASHI, M. 2019. A shared 
gene drives lateral root development and root nodule symbiosis pathways in Lotus. 
Science, 366, 1021-1023. 
SPRENT, J. I. 2007. Evolving ideas of legume evolution and diversity: a taxonomic 
perspective on the occurrence of nodulation. New Phytol, 174, 11-25. 
STEVE ROZEN, H. J. S. 2000. Primer3 on the WWW for general users and for biologist 
programmers. In: KRAWETZ S, M. S. (ed.) Bioinformatics Methods and Protocols: 
Methods in Molecular Biology. Totowa, NJ: Humana Press. 
STOUGAARD, J., ABILDSTEN, D. & MARCKER, K. A. 1987. The Agrobacterium 
rhizogenes pRi TL-DNA segment as a gene vector system for transformation of 
plants. Molecular and General Genetics MGG, 207, 251-255. 
STURTEVANT, R. Circadian patterns in linear growth of Escherichia Coli.  
ANATOMICAL RECORD, 1973a. WILEY-LISS DIV JOHN WILEY & SONS 
INC, 111 RIVER ST, HOBOKEN, NJ 07030 USA, 453-+. 
STURTEVANT, R. P. 1973b. Circadian variability in Klebsiella demonstrated by cosinor 
analysis. Int J Chronobiol, 1, 141-6. 
SYSKA, C., BROUQUISSE, R., ALLOING, G., PAULY, N., FRENDO, P., 
BOSSENO, M., DUPONT, L. & BOSCARI, A. 2019. Molecular Weapons 
Contribute to Intracellular Rhizobia Accommodation Within Legume Host Cell. 
Frontiers in Plant Science, 10. 
TADEGE, M., WEN, J., HE, J., TU, H., KWAK, Y., ESCHSTRUTH, A., CAYREL, A., 
ENDRE, G., ZHAO, P. X. & CHABAUD, M. 2008a. Large-scale insertional 
mutagenesis using the Tnt1 retrotransposon in the model legume Medicago 
truncatula. The Plant Journal, 54, 335-347. 
TADEGE, M., WEN, J., HE, J., TU, H., KWAK, Y., ESCHSTRUTH, A., CAYREL, A., 
ENDRE, G., ZHAO, P. X., CHABAUD, M., RATET, P. & MYSORE, K. S. 
2008b. Large-scale insertional mutagenesis using the Tnt1 retrotransposon in the 
model legume Medicago truncatula. Plant J, 54, 335-47. 
TAKAHASHI, N., HIRATA, Y., AIHARA, K. & MAS, P. 2015. A Hierarchical Multi-
oscillator Network Orchestrates the Arabidopsis Circadian System. Cell, 163, 148-
TAKATA, N., SAITO, S., SAITO, C.T. & UEMURA, M., 2010. Phylogenetic footprint 
of the plant clock system in angiosperms: evolutionary processes of Pseudo-
Response Regulators. BMC evolutionary biology, 10(1), 1-14. 
 - 140 - 
TAKATA, N., SAITO, S., TANAKA SAITO, C., NANJO, T., SHINOHARA, K. & 
UEMURA, M., 2009. Molecular phylogeny and expression of poplar circadian 
clock genes, LHY1 and LHY2. New Phytologist, 181(4), 808-819. 
TAVORMINA, P., DE CONINCK, B., NIKONOROVA, N., DE SMET, I. & 
CAMMUE, B. P. 2015. The Plant Peptidome: An Expanding Repertoire of 
Structural Features and Biological Functions. Plant Cell, 27, 2095-118. 
TAYLOR, J. A., OUIMET, M. C., WARGACHUK, R. & MARCZYNSKI, G. T. 2011. 
The Caulobacter crescentus chromosome replication origin evolved two classes of 
weak DnaA binding sites. Mol Microbiol, 82, 312-26. 
TERPOLILLI, J., HILL, Y., TIAN, R., HOWIESON, J., BRU, L., GOODWIN, L., 
HAN, J., LIOLIOS, K., HUNTEMANN, M., PATI, A., WOYKE, T., 
MAVROMATIS, K., MARKOWITZ, V., IVANOVA, N., KYRPIDES, N. & 
REEVE, W. 2013. Genome sequence of Ensifer meliloti strain SM1022; a highly 
effective microsymbiont of the model legume Medicago truncatula A17. Stand Genomic 
Sci, 9, 315-24. 
TERPOLILLI, J. J., OHARA, G. W., TIWARI, R. P., DILWORTH, M. J. & 
HOWIESON, J. G. 2008. The model legume Medicago truncatula A17 is poorly 
matched for N2 fixation with the sequenced microsymbiont Sinorhizobium 
meliloti 1021. New Phytologist, 179, 62-66. 
TIMMERS, A. C., AURIAC, M. C. & TRUCHET, G. 1999. Refined analysis of early 
symbiotic steps of the Rhizobium-Medicago interaction in relationship with 
microtubular cytoskeleton rearrangements. Development, 126, 3617-28. 
TIRICZ, H., SZUCS, A., FARKAS, A., PAP, B., LIMA, R. M., MAROTI, G., 
KONDOROSI, E. & KERESZT, A. 2013. Antimicrobial nodule-specific cysteine-
rich peptides induce membrane depolarization-associated changes in the 
transcriptome of Sinorhizobium meliloti. Appl Environ Microbiol, 79, 6737-46. 
TOMITA, J., NAKAJIMA, M., KONDO, T. & IWASAKI, H. 2005. No transcription-
translation feedback in circadian rhythm of KaiC phosphorylation. Science, 307, 
251-4. 
UCHI, N., FUKUDOME, M., NOZAKI, N., SUZUKI, M., OSUKI, K. I., 
SHIGENOBU, S. & UCHIUMI, T. 2019. Antimicrobial Activities of Cysteine-rich 
Peptides Specific to Bacteriocytes of the Pea Aphid Acyrthosiphon pisum. Microbes 
Environ, 34, 155-160. 
UDVARDI, M. & POOLE, P. S. 2013. Transport and metabolism in legume-rhizobia 
symbioses. Annu Rev Plant Biol, 64, 781-805. 
UEOKA-NAKANISHI, H., YAMASHINO, T., ISHIDA, K., KAMIOKA, M., 
NAKAMICHI, N. & MIZUNO, T. 2012. Molecular mechanisms of circadian 
rhythm in Lotus japonicus and Arabidopsis thaliana are sufficiently compatible to 
regulate heterologous core clock genes robustly. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem, 76, 2332-
VAN DE VELDE, W., ZEHIROV, G., SZATMARI, A., DEBRECZENY, M., 
ISHIHARA, H., KEVEI, Z., FARKAS, A., MIKULASS, K., NAGY, A., TIRICZ, 
H., SATIAT-JEUNEMAITRE, B., ALUNNI, B., BOURGE, M., KUCHO, K., 
ABE, M., KERESZT, A., MAROTI, G., UCHIUMI, T., KONDOROSI, E. & 
MERGAERT, P. 2010. Plant peptides govern terminal differentiation of bacteria 
in symbiosis. Science, 327, 1122-6. 
VAN VELZEN, R., HOLMER, R., BU, F.,et al. 2018. Comparative genomics of the 
nonlegume Parasponia reveals insights into evolution of nitrogen-fixing rhizobium 
symbioses. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 115, E4700-E4709. 
 - 141 - 
VANCE, C. P. 2001. Symbiotic nitrogen fixation and phosphorus acquisition. Plant 
nutrition in a world of declining renewable resources. Plant Physiol, 127, 390-7. 
VERNI, T., KIM, J., FRANCES, L., DING, Y., SUN, J., GUAN, D., NIEBEL, A., 
GIFFORD, M. L., DE CARVALHO-NIEBEL, F. & OLDROYD, G. E. D. 2015. 
The NIN Transcription Factor Coordinates Diverse Nodulation Programs in 
Different Tissues of the Medicago truncatula Root. The Plant Cell, 27, 3410-3424. 
VICENTE, E. J. & DEAN, D. R. 2017. Keeping the nitrogen-fixation dream alive. 
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 114, 3009-3011. 
VOGT, J.H. and SCHIPPERS, J.H. 2015. Setting the PAS, the role of circadian PAS 
domain proteins during environmental adaptation in plants. Frontiers in plant science, 
6, p.513. 
WALKER, L. 2019. Analyzing the molecular basis of plant root responses to the 
environment. PhD thesis, University of Warwick. 
WALKER, L., BODDINGTON, C., JENKINS, D., WANG, Y., GRNLUND, J. T., 
HULSMANS, J., KUMAR, S., PATEL, D., MOORE, J. D., CARTER, A., 
SAMAVEDAM, S., BONOMO, G., HERSH, D. S., CORUZZI, G. M., 
BURROUGHS, N. J. & GIFFORD, M. L. 2017. Changes in Gene Expression in 
Space and Time Orchestrate Environmentally Mediated Shaping of Root 
Architecture. Plant Cell, 29, 2393-2412. 
WALKER, L., LAGUNAS, B. & GIFFORD, M. L. 2020. Determinants of Host Range 
Specificity in Legume-Rhizobia Symbiosis. Frontiers in Microbiology, 11. 
WANG, K., BU, T., CHENG, Q., DONG, L., SU, T., CHEN, Z., KONG, F., GONG, 
Z., LIU, B. & LI, M. 2021. Two homologous LHY pairs negatively control soybean 
drought tolerance by repressing the abscisic acid responses. New Phytologist, n/a. 
WANG, Q., LIU, J., LI, H., YANG, S., KORMOCZI, P., KERESZT, A. & ZHU, H. 
2018. Nodule-Specific Cysteine-Rich Peptides Negatively Regulate Nitrogen-
Fixing Symbiosis in a Strain-Specific Manner in Medicago truncatula. Mol Plant Microbe 
Interact, 31, 240-248. 
WANG, Q., YANG, S., LIU, J., TERECSKEI, K., BRAHM, E., GOMBR, A., 
DOMONKOS, ., SZCS, A., KRMCZI, P., WANG, T., FODOR, L., 
MAO, L., FEI, Z., KONDOROSI, ., KAL, P., KERESZT, A. & ZHU, H. 
2017. Host-secreted antimicrobial peptide enforces symbiotic selectivity in 
Medicago truncatula. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 114, 6854-6859. 
WANG, W., BARNABY, J. Y., TADA, Y., LI, H., TR, M., CALDELARI, D., LEE, 
D.-U., FU, X.-D. & DONG, X. 2011. Timing of plant immune responses by a 
central circadian regulator. Nature, 470, 110-114. 
WANG, Z. Y. & TOBIN, E. M. 1998. Constitutive expression of the CIRCADIAN 
CLOCK ASSOCIATED 1 (CCA1) gene disrupts circadian rhythms and 
suppresses its own expression. Cell, 93, 1207-17. 
WEBB, A. A. R., SEKI, M., SATAKE, A. & CALDANA, C. 2019. Continuous dynamic 
adjustment of the plant circadian oscillator. Nature Communications, 10, 550. 
XIAO, T. T., SCHILDERINK, S., MOLING, S., DEINUM, E. E., KONDOROSI, E., 
FRANSSEN, H., KULIKOVA, O., NIEBEL, A. & BISSELING, T. 2014. Fate 
map of Medicago truncatula root nodules. Development, 141, 3517-3528. 
XIE, F., MURRAY, J. D., KIM, J., HECKMANN, A. B., EDWARDS, A., OLDROYD, 
G. E. D. & DOWNIE, J. A. 2012. Legume pectate lyase required for root infection 
by rhizobia. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 109, 633-638. 
XU, G., JIANG, Z., WANG, H. & LIN, R. 2019. The central circadian clock proteins 
CCA1 and LHY regulate iron homeostasis in Arabidopsis. Journal of Integrative Plant 
Biology, 61, 168-181. 
 - 142 - 
XU, Y., MORI, T. & JOHNSON, C. H. 2003. Cyanobacterial circadian clockwork: roles 
of KaiA, KaiB and the kaiBC promoter in regulating KaiC. Embo j, 22, 2117-26. 
YANG, R. & SU, Z. 2010. Analyzing circadian expression data by harmonic regression 
based on autoregressive spectral estimation. Bioinformatics, 26, i168-74. 
YANG, S., WANG, Q., FEDOROVA, E., LIU, J., QIN, Q., ZHENG, Q., PRICE, P. 
A., PAN, H., WANG, D., GRIFFITTS, J. S., BISSELING, T. & ZHU, H. 2017. 
Microsymbiont discrimination mediated by a host-secreted peptide in Medicago 
truncatula. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 114, 6848-6853. 
YOUNG, N. D., DEBELLE, F., OLDROYD, G. E., et al. 2011. The Medicago genome 
provides insight into the evolution of rhizobial symbioses. Nature, 480, 520-4. 
ZAMIOUDIS, C. & PIETERSE, C. M. 2012. Modulation of host immunity by beneficial 
microbes. Mol Plant Microbe Interact, 25, 139-50. 
ZHANG, C., XIE, Q., ANDERSON, R. G., NG, G., SEITZ, N. C., PETERSON, T., 
MCCLUNG, C. R., MCDOWELL, J. M., KONG, D., KWAK, J. M. & LU, H. 
2013a. Crosstalk between the Circadian Clock and Innate Immunity in 
Arabidopsis. PLOS Pathogens, 9, e1003370. 
ZHANG, Q., DU, H., LV, D., XIAO, T., PAN, J., HE, H., WANG, G., CAI, R., WENG, 
Y. & PAN, J. 2018. Efficient Transposition of the Retrotransposon Tnt1 in 
Cucumber (Cucumis sativus L.). Horticultural Plant Journal, 4, 111-116. 
ZHANG, W., DOU, Z., HE, P., JU, X. T., POWLSON, D., CHADWICK, D., NORSE, 
D., LU, Y. L., ZHANG, Y., WU, L., CHEN, X. P., CASSMAN, K. G. & ZHANG, 
F. S. 2013b. New technologies reduce greenhouse gas emissions from nitrogenous 
fertilizer in China. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A, 110, 8375-80. 
ZHOU, C., HAN, L., FU, C., CHAI, M., ZHANG, W., LI, G., TANG, Y. & WANG, 
Z. Y. 2012. Identification and characterization of petiolule-like pulvinus mutants 
with abolished nyctinastic leaf movement in the model legume Medicago truncatula. 
New Phytol, 196, 92-100. 
	Insert from: "WRAP_Coversheet_Theses_new.pdf"
	http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/157199
