Microsoft Word - thesis_final.docx
warwick.ac.uk/lib-publications  
A Thesis Submitted for the Degree of PhD at the University of Warwick 
Permanent WRAP URL: 
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/149016 
Copyright and reuse:                     
This thesis is made available online and is protected by original copyright.  
Please scroll down to view the document itself.  
Please refer to the repository record for this item for information to help you to cite it. 
Our policy information is available from the repository home page.  
For more information, please contact the WRAP Team at: wrap@warwick.ac.uk  
http://go.warwick.ac.uk/lib-publications
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/149016
mailto:wrap@warwick.ac.uk
Department 
Address 
Address 
Address 
Coventry CV4 8UW UK  
T (0)24 7615 xxxxx 
F (0)24 7615 xxxxx 
E youremail@warwick.ac.uk 
www.warwick.ac.uk 
The effect of beneficial microbes on plant 
fitness and microbiome  an integrated 
approach 
Chrysi Sergaki 
Thesis 
Submitted to the University of Warwick 
for the degree of 
Doctor of Philosophy 
School of Life Sciences 
April 2019 
This work is dedicated to my family, to Sophie Piquerez and to those who 
believed in me, supported me and taught me to follow my dreams
Table of contents  
2.10 Medicago truncatula microbiome experiment preparation, sampling and 
Chapter 3: Serendipita indica effector proteins as a strategy to establish a 
3.2.1 Leaf protoplast screening of effectors to identify effector function in response to 
3.2.3 Basal expression of auxin responsive genes is altered in A. thaliana seedlings 
3.3.1 Constitutive expression of S. indica effector proteins in A. thaliana plants affect 
3.3.2 Constitutive expression of S. indica effector proteins in A. thaliana plants alter the 
Chapter 4: Influence of beneficial fungi on the composition of the Arabidopsis 
4.3.1 S. indica and its combination with the core microbiome improves plant growth in 
4.3.3 The presence of the bacterial community eliminates the fungal presence in the 
Chapter 5: Influence of rhizobia strains on the composition of the core root 
5.2.1 S. meliloti spp. differ in their ability to promote growth in dependency of nutrient 
5.2.3 Effect of rhizobial strains on Medicago truncatula growth in different soil types . 89 
5.2.4 S. meliloti 1022 alters the bacterial but not the fungal community structure in 
5.2.5 S. meliloti 1022 alters the composition of bacterial but not fungal community in 
5.2.6 The plant bacterial microbiome composition correlates with changes in plant 
5.3.2 Efficiency of Sinorhizobium species varies and also differs depending on the soil 
5.3.4 Strong effect of S. meliloti 1022 on the bacterial community structure but not on 
5.3.5 Strong effect of S. meliloti 1022 on the bacterial community composition but not 
5.3.6 S. meliloti 1022 promotes plant growth irrespectively of the soil characteristics 127 
5.3.7 Soil characteristics differently affect the bacterial and fungal community structure
6.2 The potential of (S. indica) effectors on the establishment of fungal 
6.3.1 Potential and limitations of gnotobiotic systems as reproducible tools to study the 
6.4 The necessity of a fundamental understanding of individual microbes 
properties, capabilities and lifestyles - Approaches to ensure inoculant 
6.5 Future approaches to examine and exploit microbial bioagents for agricultural 
List of Figures 
Figure 3.1: Pipeline for effector screening using the Arabidopsis protoplast 
Figure 3.2: S. indica effectors that significantly affected the GH.3.3 expression in 
Figure 3.3: Root growth inhibition in the presence of different concentrations of 
Figure 3.4: Main root length relative to the control plants expressing GFP treated 
Figure 3.5: Main root length of plants expressing SIEs (as pools and as 
independent lines) relative to control plants expressing GFP when grown on 
Figure 3.6: Basal expression of the auxin-responsive genes GH3.3 and IAA5 in 
Figure 4.1: Growth and survival of Arabidopsis plants growing in flowpots 
Figure 4.4: Bacterial microbiome structure was determined using principle 
Figure 4.5: Relative abundance of each class in the matrix and root samples 
Figure 5.4: Soil chemical characteristics before the experiments were set up 
Figure 5.8: Correlation of edaphic factors with microbial community structure. 88 
Figure 5.9: Comparison of plant growth of Medicago truncatula in different soil 
Figure 5.10: Dry shoot weight of Medicago truncatula in different soil types and 
Figure 5.11: Bacterial and fungal community structure including all treatments 
Figure 5.12: Bacterial community richness and structure in the three different soil 
Figure 5.13: Fungal community richness and structure in the three different soil 
Figure 5.15: Differentially enriched bacterial taxa in the endosphere of Medicago 
Figure 5.16: Differentially enriched bacterial taxa in the rhizosphere of Medicago 
Figure 5.17: Fungal community composition in the three different soil types. .. 108 
Figure 5.18: Soil pH and conductivity in soil types upon different treatments. .. 112 
Figure 5.19: Soil available NO3-, PO43- and K soil types upon different treatments.
Figure 5.21: Plant C:N ratio and C and N contents soil types upon different 
Figure 5.22: Correlation of soil and plant biochemical characteristics, microbial 
richness and shoot dry weight upon mock and S. meliloti 1022 treatment, in the 
Figure 5.23: Correlation between edaphic factors and soil microbial community 
structure of mock and S. meliloti 1022-treated plants grown in three different soil 
Figure 5.24: Correlation between soil and plant biochemical characteristics and 
the structure of rhizosphere and endosphere microbial communities of mock and 
Figure S3.1: Normalized luciferase expression relative to eV GFP in control and 
Figure S4.1: Relative abundance of each family in the matrix and root samples 
Figure S5.1: Growth curves of Medicago trancatula plants growing in different 
Figure S5.2: Result from bacterial OTU2 alignment with available genomes on 
List of Tables 
Table 3.1: Summary table of results from different methods examining the effect of 
SIEs on plant root growth and auxin signalling, indicating the selection of the 
Table 3.2: Summary table of results from different methods examining the effect of 
Table 5.1: Crop rotation for each soil type for the last 4 years before soil 
Table 5.2: Microbial taxa contributing to the differences in community structure.
Table 5.3: Heatmap of significant changes in the bacterial community 
Table 5.4: Heatmap of significant changes in the fungal community composition 
Table 5.5: Microbial taxa contributing to the differences in community structure 
Table 5.6: Microbial taxa contributing to the differences in community structure 
Table 5.7: Fungal taxa contributing to the differences in community structure in 
Table 5.8: Fungal taxa contributing to the differences in community structure in 
Table S2.2: Number of reads before and after the analysis of the microbiome 
Table S3.1: List of S. indica effectors gene names with the number used in the 
Table S3.1: Raw data from the protoplast screening of the top effector candidates.
Acknowledgments 
Firstly, I would like to thank my supervisor Patrick Schfer who has provided 
priceless support, guiding me as a scientist and as a person, for the valuable lessons 
he taught me, for his limitless patience, his honesty and compassion. I would like 
to thank NERC for supporting my work and providing further opportunities for 
professional development. I would like to further extend my appreciation to Miriam 
Gifford, Paul Schulze-Lefert and Stephane Hacquard for the excellent collaboration 
and for providing the materials and feedback to build this thesis, as well as Beatriz 
Lagunas for the incredible work and support. I would like to thank Richard Napier 
for his help and guidance on the work with auxin, as well as for providing primers 
for my research and further thank my advisory panel, Gary Bending and Munehiro 
Assaly for the valuable guidance and advice.  
I would like to thank Silke for all the work she did on the effectors project, the 
optimisation of the protocols and the production of all the constructs and plant lines, 
as well as her guidance and support on my work. I would like to thank Sally Hilton 
for the incredible support on the microbiome work, for her time, advice and help 
she kindly provided. 
Finally, I would like to thank the Patrick Schfer group for their support and 
constant feedback on my work, Vardis Ntoukakis for the incredible support from 
the start of my research career, as well as Sophie Piquerez for the limitless support, 
guidance and empowerment. I would like to thank my family, friends, and 
particularly Julius Drr, Emeka Okechukwu, Despoina Sousoni, Manos 
Mastorakis, Niki Mantaraki, Antonia Gkagklaki, Gurdaman Singh and my sister 
Evi Sergaki for believing in me and supporting me throughout this journey, as well 
as my students Natassa, Lea and Birte for all the help. Special thanks should go to 
coffee for existing and brightening up my life. 
Declarations 
This thesis is presented in accordance with the regulations for the degree of Doctor 
of Philosophy. It has been composed by myself and has not been submitted in any 
previous application for any degree. The work in this thesis has been undertaken by 
myself except where otherwise stated. 
Abstract 
The plant root microbiota, consisting of diverse microbial communities within and 
around the plant roots, can significantly influence plant development and stress 
tolerance. The goal of this thesis was to analyse the microbe-microbe and plant-
microbe interactions in the root. For this purpose, Serendipita indica, a mutualistic 
fungal root endophyte, able to improve plant performance and disease resistance in 
host plants, was studied. Strategies of the fungus to establish colonisation within 
the plant were studied by investigating the effect of putative S. indica effector 
proteins on the plant auxin signalling pathway. Single S. indica effectors were 
found to alter the expression of auxin-related genes, with consequent effects on 
plant growth, indicating a potential competitive advantage of S. indica gained 
through effectors against other microbes. Furthermore, by analyzing the effect of 
two beneficial fungal endophytes, S. indica and Colletotrichum tofieldiae on the 
rhizobiome composition of Arabidopsis thaliana, inoculated individually on plant 
roots, I aimed to reveal plant- and/or microbe-derived patterns that are involved in 
shaping the root microbiome. Using a gnotobiotic system and a synthetic bacterial 
community, I demonstrated the persistence of the bacterial community in the plant 
root, as well as the transition of C. tofieldiae to a potentially pathogenic lifestyle 
hereby affecting plants survival. To further test these patterns in a natural 
environment, a bacterial taxon commonly utilized in agriculture, Rhizobia, was 
used as a mutualist root symbiont of the legume Medicago truncatula. Rhizobia 
strains were tested for their ability to stimulate plant growth and nutrient supply as 
well as their competitiveness in representative UK soil types and their different 
natural microbiomes. Sinorhizobium meliloti 1022 was found to enhance plant 
growth and nitrogen acquisition in all soil types, altering the bacterial community 
structure and composition of the root endosphere, while the fungal community 
structure and composition was driven only by the soil characteristics. Overall, this 
work contributes towards elucidating the stability of beneficial plant-microbe 
interactions in natural communities and in different environments. The long-term 
aim of such study is to integrate molecular and environmental factors to generate 
customized beneficial microbiomes that can be applied to sustainably support crop 
production. 
Abbreviations 
AMs Arbuscular mycorrhizas 
A. thaliana  Arabidopsis thaliana 
ATS Arabidopsis thaliana salts 
C. tolfidiae  Colletotrichum tolfidiae 
CbetaPs beta-subclass Proteobacteria 
cDNA   complementary Deoxyribo-Nucleic Acid 
CT   Cycle threshold 
dai Days after inoculation 
DCT   Delta cycle hreshold 
DDCT   Double delta cycle threshold 
DEX   Dexamethasone  
DMSO dimethyl sulfoxide 
DMSO  Dimethyl sulfoxide 
eV   empty Vector 
GC-MS   Gas ChromatographyMass Spectrometry 
GFP  Green Fluorescent Protein 
GUS Beta-glucuronidase 
GUS  -glucuronidase 
IAA  Indole-3-acetic acid 
ILA  Indole3lactate 
ITS  Internal transcribed spacer 
LUC  Luciferase  
M. truncatula  Medicago trancatula 
MES 2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid  
mRNA  messenger Ribo-Nucleic Acid 
MS  Murashige and Skoog medium 
MUG 4-Methylumbelliferyl--D-glucuronide 
NAA  Naphthaleneacetic acid 
NCBI National Center for Biotechnology Information 
OTU  Operational Taxonomic Unit 
P. striata  Pseudomonas striata 
P. syringae  Pseudomonas syringae  
PCoA  Principle Coordinate analysis 
PCR  Polymerase Chain Reaction 
RA   Relative Abundance 
RLU relative light units 
rpm revolutions per minute 
rRNA   Ribosomal ribonucleic acid 
S. indica  Serendipita indica 
S. medicae  Sinorhizobium medicae 
S. meliloti  Sinorhizobium meliloti 
SIE  Serendipita indica effector 
Tukey's HDS Tukey's Honest Significant Difference 
TY medium Tryptone  yeast extract medium  
Chapter 1: Introduction 
1.1 The importance of soil microbiome for sustainable agriculture 
The increasing demand for food, in combination with the major agricultural 
challenges, such as pests, plant diseases caused by microbes, drought stress and soil 
nutrient deficiencies drive the need for sustainable solutions to improve crop 
protection and increase crop yield (Ericksen et al., 2009; Garnett, 2013). Plant 
pathogens such as Magnaporthe oryzae (rice blast), Fusarium graminearum 
(fusarium head blight), Pseudomonas syringae and Ralstonia solanacearum, can 
cause severe crop yield losses (Dean et al., 2012; Mansfield et al., 2012). On the 
other hand, beneficial microbes such as mycorrhizal fungi and plant growth-
promoting rhizobacteria have remarkable effects on plant growth, health and 
tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses (Berg, 2009; Finkel et al., 2017; Pineda et 
al., 2010). In recent years, a lot of attention has been directed towards the analyses 
of complex microbial communities associated with plants (Hacquard et al., 2015). 
These so-called microbiomes have been found to hold a wealth of plant beneficial 
microbes and as such considered to be a promising and underexploited resource for 
agriculture (Mendes et al., 2013). As plant-associated microbiomes have key roles 
in plant development and health (Berendsen et al., 2012), understanding their 
function in plant processes would encourage the use of microbiomes beneficial 
properties as a potential sustainable solution to agricultural challenges. In turn, 
intensive agriculture as well as the farming methods can affect microbial 
communities and can lead to soil decline (Hartman et al., 2017, 2018). 
Understanding the effect of soil factors on microbiome parameters (e.g. community 
assembly, structure, composition, diversity) and the consequent effect on plant 
growth and health can reveal consequences of farming practices on soil ecosystem 
functioning and encourage the development of novel cropping practices. 
The root, as principal tissue for nutrient and water acquisition, is important 
for plant health and development (Hodge et al., 2009). In addition, plant roots 
represent a very specific and rich niche for microbes and only a few of them can 
overcome defence mechanisms of plants and establish colonisation within the root 
tissue (Bai et al., 2015; Hacquard et al., 2015). The rhizosphere, in particular, is a 
highly competitive environment for microbes as it is enriched in plant-derived 
nutrients. Microbes can form complex interactions with the plant root ranging from 
parasitic, in the case of soil-borne plant pathogens leading to the reduction of crop 
yield (Mller et al., 2016), to mutualistic interactions, as in the case of legume-
rhizobia symbioses, which improve plant development and health (Garg and 
Geetanjali, 2009). However, the full potential of these interactions, as well as the 
underlying mechanisms are largely unknown. The high complexity, diversity and 
variation of these interactions demand for holistic approaches in order to capture 
the whole spectrum of microbiomes capabilities. 
1.2 Plant  microbe interactions from a molecular perspective  
1.2.1 The role of hormones in plant-microbe interactions  
The continuous pressure of the environment on crops, leading to crop 
diseases and yield loss, has created the need for deeper understanding of how plants 
face and resist environmental cues such as biotic and abiotic stresses (Conforti, 
2011). Plants bear a remarkable plasticity to cope with changing environments. 
Plant cells have developed highly sensitive perception and transduction systems to 
monitor their environment and adapt cellular behaviour in response to external 
changes. Plant hormones take an essential role in integrating environmental stimuli 
and, in combination with other signalling pathways, initiate physiological responses 
(Davies, 2010), including stress adaptive processes (Xu et al., 2018). So far, auxin 
(IAA), abscisic acid (ABA), ethylene (ET) brassinosteroids (BRs), cytokinins 
(CKs), gibberellins or gibberellin acid (GA), jasmonate (JA), nitric oxide, salicylic 
acid (SA), and strigolactones (SLs) are defined as plant hormones (Santner and 
Estelle, 2009). Various plant hormones and the crosstalk between them are involved 
in the regulation of plant - microbe interactions (Xu et al., 2018). For example, JA 
and SA are part of the plant defense signaling during pathogen attack (Koornneef 
and Pieterse, 2008; Kunkel and Brooks, 2002), while CKs and IAA can modify 
growth processes as part of host-microbe interaction (Gamas et al., 2017; Sukumar 
et al., 2013). In addition, microbes are able to produce hormones as a strategy to 
influence plant metabolism in order to facilitate plant colonisation (Costacurta and 
Vanderleyden, 1995). Due to their ability to regulate plant response (i.e. to integrate 
environmental stresses) (Vurukonda et al., 2016) microbe-derived hormones are 
considered as a valuable source for plant-strengthening bioagents (Egamberdieva 
et al., 2017).  
Auxin, in particular, has drawn a lot of attention regarding its function in 
plant microbe-interactions, due to its well-known function in plant growth and 
defense (Teale et al., 2006). It is synthesised in meristematic tissues and its 
homeostasis is essential for plant metabolism (Kazan, 2013). Auxin depletion and 
accumulation in cells play a crucial role in plant development (Ljung, 2013; Sorefan 
et al., 2009). Auxin can accumulate very locally (i.e. within one cell or in a small 
group of cells) or show a gradient distribution among cells to control certain 
pathways and responses (Sorefan et al., 2009). Auxin affects growth as it is 
involved in cell division, elongation and differentiation and is highly mobile within 
the plant by utilising a very specific transportation system (Teale et al., 2006). 
Auxin is also involved in different stages of plant-microbe interactions, 
including pathogenic interaction and the formation of symbioses (Boivin et al., 
2016). The down-regulation of auxin signalling is often part of a defence response 
of plants against pathogens. Therefore auxin is an important target for microbes in 
order to establish plant colonisation (Spaepen and Vanderleyden, 2011). The 
manipulation of auxin signalling pathways can be achieved through microbial 
effectors or microbial production of auxin molecules (Kunkel and Harper, 2018). 
Notably, the majority of rhizosphere-associated bacteria can produce IAA (Patten 
and Glick, 1996). This exogenous IAA can increase the susceptibility of plants to 
microbes allowing microbial proliferation within plant tissues (Spaepen and 
Vanderleyden, 2011). Auxin is also involved in the establishment of beneficial 
plant symbioses, for example, in the formation of rhizobial nodules (van Noorden 
et al., 2007). Due to its significance in the establishment of beneficial and 
pathogenic interactions, the ability of microbes to manipulate the auxin signalling 
pathway can outcompete other microbes and, thus, represent a competitive 
advantage.  
1.2.2 The key role of microbial effectors in plant  microbe interactions 
Plants have a sequence of defence mechanisms against microbes that 
attempt to colonise them. They recognise pathogen-associated molecular patterns 
(PAMPs), such as bacterial flagellin or fungal chitin, and trigger the activation of 
immunity (pattern triggered immunity) (Couto and Zipfel, 2016; Zipfel, 2014). 
Microbes secrete effectors, molecules that can alter host cell structure and function 
(Kamoun, 2006), in order to overcome plant immune response. Plants have evolved 
a second layer of immunity, termed effector triggered immunity (ETI), to recognise 
microbial effectors and initiate defence mechanisms against those microbes (Cui et 
al., 2014; Selin et al., 2016). For this reason, microbes keep evolving their effector 
repertoire in order to escape the plant immune system and maintain their ability to 
colonise plants for reproduction. In response, the plant keeps evolving the 
recognition and defence mechanisms, resulting in continuous cycles of co-evolution 
(Dodds and Rathjen, 2010; Jones and Dangl, 2006).  
Microbial effectors can act in the apoplast or inside the host cell, where they 
target and modify plant proteins (Hogenhout et al., 2009). Effectors may have 
single or multiple host targets and they can mimic plant hormones or other plant 
molecules. Certain effectors can move between plant cells to establish infection 
sites (Djamei et al., 2011; Hogenhout et al., 2009). By influencing cellular 
signalling processes of the host, e.g. by suppressing host defence mechanisms, 
microbes essentially improve their ability to colonise and spread (Win et al., 2012). 
In this respect, the effector repertoire provides a competitive advantage and defines 
the success of microbes in colonising plants (Selin et al., 2016). In a community 
context, members of the microbiome may affect the virulence of other microbes, 
determining the outcome of the plant - microbe interaction (Xin et al., 2018). For 
example, certain microbes used as biocontrol agents against plant pathogens, 
activate defense responses as a strategy for disease protection (Pieterse et al., 2014), 
potentially through the secretion of effector proteins. Understanding the 
mechanisms of these interactions will enhance our ability to predict and manipulate 
their function and ensure their effectiveness in agricultural applications.  
Microbial effectors have attracted a lot of attention as determinants of the 
establishment of pathogenic and beneficial plant-microbe interactions (Baker et al., 
1997). In addition, effectors hold a great potential for agriculture, e.g. in defining 
disease resistance traits in breeding programmes (Vleeshouwers and Oliver, 2015). 
However, there are certain limitations in unravelling the biological functions of 
microbial effectors. For instance, the large diversity of effectors, with no specific 
functional signatures within their amino acid sequence, makes it challenging to 
assign functions to effectors. In addition, the lack of methods for genetic 
manipulation of microbes (e.g. for many fungi) interferes with functional effector 
studies (Rafiqi et al., 2012). Many approaches have been used to study the 
effectome, as the entirety of the microbial effector repertoire of a given microbe, 
mainly for pathogens. Such approaches include pathogenicity assays (Schechter et 
al., 2007), as well as machine learning that enables effector systematic analysis and 
prediction (Wang et al., 2017a). Petre et al. (2014) have highlighted the necessity 
of new high-throughput approaches for the identification and functional 
characterization of new effector proteins (effectomics). Combining comparative 
genomics, structural and functional studies (Anderson et al., 2015) could give a 
holistic understanding of the role of microbial effectors in plant microbe 
interactions. 
1.3 Plant interactions with beneficial bacteria and fungi 
1.3.1 The Medicago truncatula  rhizobia interaction 
Bacteria are highly abundant in all plant compartments (Hacquard et al., 
2015) and hold key roles in soil nutrient cycling, influencing various processes of 
the ecosystem (Harris, 2009). They are found as free living, closely associated with 
the root surface or within the root tissue. Bacteria affect plants in multiple ways: 
synthesizing molecules, when associated with plants (e.g. phytohormones), 
enabling nutrient acquisition from the soil (either by altering root architecture or by 
actively making certain compounds available to the plants) and providing disease 
tolerance and protection (Hayat et al., 2010).  
Symbioses of legumes with nitrogen-fixing rhizobia represent agriculturally 
important plant-bacterial associations as they can enrich the soil with nitrogen 
(Fournier et al., 2008; Jones et al., 2007; Oldroyd et al., 2011; Rangin et al., 2008). 
Medicago truncatula is a model organism for legumes (Cook, 1999). Legumes 
secrete flavonoids in order to attract nitrogen fixing rhizobia, which form nodules 
in the roots of the plant (Bertin et al., 2003; Hassan and Mathesius, 2012; Oldroyd 
et al., 2011). Nodules provide low oxygen conditions, which rhizobia require for 
the conversion of N2 into ammonia, using the enzymatic complex called nitrogenase 
(Day et al., 2001; Gage, 2004; Gibson et al., 2008). Thus, in this symbiotic 
relationship rhizobia provide ammonia to plants, while plants provide carbon and 
energy to the bacteria (Poole et al., 2018). Furthermore, nodules, have been found 
to enclose microbial communities, with possible beneficial effects on the plant 
(Hartman et al., 2017; Martnez-Hidalgo and Hirsch, 2017; Velzquez et al., 2017). 
However, functional studies are required for unravelling the function of the nodule 
microbiome.  
Rhizobial-legume symbioses are regulated by genetic and environmental 
factors (e.g. recognition mechanisms, soil nitrogen availability). For rhizobia to 
enter plant roots, the plant has to recognize the bacterial-derived Nod factors for the 
activation of a series of processes that will enable successful nodulation (Oldroyd 
et al., 2011). The plant-host has control over the survival of the bacteria within the 
nodule. It is responsible for supporting the metabolic processes of bacteria, provide 
the necessary nutrients, as well as the limited oxygen conditions required for 
nitrogen fixation (Jones et al., 2007; Mergaert et al., 2006). Thus, the plant defense 
pathways can regulate the number of nodules, resulting in negative control 
(autoinhibition) of nodulation (van Brussel et al., 2007). Such inhibition signals are 
regulated by plant hormones, having a key role in plant-microbe interactions (Sun 
et al., 2006).  
1.3.2 The Arabidopsis thaliana - Serendipita indica interaction 
Fungi take important roles in the function of ecosystems and it is 
hypothesized that early symbioses with fungi enabled plants to colonise land 
(Brundrett, 2002). The most extensively studied beneficial plant-fungi symbioses 
are mycorrhizas. Arbuscular mycorrhizas (AMs) establish arbuscules inside root 
cells of their host plants. AMs provide nitrogen and phosphorus to host plants and, 
in turn receive carbohydrates from their hosts. The establishment of mycorrhizas is 
based on complex communication signals and metabolic processes (Parniske, 
2008).  
In addition to mycorrhizas, plants can undergo beneficial symbioses with a 
diversity of other fungal species. The root fungal endophyte Serendipita indica, 
which is closely related to some mycorrhizal fungi (e.g. orchid mycorrhizas )(Weiss 
et al., 2004), is another well-studied microbe that forms mutualistic relationships 
with a broad range of plants. S. indica is a mutualistic fungal root endophyte of the 
order Sebacinales (Basidiomycota) that was isolated in the Indian Thar desert and 
was observed to improve plant phosphorus supply and disease resistance (Qiang et 
al., 2012a). Similar to other symbionts it receives carbon from host plants, essential 
for its growth and survival (Aslam et al., 2019). Members of the order Sebacinales 
are known as asymptomatic endophytes, that have been found in a large variety of 
plants from different environments and ecosystems around the world. These fungi 
are thought to enhance the ecological competitiveness of their host plants (Wei et 
al., 2011) and their ubiquitous presence might indicate a superior competitiveness 
of sebacinoid fungi in colonizing plant roots. 
Various studies have aimed at identifying the molecular nature of the 
beneficial interaction between the fungus and its host plants (Becker et al., 2005; 
Cosme et al., 2016; Draft et al., 2011; Lahrmann et al., 2013; Molitor and Kogel, 
2009). S. indica has been found to suppress plant innate immunity and alter 
hormone homeostasis during infection. This involves upregulation of genes related 
to auxin, gibberellin, abscisic acid and down-regulation of salicylic acid-related 
genes (Schfer et al., 2009). In addition, plant ethylene signalling has been found 
to be essential for host colonisation (Camehl et al., 2010). While these studies 
indicate the potential of S. indica in improving crop production, its application in 
the field was less promising (Serfling et al., 2007). It suggests, as it is for other 
beneficial microbes, to exploit their full beneficial potential as bioagents, we need 
to understand their behavior within complex microbial communities. 
1.4 Plant microbe interactions at the community level 
Root microbiota, as diverse microbial communities in and around plant 
roots, can significantly influence plant development and stress tolerance (Bulgarelli 
et al., 2015). Microbes have specialized to alter plant signaling and metabolism in 
order to create a habitat that is sufficiently supplied with plant-derived nutrients to 
support microbial survival and proliferation (Ortz-Castro et al., 2009). In turn, 
plants can influence the composition of microbial communities in the rhizosphere 
through root exudates, attracting plant beneficial microbes to the root (Bulgarelli et 
al., 2013). It is thus important to understand the specific role of different microbes 
in complex ecosystem processes and the influence of nutrient availability and other 
environmental factors on their activity. 
1.4.1 Microbial interactions within the community  
Bacteria and fungi often share micro-environments and their interactions 
drive many processes in a given ecosystem, and can contribute to plant and animal 
fitness (Deveau et al., 2018). These microbial groups have evolved various 
strategies in order to co-exist and/or thrive in the ecosystem they share. For 
example, fungal hyphae can provide micro-habitats for bacteria (Frey-Klett et al., 
2011) and can facilitate bacterial migration along hyphae (Warmink et al., 2011). 
In turn, certain fungi rely on bacterial endosymbionts for their growth and function 
(Bonfante and Desir, 2017). This close relationship between bacteria and fungi 
relies on sophisticated ways to balance their interactions.  
In soil-plant ecosystems, microbes have evolved various strategies to 
communicate and influence the environment around them (Tseng et al., 2009). 
Bacteria use quorum sensing to mediate the establishment of colonisation within 
the plant. Quorum sensing, as defined by Miller and Bassler (2002), is the 
regulation of gene expression in response to fluctuations in cell-population density. 
This is achieved using signal molecules such as lipid-like diffusible factors and 
signalling peptides, as well as N-acyl homoserine lactones. These signal molecules 
mediate bacterial virulence, biofilm development, production of cell-wall-
degrading enzymes, bacteria adhesion and movement (Leach et al., 2017; Miller 
and Bassler, 2002). Quorum sensing is also involved in interspecies 
communication, and quorum sensing signals can trigger competition responses in 
other microbes, such as antibiotic production (Dubuis et al., 2007). Another 
bacterial mechanism of communication is the production of volatile organic 
compounds, which affect virulence, biofilm formation and stress survival 
mechanisms in adjacent bacteria (Lee et al., 2015). Fungi can also produce volatile 
organic compounds, with some of them exerting antimicrobial activity 
(Kanchiswamy et al., 2015), regulate fungal pathogenicity (Tsitsigiannis and 
Keller, 2007), or activate plant defense pathways plants (Li et al., 2016a). Quorum 
sensing and volatile organic compounds production can also affect plant 
metabolism, development and defense by modifying respective plant pathways 
(Hartmann et al., 2014; Kanchiswamy et al., 2015).  
Quorum sensing signals and volatile organic compunds play important roles 
in the interspecies and inter-kingdom communication. It has been shown that these 
signals can affect the phytobiome composition and the outcome of the interactions 
within the plant (Leach et al., 2017). For example, certain fungal compounds such 
as mycotoxins can inhibit the perception and response of some quorum sensing 
signals (Bacon et al., 2017; Rasmussen et al., 2005). Fungal volatiles, in turn, can 
affect motility of bacteria (Schmidt et al., 2016). Plants can mimic fungal volatiles 
to regulate fungal colonisation and pathogenicity (Gao and Kolomiets, 2009), as 
well as to mimic or inhibit bacterial quorum sensing and signalling (Corral-Lugo et 
al., 2016; Vikram et al., 2010). The complexity of communication within 
microbiomes and between microbes and plants makes the study of microbe-microbe 
and plant-microbe interactions challenging. These interactions are highly dynamic 
and the recruitment of different approaches is necessary in order to resolve and, 
thus, understand underlying mechanisms involved in the spatiotemporal 
organization of these activities.  
1.4.2 The expansion of microbiome research  
The advancement in sequencing technologies and the increased 
computational power has led to a large number of microbiome-based studies 
(Fierer, 2017; Prosser, 2015). The common approach used recently in microbiome 
research, is the barcoded amplicon sequencing using specific conserved regions of 
microbes; usually the 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) for bacteria and the intergenic 
spacer (ITS) region for fungi. Amplicon sequencing has been an essential tool for 
microbiome studies as it allows simultaneous analyses of multiple samples and, by 
increasing the complexity of experiments, it allow us to observe general patterns in 
microbiome structure and composition (Bulgarelli et al., 2012; Lundberg et al., 
2012a; Peiffer et al., 2013; Tkacz et al., 2015).  
1.4.3 The use of synthetic microbial communities in gnotobiotic systems 
Following the advancement in sequencing technologies, there are novel 
methods to culture previously unculturable microbes, encouraging new studies and 
efforts to isolate and characterize new microbial strains (Bai et al., 2015; Browne 
et al., 2016; Vartoukian et al., 2010). These isolates are often recruited for the 
construction of synthetic microbial communities to study mechanisms involved in 
the assembly of microbial communities by the plant as well as to uncover and 
explain shifts in microbiome structure and/or composition in response to specific 
changes in the system (Bai et al., 2015; Niu et al., 2017). These experimentally 
tractable, synthetic microbial communities can be used in gnotobiotic systems, 
allowing the targeted manipulation of various factors of a system in order to test 
specific hypotheses (Vorholt et al., 2017). Gnotobiotic is defined as a system in 
which all the organisms are known and all parameters defined (Wagner, 2008). For 
this reason, gnotobiotic system-based analyses often start with a sterile environment 
and controlled conditions, where known organisms are added aseptically (Simons 
et al., 1996; Wagner, 2008). This sophisticated approach enables the functional 
characterization of individual microbes within a community context and/or in the 
presence of a plant. Such approaches will increase our understanding of the 
interactions within the microbiome (Levy et al., 2018).  
The use of synthetic microbial communities in gnotobiotic systems can 
assist us in characterizing the function of microbiome members within a community 
and in association with a plant; thus, associating genotypes with phenotypes 
(Vorholt et al., 2017). This approach has enabled the identification of keystone 
microbes, the lack of which can lead to the collapse of microbiomes (Niu et al., 
2017), or their presence in the root can buffer negative effects of a microbial 
species on the plant (Hartman et al., 2017). It suggests that even individual species 
can have significant effects on microbiome dynamics and functions. This 
experimental approach can enable us to overcome ecosystem complexity and build 
fundamental knowledge on the processes within (plant) microbiomes. 
1.5 Bridging the lab-field gap 
An ultimate aim of microbiome research is to be able to use the knowledge 
gained in the laboratory, to the field; e.g. to improve agricultural ecosystem 
functioning. However, agricultural practices have a strong impact on the 
microbiome structure, diversity and function. Such effects, though, cannot be 
studied in a laboratory experimental set up. Therefore, more agriculturally relevant 
experiments are necessary to advance our understanding of microbiome and its 
functions (Sergaki et al., 2018). 
The physicochemical properties of soils, such as pH, texture, organic matter 
and nutrient content can vary largely. These soil properties can strongly affect 
microbiome structure and composition either by creating specific environmental 
niches, or by influencing plant root exudate availability and consequently, the 
microbial assembly by the plant (Lareen et al., 2016). Notably, it has been observed 
that soil types can have stronger effects on bacterial community structure than 
geographical location (Gelsomino et al., 1999) and can drive the succession and the 
stability of microbiomes in plant rhizospheres (Tkacz et al., 2015). Soil pH, 
nitrogen and phosphate availability can shift the abundance of pathogenic as well 
as beneficial microbes (Duffy et al., 1997; Dumbrell et al., 2010; Hper et al., 1995; 
Rotenberg et al., 2005). Similarly, soil microbiome structure changes with the 
addition of fertilizers (Toljander et al., 2008). It highlights the importance of 
studying the effect of soil characteristics on microbiome, gaining knowledge 
applicable in an agricultural setting. Studying plant-microbe interactions using 
approaches with increasing complexity, from the molecular level (e.g. effectome) 
to the ecosystem level (e.g. in a field setting), will allow the exploitation of these 
interactions for the improvement of crop yield and health. 
1.6 Aims of this thesis 
Microbe-microbe and plant-microbe interactions are highly complex 
systems. At the molecular level, hormones play a key role in the establishment of 
plant-microbe interactions and microbial effectors enable the manipulation of the 
host for the successful microbial establishment. The bipartite interactions between 
M. truncatula  Sinorhizobium spp and A. thaliana  S. indica are well-studied 
model systems of mutualistic plant-microbe interactions. However, microbial 
interactions in a community context are highly complex. The development of 
amplicon sequencing, along with the development of gnotobiotic system and the 
construction of synthetic microbial communities have assisted in improving our 
understanding of the factors that affect the microbiome structure and composition. 
Furthermore, this knowledge needs to be transferred to the field, studying 
agriculturally relevant factors that may affect the microbiome, and consequently 
plant performance, such as soil characteristics. This work aims to give an insight 
into these interactions using different approaches. 
This thesis consists of three chapters containing experiments and data that 
aimed at identifying strategies of S. indica to establish colonisation within the root 
(Chapter 3), plant or/microbe derived patterns that shape the root microbiome in a 
defined system (Chapter 4) as well as in natural soil types, along with exploring the 
competitiveness of beneficial root symbionts (Chapter 5). 
In more detail, in Chapter 3 potential strategies for the establishment of the 
S. indica colonisation of the plant were investigated. The effect of single putative 
effectors on auxin signalling was evaluated using a high-throughput protoplast 
screening approach followed by root growth inhibition assays of Arabidopsis plants 
expressing S. indica effectors. Basal expression of auxin related genes of those 
Arabidopsis plant lines were examined, in order to evaluate whether the expressed 
effector can regulate auxin signalling. This work aimed to identify S. indica putative 
effector proteins that affect auxin signalling as a strategy of the fungus to establish 
colonisation within the plant and potentially influence the plant-associated 
microbiome. 
Chapter 4 has a focus on the role of beneficial microbes in shaping the plant-
associated microbiome, improving plant yield. In this chapter, I employed a 
gnotobiotic system and a synthetic microbial community to study the effects of S. 
indica and Colletotrichum tofieldiae on A. thaliana growth and bacterial 
community structure. This approach aimed to reveal the effect of a single beneficial 
fungus on the core bacterial community structure and diversity of A. thaliana, and 
the consequent effect on plant growth.  
Following the reductionist approach, the work presented in Chapter 5 
intended to increase the system complexity investigating the plant-microbe 
interactions in a more agriculturally relevant experimental set up. For these 
experiments, I used three different natural UK soils, collected from agricultural 
fields, the legume Medicago truncatula and three Sinorhizobium strains. The 
purpose of these experiments was to investigate the competitiveness of 
Sinorhizobium strains in agricultural soils and their effect on plant growth, 
phytobiome, as well as the dependency of these effects on soil characteristics.  
Chapter 2: Materials and Methods 
2.1 Plant material and growth 
For the experiments with Arabidopsis thaliana the ecotype Col-0 wild type 
(Nottingham Arabidopsis Stock Centre accession N60000) was used. For the 
protoplast screening, Col-0 plants were grown in a compost/sand/vermiculite mix 
(6:1:1) for 4-5 weeks, in a growth cabinet in a 22C light/20C dark cycle (12 hours 
light). For the auxin experiments, pEG201::HA-SIE (SIE = Serendipita indica 
effector) lines were used, along with Col-0 and pAtUBQ10::HA-GFP plants as 
controls. For these experiments, seeds were sterilized with chlorine gas, by mixing 
50 ml bleach (14% v/v NaOCl in aequeous solution) and 3 ml of concentrated HCl 
(32% v/v) in a desiccator, for 4 hours. After adding 1 ml of 0.02% w/v sterile 
Phytoagar (Duchefa Biochemie) solution, seeds were sown on  MS agar plates; 
2.151 g l-1 Murashige and Skoog basal salts (M5524-10L Sigma-Aldrich), 0.5 g l-1 
2-(N-morpholino)ethanesulfonic acid (MES) hydrate, pH adjusted to 5.7 with 1 M 
KOH, and 0.7% w/v Phytoagar, and kept at 4C in the dark for 2 days before 
transferring them to growth cabinet in a 22C light/20C dark cycle (12 hours light).  
For the Arabidopsis microbiome experiments, seeds were sterilised in a 
NaOCl solution. To this end, seeds were first mixed with H2O 0.02% Tween20, 
which was then replaced by 70% ethanol. Seeds were then incubated for 5 min in 1 
ml of a 3% v/v NaOCl solution and then washed thoroughly 7 times with sterile 
water. At the end of the sterilization, the seeds were left in sterile 0.2% w/v Gelrite 
(Duchefa Biochemie) solution. Seeds were sown on squared petri dishes containing 
ATS (Arabidopsis thaliana salts) medium (Lincoln, 1990) supplemented with 4.5 
g l-1 Gelrite and kept at 4C in the dark for 2 days before transferring them to a 
growth cabinet at 20C and 10 hours light, 14 hours dark. 
For the experiments with Medicago truncatula, the ecotype Jemalong A17 
wild type was used. Seeds were scarified with concentrated sulfuric acid for 20-30 
min and washing three times with water. This was followed by sterilisation in 7% 
v/v NaOCl for 5 min and washed 8 times with sterile water. Seeds were then placed 
on 1.5% phytoagar plates and hydrated by the sequential addition of three droplets 
of water. To provide high humidity, sterile wet growth pouches were placed in the 
lids of the square plates. Plates were kept at 4C in the dark for 4 days before they 
were transferred to a growth cabinet at 25C in the dark for 2 more days. Seeds 
were then transferred to pots containing autoclaved sterile perlite (Sinclair Pro) 
covered with a thin layer of sterile vermiculite (Sinclair Pro) to maintain humidity, 
grown at 24C light/22C dark cycle (16 hours light).  
For the experiments in perlite, Medicago trancatula genotype Jemalong 
A17 plants were inoculated 1 day after being transferred to the pots. Fresh shoot 
weight and the fungal colonisation were quantified 49 days after inoculation (dai) 
(corresponding to 52 day old plants). 
For the microbiome experiments, Medicago trancatula genotype Jemalong 
A17 plants were inoculated 1 day after being transferred to the pots, and they were 
left in perlite for 11 days more. Watering was performed on demand using nutrient 
solution (0.5 mM MgSO4*7H2O, 0.7 mM KH2PO4, 0.8 mM Na2HPO4*2H2O, 20 
M FeNaEDTA, 8 M MnSO4*H2O, 4 M CuSO4*5H2O, 7.34 M ZnSO4*7H2O, 
16 M H3BO3, 4.13 M Na2MoO4, 1 mM CaCl2, pH to 6.5) without N. Seedlings 
were then transferred to the pots containing the natural soil types. 7cmx7cm (fp7) 
pots had been filled with the soils and bottom watered with RO (Reverse Osmosis) 
water. 8 technical repetitions were set up per treatment and soil type. To identify 
the best sampling time point, shoot dry weight was measured 46, 56, 63 and 70 dai 
(49, 59, 66 and 73 day old plants respectively). Quantification of fungal 
colonisation was done 56 dai (59 day old plants). Samples for microbiome analysis 
were taken 63 dai (66 day old plants).  
2.2 Microbial strains, growth conditions and inoculation 
Serendipita indica (formerly Piriformospora indica, German collection of 
microorganisms and cell cultures Deutsche Sammlung fr Mikroorganismen und 
Zellkulturen, DSMZ, Braunschweig, Germany, accession number DSM 11827) 
was grown on Complex Medium (CM) (Pham et al., 2008) for 8-10 weeks, at 25C 
in the dark. S. indica spore suspension was prepared as in Banhara et al. (2015a), 
counted under the light microscope using a counting chamber and diluted in sterile 
milliQ water at the concentration of 500,000 spores/ml. For the Arabidopsis 
microbiome experiments, the bacterial collection from (Bai et al., 2015) was used. 
200 bacteria were grown at 20C in 96 well plates with 50% Tryptic Soy Broth 
(Sigma-Aldrich) and pooled together (in equal ratios), creating in this way the 
synthetic community (SynCom). The synthetic community was adjusted to OD600 
0.5 and 1 ml (approx. 108 cells) was added to 50 ml of  MS media (including 
vitamins).  
Sinorhizobium meliloti strains WSM1022 and WSM1021 and 
Sinorhizobium medicae WSM419 were kindly donated by Jason Terpolilli 
(Murdoch University, Perth, Australia). They were grown in TY (Tryptone  yeast 
extract) medium (5 g l-1 tryptone, 3g/l yeast extract, 4.766g/l HEPES, pH 7 with 
KOH, 6 ml l-1 1 M CaCl2 added after autoclaving) at 28C for 2 days. 100 mg l-1 
streptomycin was used to select for WSM1021, and 20 mg l-1chloramphenicol for 
WSM419 and WSM1022. For the plant inoculation, the rhizobia strains were grown 
overnight in liquid TY, at 28C and 220 rpm shaking. Rhizobia were then harvested 
by centrifugation at 2880 x g for 10 min at 4C, washed 3 times with sterile water 
to get rid of any nutrients and antibiotics from the media, before they were 
resuspended to a final OD600 of 0.05 in sterile milliQ water. 
The co-inoculation of Serendipita indica with Sinorhizobium meliloti 
strains was performed using a mix of both microbes. The bacterial culture was 
centrifuged at 2880 x g for 10 min at 4C and the supernatant was replaced with 
equal volume of the spore suspension. After mixing appropriately, each plant was 
inoculated from the top into the perlite using a pipette, with 250 l of the 
suspension.  
2.3 Protoplast-based luciferase reporter assay 
For the isolation of protoplasts, leaves from 24 plants were sliced into 1 mm 
strips and transferred into 6 ml of enzyme solution (20 mM MES pH 5.7, 0.4 M 
mannitol, 20 mM KCl, 1.5% w/v cellulase R10 (Duchefa Biochemie), 0.4% w/v 
macerozyme R10 (Duchefa Biochemie) in a 5.5 cm petri dish. The enzyme solution 
was vacuum infiltrated into the tissue twice at -0.8 bar for 5 minutes, before 
incubation at 25C for 3 hours. After the incubation the protoplasts were filtered 
through a 70 m nylon filter into a 50 ml falcon tube and rinsed with the 6 ml 
volume of W5 washing solution (2 mM MES, pH 5.7, 154 mM NaCl, 125 mM 
CaCl2, 5 mM KCl, autoclaved). The cells were then centrifuged at 100 x g for 2 
minutes at 4C, the supernatant was discarded, and protoplasts resuspended in the 
12 ml of cold W5 solution (4C). Protoplasts were centrifuged again and 
resuspended in MMG solution (4 mM MES, pH 5.7, 0.4 M mannitol, 15 mM 
MgCl2, autoclaved). The number of protoplasts was determined using a Fuchs-
Rosenthal haemacytometer and adjusted to 330,000 protoplasts per ml in MMG 
solution. The DNA mix used for the transformation consisted of 1 g each of 
plasmids pGH3.3::LUC (ABRC, CD3-913), pAtUBQ10::GUS (Abel and 
Theologis, 1994), and pEG201::HA-SIE (SIE construct) (Earley et al., 2006), or the 
empty vector pAtUBQ10::HA-GFP (Abel and Theologis, 1994) as control. The SIE 
sequences were synthesised by LifeTech Scientific and cloned into the pEG201 
using the Gateway system (Earley et al., 2006) by members of P. Schfer group 
(University of Warwick). All plasmids extracted from Escherichia coli liquid 
cultures (grown overnight in Luria broth, 37C, 100 rpm shaking) using the 
ZymoPURE Plasmid Midiprep Kit (Zymo Research). The DNA was mixed with 30 
l of the protoplast solution (around 10,000 cells), and 33 l of freshly prepared 
transfection solution (40% w/v PEG 4000, 0.2 M mannitol, 100 mM CaCl2,) in 
order to start the transformation. The cells were then shaken at 1000 rpm on an 
orbital shaker for 1 min, incubated at room temperature for 15 minutes. The 
transformation was stopped by adding 170 l of W5 solution and incubating the 
mix at 1000 rpm for 1 minute. The cells were spun down for 1 minute at 100 x g, 
before 160 l of the supernatant were removed and cells were resuspended in 140 
l of WI solution (4 mM MES, pH 5.7, 0.5 M mannitol, 20 mM KCl, autoclaved) 
upon shaking at 1000 rpm for 1 minute. The transformed cells were incubated 
overnight in a growth cabinet at 22C, 12 hours light/12 hours dark.  
On the next day, the protoplasts were spun down at 100 x g for 2 min, and 
100 l of the supernatant were removed. The protoplasts were then treated with the 
synthetic auxin 1-Naphthaleneacetic acid (NAA, 500 nM final concentration) or 
water as control. For the luciferase reporter assay, white 96-well 0.5 ml 
polypropylene plates (Nunc #267350) were used. 10 l of the treated protoplasts 
were pipetted into each well and 20 l of the Beetle Luciferin luciferase substrate 
(Promega, #E1602) was added. Measurements were taken with a Photek camera 
and the LUC activity data were extracted from the images with the Image32 
software (Photek), as relative light units (RLU). After that, 100 l of 1x lysis buffer 
(Luciferase Assay System, Promega # E1500) were added, and protoplasts were 
shaken at room temperature at 1000 rpm for 30 sec. For the GUS (-glucuronidase) 
assay, 10 l of the lysate were pipetted into each well of a transparent flat bottom 
96-well plate and 100 l of GUS substrate (1 mM 4-methylumbelliferyl-beta-D-
dglucuronide (MUG), 10 mM Tris-HCl pH 8, 2 mM MgCl2) were added. The mix 
was incubated at 37C for 1 hour and fluorescence measurements taken using a 
TECAN GENios microplate reader (Tecan Life Sciences AG) (excitation filter 360 
nm, emission filter 465 nm) equipped with the Magellan software (version 
Standard, Tecan Life Sciences AG). The Magellan software measures the GUS 
activity as relative light units (RLU) for each well in the 96-well plate, which is 
used for further analysis. 
2.4 Analysis of protoplast-based luciferase reporter assay data 
For the data analysis the luminescence values of the activity of the promoter 
in the control treatment was compared with the auxin treatment, as well as the 
values of the empty vector with those of the effectors. All luminescence values were 
normalised using the data from the GUS assay, by dividing the LUC values by the 
corresponding GUS (and then multiplied with a high factor to get values in a similar 
range as the raw data). 
For the selection of the best candidates, the ratio of the difference in the 
normalised LUC expression of the effector to that of the empty vector (eV) in the 
mock treatment was multiplied by the ratio of the difference of the normalised LUC 
expression of the effector to that of the empty vector (eV) under the NAA 
treatments:  
2.5 Auxin tests 
Arabidopsis plants were grown on  MS plates as described in 2.1 for 7 
days and then transferred to  MS plates containing 40 nM indole-3-acetic acid 
(IAA) in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or DMSO as control (3.2 l in 800 ml MS). 
7 days later, pictures of the whole plate were taken and the primary root length was 
measured using the ImageJ software (https://imagej.net).  
2.6 RNA extraction, cDNA synthesis, qPCR 
Frozen plant tissue samples were ground using a Tissue Lyser (QIAGEN) 
at 25 Hz for 1 min on each side. The frozen ground material were kept on ice and 1 
mL Trizol was added to them and were vortexed thoroughly. Then, 200 l 
chloroform was added and samples were vortexed for 15 sec. Samples were 
incubated on ice for 2-3 mins and then centrifugated for 30 mins at 13000 rpm at 
4C. The colourless supernatant (approximately 400 l, avoiding the gDNA-
containing interphase) was transferred into a 1.5 mL RNase-free microcentrifuge 
tube containing 500 l isopropanol. RNA was precipitated overnight at -20C. 
Precipitated RNA was pelleted by centrifugation at 13000 rpm for 50 min at 4C. 
The supernatant was discarded and the pellet washed in 75% ethanol. The ethanol 
was removed and the pellet dried for 5 mins on ice, before being resuspended in 
10-30 l nuclease-free water. The samples were vortexed, incubated at 35C for 10 
mins and RNA concentration was measured using NanoDrop (ThermoFisher 
Scientific). 
Genomic DNA was removed from samples using a DNase digest prior to 
cDNA synthesis. The reaction mix per sample for this process was: 2 g sample 
RNA, 2 l 10x reaction buffer with MgCl2, 2 l DNase I (1 U/l, Thermo 
SIE normalised LUC 
expression in mock
eV normalised LUC 
expression in mock
SIE normalised LUC 
expression in NAA treatment
eV normalised LUC 
expression in NAA treatment
xRanking ratio =
Scientific), 0.5 l Ribolock RNase inhibitor (40 U/l, Thermo Scientific), made up 
to total volume of 20 l with nuclease-free water. The mix was incubated at 37C 
for 30 mins in a thermal cycler, before the addition of 2 l of 50 mM EDTA 
(Thermo Scientific) and a further 10 min incubation at 65C, to inactivate the 
DNase. RNA concentration was re-measured by Nanodrop. 
cDNA synthesis was performed using Quanta Biosciences qScript cDNA 
Synthesis Kit (#95047-100). The reaction mix per sample for this process was: 1 
g DNase-treated RNA, 4 l 5x qScript Reaction Mix, 1 l qScript Reverse 
Transcriptase, made up to total volume of 20 l with nuclease-free water. Samples 
were incubated in a thermal cycler for 5 mins at 25C, 30 mins at 24C, 4 mins at 
85C, then held at 8C. The resulting cDNA was diluted to 5 ng/l with 
H2Obidest and stored at -20C. 
For quantifying transcriptional expression of genes, qPCR was performed. 
The reaction mix per sample for this process was: 8 l SYBR Green JumpStart Taq 
ReadyMix (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.4 l forward primer, 0.4 l reverse primer, 2 l DNA 
template, 9.2 l MilliQ water was used. Each sample tested with each primer pair 
in triplicate (technical replicates). For the quantification of Arabidopsis thaliana 
UBQ5, the primers used were 5  ATGACTCGCCATGAAAGTCC as forward 
and 5  ATGACTCGCCATGAAAGTCC as reverse (Jacobs et al., 2011). The 
primers for the auxin-responsive genes GH3.3 (AT2G23170) and IAA5 
(AT1G15580) were 5- GGAGATTCAACGTATTGCCA as a forward primer and 
5  GGTTGGCATCAACTTCCTTT as reverse for GH3.3 and 5- 
CGTTGAAGGAAAGTGAATGTG as a forward primer and 5  
ATCCAAGGAACATTTCCCAA as reverse for IAA5. The primers were designed 
to bind on the exons of the sequences. The PCR reaction was performed using a 
thermocycler Agilent Technologies Stratagene Mx3005P, with : 5 minutes at 95C, 
40 cycles of [15 sec at 95C, 30 sec at 60C, 30 sec at 72C], followed by 1 min at 
95C, 10 sec at 55C, 10 sec at 95C. Gene expression for the gene of interest in 
each sample was normalised against UBQ5 expression by calculating the mean 2-
DCT across each triplicate, where DCT is the difference between the CT value 
of UBQ5 in the sample and the CT value of the gene of interest. Fold change from 
the mock treatment was calculated using the 2-DDCT method (Schmittgen and Livak, 
2008). 
2.7 Quantification of fungal colonisation using qPCR 
For the quantification of fungal colonisation, genomic DNA was extracted 
from roots using the Doyle and Doyle method for rapid DNA isolation (Doyle and 
Doyle, 1987). This DNA was used as a template for qRT-PCR which was 
conducted as described above (section 2.6). The primers used for the quantification 
of S. indica ITS were 5- CAACACATGTGCACGTCGAT as a forward primer and 
5  CCAATGTGCATTCAGAACGA as reverse (Deshmukh et al., 2006a). For the 
quantification of Arabidopsis thaliana UBQ5, the primers used were 5  
CCAAGCCGAAGAAGATCAAG as forward and 5  
ATGACTCGCCATGAAAGTCC as reverse (Jacobs et al., 2011). For the 
quantification of Medicago truncatula Medtr6g084690 (PDF2), the primers used 
were 5  GATCAAGAATTGGCGTTGGT as forward and 5  
TAGGCGACCATCTGACATTG as reverse (Jacobs et al., 2011). For the 
quantification of the DNA a reaction mix containing 8 l SYBR Green JumpStart 
Taq ReadyMix (Sigma-Aldrich), 0.4 l forward primer, 0.4 l reverse primer, 2 l 
DNA template, 9.2 l MilliQ water was used. Each sample tested with each primer 
pair in triplicate (technical replicates). The PCR reaction was performed using a 
thermocycler Agilent Technologies Stratagene Mx3005P, with : 5 minutes at 95C, 
40 cycles of 15 sec at 95C, 30 sec at 60C, 30 sec at 72C, 1 min at 95C, 10 sec 
at 55C, 10 sec at 95C. The amount of fungal DNA as the expression of ITS was 
normalised against the UBQ5 gene quantity for Arabidopsis samples and PDF2 for 
Medicago samples, was determined by the 2-DDCT method (Schmittgen and Livak, 
2008). 
2.8 Arabidopsis thaliana microbiome preparation, sampling and 
processing 
Arabidopsis plants were inoculated with S. indica spore suspension, C. 
tolfidiae mycelium (Hiruma et al., 2016), or sterile water 3 days after germination, 
and 2 days after inoculation were transferred into the sterile Flowpots system 
(Kremer et al., 2018). The soil (peat)/vermiculite mix used in the system was 
washed with water, sterilized twice by autoclaving and was incubated at 65C until 
being completely dehydrated. The Flowpots were prepared as in Durn et al., 2018, 
using microbial strains as reported in Bai et al., 2015. Two seedlings were placed 
in each flowpot and 6 flowpots in each box (24 seedlings were used for the microbe 
free samples and 36 seedlings for all the rest treatments). The plants were kept at 
22 C, 11 hours light/13 hours dark, and 54% humidity for 6 weeks. The seedlings 
were then extracted from the pot, washed in washing buffer (1x TE + 0.1% Triton 
X-100) and flash frozen in Lysing Matrix E and in liquid nitrogen. Bulk soil was 
sampled in Lysing Matrix E (MP Biomedicals, Fisher Scientific) in liquid nitrogen. 
The fresh weight of the plant shoot was measured. 
Three samples fractions were used in the experiment. Input culture is the 
mix of all the microbes inoculated as the core microbiome. As matrix is referred 
the bulk soil, sampled away from the roots and as root is defined the plant root 
endosphere and rhizosphere, after the removal of all soil particles attached to it.  
2.9 Arabidopsis thaliana microbiome library preparation 
The Lysing Matrix E tubes with the samples were homogenized at 5,600 
rpm for 30 seconds using Precellys 24 tissue lyzer (Bertin Technologies, Montigny-
le-Bretonneux, France), and DNA was extracted from all samples using the 
FastDNA SPIN Kit for soil (MP Biomedicals) according to the manufacturers 
instructions. The DNA concentrations were measured using PicoGreen dsDNA 
Assay Kit (Life technologies) and diluted to 3.5 ng/l. Bacterial 16S rRNA genes 
were amplified using V4V7 region of bacterial 16S rRNA with the primers 799F 
5 - ACGTCATCCCCACCTTCC and 1192R 5  
CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGAT (Durn et al., 2018). The Fungal ITS 
region was amplified with the primer pair fITS7 5 - 
GTGARTCATCGAATCTTTG and ITS4 5  TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC 
(Durn et al., 2018). Each sample was amplified in duplicate by two independent 
PCR mixtures (plus respective no template controls). For the PCR BIORON DFS-
Taq was used (including 3% BSA). For the PCR program 55C annealing 
temperature was used for 30 sec and 1 min elongation time. After the PCR, the 
replicates of each sample were pooled together for the cleaning procedure. Per 
sample, 1 l of Antarctic phosphatase was used, 1 l of Exo I and 2.44 l of 
Antarctic phosphatase Buffer. The mix was incubated at 37C for 30 minutes, 
followed by 15 minutes at 85C to deactivate the enzymes. The samples were then 
centrifuged for 10 minutes at 3000 rpm and the supernatant was transferred to a 
new plate for the second PCR. This reaction was set up and run in the same as the 
first one, but with unique barcodes (as in Durn et al., 2018) for each sample 
attached on the forward primer. The duplicates of each sample were combined and 
the final product was then purified with Agencourt AMpure XP (Beckman Coulter), 
following the manufacturers instructions, quantified with PicoGreen 
(ThermoFisher Scientific). All the samples were pooled together in a tube and 
quantified with Qubit. The DNA was then adjusted to 200 ng/l and diluted to 1:2, 
1:10, 1;100. The libraries were subjected to MiSeq paired-end sequencing using 
Nextera XT 300bp amplicon size.  
2.10 Medicago truncatula microbiome experiment preparation, 
sampling and processing 
For the Medicago truncatula microbiome experiments, the seedlings after 
germination on agar plates (as described at 2.1), were transferred to sterile FP9 pots 
with sterile perlite, covered with a 0.5 cm layer of sterile vermiculite on the top, 
wet with nutrient solution (CaCl2 2H2O 6 mM, KH2PO4 1 mM, FeC6H5O7 75 M, 
MgSO4 7H2O 1 mM, K2SO4 0.25 mM, MnSO4 H2O 6 M, H3BO3 20 M, ZnSO4 
7H2O 1 M, CuSO4 5H2O 0.5 M, CoSO4 7H2O 0.05 M, Na2MoO4 2H2O 0.1 M, 
NH3NO3 0.1mM) at 24C light/22C dark cycle (16 hours light). One day later the 
seedlings were individually inoculated with 250 l of rhizobia inoculum prepared 
as described at 2.2 11 days after inoculation, the seedlings were transferred into 
individual sterile FP9 pots with the different soil types. 63 days after inoculation, 
plants were harvested; above ground tissue was collected, dried at 65C for 3 days 
and weighed. The below ground tissue was harvested in falcon tubes to be 
processed for the construction of microbiome libraries. Bulk soil samples were 
obtained before the start and after the end of the experiment. Roots were processed 
in pairs; 2 individual roots were pooled together as one microbiome sample. 4 
samples per sample type were collected for every biological replicate and the 
experiment was performed 4 times (4 biological replicates, 4 technical replicates 
each, 16 samples per sample type in total). All the roots close to the surface, the 
bottom and the sides of the pot were removed, in order to keep only the core root 
tissue in the middle of the pot, which should be the least affected by the 
environment. The root samples were then thoroughly washed with sterile water in 
a sterile hood and the first wash was centrifuged at 4,000 x g for 15 min, in order 
to concentrate the rhizospheric soil. Supernatant was carefully discarded and 500 
l of the pellet was collected into a Lysing Matrix E (MP Biomedicals) tube and 
flash frozen in liquid nitrogen as the rhizospheric sample. The roots were further 
washed with 3ml of washing buffer (1x TE + 0.1% Triton X-100) and 3 times with 
sterile water. They were then cut in small pieces with sterile scissors and transferred 
into the matrix tube and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen as the endospheric sample. 
For this study, 5 different sample types/fractions were used; input soil, 
unplanted soil, soil, rhizosphere and endosphere. The input soil sample was 
collected at the start of each experiment, before transferring the plants to the soil. 
The unplanted soil came from soil pots grown without a plant alongside with the 
planted pots, in order to capture the influence of the plant. The bulk soil is referred 
as soil, sampled away from the roots, as rhizosphere (rhizo) the microbes at the 
surface of the root and as root associated (endo) the inside of the root, clean from 
all the microbes on the surface of the root.  
2.11 Medicago truncatula microbiome library preparation 
The Lysing Matrix E tubes with the samples were homogenized at 5,600 
rpm for 30 seconds using Precellys 24 tissue lyzer (Bertin Technologies, Montigny-
le-Bretonneux, France), and DNA was extracted from all samples using the 
FastDNA SPIN Kit for soil (MP Biomedicals) according to the manufacturers 
instructions. The DNA concentrations were measured using PicoGreen dsDNA 
Assay Kit (Life Technologies) and diluted to 5 ng/l. The libraries were constructed 
using 2-step PCR using Q5 Hot Start High-Fidelity DNA Polymerase (NEB) and 
10-20 ng of DNA template. The taxa primers used for the first PCR, for the 
amplification of bacterial 16S (341f/785r (region V3-V4)) were 341f 5  
CCTACGGGNGGCWGCAG and 785r 5  GACTACHVGGGTATCTAATCC 
(Thijs et al., 2017) and for the fungal ITS2 region, ITS4 5  
GTGAATCATCGAATCTTTGAA and ITS86F 5  
TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC (Op De Beeck et al., 2014). For the PCR program, 
53C annealing temperature and 25 cycles were used for bacteria, 55C and 35 
cycles for fungi and 20 sec elongation time for both. The PCR product was run in 
1.2% agarose gel and cleaned up with Agencourt AMpure XP (Beckman Coulter) 
following the manufacturers instructions. The second (Index) PCR was performed 
using the Illumina index primers as listed at Table S2.1. For the PCR program, 
55C, 15 sec elongation and 8 cycles. The PCR product was cleaned using 
SequalPrep Normalization Plate (96) Kit (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Catalog 
number A1051001). All samples were pooled together and quantified using 
NEBNext Library Quant Kit for Illumina (NEB), according to the manufacturers 
manual. The libraries were subjected to MiSeq paired-end sequencing using 
Nextera XT 300bp amplicon size. 
2.12 Analysis of microbiome sequencing data 
2.12.1 Raw data analysis 
The reads from the MiSeq run were processed using Trimmomatic (Bolger 
et al., 2014) trimming at the quality level of Q15 reads for Arabidopsis microbiome 
data and Q20 for the Medicago microbiome. The sequencing data were processed 
using Qiime1 (Caporaso et al., 2010), UPARSE (Edgar, 2013) and USEARCH 
(Edgar, 2010) and taxonomy was assigned using the Greengenes database 
(DeSantis et al., 2006; McDonald et al., 2012). The number of raw reads, filtered 
reads and the number of reads at the OTU table level are shown on Table S2.2.  The 
reads at the end of the raw data analysis were rarefied (normalised all samples to 
the same total number of reads) at 2400 reads for the Arabidopsis bacterial 
community, 2000 for the Arabidopsis fungal community, 1000 for Medicago 
bacterial community and 5000 reads for the fungal community, in order to be able 
to compare the samples (Weiss et al., 2017). This process may lead to the loss of 
low abundant and rare microbiome reads, but it is suitable for analysing and 
understanding big changes in the microbiome, rather than focusing to the taxa that 
are present in very low numbers in the samples (McMurdie and Holmes, 2014). The 
statistical analysis was performed using Qiime1 and Past3 (Hammer et al., 2001). 
The full pipeline of all the downstream analysis is presented at Figure 2.1. 
2.12.2 Alpha () and beta () diversity 
The OTU table with the rarefied reads was used to calculate the alpha () 
diversity as a measure of OTU richness, using Observed OTUs and Shannon Index 
as measure of within-sample diversity (Sepkoski, 1988). The OTU table was also 
used for the calculation of the beta () diversity, which is the between samples 
diversity (Sepkoski, 1988). The Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix was used for all 
the downstream analysis, as well as for the calculation of the community beta 
diversity. The Bray-Curtis dissimilarity matrix was used for the Principles 
Coordinate Analysis (PCoA). Plotting the first two axis of the PCoA revealed the 
between-samples diversity, which shows whether the microbiome of each sample 
differ from the rest (Beals, 1984).  
2.12.3 Statistics - Significance tests 
The significance of the differences for alpha diversity was tested using 
ANOVA followed by Tukeys Honest Significant Difference test (HSD), and for 
beta diversity. The significance of the differences was tested using analysis of 
similarities (ANOSIM) using the Bray-Curtis similarity index or. ANOSIM 
generates an R value between 0 and 1, with 0 being the null hypothesis (the samples 
are indifferent), and 1 representing high dissimilarity among the samples (Chapman 
and Underwood, 1999), along with a p value that quantifies the significance of those 
differences. The contribution of the different taxa to the observed microbial 
community differences was assessed using the rarefied OTU table along with the 
assigned taxonomy and the Similarity Percentages (SIMPER) Analysis (K. R. 
Clarke, 1993) using the Bray-Curtis similarity index. The differentially enriched 
OTUs were calculated using the Kruskal-Wallis test in order to reveal the taxa that 
are significantly enriched or depleted in the different treatments or sample types.  
2.12.4 Pearsons correlations 
Pearsons correlation was used to find correlation between soil and plant 
chemical characteristics, aboveground dry weight, bacterial and fungal alpha 
diversity (Mari et al., 2016). The R value of 1 indicates strong positive correlation, 
-1 strong negative correlation and 0 indicates no correlation. The p value indicates 
the significance of the correlation.  
2.12.5 Canonical Correspondence Analysis (CCA) 
Chemical soil and plant characteristics were associated with the fungal and 
the bacterial community structure using the Canonical Correspondence analysis 
(CCA) which reveals the relationship between the ordination of the OTUs matrix 
and the environmental variables (Gonzalez et al., 2015). The Canonical 
Correspondence analysis was calculated using Past3 (Hammer et al., 2001). CCA 
is similar to PCoA, as it uses ordination matrix but includes Pearsons correlations 
of the environmental variables with the clusters of the microbiome samples 
(Gonzalez et al., 2015). Here, the environmental variables are represented by lines, 
with the direction of the line indicating increase of that variable and the length 
representing the strength of the correlation. The position of the sample points in 
respect to the lines of the variables represent their association. Using this approach, 
it was possible to unravel the effects of S. meliloti 1022 on the plant microbiome 
and its correlation with changes of the plant aboveground nutrients. 
Figure 2.1: Infographic of microbiome analysis pipeline. 
2.13 Soil collection and nutrient content analysis 
The soils for Chapter 5 were collected from the locations given by the 
following GPS coordinates: high NP soil 5250'25.2"N 001'48.8"W 52.840334, -
0.030209, low N high P soil 5212'22.0"N 136'21.7"W 52.206114, -1.606030, low 
NP soil 5212'33.3"N 136'27.5"W 52.209239, -1.607634. For the collection of the 
low NP and low N high P soil the top 20 cm of soil was removed, as those hadnt 
been ploughed. The soil collection of the high NP was performed on ploughed soil. 
The soils were kept at 4C. 
Soil and plant sample preparation and analysis was performed by the 
postdoctoral researcher Dr. Beatriz Lagunas, from Dr Miriam Giffords group 
(University of Warwick) at the University of Nottingham. Soil and plant samples 
were dried previous to any analysis at 80C for 24h. Soil samples were sieved 
through a 2mm sieve and ground with mortar and pestle. Plant samples were ground 
1. Raw data analysis
2. Alpha diversity
3. Beta diversity
6. Enriched OTUs
QIIME/
VSEARCH
OTU abundance 
and taxonomy
QIIME / R
QIIME / R
QIIME
OTU richness 
and evenness
Bray-Curtis 
dissimilarity/ PCoA
Kruskal-Wallis 
Observed OTUs 
Shannon Index
Between samples 
diversity
Within sample 
diversity
Significantly different 
taxa between samples
ANALYSIS SOFTWARE
7. Pearsons correlations
RESULT
Past3
Correlations 
between variables
8. Canonical 
Correspondence Analysis
QIIME / 
Past3
Relationship between ordination of species 
matrix and environmental variables
4. ANOSIM Past3
Analysis of 
similarities
Samples significantly 
different
5. SIMPER Past3
Similarities 
percentages
Contribution of microbial 
taxa to the differences
Microbiome 
composition
using stainless steel grinding jars (Qiagen). pH and conductivity were measured on 
2mm soil samples incubated with distilled water (5 g on 12.5 ml) after shaking for 
30 minutes using a combined pH electrode. 
Multi elemental analysis was performed by Induced Coupled Plasma Mass 
Spectrometry (ICP-MS; Thermo-Fisher Scientific iCAP-Q; Thermo Fisher 
Scientific, Bremen, Germany; University of Nottingham). For the soil sample 
preparation, a full hydrofluoric-perchloric-nitric acid digestion was used on 0.2g 
of ground soil using Certified Reference Material  2711a (Montana II soil) 
(Sigma-Aldrich) as control. For the plant sample preparation, we used a 
microwave-facilitated nitric acid digestion on 0.2g of ground plant tissue using 
Certified Reference Material  1573a (Tomato leaves) (Sigma-Aldrich). 
 The main inorganic anions (nitrate and phosphate) were analysed in soil 
samples using a Thermo Scientific Dionex ICS-1100 Ion Chromatography System, 
University of Nottingham. Soil extraction was performed using 30 ml milliQ water 
on 3 g of 2mm soil shaking overnight at room temperature. Samples were then 
centrifuged at 2000rpm for 10min. The supernatant was filtered through a 0.2 m 
filter and kept at 4C until analysed. 
Total Carbon and Nitrogen analysis was performed by total combustion 
using a LECO Trumac CN/N determinator. 0.5g of ground soil or plant material 
were weighed into a ceramic boat and loaded into the furnace of the instrument set 
at 1350C.  
Chapter 3: Serendipita indica effector proteins as a 
strategy to establish a compatible root environment 
3.1 Introduction 
An important part of plant-microbe interactions is the manipulation of plant 
hormone pathways by microbes. Changes in plant hormones, in combination with 
other signalling pathways, can regulate physiological responses (Davies, 2010), 
plant (systemic) resistance and interplant communication (Xu et al., 2018). 
Therefore, the ability of microbes to manipulate these signals within a plant not 
only allows them to colonise plants but also confers them a competitive advantage 
for getting access to valuable plant resources. 
The phytohormone auxin (e.g. indole acetic acid, IAA) is involved in a large 
variety of developmental processes in plants (Vanneste and Friml, 2009), as well 
as in the establishment of the interaction between microbes and their host plants 
(Barker and Tagu, 2000; Vadassery et al., 2008). Auxin holds an instrumental role 
in orchestrating processes in plant development and adaptive growth (Naser and 
Shani, 2016), cell division and enlargement, organ development (Kopittke, 2016), 
as well as in stress responses and defence mechanisms (Egamberdieva et al., 2017; 
Kazan and Manners, 2009). The suppression of auxin signalling has been linked 
with antimicrobial activity (Fu et al., 2011; Navarro et al., 2006). In addition, it has 
been shown that growth-promoting microbes can directly or indirectly (e.g. via 
nitric oxide) change IAA biosynthetic and signalling pathways in plants to interfere 
with the plant metabolism (Creus et al., 2005; Molina-Favero et al., 2008; Spaepen 
et al., 2007). Overall this indicates the significance of auxin in the establishment of 
plant-microbe interactions and explains why a diversity of microbes would target 
auxin metabolism and/or signalling.  
Microorganisms can produce IAA as a tool to influence the internal auxin 
levels of the plant and induce the plant signal accordingly, as a strategy to establish 
colonisation within the plant (Tudzynski and Sharon, 2013; Yang et al., 2007). 
Notably, an IAA-overexpressing mutant of the ectomycorhizza Hebeloma 
cylindrosporum was found to colonise plant roots faster and deeper than the wild 
strain, as well as triggering faster transcriptional response by the plant (Pinus 
pinaster) (Charvet-Candela et al., 2002; Reddy et al., 2006; Tranvan et al., 2000). 
Hilbert et al. (2012) showed that S. indica gene PiTam1 holds a key role in 
establishing the biotrophic interaction of the fungus with the plant, but the lack of 
it did not compromise the growth promotion effect, suggesting additional 
mechanisms involved in this plant  microbe interaction. In more detail, they 
demonstrated that S. indica can produce the phytohormones indole3acetic acid 
(IAA) and indole3lactate (ILA). The production of these phytohormones is 
involved in the successful establishment of the fungus in the roots, with the gene 
PiTam1 having a key role in their production. Therefore, microbially-produced IAA 
is a strategy for microbes to influence plants auxin signalling pathway, as this 
pathway plays a key role in microbial establishment within the root.  
Since auxin has a key role in the establishment of microbes in the root, 
microbes have developed additional strategies to affect plant auxin signalling 
pathway, besides the production of IAA. For example, the well-studied 
Pseudomonas syringae Type III effector AvrRpt2 has been found to alter the plant 
auxin signalling pathway in order to establish its colonisation (Chen et al., 2007; 
Cui et al., 2013). In particular, Cui et al. (2013) found that the effector AvrRpt2 
promotes pathogenicity via the stimulation of the Aux/IAA protein turnover, 
important negative regulators in the plant auxin signalling pathway. Interestingly, 
AvrRpt2 is not the only P. syringae effector that possesses this ability, but other 
effectors demonstrated a similar activity, indicating that this may be a general 
ability among pathogenic bacteria. Similar activity has been observed also from 
rhizosphere-associated, plant growth promoting microbes (Kunkel and Harper, 
2018). Specifically, van Puyvelde et al. (2011) demonstrated the secretion of 
effectors by plant growth promoting Azospirillum brasilense in the presence of 
auxin, as an adaptation mechanism of the microbe to the plant root. Taken together, 
microbial effectors give a competitive advantage to the microbes, enabling their 
establishment within the plant tissue via the manipulation of the plant auxin 
signalling.  
The role of plant hormones in the interaction with the fungus S. indica has 
been well studied and reviewed (Arma et al., 2012; Gill et al., 2016; Xu et al., 2018). 
These reviews highlight alterations of the plant hormone levels for IAA, cytokinin 
(CK) and gibberellins (GA) that are associated with increased plant growth and 
yield, while changes in abscisic acid (ABA), ethylene (ET) and salicylic acid (SA) 
upon fungal colonisation enhance plant stress tolerance. The observed growth 
promoting effect in various host plants by S. indica could be due to reprogramming 
of auxin signalling. Microbe-associated plant phenotypes such as auxin-induced 
root branching would be beneficial for plants as well as it can facilitate nutrient 
acquisition in soil (Lee et al., 2011; Shen et al., 2018). There has been research into 
possible S. indica-derived factors that may be responsible for the effective 
interaction and manipulation of host plants aiming to unravel the mechanisms of 
action evolved and employed by the fungus (Sirrenberg et al., 2007). These factor 
can be bioactive metabolites such as auxins (Sirrenberg et al., 2007) or fungal 
effector proteins (Rafiqi et al., 2013).  
Microbial effectors are proteins that are transferred into the plant cells by 
the fungus and physically interact with molecules  targets of plant pathways 
(Boller and He, 2009; Dodds and Rathjen, 2010; Mukhtar et al., 2011). S. indica 
putative effectors were found to represent 10% of the fungal genes induced during 
the barley-fungus interaction (386 genes) (Zuccaro et al., 2011). Rafiqi et al. (2013) 
studied the secretome of S. indica, with special focus on the effectors, highlighting 
the important role they seem to hold in the S. indica  plant interaction. They 
predicted S. indica putative effectors with certain function, e.g. protease or chitin-
binding, which are known to contribute to fungal virulence, using whole genome 
sequencing of the fungus along with the use of in silico analysis. However, these 
putative effectors have not been yet associated with auxin signalling. It is yet 
unknown how the fungus manipulates auxin signalling and changes the 
distribution/concentration of auxin in root cells (Xu et al., 2018). 
Considering the high relevance of auxin for the establishment of plant-
microbe interactions, including, S. indica symbioses, I hypothesized that certain 
effectors of S. indica have the ability to alter auxin signalling in plants. I specifically 
addressed this question as the manipulation of host auxin signalling might represent 
a key advantage for S. indica in outcompeting other microbes and, hence, 
modifying root microbiomes. In addition, considering the broad host spectrum of 
S. indica, auxin might represent a universal target for S. indica to manipulate its 
different hosts. For this study, single S. indica effectors were analysed, with no 
presence of the fungus. I investigated the effect of the fungal effectors in altering 
A. thaliana growth (as auxin-regulated process) and auxin signalling using a 
combination of systems. 
The experimental approach used in this chapter consisted of a protoplast 
screening and in vivo assessment of the function of putative S. indica effectors. 
More specifically, I used a high-throughput screening in A. thaliana leaf protoplasts 
which were transformed with individual S. indica putative effectors, along with an 
auxin-responsive gene in association with a luciferase reporter and tested using 
synthetic auxin. The effect of each effector in the expression of the auxin responsive 
gene was evaluated using the signal from the luciferase expression. The putative 
effectors were transformed in A. thaliana plants under constitutive promoter and 
used for root growth inhibition assays on plates and basal gene expression 
quantification.
3.2 Results 
3.2.1 Leaf protoplast screening of effectors to identify effector function in 
response to auxin  
A library of S. indica effectors was generated in the Schfer laboratory, 
(University of Warwick).  Dr. Frances Burton, former PhD student, identified 852 
S. indica effector candidates using RNA sequencing of A. thaliana roots colonised 
by the fungus, 3 and 10 dai (unpublished data). These effector candidates were 
filtered based on their sequences and resulted to a final list of 150 effector 
candidates (see list with number-coded effectors in Table S3.1) (unpublished data).  
For this thesis, in a first step the S. indica effectors were screened for affecting the 
expression of the auxin marker gene GH3.3 using an A. thaliana leaf protoplast 
assay as summarized in Figure 3.1. The gene GH3.3 is commonly used as an 
indicator for increased auxin levels, as its expression is upregulated in response to 
auxin (Stringlis et al., 2018). Therefore, the promoter of the auxin-inducible GH3.3 
promoter was fused to a luciferase (LUC) gene. Leaf protoplasts were transformed 
with three plasmids simultaneously, pGH3.3::LUC, pAtUBQ10::GUS, and S. 
indica effector (SIE) constructs (35S::SIEs), or the empty vector pAtUBQ10::HA-
GFP as a control. Transformed protoplasts were then treated with synthetic auxin 
(NAA) and luciferase activity was measured, as described in the methods section. 
In total, 150 effectors were analysed in this assay. 
Figure 3.1: Pipeline for effector screening using the Arabidopsis protoplast assay. 
Protoplasts were isolated from leaves of 24 plants, co-transformed with three 
plasmids, SIE construct, pGH3.3::LUC and pAtUBQ10::GUS, using a robotic 
system. The transformed protoplasts were treated with auxin (NAA) or sterile H2O 
(Mock) and subsequently luciferase expression was measured using Photek 
camera, and GUS readings for normalization of the luciferase expression. 
[Arabidopsis plant, petri dish, protoplasts, plasmids and pipette] illustrations 
courtesy of somersault18:24, Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 
From the 150 putative effectors tested, twenty effectors with the most 
significant effects were used for further analyses. Effector-mediated responses were 
ranked from the strongest induction to the strongest suppression of the expression 
of GH3.3. For this ranking, the ratio of the difference in the LUC activity of the 
effector to that of the empty vector (eV) in the mock treatment was multiplied by 
the ratio of the difference of the LUC expression of the effector to that of the empty 
vector (eV) under the NAA treatments (see equation 2.1 in methods section) (Table 
S3.2). Based on these calculations, the 20 effectors that more strongly suppressed 
or induced the expression of the auxin marker were used for further experiments; 
Arabidopsis thaliana leaves
Add auxin (NAA) to 
transformed protoplastsAnalyze luciferase expression 
using Photek camera
normalize using GUS readings
pAtUBQ10::GUSpGH3.3::LUC
pEG201::HA-SIE 
Protoplasts Isolated 
from 24 plants
Triple transformation into 
multi-well plates via Robotics
Auxin
eV SIE 2 SIE 150SIE 1
these were the S. indica effectors (SIEs) 149, 87, 67, 83, 7, 16, 24, 88, 56, 148 
(suppressing GH3.3 expression) and effectors SIEs 10, 144, 64, 75, 126, 76, 69, 9, 
81, 59 (inducing GH3.3 expression) (Figure 3.2).  
The effectors with the strongest response to auxin were used to generate A. 
thaliana plants that constitutively expressed the effector under the 35S promoter. 
Expressing the effectors in A. thaliana would allow us to study the effect of each 
effector on plant growth and its response to the addition of exogenous auxin. SIEs 
12, 30, 77, 103, 106 strongly suppressed the activity of the marker gene but were 
not chosen for further analysis as the strongly reduced LUC activity in SIE-
expressing protoplasts was further associated with low GUS expression, the marker 
used for normalisation, indicating cell death or a strong general interference with 
cellular transcription and/or translation. 
Figure 3.2: S. indica effectors that significantly affected the GH.3.3 expression in 
A. thaliana protoplasts. Bars represent log2 ratio of the fold changes of mock-
treated samples multiplied by the fold change of auxintreated protoplasts, of the 
top candidate effectors that suppress or induce GH.3.3 expression in protoplasts in 
comparison to the empty vector (ev) pEG201. Data are based on normalized 
luminescence from protoplasts transformed with an effector over protoplasts 
transformed with the empty vector with (ratio treatment) or without (ratio mock) 
treatment. 
3.2.2 Plants expressing S. indica effectors can affect root growth  
The protoplast assay based on GH.3.3 expression was the initial screening 
tool to identify S. indica effectors with strong effect on auxin signalling. This 
screening was followed by root growth inhibition assays, which were performed on 
a subset of the initial effector pool (20 effector candidates, less than 15%). This 
assay was carried out to see if the effectors that caused transcriptional changes in 
the auxin pathway in protoplasts would also result in an altered growth when 
constitutively expressed at the whole plant level. This approach could provide 
robust evidence for the involvement of the effectors in signal transduction and 
growth regulation processes. For these experiments the auxin compound IAA was 
used, as is the auxin molecule more commonly found in nature (Woodward and 
Bartel, 2005).  
A. thaliana Col-0 plants were stably transformed with the different chosen 
effectors and propagated to obtain T1 generation plants by Dr. Silke Lehmann (P. 
Schfer group, University of Warwick). T2 seeds from three independent 
transformation lines were pooled to perform the root growth analysis in order to 
compensate for possible positional effects of the transgene. Such T2 pools were 
tested for 10 effectors that suppressed auxin responses in the protoplast screening 
and 10 effectors that induced the response (Figure 3.2). In order to identify the right 
auxin concentration for the analysis, root growth inhibition of Col-0 seedlings was 
measured using different concentration of IAA (Figure 3.3). Plants grown at 40 nM 
IAA showed 32% reduction of root length in comparison to mock and this 
concentration was used for subsequent root growth inhibition phenotyping in the 
presence of auxin. 
Figure 3.3: Root growth inhibition in the presence of different concentrations of 
auxin (IAA). Average main root length (cm) of 14 days old Col-0 seedlings grown 
on different IAA concentrations from 0 to 400 nM IAA. Data were collected from 
126 plants per treatment (3 biological replicates, 42 plants per replicate) and mean 
values are shown with standard deviations. 
Initially, the root growth inhibition assays were performed using the T2 
pools of plants expressing the SIEs. A. thaliana lines expressing the 20 effectors 
were tested on 40 nM IAA to measure root growth on each plate. SIE88, 144, 64, 
24 and 59 had significantly longer primary roots than GFP control lines on control 
plates. Lines expressing SIE10, 75, 76 and 81 had significantly shorter roots than 
GFP lines on control plates (Figure 3.4A). On the other hand, lines expressing 
SIE24, 144, 59, 88, 67, 87, 16, 149, 69 and 64 grow longer roots in the presence of 
auxin in comparison to control plants expressing GFP. A. thaliana lines expressing 
SIE75, 76 and 10 had smaller roots as compared to control plants under inhibitory 
auxin concentration (Figure 3.4B). Notably, all the lines that had significantly 
different growth on the control plates, had also significantly different growth in the 
presence of IAA. An exception was the line expressing SIE81, which did not show 
significantly different growth in the presence of IAA.  
10 nM
40 nM
100 nM
400 nM
Figure 3.4: Main root length relative to the control plants expressing GFP treated 
with DMSO (control) or 40 nM IAA. Root length of plants presented as percentage 
(%) of the root length (cm) of GFP-expressing control plants grown in the same 
conditions; A) control MS plates with DMSO; B) MS plates with 40 nM IAA. Data 
were collected from 42 plants per line and treatment. Mean values are shown with 
standard errors. Significance is based on t-test with * p < 0.05, ** p < 0.01, *** p 
< 0.001  
By comparing the results from protoplast screening results with the results 
of the root growth inhibition assay in the presence of auxin (40 nM IAA), nine 
effectors, SIE149, 87, 67, 16, 24, 88, 76, 75 and 10, had similar effects when 
expressed in plants under a constitutive promoter and expressed in leaf protoplasts. 
On the other hand, there are certain contradictions between the protoplast screening 
method and the root growth inhibition assay. For example, SIE144 and 75 induced 
CONTROLA)
**   **     *     ** 
*** ***
*** ***
** * *** ***
******
the expression of GH3.3 in protoplasts, in the presence of inhibitory auxin 
concentrations (Figure S3.1) but showed increased root growth in the presence of 
inhibitory auxin concentration (SIE144) or reduced root length (SIE75). However, 
45% of the protoplast screening results were confirmed when effectors were 
expressed in whole plants and tested on plates containing IAA.  
Plants expressing SIEs that demonstrated the strongest effect on root growth 
in the presence of inhibitory auxin levels were tested as independent lines and not 
pools, in order to exclude the possibility that the observed effects were due to 
positional effects of SIE insertions in the genome. A. thaliana lines expressing 
SIE75 could not be analyzed due to low seed germination rate of all lines carrying 
this construct. The screening of the independent lines expressing the selected SIEs 
revealed two effectors, SIE10 and 24, with strong effects on plant growth as well 
as consistency of the effect among the independent lines, although with some 
variation (Figure 3.5). A. thaliana lines 10_6 and 10_8 showed significantly 
decreased root length both in the presence and absence of IAA in comparison to 
GFP-expressing plants, and similar to the results of the pool. Line 24_1 showed 
significantly increased root length on control and IAA plates in comparison to GFP 
expressing plants, and similar to the pool of the three independent lines. Line 24_3 
had a similar increase of root length to the pool on IAA plates, but not on the control 
plates. Line 24_2 showed no significant difference to GFP lines (Figure 3.5).  
Figure 3.5: Main root length of plants expressing SIEs (as pools and as independent 
lines) relative to control plants expressing GFP when grown on control and 40 nM 
IAA plates. Root length of plants is presented as percentage (%) of the root length 
(cm) of control plants. A) Control MS plates with DMSO; B) MS plates with 40 nM 
IAA. Data were collected from 42 plants per line and treatment. Mean values are 
shown with standard errors. Significance is based on t-test with * p < 0.05, ** p < 
0.01, *** p < 0.001 
In summary, many plants expressing SIEs were affected in root growth, in 
control condition but also under inhibitory auxin levels. This effect was initially 
investigated using pools of A. thaliana lines expressing the same effectors in order 
to eliminate any possible positional effect on the transgene. Independent lines from 
these SIEs showing the strongest effect as pools were selected and tested 
*** ***
CONTROL
*** ***
individually. Therefore, lines 10_6 and 24_1, expressing SIE10 and SIE24, 
respectively, were chosen for measuring the basal expression of auxin responsive 
genes. 
3.2.3 Basal expression of auxin responsive genes is altered in A. thaliana 
seedlings expressing S. indica effectors 
Auxin responses are often characterised using three groups of auxin-
responsive genes: GH3s, IAAs and SAURs (Weiste and Drge-Laser, 2014). GH3 
genes are involved in the conjugation of amino acids to IAA and are responsible 
for auxin homeostasis, regulating plant growth and responses to stress (Park et al., 
2007; Staswick, 2005). On the other hand, the expression of IAA genes is known to 
be depleted in the absence of auxin and rapidly induced with the addition of auxin 
(Hagen and Guilfoyle, 2002). The gene IAA5 is found to have increased expression 
as a response to inhibitory auxin concentrations (Uchida et al., 2018). Therefore, 
GH3.3 and IAA5 are robust genes for the investigation of changes in auxin 
signalling mediated by S. indica effectors. 
A. thaliana lines expressing SIE10 and 24 were used to examine whether 
the altered root growth under control and inhibitory auxin levels was associated 
with an altered plant auxin signalling. Root and leaf samples from 11 days old 
seedlings (growing on MS plates without IAA) expressing GFP as a control, 
SIE10_6 or SIE24_1 were sampled for RNA extraction. Generated cDNAs were 
subsequently used to quantify the expression of auxin responsive genes GH3.3 and 
IAA5 by RT-qPCR.  
Figure 3.6: Basal expression of the auxin-responsive genes GH3.3 and IAA5 in 
Arabidopsis lines expressing GFP, SIE10 or SIE24. log2 fold change of gene 
relative expression (Ct) of auxin reporter gene GH3.3 (A, B) and IAA5 (C, D) in 
shoot and roots of Arabidopsis plants expressing SIE10 or SIE24., Mean fold 
change from 2 biological replicates are shown with standard errors. Significance 
is based on t-test with * p < 0.05 
The basal expression of GH3.3 gene was not significantly altered in leaves 
or roots of A. thaliana lines expressing SIEs (Figure 3.6A and B). The basal 
expression of the auxin responsive gene IAA5 was significantly upregulated in the 
shoot of plants expressing the SIE10_6, but not SIE24_1 (Figure 3.6C). In contrast, 
IAA5 expression in roots was significantly downregulated in lines expressing 
SIE10_6 and significantly upregulated in SIE24_1 (Figure 3.6D). The IAA5 gene 
expression in the roots expressing SIE10 and SIE24 follows the root growth of these 
lines, with line 10_6 having decreased root growth and 24_1 increased, in 
comparison to the GFP line. 
A) B)
C) D)
GFP SIE_10-6 SIE_24-1
GH3.3 root
GFP SIE_10-6 SIE_24-1
IAA5 root
GFP SIE_10-6 SIE_24-1
IAA5 shoot
GFP SIE_10-6 SIE_24-1
GH3.3 shoot
3.3 Discussion 
One of the factors that can determine the proliferation and survival of a 
species is its ability to gain a competitive advantage (Lareen et al., 2016; 
Stubbendieck et al., 2016). Here I demonstrated that S. indica may gain that 
advantage through its effector proteins, obtaining the ability to manipulate the plant 
auxin pathway resulting in altered growth and response to inhibitory auxin 
concentrations. Manipulating the auxin pathway is a strong competitive advantage 
for a microbe, as auxin controls many other processes of the plant (Vanneste and 
Friml, 2009) and has a key role in plant-microbe interactions (Barker and Tagu, 
2000; Ludwig-Mller, 2000; Vadassery et al., 2008). Recently, attention has been 
drawn on how microbial effector proteins can influence the microbiome and its 
interaction with the plant (Snelders et al., 2018). It is possible that those effector 
proteins enable the fungus to efficiently manipulate and colonise its host root 
system, but also potentially to create a favourable environment around it. Using 
those effectors, the fungus may be more competitive against other colonisers, or 
even manipulate the plant to shape a different microbiome around it (Haney and 
Ausubel, 2015), in order to benefit plant growth and health. Effector research may 
reveal which of these effector proteins can give an advantage to the entire 
microbiome or to specific microbiome members and how they use them to shape 
their environment. This study raises a lot more questions and possibilities in plant-
microbe interaction research, as effectors of beneficial microbes may be the key to 
unravelling basic mechanisms of the complex microbe-microbe and plant-microbe 
interactions as well as source for innovation and subsequent applications in 
agriculture. 
The role of S. indica effectors in plant auxin signalling was investigated 
using different methods. A high throughput screen of 150 SIEs using an A. thaliana 
leaf protoplast assay with an auxin reporter resulted in a selection of 20 effectors 
(Figure 3.2). This selection was done using the multiplied ratio of mock-treated 
effector/mock-treated control and NAA-treated effector/NAA-treated control 
(Figure 3.1), as an effort to picture the whole scale of the effect of SIEs and identify 
those SIEs with the strongest effect on auxin response. However, some SIEs that 
affect such plant auxin responses and growth during S. indica colonisation may 
have not been identified in this screening step. Nevertheless, these are putative 
effectors identified based on certain characteristics of their sequence that are found 
in known effectors (Rafiqi et al., 2013), and one would need to prove the transfer 
of effectors into host cells and show their site and tissue of action (Schilling et al., 
2014); e.g. have an effect on root cells as the tissue colonized by S. indica 
(Deshmukh et al., 2006b). Furthermore, this work focuses on only one aspect of 
effectors function and is using one auxin responsive gene, thus, comprehensive 
research would potentially reveal more effectors with strong effect on plant growth 
and signalling. In addition, even if an effector does not have an effect on leaf cells, 
it may still have an impact on plant signalling when expressed at the whole plant 
level or in specific tissues. The development of a high-throughput system for root 
protoplast screening of effectors would give a more complete picture of their 
activity. Root protoplasts are sensitive and have a low transformation rate (Mathur 
et al., 1995), while this high throughput method required a large amount of cells 
with high transformation and survival rate. Nevertheless, this screening with leaf 
protoplasts revealed S. indica effectors that strongly affect auxin signalling, as 
confirmed in experiments with whole plants. A summary of the results is presented 
in the Tables 3.1 and 3.2.  
Table 3.1: Summary table of results from different methods examining the effect of 
SIEs on plant root growth and auxin signalling, indicating the selection of the 
candidates in each step. 
As control, pEG201 eV was used in the protoplast assay and A. thaliana lines 
expressing GFP for the root growth inhibition assays. suppressor and inducer 
refer to the GH3.3 expression in the protoplast screening, increased and 
decreased refer to root growth of SIE-expressing lines on plate assays and no 
effect indicates non-significant differences based on t-test (p < 0.05). 
GH3.3 expression Root growth inhibition assays of pools
effectors Protoplast screening Control 40 nM IAA
SIE_149 suppressor no effect increased
SIE_87 suppressor no effect increased
SIE_67 suppressor no effect increased
SIE_83 suppressor no effect no effect
SIE_7 suppressor no effect no effect
SIE_16 suppressor no effect increased
SIE_24 suppressor increased increased
SIE_88 suppressor increased increased
SIE_56 suppressor no effect no effect
SIE_148 suppressor no effect no effect
control pEG201 eV GFP GFP
SIE_144 inducer increased increased
SIE_64 inducer increased increased
SIE_59 inducer increased increased
SIE_81 inducer decreased no effect
SIE_9 inducer no effect no effect
SIE_69 inducer no effect increased
SIE_76 inducer decreased decreased
SIE_126 inducer no effect no effect
SIE_75 inducer decreased decreased
SIE_10 inducer decreased decreased
Table 3.2: Summary table of results from different methods examining the effect of 
SIE 10 and 24 on plant root growth and auxin signalling.  
As control, pEG201 eV was used in the protoplast assay and A. thaliana lines 
expressing GFP for the root growth inhibition assays and for the basal gene 
expression assesement.suppressor and inducer refer to the GH3.3 expression 
in the protoplast screening, increased and decreased refer to root growth of 
SIE-expressing lines on plate assays, or the basal IAA5 gene expression and no 
effect indicates non-significant differences based on t-test (p < 0.05). 
3.3.1 Constitutive expression of S. indica effector proteins in A. thaliana plants 
affect root growth  
Auxin regulates plant growth, consequently suppressors of auxin signalling enable 
roots to grow longer (Teale et al., 2006). Indeed, some effectors that were 
characterised as suppressors of auxin signalling, as observed by the suppression of 
GH3.3 expression in the protoplast assay, showed increased root length in the 
presence of inhibitory auxin concentration (Table 3.1). On the contrary, three of 
these effectors that were characterised as inducers of auxin signalling showed 
decreased root length, both in basal conditions and inhibitory auxin concentrations 
(Table 3.1). 
However, certain effectors showed contrasting effect between the two 
assays, the protoplast screening and the root growth inhibition assay (Table 3.1). 
This phenomenon (inducers of auxin signalling in protoplast assay and suppressors 
GH3.3 expression Root growth inhibition assays Basal gene expression of IAA5
Lines
Protoplast 
screening
Control 40 nM IAA In leaves In roots
SIE_24 suppressor increased increased - -
Line 24_1 increased increased no effect increased
Line 24_2 no effect no effect - -
Line 24_3 no effect increased - -
control pEG201 eV GFP GFP GFP GFP
SIE_10 inducer decreased decreased - -
Line 10_6 decreased decreased increased decreased
Line 10_8 decreased decreased - -
of auxin signalling in the root growth inhibition assay) could be explained by 
differential levels of expression of the given effectors, due to the transient and stable 
expression methods. Alternatively, the observed SIE effects on GH3.3 expression 
might be caused by ectopic effector expression. In addition, SIEs might have 
different effect depending on the plant tissue (Schilling et al., 2014), which could 
explain the observed phenotypes. For example, Strehmel et al. (2016) demonstrated 
that S. indica inoculation has substantially different effect in A. thaliana root and 
the leaf tissue, with many plant molecules being increased in the roots upon 
inoculation, such as amino-acids, but not in the leaves. In support of this, auxin 
signalling has been found to be differentially regulated depending on plant tissue, 
with different auxin pathways and genes being involved in the shoots and in the 
roots (Novk et al., 2012). For this reason, coupling this high-throughput leaf 
protoplast screening with a root (or other tissue if necessary) protoplast screening 
would give information of the activity of effectors in different tissues, whereas 
characterising the transcriptional profile of those plants could reveal a first insight 
into the mode of action of those effectors.  
The SIE24 was found to suppress auxin signalling in leaf protoplasts, as 
well as inducing main root growth in the presence and absence of auxin (Table 3.2). 
Since immune responses are strongly associated with auxin signalling (Naseem et 
al., 2015), S. indica, may be using SIE24 to manipulate auxin signalling and 
subsequently suppress any immune response by the plant, in order to establish 
colonisation within the root. However, this could be observed with a 
transcriptomics study. Similarly, Chen et al. (2007) showcased the effect of a single 
effector on auxin signalling using A. thaliana lines expressing the P. syringae type 
III effector AvrRpt2 under constitutive promoter and lacking RPS2, the AvrRpt2-
responsive gene in the plant. They found that such lines had longer primary roots, 
like the SlE24, as well as increased number of lateral roots, and higher sensitivity 
to auxin. Therefore, SlE24 may play a key role in the establishment of S. indica in 
the A. thaliana root, similarly to the P. syringae effector AvrRpt2.  
On the other hand, SIE10 was found to induce auxin signalling in leaf 
protoplasts and affect negatively the main root growth. The induction of auxin 
signalling by the fungus may be an alternative role to that of SIE24. It is suggested 
that IAA can affect gene expression of certain microbes (Spaepen and 
Vanderleyden, 2011). For example, addition of IAA regulates the metabolic 
pathways of Escherichia coli, increasing its growth and adaptation to 
environmental stresses (Bianco et al., 2006a, 2006b). In addition, IAA in low 
concentrations can induce the growth of Saccharomyces cerevisiae, while in high 
concentrations it blocks its growth (Prusty et al., 2004). Taken together, the role of 
SIE10, as an inducer of auxin signalling, may have an effect in the interaction of 
microbes with the plant, possibly by securing its own proliferation within the root, 
limiting the presence of antagonistic microbes, or enabling the establishment of 
beneficial microbes within the root. However, when SIE10 is constituently 
expressed in the whole plant, the constant induction of auxin signalling may affect 
other mechanisms within the plant, compromising its growth.  
The strong effect of S. indica effectors on A. thaliana auxin response is 
clear. In the protoplast screening, the activity of certain effectors led protoplasts 
potentially to cell death or had strong interference with cellular transcription and/or 
translation. Furthermore, the strong effect on plant growth, even the loss of seed 
viability in certain cases, indicates the detrimental effect of those effectors in plant 
health when expressed under constitutive promoter. Expressing microbial effectors 
under inducible promoter(s) as commonly used for such studies, e.g. estrogen-
inducible or DEX-inducible expression of P. syringae effectors HopAI1 and 
AvrRpm1 respectively in plants (Mackey et al., 2003; Zhang et al., 2007), would 
enable the further investigation of these interactions in depth.  
3.3.2 Constitutive expression of S. indica effector proteins in A. thaliana plants 
alter the expression of auxin responsive genes 
Independent A. thaliana lines expressing SIE10 and SIE24 were grown (on 
 MS) and samples were collected for gene expression of auxin reporter genes. 
Lines 10_6 and 10_8 had similar phenotype with the pool of these, while lines 24_2 
and 24_3 did not show the same phenotype as the pool, as they were not 
significantly different from the GFP line. These differences between independent 
lines might be either due to different expression levels of the effector and/or T-
DNA insertion positional effect. Therefore, lines 24_1 and 10_6 were chosen to 
study the expression levels of auxin responsive genes.  
The genes used to study the effect of the effectors in the auxin signalling 
pathway were GH3.3, which is the auxin-responsive gene used in the protoplast 
screening, and another auxin marker IAA5. Lines 10_6 and 24_1 were found to alter 
the expression of gene IAA5 in different ways. In contrast to the protoplast assay, 
expression of GH3.3 was not affected in both lines, which might lie in the nature of 
the assay. It is important to recognise that a pGH3.3::LUC construct was used in 
the protoplast assay. Therefore, post-transcriptional regulation of GH3.3 transcript 
might not operate as compared to effector-expressing plants. In addition, the 
physiological state of a protoplast can be quite different to that of a whole plants 
and pathways recruited by the effectors in single cell protoplasts are not necessarily 
accessible for manipulation or the manipulation is compensated (e.g. in 
communication with neighbouring cells). Auxin is a highly mobile hormone, and 
its transportation, as well as the gradient accumulation among cells play crucial role 
in the activity of auxin (Ljung, 2013; Sorefan et al., 2009; Teale et al., 2006), and 
can be observed in the whole plant context, as the protoplast system lacks such 
complexity. It further indicates the significance of using more than one reporter in 
confirming protoplast-based expression profiles. 
The differential expression of IAA5 in SIE10 or SIE24 lines might point 
towards an explanation of the different auxin-related phenotypes for both lines. An 
increase in the expression of IAA5 is associated with an activation of auxin 
signalling pathway (Uchida et al., 2018) and IAA5 is downregulated during 
suppression of auxin signalling (Dharmasiri et al., 2005). The expression of IAA5 
in the SIE10 line is up-regulated in the shoot and down-regulated in the root, 
indicating activation of auxin signalling in the shoot and suppression of auxin 
signalling in the root. Suppression of auxin signalling is associated with decreased 
susceptibility to pathogens (Navarro et al., 2006) and can have direct effect on the 
establishment of microbes in the plant, independently of their ability to produce 
auxin (Spaepen and Vanderleyden, 2011). While this ability of the fungus has been 
demonstrated, e.g. protection of barley from Fusarium graminearum (Deshmukh 
and Kogel, 2007), SIE10 may play a crucial role in the protection of the plant from 
soil-derived pathogens. The possible induction of auxin signalling in the shoot by 
SIE10 could be a result of plant defence response to biotic factor (Bari et al., 2009), 
as the effectors are not expected to be found in leaf tissue since S. indica is a root 
endophyte. This might explain the compromised growth of the plant in the presence 
of the SIE10.  
In contrast, IAA5 was significantly up-regulated in roots (while expression 
in the shoot was unaltered) of A. thaliana lines overexpressing SIE24 (Uchida et 
al., 2018). Consistent with IAA5 upregulation, line SIE24_1 showed increased root 
growth under mock conditions. Interestingly, SIE24_1 line showed improved root 
growth under inhibitory auxin concentrations. It has been shown that root growth 
inhibition caused by high concentrations of auxin can be overcome in the presence 
of S. indica and rescue plants from negative effects of the hormone (Vadassery et 
al., 2008). This could be a possible modulation of the pathway through a fungal 
effector such as SIE24. Furthermore, this activity of the effector may be a strategy 
to improve nutrient acquisition by affecting root architecture and length, similarly 
to plant growth promoting bacteria which improve plant performance through 
auxin-mediated enhancement of root structure, independently of their ability to 
synthesise IAA (Spaepen and Vanderleyden, 2011). Transcriptome analysis of this 
line could reveal first insights into the effect of this effector on auxin and plant 
signalling.  
The beneficial effect of S. indica on host plants is likely a combination of 
different mechanisms. Effectors might take an essential role in manipulating plant 
signalling in order to stimulate those mechanisms. However, S. indica effectors can 
have very different effect in different plant tissue. Increased plant growth in the 
presence of the fungus has been associated with high levels of auxin in roots, 
whereas the auxin concentration in leaves was found unaffected (Hilbert et al., 
2012; Lee et al., 2011). In my work, differential expression of auxin reporter genes 
in the shoot and the root samples indicate the presence of distinct mechanisms in 
the regulation of auxin or/and other signalling pathways in the different plant organs 
and tissues. Even though the fungus is present in plant roots, it may cause different 
responses in other plant tissues, potentially involving different effectors or/and 
different mechanisms. Unraveling the function of S. indica effectors in establishing 
beneficial plant-microbe interactions and in activating beneficial activities in host 
plants can reveal mechanisms to improve plant growth under changing 
environments.  
3.3.3 Conclusions and future perspectives 
This work, as part of a larger project within the Patrick Schfer group, 
illustrates the effect of a mutualistic fungus on plant signalling through effector 
proteins. It shows that single S. indica effectors affect plant auxin signalling and 
provides a high-throughput approach to study the involvement of microbial 
effectors on plant signalling of A. thaliana. Alongside, this work provided an 
insight to the effectiveness and the limitations of the pipeline used, as a high-
throughput tool to identify effectors that influence plant signalling pathways. The 
alteration of the auxin-responsive genes expression was used as an indication for 
effector functions in to the regulation of the auxin pathway. However, my analysis 
was a first step, as a proof of concept, and more extensive research is required to 
understand the mode of actions of S. indica effectors on plant auxin signalling. 
Understanding thoroughly the involvement of microbial effectors in plant 
signalling could enable the development of new tools to stimulate plant growth and 
signalling, as well as the interactions with the microbiome. 
High-throughput experiments using protoplast to test gene functions have 
been used before (Confraria and Baena-Gonzlez, 2016; Li, 2016), often for the 
study of transcription factors (Wehner et al., 2017) and with the use of robotic 
systems (Dlugosz et al., 2016; Lenaghan and Neal Stewart, 2019). However, the 
method has not been used for the study of fungal effectors and their effect on plant 
signalling. Here, I demonstrate the usefulness of this system, established by group 
members of the P. Schfer group. Some S. indica effectors that have been identified 
to have a strong effect on auxin signalling from the protoplast screening, showed 
also a strong effect when they were stably expressed in plants. This suggests a high 
efficiency of the protoplast screening to identify suitable candidates for further 
experiments, however, considering that their effect might change when expressed 
in whole plants. The results of my experiment could be supported further by 
identifying host proteins interacting with effectors via methods such as Yeast-2-
Hybrid or affinity tandem mass spectrometry (Mukhtar et al., 2011; Vasilescu et 
al., 2004; Weling et al., 2014). This would elucidate potential mechanisms for 
effector functions in planta to support effector activities observed in the protoplast 
and whole plant screens.  
Chapter 4: Influence of beneficial fungi on the 
composition of the Arabidopsis thaliana core root 
microbiome  a reductionist approach 
4.1 Introduction 
The progress in the development of new tools and experimental approaches 
has enabled us to study new aspects of interactions within microbiomes as well as 
microbial interactions with the host (Goodrich et al., 2017). In particular, 
advancements in sequencing technologies and computational power together with the 
reduction of sequencing costs has encouraged a large number of studies of soil and 
plant microbiome (Fierer, 2017; Prosser, 2015). One of the most common type of 
sequencing in microbiome research is the metataxonomic amplicon sequencing, 
amplifying a specific conserved region of the genome, usually 16S rRNA (Bacteria 
and Archaea) or the intergenic spacer (ITS) region (Eukaryotes). This technology has 
enabled researchers to determine general patterns in microbiome structure and 
diversity (Bulgarelli et al., 2012; Lundberg et al., 2012b; Peiffer et al., 2013; Tkacz 
and Poole, 2015). However, amplicon sequencing reveals only the structure of the 
microbiome but does not provide any information on the real function of the 
community or individual community members.  
In recent years, there have been significant efforts to unravel the complexity of 
soil and plant microbiomes (Bulgarelli et al., 2012; Lundberg et al., 2012b) and to 
incorporate those findings into strategies for a more sustainable agriculture that has 
the potential to propel a next green evolution (Jez et al., 2016). In order to effectively 
exploit the potential of microbiomes, it is important to develop strategies that will 
enable us to study their functional capabilities (Bashiardes et al., 2018). Despite the 
extended research on microbiome structure (Schlaeppi and Bulgarelli, 2015) it is 
necessary to associate such structures with microbial dynamics and community 
functioning (Snchez-Caizares et al., 2017). Moreover, it is important to study and 
understand the whole functional range of each microbe individually and in a 
community context. It has been shown that even species of the same genus can have 
substantially different lifestyles, from pathogenic to mutualistic, in dependency of 
environmental parameters (Hacquard et al., 2016; Hiruma et al., 2016), or the 
horizontal transfer of certain functional genes (Qiu et al., 2009). Understanding the 
functional diversity of microbes can enable us to develop strategies that will employ 
the beneficial traits within microbiomes for agriculture. 
New approaches and experimental set ups have been employed in order to 
overcome those challenges originating from the complexity of microbiomes 
functional diversity. There have been extensive efforts to isolate, cultivate and 
characterise microbial isolates (Bai et al., 2015; Levy et al., 2018; Mauchline et al., 
2015). Those isolates can be used for the construction of synthetic microbial 
communities and test specific hypotheses in a very defined experimental environment 
(e.g. gnotobiotic systems) (Finkel et al., 2017; Lebeis et al., 2015), such as how the 
differences in the composition of microbial community influence the response of the 
plant to phosphate stress (Herrera Paredes et al., 2018). Such defined systems represent 
excellent tools to describe the dynamics and functional properties of individual 
microbes as well as microbiomes. This set up can further reveal key species that drive 
the community composition and function (Niu et al., 2017), recruitment patterns of the 
host (Bai et al., 2015), as well as microbe-microbe interactions and their effect on plant 
growth (Hartman et al., 2017; Herrera Paredes et al., 2018). Interestingly, Niu et al., 
(2017) used synthetic microbial communities on legume roots in a sterile system and 
showed that removing one strain from the system caused the total collapse of the 
microbial community. This indicates the significant role of each organism in the 
system and that even small changes can affect the whole structure of a microbiome. 
Furthermore, Hartman et al., (2017), using a similar setting with a small synthetic 
microbial community, showed that the negative effect of a microbe on maize plants 
could disappear in the presence of other microbes, even though all of them remained 
abundant in the plant root. These studies provide examples for interactions between 
microbes and the host that we probably could not uncover without the use of synthetic 
communities. Therefore, understanding the dynamics within the microbiome will 
allow us to understand and more effectively exploit it for a more sustainable crop 
production. 
The aim of this study was to understand the complex interactions within 
microbial communities and to uncover their effect on plant growth. I hypothesized that 
the presence of a fungus in the roots might alter the bacterial microbiome, employing 
different bacteria. I also hypothesize that the presence of the fungus and the potential 
effect on the microbiome might affect plant growth. To test these hypotheses, we 
employed a synthetic bacterial community, initially isolated from Arabidopsis 
thaliana rhizosphere and characterized as Arabidopsis root core microbiome (Bai et 
al., 2015), and tested it in a gnotobiotic system. In collaboration with Stephane 
Hacquard and Prof. Paul Schulze-Lefert at the Max Planck Institute in Cologne 
(Germany) we investigated how 2 different fungi, the mutualist Serendipita indica and 
Colletotrichum tofieldiae, shape the composition of the Arabidospis core microbiome 
under controlled conditions. S. indica and C. tofieldiae are both root endophytes that 
assist the plant in phosphorus acquisition and improve plant growth (Hiruma et al., 
2016; Wu et al., 2018). For this study, plant roots colonized by S. indica or with C. 
tofieldiae were exposed to the collection of about 200 bacterial species. This core 
microbiome was applied to Arabidopsis roots in order to monitor any changes in core 
microbiome composition and plant growth as a result of co-inoculation with or without 
S. indica / C. tofieldiae 
4.2 Results 
4.2.1 Effect of the fungi on plant growth and root core microbiome 
The analysis of fresh shoot weight of plants at 6 weeks after transfer into the 
gnotobiotic system (Figure 4.1A) showed that the presence of the bacteria increased 
plant growth (p<0.05) from 25.2 g, (for microbe free samples; n=24) to 49.2 g average 
shoot weight in the presence of the bacterial microbiome (n=33). In the presence of S. 
indica as well as both S. indica and the bacterial microbiome, plant growth increased 
to an average shoot weight of 58.6 g (n=33) and 55.1 g (n=35), respectively (p < 0.05 
and p < 0.01, respectively). The average fresh shoot weight of the C. tofieldiae treated 
plants was 16.53 g (n=20) and significantly lower than the bacteria treated plants (p < 
0.01) and plants treated with S. indica (p < 0.001). In the presence of the bacterial 
community the average weight of the C. tofieldiae-treated plants was almost doubled, 
with an average of 31.57 g (n=31), however still significantly different from S. indica-
treated plants (p < 0.01) and S. indica-treated plants including the bacterial community 
(p < 0.05). In addition, differential plant survival was observed in the different 
treatments. Notably, the survival rate of plants inoculated with C. tofieldiae was 
reduced by 44.4% as compared to microbe free plants, which was increased by 30.5% 
in the presence of the bacterial microbiome in the system (Table 4.1B). 
Figure 4.1: Growth and survival of Arabidopsis plants growing in flowpots system for 
6 weeks. A) Fresh shoot weight. Mean values are shown with standard error and 
letters indicate the significance according to ANOVA followed by to Tukeys HDS (p 
< 0.001) (n=20-35, depending on survival). B) Plant survival rate shown as 
percentage.  
By employing next generation sequencing we could reveal the Relative 
Abundance (RA) of S. indica and C. tofieldiae in the system (ITS amplicon) (Figure 
4.2), as well as the structure and composition of the bacterial microbiome (16S 
amplicon) (Figures 4.3-4), as described in Materials and Methods. The analysis of the 
sequencing data showed the presence of fungal and plant DNA. The plant DNA was 
identified by blasting the OTU_1 (Table S4.1) using the NCBI BLAST platform 
(https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). As shown in Figure 4.3A, S. indica was significantly 
suppressed in the presence of the bacteria both in soil and root as compared to samples 
without bacteria (p < 0.001), based on RA. As a result, in the presence of bacteria, 
plant DNA was mostly amplified with ITS primers (Cheng et al., 2016). A similar 
effect was observed for C. tofieldiae, which was significantly reduced in the presence 
of bacteria both in the root and substrate matrix (p < 0.001), based on RA. In all 
samples, some reads (3-6%) belong to OTUs with very low abundance (~1-20 reads) 
and present in one or very few samples only. These OTUs are considered as 
contaminants for this study, with 21% of the reads belonging to contaminants in the 
matrix samples from C. tofieldiae and bacteria-treated plants. 
Figure 4.2: Relative abundance of fungi and plant. Relative abundance (RA) of fungi 
and plant (in %) in matrix and root samples, in the presence (bacteria) or absence 
(mock) of the bacterial community. Presented as a percentage of all reads in each 
sample. A) RA of S. indica and plant (%) and B) RA of C. tofieldiae and plant (%) 
Focusing on the effects of fungi on the bacterial microbiome, the -diversity 
was calculated using rarefied data and presented as the number of observed OTUs 
(richness) and Shannon Index (evenness) (Figure 4.3A, B). The input culture samples 
contain the most OTUs on average, however this number is not significantly higher 
than the number of observed OTUs in the roots under any treatment. The OTU richness 
in the matrix samples was the lowest on average and significantly lower than the input 
culture samples (p < 0.01 for the samples without fungi/C. tofieldiae and p < 0.05 for 
S. indica-treated samples). Regarding the evenness of the samples, calculated as 
Shannon Index, a similar pattern was observed. The input culture samples were the 
most even on average, but not significantly different than the root samples, nor from 
the matrix samples containing fungus-inoculated plants. The matrix samples that 
contain no fungus had significantly lower evenness than the input culture samples and 
the root samples with fungi (p < 0.01). In addition, root samples treated with fungi 
were significantly more even than the matrix samples containing fungi (p < 0.05). 
Summarising, higher sample richness and evenness was observed at the input culture 
samples, followed by the root samples, while the matrix samples presented the lowest 
sample richness and evenness. 
Figure 4.3: Boxplot of alpha diversity indices. Mean values are shown with standard 
error, whiskers represent quartile distribution, letters represent significant differences 
according to ANOVA followed by to Tukeys HDS (p < 0.001): A) Number of observed 
OTUs in each sample, B) Shannon Index of each sample. (n=2-6, depending on 
survival) 
In order to detect differences between samples -diversity was determined 
using Principle Coordinates Analysis (PCoA) based on Bray-Curtis distances on the 
rarefied OTU table. The results were visualized using the first two dimensions of 
PCoA (Figure 4.4). The input culture clusters independently from all samples whereas 
the rest of the samples have no specific cluster pattern.  
observed_otus_2400
Matrix Root
ab ab
Shannon_2400
Matrix Root
abc a a
Figure 4.4: Bacterial microbiome structure was determined using principle 
coordinates analysis (PCoA). The first two dimensions of PCoA are plotted based on 
Bray-Curtis distances (rarefied reads used). The treatments are color coded and 
represented with different symbols, the root samples differentiate from the matrix as 
filled/empty respectively. (n=2-6, depending on survival) 
In turn, the composition of the microbiome changes from the matrix to the root 
fraction (Figure 4.5). The significant changes between the compartments and the 
treatment was tested individually for each bacterial taxon with Analysis of Similarities 
(ANOSIM) (Table 4.1). Comparisons scoring R values close to 1 are highly different, 
whereas 0 indicate indifference; p values indicate the significance of the difference 
observed. The relative abundance of most of the bacterial taxa was significantly 
different from the input culture, with Bacilli significantly and strongly reduced in all 
compartments in comparison to the input (Table 4.1C). The -Proteobacteria taxon is 
strongly but not significantly different in the root compartment in comparison to input 
(Table 4.1E). 
Moving on to the differences between the matrix and the root compartment, 
Actinobacteria are significantly enhanced in the root compartment in comparison to 
the matrix (Table 4.1B). The relative abundance of Flavobacteria is significantly 
reduced in the roots treated with C. tofieldiae in comparison to all matrix samples, 
whereas -Proteobacteria is significantly increased (Table 4.1A and E respectively). 
-Proteobacteria have different relative abundance in the matrix an with the root, with 
more significant the difference of the relative abundance between the matrix 
-0.3 -0.2 -0.1 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3
PC1 (59.68%)
input culture
no fungi matrix
C. tofieldiae matrix
S. indica matrix
no fungi root
C. tofieldiae root
S. indica root
containing S. indica and the roots of all treatments (Table 4.1D). -Proteobacteria 
relative abundance in the matrix samples containing either S. indica or C. tofieldiae is 
significantly different from that in the root with no fungi and root with S. indica (Table 
4.1F). Only the relative abundance of -Proteobacteria tends to be different in the root 
between the different treatments, however this difference is not significant (Table 
4.1E). 
Figure 4.5: Relative abundance of each class in the matrix and root samples treated 
with S. indica, C. tofieldiae or no fungi. RA is represented using stacked bar plot of 
the calculated means of rarefied reads. 
Class
Flavobacteriia
Bacilli
Alphaproteobacteria
Betaproteobacteria
Gammaproteobacteria
Actinobacteria
Matrix Root
Table 4.1: Heatmap of significant changes in the microbiome composition.  
Flavobacteriia
p values input culture no fungi soil S. indica soil C. tofieldiae soil no fungi root S. indica root C. tofieldiae root
input culture
no fungi soil 0.0023
S. indica soil 0.002 0.4917
C. tofieldiae soil 0.0027 0.7107 0.8997
no fungi root 0.0063 0.1226 0.0477 0.0967
S. indica root 0.0816 0.0627 0.0732 0.0817 0.8336
C. tofieldiae root 0.0727 0.0347 0.0342 0.038 0.6697 0.5075
R values input culture no fungi soil S. indica soil C. tofieldiae soil no fungi root S. indica root C. tofieldiae root
input culture
no fungi soil 0.837
S. indica soil 0.8056 -0.01667
C. tofieldiae soil 0.7963 -0.07037 -0.1074
no fungi root 0.6111 0.1865 0.3373 0.1865
S. indica root 0.4259 0.3951 0.3765 0.3086 -0.1481
C. tofieldiae root 0.3333 0.9583 1 0.9583 -0.1786 0
Actinobacteria
p values input culture no fungi soil S. indica soil C. tofieldiae soil no fungi root S. indica root C. tofieldiae root
input culture
no fungi soil 0.1469
S. indica soil 0.0286 0.8175
C. tofieldiae soil 0.0808 0.5234 0.5108
no fungi root 0.0052 0.0051 0.0043 0.0111
S. indica root 0.011 0.0127 0.0149 0.0116 1
C. tofieldiae root 0.0354 0.0369 0.0339 0.0357 0.8015 0.7099
R values input culture no fungi soil S. indica soil C. tofieldiae soil no fungi root S. indica root C. tofieldiae root
input culture
no fungi soil 0.1148
S. indica soil 0.3315 -0.1037
C. tofieldiae soil 0.2463 -0.05833 -0.0213
no fungi root 0.5595 0.8056 0.881 0.7302
S. indica root 0.6358 0.8395 0.9321 0.7531 -0.2963
C. tofieldiae root 0.8646 0.9792 1 0.9479 -0.1429 -0.25
Alphaproteobacteria
p values input culture no fungi soil S. indica soil C. tofieldiae soil no fungi root S. indica root
C. tofieldiae
input culture
no fungi soil 0.0243
S. indica soil 0.0065 0.5306
C. tofieldiae soil 0.0112 0.5099 0.8715
no fungi root 0.803 0.0233 0.0114 0.0161
S. indica root 0.6136 0.0361 0.0118 0.0112 0.832
C. tofieldiae
0.7814 0.282 0.033 0.0684 0.3955 0.2093
R values input culture no fungi soil S. indica soil C. tofieldiae soil no fungi root S. indica root
C. tofieldiae
input culture
no fungi soil 0.4259
S. indica soil 0.6593 -0.0537
C. tofieldiae soil 0.513 -0.03333 -0.09444
no fungi root -0.1349 0.4603 0.7341 0.5476
S. indica root -0.1049 0.5309 0.8765 0.7531 -0.1481
C. tofieldiae
root -0.1667 0.09375 0.6458 0.4167 0.1429 0.25
Bacilli
p values input culture no fungi soil S. indica soil C. tofieldiae soil no fungi root S. indica root C. tofieldiae
input culture
no fungi soil 0.0023
S. indica soil 0.0024 0.9887
C. tofieldiae soil 0.0022 0.4548 0.2917
no fungi root 0.0048 0.6918 0.8846 0.204
S. indica root 0.0123 0.1552 0.2871 0.0454 0.542
C. tofieldiae root 0.0364 0.8985 0.8613 0.57 1 0.3908
R values input culture no fungi soil S. indica soil C. tofieldiae soil no fungi root S. indica root
C. tofieldiae
input culture
no fungi soil 1
S. indica soil 0.9963 -0.1444
C. tofieldiae soil 0.9926 -0.01111 0.04259
no fungi root 0.996 -0.1071 -0.1488 0.1032
S. indica root 1 0.216 0.03704 0.3765 -0.08333
C. tofieldiae root 1 -0.25 -0.2188 -0.07813 -0.3214 0.1667
Heatmap of p and R values from ANOSIM test for significance between samples 
groups for each bacterial class observed in the microbiome. A) Flavonobacteria; B) 
Actinobacteria; C) Bacilli; D) Alphaproteobacteria; E) Betaproteobacteria; F) 
Gammaptoteobacteria. 
In summary, Arabidopsis core microbiome had a positive effect on the plant 
growth in comparison to the microbe free, as well as rescuing the growth and 
increasing the survival of plants inoculated with C. tofieldiae. A significant increase 
p value
< 0.05
< 0.01
< 0.001
R value
Betaproteobacteria
p values input culture no fungi soil S. indica soil C. tofieldiae soil no fungi root S. indica root
C. tofieldiae
input culture
no fungi soil 0.002
S. indica soil 0.0024 0.3112
C. tofieldiae soil 0.0024 0.7589 0.9402
no fungi root 0.1313 0.0154 0.0542 0.0081
S. indica root 0.2794 0.0131 0.0125 0.0119 0.741
C. tofieldiae
root 0.8935 0.0347 0.034 0.0356 0.1393 0.1019
R values input culture no fungi soil S. indica soil C. tofieldiae soil no fungi root S. indica root
C. tofieldiae
input culture
no fungi soil 0.042
S. indica soil 0.0504 1
C. tofieldiae soil 0.0504 1 1
no fungi root 1 0.3234 1 0.1701
S. indica root 1 0.2751 0.2625 0.2499 1
C. tofieldiae
1 0.7287 0.714 0.7476 1 1
Gammaproteobacteria
p values input culture no fungi soil S. indica soil C. tofieldiae soil no fungi root S. indica root
C. tofieldiae
input culture
no fungi soil 0.0947
S. indica soil 0.3463 0.3793
C. tofieldiae soil 0.5275 0.3169 0.8081
no fungi root 0.0163 0.0194 0.0047 0.0054
S. indica root 0.0974 0.1329 0.0269 0.0118 0.6864
C. tofieldiae
root 0.4618 0.8884 0.4283 0.5027 0.0679 0.1957
R values input culture no fungi soil S. indica soil C. tofieldiae soil no fungi root S. indica root
C. tofieldiae
input culture
no fungi soil 0.1352
S. indica soil 0.04259 -0.03148
C. tofieldiae soil -0.01481 0.01852 -0.1037
no fungi root 0.4802 0.4921 0.869 0.8889
S. indica root 0.3704 0.179 0.7037 0.7037 -0.1296
C. tofieldiae
root -0.01042 -0.3021 -0.09375 -0.02083 0.8214 0.6667
of plant yield was observed only in the presence of S. indica, with and without the 
bacterial community. However, both fungi were eliminated from the root in the 
presence of the bacterial community and they had no effect on bacterial community 
alpha () nor beta () diversity. Significant differences were observed in the alpha 
diversity and the bacterial composition when comparing the input with the rest of the 
samples and between the compartments.  
4.3 Discussion 
The use of gnotobiotic system and synthetic communities can give insights 
into microbial community dynamics and functional effects on plants. In this 
experiment, two plant beneficial fungi were individually tested in such a system, 
with the addition of a synthetic bacterial community.  
4.3.1 S. indica and its combination with the core microbiome improves plant 
growth in the gnotobiotic system 
The plant fresh weight results highlight the improved plant growth in the 
presence of the microbiome (Figure 4.1A). S. indica has a positive effect on plant 
growth as expected (Carvalhais et al., 2013), showing significantly higher 
aboveground plant yield in the presence and in the absence of the bacterial 
community,  in comparison to the microbe free plants. The combination of S. indica 
inoculated plants with the bacterial community did not have a significant additive 
effect on the growth, either because this weight could be the maximum that the 
plants could reach at this stage of development or due to other complex interactions 
within the community.  
4.3.2 C. tofieldiae has negative effect on plant growth and survival 
C. tofieldiae did not improve plant growth, but instead, its presence led to 
high plant mortality (50%). In addition, the fresh shoot weight of the plants treated 
with C. tofieldiae had reduced growth in comparison to those treated with S. indica, 
with and without the presence of the bacterial community. While C. tofieldiae has 
been identified as an endemic root endophyte of Arabidopsis thaliana promoting 
plant growth in phosphate starvation conditions (Hiruma et al., 2016), in this 
gnotobiotic system it showed an inhibitory effect on plant survival. It is suggested 
that C. tofieldiae is able to improve growth by improving phorsporus uptake, and 
this ability is induced by phosphorus starvation processes (Hiruma et al., 2016). 
Considering that the soil substrate (common peat) used in this experiment is not 
depleted in phosphorus, may explain the absence of growth promotion, however, it 
does not explain the low survival rate of the plants treated with C. tofieldiae. 
Even though C. tofieldiae is studied for its beneficial effect on phosphorus 
upatake and plant growth promotion (Hiruma et al., 2016), Colletotrichum species 
are known as common plant pathogens (Perfect et al., 1999) causing diseases on 
crops worldwide, leading to pre- and post- harvesting losses (JEFFRIES et al., 
1990). In fact, Colletotrichum spp. has been characterized as the eighth most 
important plant pathogen, among the well-known Fusarium and Botrytis species, 
based on its scientific and economical importance (Dean et al., 2012). However, it 
is known that Colletotrichum species can have very different repertoire of genes, as 
well as completely different host invention strategies and host specificity 
(OConnell et al., 2012). Studying the transciptomes of C. tofieldiae and its 
pathogenic relative C. incanum, genomic signatures were determined to signify the 
lifestyle transition of this genus, from pathogenic to mutualistic (Hacquard et al., 
2016). This study further suggests that C. tofieldiae is potentially saprotrophic, thus 
its pathogenicity genes are not expressed during plant infection, in contrast to its 
relative Colletotrichum. Regarding the plant, its metabolic responses were 
differentially affected during C. tofieldiae colonisation in accordance to phosphate 
availability, with defense responses being activated in the presence of replete 
phosphorus (Hacquard et al., 2016). Since the soil substrate used in our experiment 
was not phosphorus depleted, it is possible that plant defense mechanisms were 
activated in the presence of C. tofieldiae, resulting to plant fatality. Notably, fungi 
used by Durn et al. (2018) are part of the Arabidopsis core microbiome that, when 
inoculated without other microbes, exhibit a negative effect on plants. It indicates 
that plant fungal endophytes can exert pathogenic activities under certain 
conditions. This effect was observed with C. tofieldiae in our experiments, which 
is also characterized as an endemic endophyte of Arabidosis root (Hiruma et al., 
2016). Studies have found that mono-associations of fungal endophytes with the 
plant restrict plant growth (Durn et al., 2018; Keim et al., 2014; Kia et al., 2017). 
This indicates that the plant alone cannot modulate fungal colonisation and its 
potential negative effect, but the microbial communities may play a role in 
balancing the plant-fungal interactions. However, such negative effect was not 
observed in the case of S. indica, indicating its close beneficial relationship with 
the plant.  
The negative effect of C. tofieldiae on the plant growth and survival, was 
masked by the bacterial community. In the presence of the core microbiome, the C. 
tofieldiae treated plants reached plant growth similar to that of plants without the 
C. tofieldiae treatment and rescued 30% of the plants from the detrimental effects 
of the fungus. The differences observed in the C. tofieldiae  treated root 
microbiome are mostly in the relative abundance of Flavobacteria and -
Proteobacteria, with Flavobacteria being decreased and the -Proteobacteria 
increased. De Boer et al. (2001) showcased the mycolytic activity of members of 
-Proteobacteria (CbetaPs), which are able to inhibit fungal growth followed by the 
proliferation of -Proteobacteria. The decrease of Flavobacteria members may be 
just an effect of the proliferation of -Proteobacteria. These observations highlight 
the contribution of the root core microbiome to the plant health, development and 
defense towards root pathogens, in agreement to previous findings (Haas and 
Dfago, 2005; Whipps, 2001) and its potential in agriculture.  
4.3.3 The presence of the bacterial community eliminates the fungal presence 
in the plant root and the matrix 
In order to further investigate the interaction between the fungal species 
studies in this chapter and the core microbiome, the relative abundance of the fungi 
at the end of the experiment was calculated. The chosen method to determine fungal 
presence and colonisation was through amplicon sequencing. However, this method 
only gives information on the relative abundance and it is more suitable for samples 
of higher complexity (i.e. microbiome community samples). Nevertheless, the 
amplicon sequencing data gave an insight in the relative abundance of the fungi in 
the system, showing a significant reduction (p < 0.001) of the relative abundance 
of both fungi in the presence of the bacterial community. The reason for the 
unsuccessful colonisation of the root by S. indica, despite applying the optimal 
inoculation method (Ghaffari et al., 2016; Harrach et al., 2013; Pedrotti et al., 2013; 
Vahabi et al., 2016), could be due to competition with certain members of the 
bacterial community as observed in the past between certain bacterial and fungal 
species (Mille-Lindblom et al., 2006). As previously mentioned, S. indica has been 
studied for its beneficial effects but also for the interactions with other organisms. 
It is well known that the bacteria compete with fungi for the same niche (Rousk et 
al., 2008), but also it has been shown that certain bacteria can feed on fungal hyphae 
or fungal exudates (Leveau and Preston, 2008). In more detail, the fluorescent 
Pseudomonas, Bacillus spp. and Burkholderia spp. are known as biological control 
agents based on their ability to produce antifungal metabolites and affect the 
symbiosis of fungal mutualists with the plant (Raaijmakers et al., 2009). In fact, 
assays on plates have shown that Pseudomonas strains, like Pseudomonas 
fluorescens WS5 and SS101, inhibited the growth of S.indica (Varma et al., 2012). 
Moreover, Meena et al., (2010) showed that the root colonisation of S. indica can 
be regulated by Pseudomonas striata. Representatives of those taxa were present in 
the synthetic community and they might have influenced the growth of S. indica 
and its successful colonisation through those antifungal compounds. Furthermore, 
Kumar Bhuyan et al., (2015) investigated the interaction of S. indica with the 
bacteria Azotobacter chroococcum. While one Azotobacter strain showed a positive 
interaction with the fungus, another strain of the same species had inhibitory effects, 
highlighting the ability of bacteria to influence the growth and physiology of the 
fungus. As a result, it is important to keep in mind that  different interactions 
amongst biological kingdoms will have a direct influence on the host plants (Kumar 
Bhuyan et al., 2015). These examples showcase how bacteria can influence S. 
indica growth and colonisation, and it is a likely explanation of the inhibition of S. 
indica in the gnotobiotic system experiments (Figure 3.22). Similar might be the 
case of C. tofieldiae, even though the inhibition of plant pathogenic fungi by 
endophytic bacteria is broadly known (Berg and Hallmann, 2007; Haas and Dfago, 
2005; van Loon et al., 2002). An interaction experiment as presented by Vorholt et 
al., (2017), where interactions among all members of the microbiome are tested, 
could provide further details and reveal positive or negative interactions between 
the members of the bacterial collection and the fungi, and give some indications on 
synergism and antagonism of the fungus with those bacteria.  
4.3.4 The robustness and the limitations of the gnotobiotic system 
The alpha and beta diversity of the microbiome could provide information 
on the structure and the composition of the microbiome. While the beta diversity 
revealed no differences between the compartments and the treatments, the alpha 
diversity revealed significant differences in the richness and evenness of the 
microbiome between the input culture, the root samples and the matrix samples. 
The matrix samples had the lowest species richness and evenness. The differences 
in the microbial community observed between the matrix and the root are expected, 
due to competition at the root surface as well as root exudates that are produced by 
plants that attract or repel certain microbes (Carvalhais et al., 2011; Dennis et al., 
2010). In addition, the bacterial culture used was isolated and characterised as the 
core rhizobiome of Arabidopsis, indicating the preference of those bacteria to 
inhabit the root rhizo/endosphere of the plant (Bai et al., 2015), which might explain 
the lower number of OTUs observed in the matrix samples. The fungal pre-
treatment did not have an effect on the number of observed OTUs, but certain 
differences were observed at the Shannon Index values (species evenness). In more 
detail, the species evenness of the samples treated with fungi (matrix and root) was 
not significantly different than that of the input culture. In contrast, the Shannon 
Index of the matrix samples containing only bacteria where significantly lower than 
the input culture and the root samples containing fungi. This could indicate that the 
fungi may play a role in the establishment of the microbes in this habitant.  
It would be challenging to further investigate the biological basis of the 
results of this experiment, and whether the interactions observed are due to the 
specific experimental set up. One first step to unravel the fundamental mechanisms 
of those interactions would be investigating the dynamics between the 
microorganisms and the plants at early stages of colonisation by harvesting samples 
at different time points, as research has shown that there are enormous differences 
in the microbiome structure and composition over time (Qiao et al., 2017; Yuan et 
al., 2015). Such an experiment would give an insight into the establishment of the 
balance in the system as well as how this is achieved and would provide further 
information on the robustness and reproducibility of the experimental system. 
Furthermore, sampling the rhizosphere and the endosphere independently would be 
an additional step that could give different results. That is because rhizosphere 
microbiome is more similar to the soil microbiome (Hacquard et al., 2015), and 
therefore might be masking the differences, if the endospheric microbiome was 
more distinct. Nevertheless, the knowledge gained from this pioneering experiment 
is a promising starting point for the usage of such a simplified gnotobiotic system 
in revealing regulatory principles in the establishment of microbial communities.  
Similar research employing gnotobiotic system and synthetic microbial 
communities, has confirmed the practicality and utility of such experimental set up 
observed in my experiments. For instance Durn et al. (2018) used the same 
experimental set up to study interkingdom interactions and demonstrated the 
necessity of the bacterial microbiome for plant growth and survival. They employed 
part of the bacterial collection used in this study, as well as a collection of fungi and 
Oomycetes. Their study demonstrated that the fungal community was detrimental 
for plant survival but was suppressed in the presence of the bacteria, which rescued 
the plant. They further showed that the Flavobacteriaceae, Pseudomonadaceae, 
Comamonadaceae and Rhizobiaceae are highly competitive families in this system. 
Those families are also the most abundant families in my study in all samples 
(Figure S4.1), which confirms the robustness and reproducibility of this 
experimental set up, as well as of the observed results. Furthermore, even though 
the number of the input bacteria was 148 isolates, they could only detect 65 OTUs 
in their MiSeq run. Similarly, in my experiment the input number of bacterial 
isolates was 200 but only 78 OTUs (or 54 after rarefying) were detected after 
sequencing. In both experiments the number of observed OTUs is similar, as well 
as the observed balance in the community structure (most abundant families). This 
is probably due to some of the strains being lost from inoculation to harvesting day 
or during the MiSeq library preparation, or too low in abundance to be detected in 
the sequencing. They also showed that the combination of bacterial and fungal 
community induced similar levels of plant growth as observed in plants inoculated 
with the bacterial community only, and the maximum growth was achieved only in 
the presence of all bacterial, fungal and oomycete communities. Taken together, it 
highlights the reproducibility of data and, hence, robustness of the experimental set 
up used in my work. 
4.3.5 Conclusions and future perspectives 
The gnotobiotic system can enable the study of the mechanisms involved in 
the dynamic changes within the community, as well as the lifestyle transition of 
microbes under certain conditions. This current work showcases that the 
Arabidopsis thaliana core microbiome establish its colonisation in the root and 
maintains a similar community structure irrespectively of the fungal treatments 
used. In addition, this core bacterial community is able to rescue plants from fatality 
caused by C. tofieldiae. The observed effect of the bacteria on fungal colonisation 
could have remarkable potential for agricultural applications as biocontrol agents 
for fungal pathogens (Haas and Dfago, 2005; Whipps, 2001). Research suggests 
that recruitment of certain microbes by the root can enhance plant health and 
resistance to pathogens (Berendsen et al., 2012; Hartmann et al., 2009). 
Understanding these interactions could enable the manipulation of microbiomes, 
for example, through microbiome engineering (Orozco-Mosqueda et al., 2018), and 
to combat devastating plant pathogens (Sergaki et al., 2018).  
The reproducibility of the system as observed when comparing our study 
with that of Duran et al. (2018) make this system a robust tool for unraveling the 
complex interactions within this small, simplified ecosystem, particularly in 
combination with other omics methods such as transcriptomics, proteomics and 
metabolomics. Such an approach would enable the understanding of the differential 
effect of two fungi known as beneficial, with S. indica maintaining its beneficial 
properties while C. tofieldiae had detrimental effect on the plant growth and 
survival. Furthermore, while it highlights the potential of the beneficial symbiont 
S. indica inoculant for field application, it is important to better study its 
establishment and the interactions in the presence of other competitive microbial 
communities in order to ensure its effectiveness when used as agricultural 
inoculant. 
Chapter 5: Influence of rhizobia strains on the 
composition of the core root microbiome of Medicago 
truncatula in natural UK soils 
5.1 Introduction 
Lab based research has set a benchmark for studying the fundamentals of 
microbiome, however, the application of microbiomes in agriculture should focus on 
improving the most vital aspects of crop production, such as nutrient availability, soil 
fertility and health (Syed Ab Rahman et al., 2018). In this respect, microbiome 
research can provide sustainable solutions by uncovering the interactions within 
microbiomes and with the host under natural conditions. Bridging the lab  field gap 
has become a necessity in order to exploit the full potential of microbiomes in 
agriculture. However, it requires more short and long-term field experiments, aiming 
to understand the complex dynamics of the communities in nature and the effect of the 
environment and the farming practices on them (Parnell et al., 2016; Schlaeppi and 
Bulgarelli, 2015). 
Nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium can be a major limitation for plants which 
often is compromised by the use of fertilizers. While excessive use of fertilizers is 
associated with environmental pollution (Good and Beatty, 2011), extensive research 
on soil and plant-associated microorganisms that enhance plant production has shown 
the enormous potential of using microbial communities as a sustainable solution to 
certain unsustainable farming practices (Bakker et al., 2012; Busby et al., 2017; 
Chaparro et al., 2012; Schlaeppi and Bulgarelli, 2015; Sergaki et al., 2018). In this 
respect, legumes can play a vital role. Legume plants hold major roles in agriculture 
and in ecological systems (e.g. enriching soil with nitrogen), making them very 
important for ecosystem functioning including agricultural fields (Sprent et al., 2017). 
This eco-beneficial potential of legumes is closely linked with their ability to establish 
bacterial symbioses. Certain soil bacteria support plants, e,g., plant growth-promoting 
rhizobacteria (PGPR), are known as natural biofertilizers and are occupiers of the same 
niche in the plant as phytopathogens and microbes stimulating plant nutrient 
acquisition (Glick, 2015; Martnez-Viveros et al., 2010). One taxon of PGPR is 
rhizobia, which are known for their ability to form symbiosis with legume roots and 
fix atmospheric nitrogen (Zahran, 1999). These bacteria are able to take up nitrogen 
(N2) from the air, a molecule not available to the plant, and transform it to plant 
available ammonium (NH4+) (Udvardi and Poole, 2013). In exchange, the plant host 
will give rhizobia carbon compounds such as sugars and amino acids (Oldroyd et al., 
2011). Harnessing the full potential of this symbiotic relationship can establish levels 
of nitrogen required in agricultural crop production and decrease the use of chemical 
fertilizers (Howieson et al., 2000). Production of nitrogen fertilizers is dependent on 
the Haber-Bosch process, an energy-demanding process that uses 1-2% of worlds 
energy resources. Moreover, for every ton of N-fertilizer manufactured and used, ~9.7 
tons of greenhouse gas CO2-equivalent are produced (Smith, 2002). Therefore, 
decreasing the production and use of nitrogen fertilizers would have a beneficial 
impact on the environment developing strategies to achieve this is therefore a main 
goal for sustainable agriculture. 
In addition to nitrogen, soil phosphorus availability is a major limitation for 
plant growth and fitness, including legume plants associated with rhizobia (Vance et 
al., 2003). Even though phosphorus is present in many soil types across the world, it 
is mostly inaccessible always for plants (Akinrinde et al., 2006). While arbuscular 
mycorrhizas are well-studied as plant symbiotic fungi that can enhance plant 
phosphorus supply (Richardson, 2002), this can have negative effects on plant growth 
in cases where mycorrhiza compete with plants for nitrogen under low nitrogen 
conditions (Wang et al., 2018). Serendipita indica (formerly Piriformospora indica) 
has demonstrated an increased ability to improve phosphorus nutrition, along with 
plant growth (Johri et al., 2015). The co-inoculation of S. indica and a growth 
promoting rhizobacteria (Pseudomonas striata) has previously shown synergistic 
effects; e.g. enhancing plant growth and colonisation by the PGPR bacteria (Meena et 
al., 2010). Based on these findings, S. indica was used with a Sinorhizobium meliloti 
strain and the model legume Medicago trancatula to investigate their combined effect 
on plant yield and nutrient acquisition.  
I used Medicago truncatula for my studies as an accepted model organism for 
legumes and for the association with nitrogen-fixing bacteria (Barker et al., 1990; 
Cook, 1999). A nitrogen-fixing bacterium often associated with this model organism 
is Sinorhizobium meliloti, which has been extensively studied (Galibert et al., 2001; 
Jones et al., 2007; Marx et al., 2016). The Sinorhizobium meliloti strain 1021 is most 
commonly studied with Medicago truncatula (Zhao et al., 2012), while additional 
nitrogen-fixing strains such as Sinorhizobium meliloti 1022 and Sinorhizobium 
medicae 419 (formerly Sinorhizobium meliloti) have attracted some attention in recent 
years (Terpolilli et al., 2008). Sinorhizobium meliloti 1022 was isolated from a field of 
a Greek island and it is characterised as a highly effective rhizobial strain (Terpolilli 
et al., 2013). Sinorhizobium medicae 419, formerly known as Sinorhizobium meliloti 
WSM 419 (Hellweg et al., 2009) was isolated from Sardinia (Howieson and Ewing, 
1986) and it has been studied for its positive effect on plant growth (Larrainzar et al., 
2014; Reeve et al., 2006; Tiwari et al., 1996). These three strains were chosen for this 
study in order to investigate how synergistic interactions with co-inoculated S. indica 
might differ when in combination with rhizobia with variation in N-fixing efficiency 
Nutrient uptake can be facilitated and significantly altered by the microbiome 
(Carvalhais et al., 2013). Revealing the microbial dynamics that influence changes in 
plant growth and nutrition under different environmental conditions could encourage 
the exploitation of microbiomes in agriculture (Sergaki et al., 2018). Alongside with 
the tripartite interaction between Medicago trancatula, Sinorhizobium spp. and S. 
indica, microbial communities as well as plant and soil biochemical characteristics 
were examined, aiming to unravel the effects of the co-symbioses on the system. 
Microbiome composition changes in dependency of environment biochemical 
properties, day length, geographic position and biotic factors (Lozupone and Knight, 
2007). Correlations between soil bacterial communities and environmental factors 
have been made before, and it is believed that bacterial abundances can be predicted 
by those environmental factors (Griffiths et al., 2011). Research on the microbiome is 
complex due to its dependency on the conditions of soil ecosystems, one of the most 
biodiverse ecosystems on earth (Whitman et al., 1998). Microbiome research has both 
shown that microbial communities with different composition have similar functional 
capacities (Nannipieri et al., 2003; Wertz et al., 2006) as well as that microbial 
community composition reflects specific function (Balser and Firestone, 2005; 
Paterson et al., 2011). This striking contradiction reflects the complexity and 
challenges associated with microbiome studies and highlighting the necessity in 
assigning functions to microbiome members within ecosystem processes (Koranda et 
al., 2014). For this reason, the tripartite system was analysed in different UK 
agricultural soil types that differ in defined biochemical characteristics. The three soil 
types were characterised according to their phosphate (PO43-) and nitrate (NO3-) 
content as Low NP, Low N high P, High NP soil. 
The working hypothesis was that rhizobia are able to alter the microbiome, 
assisting the recruitment of beneficial taxa inside the root in order to benefit the plant. 
It was also expected that in the presence of rhizobia and the recruited microbiome, the 
plant nutrient composition would be altered, as a consequence of the altered 
microbiome. It was expected that microbial community composition will vary 
depending on the soil type leading to different results in plant growth and nutrition. 
The ultimate aim was to unravel key functions of microbe - microbe and plant root  
microbe interactions associated with the environment and the phenotypes observed. 
5.2 Results  
5.2.1 S. meliloti spp. differ in their ability to promote growth in dependency of 
nutrient composition in natural soils 
For the establishment of a complex tripartite system comprising a fungus, a 
bacterium and a plant, it is important to establish an inoculation procedure that will 
ensure the colonisation of the plant by all microbes and the presence of the beneficial 
attributes of the microbes. The co-inoculation of S. indica and the rhizobia strains was 
first tested in perlite, prior moving on to the three soil types. M. truncatula plants were 
inoculated 1 day after being transferred to the perlite pots. Fresh shoot weight and the 
fungal colonisation were quantified 49 dai (52 day old plants). For the experiments in 
the natural soil types, M. trancatula plants were inoculated with the microbes as 
mentioned above, or with sterile water (mock), in perlite pots and transferred to the 
pots with natural soil 11 days later (12 day old plants). The efficiency of the co-
inoculation was assessed using phenotypic data and quantification of the fungal 
colonisation 63 dai, (66 day old plants).  
The plant yield results, measured as the aboveground dry weight, showed no 
significant additional enhancement of plant growth in plants co-inoculated with S. 
meliloti spp. and S. indica (Figure 5.1). The visual assessment using qPCR of plant 
fungal colonisation showed that despite having a good colonisation in the presence of 
the different rhizobial strains in perlite, S. indica was significantly reduced or not 
detectable in natural soil types (Figure 5.2). 
Figure 5.1: Effect of co-symbiosis on plant yield. Plant yield (g) under different 
conditions and substrates in the absence (light grey bars representing single 
treatments) or the presence (dark grey bars representing co-inoculations) of S. indica. 
A) Fresh shoot weight of 52 day old M. truncatula plants relative to control treated 
plants grown with replete nitrogen (15mM NH4NO3), 49dai. B) Dry shoot weight of 
66 day old M. truncatula plants grown in low NP soil type, 63 dai. C) Dry shoot weight 
of 66 day old M. truncatula plants grown in low N high P soil type, 63 dai. D) Dry 
shoot weight of 66 day old M. truncatula plants grown in high NP soil type, 63 dai. 
Mean values are shown with standard error. 
Control S.m. 419 S.m. 1022
Low NP no S. indicaS. indica
Control S.m. 419 S.m. 1022
Low N high P no S. indicaS. indica
Control S.m. 419 S.m. 1022
High NP no S. indicaS. indica
mock S.m. 1021 S.m. 419 S.m. 1022
perlite no S. indica
S. indica
Figure 5.2: Root colonisation by S. indica. Amount of S. indica fungal genomic DNA 
relative to plant genomic DNA found in root samples of plants inoculated with S. 
indica (left) or inoculated with S. indica and the high efficiency rhizobial strains 
(middle and right). Results are from all substrates analysed, in perlite 49 dai (52 day 
old plants) and in the 3 different soil types 56 dai (59 day old plants). Mean Ct values 
are shown with standard error. 
The analyses suggest that the differences in bacterial and fungal growth rates 
requires a well-balanced amount of fungal vs. bacterial inoculum. As it is challenging 
to optimise inoculum concentrations and conditions (which might further differ 
between soil types) to buffer such microbe-microbe growth dynamics it was decided 
to focus on characterising the mechanism and effects of the rhizobial strains on plant 
fitness.  
5.2.2 Characterisation of soil types 
The soils used in this experiment were chosen for their distinct characteristics 
and representative for around 70% of UK soil types used in agriculture. Various tests 
were performed in order to assess their texture, nutrient content and microbiome 
composition at the start of the experiment. Crop rotation data for the preceeding 4 
years prior to the collection of the soils for this experiment was also obtained from the 
farmers or researchers that managed the land (Table 5.1).  
Soil texture and the organic matter content were quantified (Figure 5.1A) and 
no significant differences were found using ANOVA followed by Tukeys HSD test. 
However, there is significantly more silt and less sand content found in the high NP 
soil in comparison to the other two soil types (Figure 5.2B). Based on Rhodes (2013), 
low NP and low N high P soil types are categorised as sandy loams, and the high NP 
is categorised as loam (Rhodes, 2013). The high NP soil is also characterised by 
significantly higher pH and conductivity (Figure 5.4A and B). The soil nitrogen (N) 
and phosphorus (P) available to the plant are significantly different in every soil type 
as indicated by the soil attributes (e.g. low, high) (Figure 5.4C, D). However, low N 
high P soil type has significantly higher available P than the high NP soil. Soil C:N 
ratio, C % and N% content is significantly higher at the high NP soil type in 
comparison to the low NP soil type (Figure 5.4E, F).  
Table 5.1: Crop rotation for each soil type for the last 4 years before soil collection 
for these experiments. 
Figure 5.2: Soil organic matter and texture characteristics. A) Percentage of organic 
matter found in each soil type referred to total soil weight and B) soil texture presented 
as the percentage of clay, silt and sand content for each soil type.  
Soil 2013/14 2014/15 2015/16 2016/17
Low NP Winter wheat Grass / weeds Grass / weeds Grass / Weeds
Low N high P Winter wheat Oilseed rape Winter wheat Winter Barley
High NP Fennel Celeriac Beet Wheat
Figure 5.4: Soil chemical characteristics before the experiments were set up showing 
initial differences amongst soil types. A) pH; B) Conductivity; C) Available nitrogen 
(N); D) Available phosphorus (P); E) Ratio of soil carbon:nitrogen (C:N); F) 
Percentage of total soil nitrogen (soil N%) and total soil carbon (soil C%). Means are 
shown with standard error and letters represent significant differences according to 
ANOVA followed by to Tukeys HDS (p < 0.001). 
An important soil characteristic for this experiment is the microbiome 
composition. Therefore, the soil microbiome was sampled before the start of the 
experiment and sequenced using Illumina Miseq. The microbiome alpha and beta 
diversity, determining the within sample and between sample diversity respectively, 
was analysed using rarefied reads. The number of observed OTUs in each sample was 
low N
high P
pH a a
low N
high P
low N
high P
low N
high P
soil N % soil C %
low NP
low N high P
high NP
low N
high P
A) B)
C) D)
E) F)
calculated as a measure of alpha diversity. The number of observed bacterial OTUs in 
the High NP input soil was significantly higher than the input soil samples of low NP 
soil type. Moreover, the planted and unplanted (soil without plant) samples of the high 
NP soil type contained significantly higher numbers of OTUs than any other sample. 
When plotting the beta diversity in a PCoA plot, this revealed a cluster of all high NP 
soil type samples, while the low NP and the low N high P soil types cluster together 
(Figure 5.5).  
Figure 5.5: Bacterial community richness and structure. A) Bacterial community 
alpha diversity presented as the number of observed OTUs in each sample type: input 
soil, planted (mock-treated) and unplanted soil in the different soil types. Letters 
observed otus soils
high NP
low NP
low N high P 
0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08
-0.10
-0.05
all soils
PC1 (70.01%)
input
planted soil
unplanted soil
input
planted 
unplanted soil
input
planted soil
unplanted soil
low NP
low N
high P
high NP
represent significant differences according to ANOVA followed by to Tukeys HDS (p 
< 0.001). Boxplots represent the median value (black bar inside the box) and whiskers 
represent quartile distribution; outlier data points are depicted as black dots outside 
the boxplots. B) beta diversity presented as bacterial community structure using 
Principle Coordinates Analysis (PCoA). The first two dimensions of PCoA are plotted 
based on Bray-Curtis distances (rarefied reads used) and they explain 80.38% of the 
variation in the data. 
In contrast to the bacterial community results, the number of fungal observed 
OTUs in the High NP soil was significantly lower than in the rest of the soils. Different 
to bacterial samples, fungal samples clustered according to the soil type in three 
clusters representing the beta diversity in the PCoA plot (Figure 5.6).  
Figure 5.6: Fungal community richness and structure. A) Fungal community alpha 
diversity presented as the number of observed OTUs in each sample type: input soil, 
planted (mock-treated) and unplanted soil in the different soil types. Letters represent 
significant differences according to ANOVA followed by to Tukeys HDS (p < 0.001). 
Boxplots represent the median value (black bar inside the box) and whiskers represent 
quartile distribution, outlier data points are depicted as black dots outside the 
boxplots. B) beta diversity presented as bacterial community structure using Principle 
Coordinates Analysis (PCoA). The first two dimensions of PCoA are plotted based on 
Bray-Curtis distances (rarefied reads used) and they explain 83.15% of the variation 
in the data. 
observed otus fungi soils
high NP
low NP
low N high P 
bcd cd d cd
-0.02 0.00 0.02 0.04 0.06 0.08
-0.10
-0.05
soils fungi
PC1 (61.46%)
input
planted soil
unplanted soil
input
planted soil
unplanted soil
input
planted soil
unplanted soillow NP
low N
high P
high NP
The alpha and beta diversity of the soil microbiome revealed different patterns 
in the bacterial and the fungal community. To further assess differences in the 
composition of the microbial communities, taxonomy was assigned to the OTUs and 
presented as relative abundance % (RA) (Figure 5.7).  
Figure 5.7: Bacterial and fungal community composition. A) Relative abundances % 
of bacterial taxa at the phylum level, and B) fungal taxa at the order level, shown as 
percentage of all reads and colour-coded, calculated using rarefied reads. Other 
refers to unassigned and low abundant bacterial taxa, while this is split to 
Unassigned and Low abundant taxa for fungi. 
The subsequent analysis of the bacterial community composition using 
SIMPER showed similarities among soil samples (~8% overall dissimilarity) with the 
Actinobacteria contributing 27% to the differences, followed by Acidobacteria which 
contribute 16% to the differences (Table 5.2). In the fungal community (~18% overall 
dissimilarity based on SIMPER), Sordariomycetes contributed 29% to the differences 
observed among soil samples, followed by the Eurotiomycetes which contribute 22% 
to the differences (Table 5.2).  
Table 5.2: Microbial taxa contributing to the differences in community structure.  
 The mean values of the Relative Abundance (%) of all samples are shown. Analysis of 
Similarity Percentages (SIMPER) showing bacterial taxa that contributed most of the 
dissimilarities (2%) of the bacterial communities and the fungal taxa that contributed 
to the dissimilarities of the fungal communities. 
Bacteria
Mean values
Low NP soil Low N high P soil High NP soil
Taxon Contrib. % input planted unplanted input planted unplanted input planted unplanted
Actinobacteria 27.33 30 28.6 28 31.1 28.4 26.8 37.5 33.8 31.4
Acidobacteria 16.5 12.6 12.8 11.3 12.6 13 13.3 8.12 9.5 8.68
Firmicutes 10.89 7.13 7.48 6.95 5.55 5.9 6.42 5.57 3.87 4.03
Verrucomicrobia 10.27 3.17 3.31 3.8 3.31 2.99 4.17 0.754 1.25 1.23
Proteobacteria 9.214 19 20.2 20.8 19.3 20.1 21.1 18.8 20.2 22.2
Other 6.222 5.42 5.31 5.97 4.55 4.96 5.03 2.98 4.84 4.9
Gemmatimonadetes 5.857 3.92 4 4.2 4.68 4.54 5.17 5.45 5.79 5.33
Chloroflexi 5.573 12.4 11.8 12.7 12.1 12.8 11.2 12.6 12.7 13.6
Planctomycetes 4.99 5.75 6.01 5.67 6.09 6.66 6.08 6.5 6.43 7.8
Bacteroidetes 3.164 0.683 0.608 0.625 0.787 0.658 0.7 1.71 1.62 0.9
Fungi
Mean values
Low NP soil Low N high P soil High NP soil
Taxon Contrib. % input planted unplanted input planted unplanted input planted unplanted
Sordariomycetes 29.09 35.7 34.3 37 44.6 44.4 47 51.9 56.8 58.5
Eurotiomycetes 22.07 19.8 20.2 21.9 12.8 14.6 9.16 4.82 5.99 5.3
Unassigned 13.32 16.5 18.4 18.5 17.4 19.1 23.5 30.7 21.4 23.6
Dothideomycetes 10.84 11.2 10.1 7.79 15.2 12 10.7 6.74 5.25 5.31
Leotiomycetes 8.051 7.79 6.99 5.2 2.91 2.76 4.54 0.91 1.95 1.16
Agaricomycetes 7.213 6.01 6.07 6.16 2.85 1.91 1.4 1.21 4.05 0.71
Pezizomycetes 4.218 0.84 0.62 0.94 0.3 0.64 0.58 2.85 3.02 4.26
Tremellomycetes 3.587 1.65 2.56 2.2 2.6 3.54 2.69 0.44 0.64 0.52
Other 1.059 0.26 0.28 0.2 1.36 0.91 0.46 0.44 0.38 0.43
Glomeromycetes 0.4548 0.22 0.44 0.08 0.04 0.13 0.05 0.05 0.39 0.11
The observed differences of microbiomes from different soil types could be 
explained by edaphic factors and therefore daphic factors were integrated with the 
bacterial and fungal microbiome using Canonical Correspondence Analysis (Figure 
5.8). This analysis revealed that the bacterial and fungal community of the high NP 
soil type is associated with increased soil pH, conductivity, total C and available N, 
while the fungal community of this soil type is associated with high CN ratio. The 
fungal community of the low N high P soil type is associated with increased available 
P, whereas the fungal community of the low NP soil type is associated with the 
depletion of all edaphic factors and slight increases of total N in the soil. Soil pH, 
conductivity, CN ratio, total soil C and total N as well as soil N and P available to the 
plant and explain the 75.39% of the differences in the bacterial community structure 
and the 75.72% of the differences in the fungal community structure as shown from 
the CCA plots. 
Figure 5.8: Correlation of edaphic factors with microbial community structure. 
Canonical Correspondence Analysis (CCA) illustrating the effect of edaphic factors 
on the A) soil bacterial and B) fungal community structure in the input and planted 
(mock-treated) soil samples. The two first axis of the CCA are plotted explaining the 
75.39% and the 75.72% of the differences in the bacterial and fungal community 
structure respectively. 
Overall, the three soil types are characterized by distinct microbial 
communities as well as varying biochemical characteristics. The high NP soil type has 
conductivity
soil C:N
available N
Soil C%
Soil N% available P
-2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
CCA 1 (59.63%)
Bacteria
conductivity
soil C:N
available N
Soil C%
Soil N%
available P
-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
CCA 1 (52.22%)
FungiA) B)
Input 
Planted
Low N high P
High NP 
Low NP 
Input 
Planted
Low N high P
High NP 
Low NP 
higher conductivity, pH, available nitrate, C:N ratio, C and N content and lower fungal 
OTU richness than low NP and low N high P soil types, as well as distinct bacterial 
community structure. Fungal community structure was different between all soil types 
and bacterial community composition is characterised by the strong presence of 
proteobacteria. These differences between the chosen soil types will help unravel the 
different effect that soil factors can have on plant growth and nutrient acquisition, as 
well as the effect of rhizobial inoculants under different conditions. 
5.2.3 Effect of rhizobial strains on Medicago truncatula growth in different soil 
types 
The three different soil types as described above were used to investigate 
growth promoting properties of the three rhizobial strains on Medicago truncatula 
(Figure 5.9). M. trancatula plants were inoculated 1 day after being transferred to 
perlite pots and were moved to the pots with natural soil 11 dai (14 day old plants). 
The efficiency of the co-inoculation was assessed using phenotypic data and 
quantification of the fungal colonisation 63 dai, (66 day old plants).  
 Overall, rhizobial strain 419 enhanced plant growth in low NP and low N high 
P soil types, whereas 1022 enhanced plant growth in all soil types (Figure 5.10). The 
most appropriate sampling time point was determined to be 63 dai using growth curves 
(Figure S5.1). 
Figure 5.9: Comparison of plant growth of Medicago truncatula in different soil types 
and treatments. Representative picture of 4 biological repeats showing 66 day old 
Medicago truncatula plants grown under different treatments (mock, Sm1021, Sm419, 
Sm1022) and soil types (low NP, low N high P, high NP), 63 dai. Treatments represent 
mock (sterile water) and rhizobia inoculations with 3 different Sinorhizobium strains 
(S. meliloti 1021, S. medicae 419, S. meliloti 1022). 
Low NP
High NP
Low N 
high P
mock S.m. 1022S.m. 1021 S.m. 419
10 cm
Figure 5.10: Dry shoot weight of Medicago truncatula in different soil types and 
treatments. Box plots indicating 66 day old Medicago truncatula plant weight under 
different treatments and soil types, 63 dai, based on above ground dry weight (g). 
Treatments represent mock (sterile water) and rhizobia inoculations with 3 different 
Sinorhizobium strains (S. meliloti 1021, S. medicae 419, S. meliloti 1022). Letters 
represent significant differences according to ANOVA followed by to Tukeys HDS (p 
< 0.001). Boxplots represent the median value (black bar inside the box) and whiskers 
represent quartile distribution. Outlier data points are depicted as black dots outside 
the boxplots. 
Finally, from these results it was clear that only S. meliloti 1022 increased the 
plant yield significantly in all soil types (based on ANOVA followed by Tukeys HSD 
test, p < 0.001) (Figure 5.10). Thus, S. meliloti 1022 was chosen for the following 
experiments studying the microbiome changes in the presence and absence of the 
rhizobial inoculant, in different soil types and the consequent effect on plant growth 
and nutrient acquisition.  
5.2.4 S. meliloti 1022 alters the bacterial but not the fungal community structure 
in Medicago truncatula roots in different soil types 
Roots from mock and S. meliloti 1022-treated Medicago truncatula plants were 
collected and processed for sequencing as described at the methods sections 2.10 and 
2.11. As soil is referred to bulk soil from pots grown with plants, sampled in distance 
from the roots, rhizosphere (rhizo) was defined as the microbes at the surface of the 
root and endosphere (endo) covered the inside of the root, clean from all the microbes 
on the surface of the root. Dried plant shoot tissue and soil samples were stored at 
room temperature for further nutrient analyses at the end of the experiment. These data 
enable the association of changes in microbial community structure, plant and soil 
nutrient content as well as the effect of the rhizobial strain. 
Microbiome libraries were constructed individually for fungi and bacteria and 
were subjected to Next Generation Sequencing using Illumina Miseq. The sequencing 
data were analysed using QIIME and plotted using principle coordinates analysis 
(PCoA) based on Bray Curtis distance matrices (Figure 5.11). All samples were plotted 
together in order to observe common patterns and differences between the soil types, 
however, individual PCoA plots for each soil type can be found at the next section. 
Bacterial and fungal communities of soil and rhizosphere samples of high NP soil 
clustered together and separately from all the rest of the samples, whereas soil and 
rhizosphere samples of low NP and low N high P clustered closer, as previously 
observed when analysing only the input, planted (mock-treated) and unplanted soils. 
In more detail, bulk soil bacterial communities of low NP and low N high P soil types 
clustered together, whereas some rhizosphere samples tended to create a separate 
cluster, between soil and endosphere samples (Figure 5.11A). Bulk soil and 
rhizosphere microbiomes were not separated by the treatment. The endosphere 
samples created two clear clusters distinguished by the treatment (Figure 5.11A). The 
bulk soil fungal communities in low NP and low N high P soil types clustered 
separately, yet closer than to the high NP soil type. However, some rhizosphere 
samples from low NP and low N high P soil types clustered between soil and 
rhizosphere samples (Figure 5.11B). All endosphere samples of all soil types and 
treatments clustered together.  
Figure 5.11: Bacterial and fungal community structure including all treatments and 
soil types. Bacterial community (A) and fungal community (B) beta diversity presented 
as microbiome structure using Principle Coordinates Analysis (PCoA). The first two 
dimensions of PCoA are plotted based on Bray-Curtis distances (rarefied reads used) 
and they explain 80.38% and 83.25% of the variation in the data respectively. 
Following the determination of microbiome beta diversity using PCoA, 
Analysis of similarities (ANOSIM) was performed for bacterial and fungal 
microbiomes to determine if there were any significant changes in the community 
structure between the different sample types. The P and R values were calculated and 
presented as a heatmap (Tables 5.2 and 5.3).  
The heatmap is divided by the diagonal from top left to bottom right 
corresponding to same sample comparisons, the ANOSIM-P values are presented on 
the bottom left side of that diagonal. P values <0.05 indicate significant differences 
and are highlighted in blue, e.g community structure of the mock-treated endosphere 
in low N high P soil type is significantly different (P-value 0.0276) from the 
community of the mock-treated endosphere in low NP soil type. ANOSIM-R values 
are presented on the top right side of the diagonal. R values that are very close to 1 
show highly different samples and are coloured in dark blue, e.g community structure 
in the mock-treated endosphere in low N high P soil type is very different (R-value 
0.9745) from the community in the mock-treated endosphere in low NP soil type, and 
values closer to 0 indicate indifferent samples. The data on the ANOSIM tables 
indicate that the differences observed on the PCoA plots above (Figure 5.11) are 
significant. Therefore, most of the bacterial microbiome samples of the high NP soil 
type are highly different than the other two soil types and all endosphere samples are 
highly different from all other samples (Table 5.3). Similarly, most of the fungal 
microbiome samples of the high NP soil type are highly different than the other two 
soil types, but endosphere samples present higher level of similarity (Table 5.4). These 
tables demonstrate that the differences observed at Figure 5.11 are significant. 
The alpha and beta diversity analyses revealed the broad differences in the 
microbiome. Using analysis of similarity percentages (SIMPER), it was possible to 
identify the taxa that contributed the most to the observed differences. The bacterial 
OTU2, assigned to Rhizobiales species, and fungal OTU3, assigned to 
Sordariomycetes species of the Ascomycota phylum, had the most significant 
contribution to the differences observed among all samples in the bacterial and the 
fungal community, respectively (Table 5.5). The bacterial OTU2, a Rhizobiales 
species, contributed 12% to the differences in the bacterial community, followed by 
two other Proteobacteria species, Methylibium and a Sphigomonaceae species, as well 
as a Micrococcaceae species of the Actinobacteria Phylum, contributing 1% to the 
differences each. The fungal OTU3, Sordariomycetes species, contributed 14% to the 
differences, followed by another Sordariomycetes species which contributed 6% to the 
differences, other Sordariomycetes species including Fusarium and a Eurotiomycetes 
species, that contribute to 1-4% to the observed diversity.  
Table 5.5: Microbial taxa contributing to the differences in community structure 
among all samples.  
Analysis of Similarity Percentages (SIMPER) identifies taxa that contribute to most of 
the dissimilarities (1%) between all the samples of the bacterial and fungal 
communities. 
Bacteria
Fungi
Overall average 
dissimilarity samples Taxon Contrib. % Taxonomy
78.21% all OTU2 12.01 Proteobacteria/Alphaproteobacteria/Rhizobiales
OTU4 1.867 Proteobacteria/Betaproteobacteria/Burkholderiales/Comamonadaceae/Methylibium
OTU8 1.063 Actinobacteria/Actinobacteria/Actinomycetales/Micrococcaceae
OTU13 1.007 Proteobacteria/Alphaproteobacteria/Sphingomonadales/Sphingomonadaceae
Overall average 
dissimilarity 
samples Taxon Contrib. % Taxonomy
71.48% all OTU3 14.08 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Incertae sedis/Ilyonectria/Ilyonectria macrodidyma
OTU2 6.887 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes sp
OTU4 4.666 Ascomycota/Incertae sedis/Incertae sedis/Pseudeurotiaceae/Pseudeurotium sp
OTU6 2.917 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales sp
OTU5 2.856 Ascomycota/Eurotiomycetes/Chaetothyriales/Herpotrichiellaceae sp
OTU9 1.714 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Bionectriaceae/Bionectria/Bionectria ochroleuca
OTU13 1.614 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Nectriaceae/Fusarium sp
OTU44 1.561 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Sordariales/Lasiosphaeriaceae/Podospora sp
Due to the high complexity of the experiment, including samples from different 
soil types, compartments, treatments and microbial kingdoms, the bacterial and fungal 
communities were analysed as per soil type, in order to be able to observe the effect 
of the S. meliloti 1022 on the microbiomes in the different soil types. 
As described earlier, the alpha and beta diversity of the bacterial community is 
presented using the number of Observed OTUs and with a PCoA based on Bray-Curtis 
respectively, for each soil type (Figure 5.12). Similar patterns are observed in all soil 
types, with the number of OTUs being significantly lower in the endosphere, 
independently of the soil type and treatment. This number is even lower in the presence 
of S. meliloti 1022 and the beta diversity PCoA plot shows that mainly the endosphere 
is clustered according to the treatment (Figure 5.12). Notably, only the thizosphere 
samples of low NP and low N high P soil types differ significantly to both the bulk 
soil and the endosphere samples in the presence of S. meliloti 1022, whilst this is not 
the case for the mock treatment. 
Figure 5.12: Bacterial community richness and structure in the three different soil 
types. A-C) Alpha diversity of bacterial community presented as the number of 
observed OTUs in each sample type. Letters represent significant differences 
according to ANOVA followed by Tukeys HDS test (p < 0.001). D-F) Beta diversity 
presented as microbiome structure using principle coordinates analysis (PCoA). The 
first two dimensions of PCoA are plotted based on Bray-Curtis distances (rarefied 
reads used). A) and D) refer to low NP soil type, B) and E) to low N high P soil type, 
C) and F) to high NP soil type. 
The alpha and beta diversity of the fungal communities were analysed in the 
same way as the bacterial community. Similar patterns were observed in low NP and 
-0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10
-0.10
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
lowNPsoil
PC1 (70.01%)
rhizo
rhizo
soil rhizo endo soil rhizo endo
observed otus low NP
Mock S.meliloti 1022
soil rhizo endo soil rhizo endo
observed otus N high P 
Mock S.meliloti 1022
-0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
lowN highP soil
PC1 (70.01%)
rhizo
rhizo
soil rhizo endo soil rhizo endo
observed otus high NP
Mock S.meliloti 1022
-0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05
-0.05
highNPsoil
PC1 (70.01%)
) endo
rhizo
rhizo
Low NP soil Low NP soil
High NP soil High NP soil
Low N high P soil Low N high P soil
low N high P soil types, with strong effects of the compartment on both alpha and beta 
diversity whereas the presence of the rhizobial inoculant had no effect on the fungal 
community (Figure 5.13A, B, D, E). In the high NP soil type the microbiome of the 
rhizosphere was indifferent from the soil microbiome, while endosphere microbiome 
clusters had less OTUs independently of the rest of the samples (Figure 5.13C and F). 
For all soil types, S. meliloti 1022 had no effect on the fungal community. 
Figure 5.13: Fungal community richness and structure in the three different soil types. 
Fungal community A), B), C) alpha diversity presented as the number of observed 
OTUs in each sample type, letters represent significant differences according to 
soil rhizo endo soil rhizo endo
observed otus low NP
Mock S.meliloti 1022
-0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05
-0.08
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
lowNPsoil
PC1 (61.46%)
rhizo
rhizo
soil rhizo endo soil rhizo endo
observed otus low N high P 
Mock S.meliloti 1022
-0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05 0.10
-0.06
-0.04
-0.02
lowN highP soil
PC1 (61.46%)
rhizo
rhizo
soil rhizo endo soil rhizo endo
observed otus high NP
Mock S.meliloti 1022
-0.15 -0.10 -0.05 0.00 0.05
highNPsoil
PC1 (61.46%)
rhizo
rhizo
Low NP soil Low NP soil
High NP soil
High NP soil
Low N high P soil
Low N high P soil
ANOVA followed by Tukeys HDS test (p < 0.001) and D), E), F) beta diversity 
presented as microbiome structure using Principle Coordinates Analysis (PCoA). The 
first two dimensions of PCoA are plotted based on Bray-Curtis distances (rarefied 
reads used). A) and D) refer to low NP soil typel, B) and E) to low N high P soil type, 
C) and F) refer to high NP soil type.  
Overall, S. meliloti 1022 affected the bacterial microbiome diversity of the root 
endosphere in all soil types, but not the fungal microbiome diversity. Observed 
differences in the diversity of fungal communities were caused by edaphic factors. 
Major contributions to these differences have the alpha-Proteobacteria and the Order 
Sordariomycetes respectively.  
5.2.5 S. meliloti 1022 alters the composition of bacterial but not fungal 
community in Medicago truncatula roots in different soil types  
In order to investigate the effect of the rhizobial inoculant on the microbiome 
composition, the RA of bacterial and fungal taxa was analysed. This analysis revealed 
taxa with different abundances in the different compartments and soil types in the 
presence of S. meliloti 1022.  
The RA of the bacterial taxa was calculated from rarefied reads and was 
analysed at the phylum level. A gradient effect of the compartment was observed, with 
an increase of Proteobacteria from soil to endosphere in both treatments and all soil 
types (Figure 5.14). Analysis of similarity percentages (SIMPER) showed that OTU2, 
belonging to Proteobacteria and assigned as Rhizobiales sp., had the most significant 
contribution to the differences observed between mock and S. meliloti 1022 samples 
in the endosphere and rhizosphere of all soil types (Table 5.6). This taxon was 
increased in the presence of the rhizobial inoculant in all samples. However, different 
species contributed to differences in the bacterial community composition between 
mock and S. meliloti 1022-treated samples in the endosphere and rhizosphere of all 
soil types (Table 5.6). In high NP soil type, a beta-proteobacteria species 
(Burkholderiales, Comamonadaceae family) contributed 11% to the differences in the 
endosphere and 2.5% to the rhizosphere between the treatments. In the low N high P 
soil type another alpha-proteobacteria species contributed 2.8% to the differences in 
the endosphere and an Actinobacteria species contributed 3.3% to the differences 
between the mock and S. meliloti 1022 samples in the rhizosphere. In the low NP soil 
type Actinobacteria and Chloroflexi species contributed 2.9-3.9% to the differences 
observed in the endosphere and a different Actinobacteria species contributed 3.2% to 
the differences observed in the rhizosphere between the treatments (Table 5.6). 
Figure 5.14: Bacterial community composition in three different soil types. Relative 
abundance of bacterial taxa at the phylum level in A) low NP soil type, B) low N high 
P soil type and C) high NP soil type; shown as percentage of all reads calculated using 
rarefied reads. Other refers to unassigned and low abundant bacterial taxa. 
Table 5.6: Microbial taxa contributing to the differences in community structure in the 
different soil types.  
Analysis of Similarity Percentages (SIMPER) identified taxa that contributed most of 
the dissimilarities (2%) of the bacterial communities between mock samples and 
those inoculated with S. meliloti 1022 (S.m 1022), in the endosphere and rhizosphere 
respectively, in the different soil types. Mean values of the Relative Abundance are 
shown for the mock and the S. meliloti 1022 treatment.  
In order to investigate the differences that were associated with S. meliloti 1022 
in the endosphere and rhizosphere microbiome, changes in the relative abundances of 
bacterial taxa at the order level were calculated by comparing their abundances in the 
S. meliloti 1022 and mock samples. The abundance of the taxa that significantly 
changed as calculated using Kruskal-Wallis test with p value < 0.001, were plotted as 
the log2 ratio of their abundance in the S. meliloti 1022-treated plants in relation to 
mock-treated plants (only taxa with significant changes were plotted) (Figure 5.15). In 
endosphere 
samples Taxon Contrib. %
mean value
Taxonomymock S.m. 1022
High NP OTU2 42.77 4.87 691 Proteobacteria/Alphaproteobacteria/Rhizobiales sp
OTU4 11.31 228 46.9
Proteobacteria/Betaproteobacteria/Burkholderiales
/Comamonadaceae/Methylibium sp
Low N high P OTU2 41.46 1.94 682 Proteobacteria/Alphaproteobacteria/Rhizobiales sp
OTU13 2.833 65.8 26.8
Proteobacteria/Alphaproteobacteria/Sphingomonadales
/Sphingomonadaceae sp
Low NP OTU2 41.87 0.25 694 Proteobacteria/Alphaproteobacteria/Rhizobiales sp
OTU9 3.896 80.1 22.8 Actinobacteria/Actinobacteria/Actinomycetales sp
OTU115 3.309 63.4 8.62 Chloroflexi/Chloroflexi/Roseiflexales/Kouleothrixaceae sp
OTU24 2.948 56.7 7.85 Chloroflexi/Chloroflexi/Roseiflexales/Kouleothrixaceae sp
rhizosphere 
samples Taxon Contrib. %
mean value Taxonomy
mock S.m. 1022
High NP OTU12 2.521 13.8 39.6 Proteobacteria/Betaproteobacteria/Burkholderiales/Comamonadaceae/Hydrogenophaga sp
OTU2 2.112 4.07 25.4 Proteobacteria/Alphaproteobacteria/Rhizobiales sp
Low N high P OTU2 10.47 1.25 149 Proteobacteria/Alphaproteobacteria/Rhizobiales sp
OTU18 3.369 6.75 54.4 Actinobacteria/Actinobacteria/Actinomycetales/Nocardioidaceae/Aeromicrobium sp
Low NP OTU2 7.549 0.267 95.1 Proteobacteria/Alphaproteobacteria/Rhizobiales sp
OTU5 3.265 0.0667 41.1 Actinobacteria/Actinobacteria/Actinomycetales/Pseudonocardiaceae/Pseudonocardia sp
all soil types, alpha-Proteobacteria were significantly enriched in the endosphere after 
S. meliloti 1022 treatment, with beta-, gamma- and delta-Proteobacteria being 
depleted, along with all other taxa (Figure 5.15). In the rhizosphere of low NP soil 
type, only 4 taxa were significantly affected negatively in the presence of the rhizobial 
inoculant (Figure 5.16A), while the rhizosphere of high NP soil type was not 
significantly affected. The relative abundance of alpha-Proteobacteria was also 
significantly increased in the rhizosphere microbiome of the low N high P soil type, 
along with the Actinobacteria, whereas the rest of the taxa had significantly reduced 
relative abundances in comparison to the mock-treated rhizosphere samples (Figure 
5.16B). 
Figure 5.15: Differentially enriched bacterial taxa in the endosphere of Medicago 
trancatula in three different soil types. Differentially enriched bacteria in the 
A) B)Low NP soil  endosphere samples
-4 -2 0 2 4
Chloracidobacteria
Acidimicrobiia
Thermoleophilia
Saprospirae
Cytophagia
Flavobacteriia
Anaerolineae
Chloroflexi
Bacilli
Gemmatimonadetes
Nitrospira
Phycisphaerae
Planctomycetia
Alphaproteobacteria
Betaproteobacteria
Deltaproteobacteria
Gammaproteobacteria
Mollicutes
Pedosphaerae
Spartobacteria
Opitutae
Verrucomicrobiae
Low abundant
Other
log2 ratio of RA of 
Sm 1022/mock treated samples
bacteria_WGendo
Verrucomicrobia
Tenericutes
Proteobacteria
Planctomycetes
Nitrospirae
Gemmatimonadetes
Chloroflexi
Bacteroidetes
Actinobacteria
Acidobacteria
Firmicutes
Low N high P soil  endosphere samples
-8 -6 -4 -2 0 2
Chloracidobacteria
Acidimicrobiia
Saprospirae
Cytophagia
Flavobacteriia
Anaerolineae
Chloroflexi
Phycisphaerae
Planctomycetia
Alphaproteobacteria
Betaproteobacteria
Deltaproteobacteria
Gammaproteobacteria
Mollicutes
Pedosphaerae
Spartobacteria
Opitutae
Verrucomicrobiae
Low abundant
Other
bacteria_WSendo [log2]
log2 ratio of RA of 
Sm 1022/mock treated samples
Verrucomicrobia
Tenericutes
Proteobacteria
Planctomycetes
Chloroflexi
Bacteroidetes
Actinobacteria
Acidobacteria
High NP soil  endosphere samples
-4 -2 0 2 4
Chloracidobacteria
Acidimicrobiia
Actinobacteria
Thermoleophilia
Saprospirae
Cytophagia
Flavobacteriia
Anaerolineae
Chloroflexi
Gemmatimonadetes
Nitrospira
Phycisphaerae
Planctomycetia
Alphaproteobacteria
Betaproteobacteria
Deltaproteobacteria
Gammaproteobacteria
Mollicutes
Pedosphaerae
Opitutae
Verrucomicrobiae
Low abundant
Other
log2 ratio of RA of 
Sm 1022/mock treated samples
bacteria_PDendo
Verrucomicrobia
Tenericutes
Proteobacteria
Planctomycetes
Nitrospirae
Gemmatimonadetes
Chloroflexi
Bacteroidetes
Actinobacteria
Acidobacteria
endosphere of plants grown at A) low NP soil type, B) low N high P soil type, and C) 
high NP soil type. Data presented as relative abundance in S. meliloti 1022-treated 
samples divided by mock-treated samples. All taxa presented are identified as 
significantly enriched/depleted using Kruskal Wallis test (p < 0.001). 
Figure 5.16: Differentially enriched bacterial taxa in the rhizosphere of Medicago 
trancatula in the three different soil types. Differentially enriched bacterial of plants 
Low NP soil  rhizosphere samples
-1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0
Saprospirae
Chloroflexi
Planctomycetia
Acidimicrobiia
Other
log2 ratio of RA of 
Sm 1022/mock treated samples
bacteria_WGrhizo
Planctomycetes
Chloroflexi
Bacteroidetes
Actinobacteria
Low N high P soil  rhizosphere samples
-2 -1 0 1 2
Chloracidobacteria
Acidobacteriia
Solibacteres
Acidimicrobiia
Actinobacteria
Thermoleophilia
Anaerolineae
Bacilli
Clostridia
Gemmatimonadetes
Nitrospira
Phycisphaerae
Planctomycetia
Alphaproteobacteria
Deltaproteobacteria
Pedosphaerae
Opitutae
Verrucomicrobiae
Low abundant
Other
bacteria_WSrhizo
log2 ratio of RA of 
Sm 1022/mock treated samples
Verrucomicrobia
Proteobacteria
Planctomycetes
Nitrospirae
Gemmatimonadetes
Chloroflexi
Actinobacteria
Acidobacteria
Firmicutes
grown at the A) low NP soil type, B) low N high P soil type. Data presented as relative 
abundance in S. meliloti 1022-treated samples divided by mock-treated samples. All 
taxa presented are identified as significantly enriched/depleted using Kruskal Wallis 
test (p < 0.001).  
As performed with the bacterial community, the fungal community 
composition was assessed using the calculated relative abundance % (RA). RA 
analysis in the fungal community reveals most significant differences in the 
endosphere of all soil types, with Sordariomycetes having a higher relative abundance 
in the endosphere as compared to other compartments. Moreover, some taxa present 
in soil and rhizosphere samples such as the Pezizomycetes seem to be excluded from 
the endosphere compartment (Figure 5.17).  
Figure 5.17: Fungal community composition in the three different soil types. Relative 
abundance of fungal taxa at the order level in A) low NP soil type, B) low N high P 
soil type and C) high NP soil type; shown as percentage of all reads and colour coded, 
calculated using rarefied reads.  
The differences in the composition of the fungal community were analysed 
using similarity percentages (SIMPER). The SIMPER analysis showed that OTU3, 
belonging to Sordariomycetes and assigned as Hypocreales species most significantly 
contributed to the differences observed between mock and S. meliloti 1022 samples in 
the endosphere of all soil types (Table 5.7) and the rhizosphere of the low NP soil type 
(Table 5.8). Notably, a Fusarium species contributed 5% to the differences observed 
between the treated and mock samples in endosphere of low N high P and low NP soil 
types (Table 5.7). In rhizosphere samples of high NP and low N high P soil types, 
OTU2 belonging to a Sordariomycetes species contributed most significantly to the 
differences observed (Table 5.8). Of all taxa that contributed to the differences in the 
fungal community between the mock and S. meliloti 1022-treated samples, more than 
3% belonged to the Ascomycota phylum (species of the order Sordariomycetes). 
However, none of those taxa was significantly affected in the presence of S. meliloti 
1022 as calculated using the Kruskal-Wallis test with a threshold of p value < 0.001.  
Table 5.7: Fungal taxa contributing to the differences in community structure in the 
endosphere, in the different soil types.  
endosphere 
samples Taxon Contrib. %
mean value
Taxonomymock Sm1022
High NP OTU3 19.68 2.22E+03 2.62E+03 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Incertaesedis/Ilyonectria/Ilyonectria macrodidyma
OTU27 10.47 510 7.67 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Microascales/Ceratocystidaceae/Thielaviopsis/Thielaviopsis basicola
OTU41 7.854 246 223
Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Hypocreaceae
/Trichoderma sp
OTU359 7.547 366 118 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Nectriaceae sp
OTU55 7.263 313 243 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Incertaesedis/Ilyonectria/Ilyonectria robusta
OTU54 4.955 196 253 Ascomycota/Dothideomycetes/Pleosporales sp
OTU75 4.398 196 52.7
Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Nectriaceae
/Cylindrocarpon sp
Low N high P OTU3 15.72 1.67E+03 1.10E+03 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Incertaesedis/Ilyonectria/Ilyonectria macrodidyma
OTU6 12.77 927 700 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales sp
OTU40 9.965 470 300
Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Nectriaceae
/Nectria sp
OTU13 5.059 323 396
Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Nectriaceae
/Fusarium sp
OTU85 4.714 105 269 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Incertaesedis/Ilyonectria/Ilyonectria mors-panacis
OTU2 4.554 29.8 266 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes sp
OTU9 4.312 146 161
Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Bionectriaceae
/Bionectria/Bionectria ochroleuca
OTU374 3.639 0 216 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Nectriaceae/Fusarium/Fusarium fujikuroi
Low NP OTU3 19.24 2.49E+03 2.66E+03 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Incertaesedis/Ilyonectria/Ilyonectria macrodidyma
OTU48 6.599 227 119
Ascomycota/Leotiomycetes/Helotiales/Incertae
sedis/Tetracladium/Tetracladium maxilliforme
OTU13 5.032 153 244
Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Nectriaceae
/Fusarium sp
OTU5 4.656 288 220 Ascomycota/Eurotiomycetes/Chaetothyriales/Herpotrichiellaceae sp
OTU26 4.54 236 82.1 Ascomycota/Dothideomycetes sp
Analysis of Similarity Percentages (SIMPER) identified taxa that contributed most of 
the dissimilarities (3%) of the fungal communities in the endosphere between mock 
samples and those inoculated with S. meliloti 1022 (S.m 1022), in the different soil 
types. Mean values of the Relative Abundance are shown for the mock and the S. 
meliloti 1022 treatment.  
Table 5.8: Fungal taxa contributing to the differences in community structure in the 
rhizosphere, in the different soil types. 
Analysis of Similarity Percentages (SIMPER) identified taxa that contributed most of 
the dissimilarities (3%) of the fungal communities in the rhizosphere between mock 
samples and those inoculated with S. meliloti 1022 (S.m 1022), in the different soil 
types. Mean values of the Relative Abundance are shown for the mock and the S. 
meliloti 1022 treatment. 
In summary, only bacterial communities (especially alpha-Proteobacteria) 
were affected in the presence of S. meliloti 1022 in all soil types, particularly in root 
endosphere. In contrast there were no significant changes in the composition of fungal 
communities in the presence of the rhizobium.  
5.2.6 The plant bacterial microbiome composition correlates with changes in 
plant nutrients in all different soil types 
To investigate the possible biological factors associated with the root 
microbiome changes described previously, environmental factors were examined to 
rhizosphere 
samples Taxon Contrib. %
mean value
Taxonomy
mock Sm1022
High NP OTU2 7.071 976 1.07E+03 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes sp
Low N high P OTU2 5.959 782 736 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes sp
OTU6 5.198 152 328 Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales sp
OTU3 4.831 192 223
Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Incertae
sedis/Ilyonectria/Ilyonectria macrodidyma
Low NP OTU3 9.383 319 831
Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Incertae
sedis/Ilyonectria/Ilyonectria macrodidyma
OTU9 4.643 188 273
Ascomycota/Sordariomycetes/Hypocreales/Bionectriacea
e/Bionectria/Bionectria ochroleuca
OTU69 4.022 202 49.9 Ascomycota/Dothideomycetes sp
OTU1738 3.516 10.1 202
Ascomycota/Eurotiomycetes/Eurotiales/Trichocomaceae
/Penicillium/Penicillium brevicompactum
determine if there was any correlation with these microbial abundance changes. 
Edaphic factors such as pH, conductivity, total soil C and N, soil available NO3- and 
PO43- were measured at the end of the experiment and compared with the initial 
measurements prior to the experiments. No significant changes were observed for any 
of the edaphic factors in the presence of S. meliloti 1022 at the end of the experiments 
(Figures 5.18, 5.19, 5.20) based on ANOVA test followed by Tukeys HSD test (p < 
0.001), except of soil C:N ratios in high NP soil type which is significantly reduced in 
the mock samples (Figure 5.20). However, some of those factors were significantly 
altered at the end of the experiment in comparison to the beginning (after 63 days), 
such as the depletion of soil available NO3- in low N high P and high NP soil types 
(Figure 5.19A). In addition, soil total elements were measured by Inducted Coupled 
Plasma-Mass Spectrometry (ICP-MS) and none of them were significantly changed in 
the presence of S. meliloti 1022, except soil Cu, which was significantly depleted in 
the presence of the rhizobial inoculant (Table 5.9). 
Figure 5.18: Soil pH and conductivity in soil types upon different treatments. A) pH 
and B) conductivity under different treatments and soil types. Letters represent 
significant differences according to ANOVA followed by Tukeys HDS test (p < 0.001). 
low NP low N high P high NP
pH ac a a b
low NP low N high P high NP
c c c
Figure 5.19: Soil available NO3-, PO43- and K soil types upon different treatments. A) 
Soil available NO3-, B) soil available PO43-, and C) soil K under different treatments 
and soil types. Letters represent significant differences according to ANOVA followed 
by Tukeys HDS test (p < 0.001). 
a a a a a a
a a a
11000
12000
13000
14000
15000
16000
low NP low N high P high NP
a a a
low NP low N high P high NP
low NP low N high P high NP
Figure 5.20: Soil CN, C% and N% soil types upon different treatments. A) Soil C:N 
ratio, B) soil N (%), and C) soil C (%) under different treatments and soil types. Letters 
represent significant differences according to ANOVA followed by Tukeys HDS test 
(p < 0.001). 
Examining the changes of the aboveground plant nutrients in the presence of 
S. meliloti 1022, more distinct changes were observed in comparison to the soil types. 
The plant C:N ratio was significantly decreased in the presence of S. meliloti 1022 in 
all soil types (Figure 5.21A), as a result of the significant increase of the plant N in the 
presence of S. meliloti 1022 in all soil types (Figure 5.21B), as calculated using 
ANOVA followed by Tukeys HSD test for significance (p < 0.001).  
low NP low N high P high NP
low NP low N high P high NP
a a a a aab
bc abc c
low NP low N high P high NP
:N ab a a
ab ab ab ab
Figure 5.21: Plant C:N ratio and C and N contents soil types upon different 
treatments. A) Plant C:N ratio, B) plant N content (%), C) plant C content (%), under 
different treatments and soil types. Letters represent significant differences according 
to ANOVA followed by Tukeys HDS test (p < 0.001). 
low NP low N high P high NP
low NP low N high P high NP
low NP low N high P high NP
a a a
The extent of correlation was tested between the different edaphic factors, plant 
nutrients and microbial number of OTUs (alpha diversity), using Pearsons correlation 
(with Bonferroni corrected p-values). In mock samples, there was a strong positive 
correlation between aboveground dry weight and pH, conductivity and soil C%, and 
less strong correlation with soil C:N ratio and available P (Figure 5.21A). Strong 
positive correlations were also observed between pH and soil C%, conductivity and 
available N, bacterial and fungal alpha diversity (as number of observed OTUs) as 
well as a negative correlation between plant N% and plant CN ratio. On the other hand, 
in the presence of S. meliloti 1022, stronger correlations were found between edaphic 
factors and plant nutrients, while the correlations between plant dry weight and soil 
factors are no longer observed (Figures 5.22A, B). The strongest positive correlations 
were detectable between pH and conductivity, soil CN ratio, soil C%, soil N% and 
plant K as well as a negative correlation of those with plant C%. In addition, a negative 
correlation was found between plant C%, N% and plant K, while the correlation 
between bacterial and fungal alpha diversity (as number of observed OTUs) remained 
positive.  
Figure 5.22: Correlation of soil and plant biochemical characteristics, microbial 
richness and shoot dry weight upon mock and S. meliloti 1022 treatment, in the three 
soil types. Pearsons correlations between microbial observed OTUs as alpha 
diversity measure (adiv), plant and soil factors in A) all mock samples and B) all S. 
meliloti 1022 samples of all soil types. Dark blue indicating strong positive correlation 
(1) and dark red indicating strong negative correlation (-1). Point sizes indicates the 
strength of the correlation, with larger size for stronger correlation. Only the 
correlations with p < 0.05 (Benferroni corrected p values) are shown. 
The environmental variables measured and described above were tested for 
correlation with the microbiome using the Canonical Correspondence Analysis 
(CCA). The soil pH, conductivity, soil available N, P and soil C:N explained 73.81% 
of the differences in the soil bacterial community structure and 77.94% of the 
differences in the soil fungal community in the different soil types. The soil bacterial 
community from high NP soil type samples correlated with increased soil pH, 
conductivity and total soil C, while the bacterial communities of the other two soils 
correlated with the decrease of those (Figure 5.23A). The soil fungal community from 
high NP soil type samples correlated with soil pH, conductivity, soil C%, C:N ratio 
and soil available N, while the other two soil fungal communities correlated with a 
decrease in those parameters (Figure 5.23B). In more detail the soil fungal community 
from low N high P soil type samples correlated with the increase of available P (PO43-
) and the low NP soil type fungal community correlated with a decrease in available P 
(PO43-).  
Figure 5.23: Correlation between edaphic factors and soil microbial community 
structure of mock and S. meliloti 1022-treated plants grown in three different soil 
types. Canonical Correspondence Analysis (CCA) illustrates the effect of edaphic 
conductivitysoil C:N
soil available N
soil C%soil N%
soil available P
-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
CCA 1 (52.66%)
conductivity
soil C:N
soil available N
soil C% soil N%
soil available P
-2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0
CCA 1 (58.18%)
Bacteria soil Fungi soilA) B)
xLow N high P
High NP 
Low NP 
xLow N high P
High NP 
Low NP 
factors on the soil A) bacterial and B) fungal community structure. The two first plotted 
axes of the CCA explaining 73.81% and 77.94% of the differences in the bacterial and 
fungal community structure, respectively  
Next, compartments were analysed that are more affected by the presence of 
S. meliloti 1022. Bacterial and fungal communities of the root rhizosphere and 
endosphere were found to be associated with certain soil and plant factors. The 
bacterial endosphere community was clustered according to soil type and treatment, 
each of the clusters being associated with different factors (Figure 5.24). In the 
endosphere, the bacterial community structure of plant treated with S. meliloti 1022 
was strongly associated with increased C% and N% in all soil types; however, the 
samples of the high NP soil type were also associated with increased soil available N 
(NO3-) and P (PO43-), soil C:N and pH. The bacterial community of the mock-treated 
endosphere was associated with increased plant total K and decreased plant C% in the 
high NP soil type. In low N high P soil type, the bacterial community of the mock-
treated endosphere was correlated with increased plant C:N ratio, with decreased plant 
total K and all soil factors tested in the low NP soil type (Figure 5.24A). The bacterial 
community structure in the rhizosphere of high NP soil type was correlated with 
increased plant K, soil pH, CN and available N (NO3-) (Figure 5.24C). The bacterial 
community of the S. meliloti 1022 treated plants in low N high P soil type was 
correlated with high plant C% and N%, while the bacterial community of mock-treated 
plants was associated with decreased soil available P (PO43-) (Figure 5.24C). Overall, 
the soil and plant factors tested could explain 75.87 % of the variation observed within 
the bacterial community in the endosphere and 59.65 % in the rhizosphere. 
In contrast, the fungal community of the endosphere was clustered only 
according to the soil type in both soil endosphere and rhizosphere. The fungal 
community of plants grown in high NP soil type correlated with increased soil pH, soil 
and plant C:N ratio and soil available N. The fungal community of low N high P soil 
type was associated with high available P (PO43-) in the soil and the fungal community 
of low NP soil type was associated with increased plant C% (Figure 5.24B). Overall, 
the soil and plant factors tested could explain 65.71 % of the variation observed within 
fungal community in the endosphere and 70.55 % of this variation in the rhizosphere. 
Figure 5.24: Correlation between soil and plant biochemical characteristics and the 
structure of rhizosphere and endosphere microbial communities of mock and S. 
meliloti 1022-treated plants grown in three different soil types. Canonical 
Correspondence Analysis (CCA) of A) bacterial endosphere, B) fungal endosphere, C) 
bacterial rhizosphere and D) fungal rhizosphere communities in association with plant 
and soil edaphic factors. CCA illustrating the effect of edaphic factors on the structure 
of A) bacterial endosphere, B) fungal endosphere, C) bacterial rhizosphere and D) 
fungal rhizosphere communities. The two first plotted axes of the CCA explain A) 75.87 
%, B) 65.71 %, C) 59.65 % and D) 70.55 % of the differences. 
Summing up the results from correlation analysis between all of the edaphic 
and microbiome parameters, the analyses found that plant N content (%) was 
significantly increased in the rhizobia-treated plants and that S. meliloti 1022 had the 
strongest effect on plant yield. This was in contrast with the findings for plant yield of 
soil pH
soil available N
soil available P
soil C:N
plant C%
plant N%
plant C:N
plant K
-2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
CCA 1 (43.25%)
Bacteria endosphere
soil pH
soil available N
soil available P
soil C:N
plant C%
plant N%
plant C:N
plant K
-1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
CCA 1 (41.9%)
Bacteria rhizosphere
Fungi endosphere
soil pH
soil available N
soil available P
soil C:N
plant C%
plant N%
plant C:N
plant K
-2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0
CCA 1 (46.73%)
Fungi rhizosphere
soil pH
soil available N
soil available P
soil C:N
plant C%
plant N%
plant C:N
plant K
-3.0 -2.5 -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5
CCA 1 (39.65%)
Plant and Edaphic factors
A) B)
C) D)
xLow N high P
High NP 
Low NP 
xLow N high P
High NP 
Low NP 
xLow N high P
High NP 
Low NP 
xLow N high P
High NP 
Low NP 
the mock-treated samples, which was strongly correlated with pH, conductivity and 
soil C%. Moreover, it was shown that changes in bacterial and fungal communities 
correlated differently with the environmental variables tested in this experiment, with 
soil pH, conductivity, available NO3 and PO4 play a key role in shaping microbial 
community structure. 
5.3 Discussion 
This study aimed to gain a better insight into rhizobia-plant interactions in 
natural soils, how those interactions alter soil and plant-associated microbiomes, 
and to what extent the interaction outcomes are affected by soil environmental 
variables. This study further aimed to improve our understanding of rhizobia-plant 
interactions in the context of soil and plant biochemical properties. Soil pH, salinity, 
temperature and farming practices typically reduce rhizobial diversity and 
population in soils (Slattery et al., 2001) and alter their effectiveness in root 
colonisation and abilities to fix nitrogen (de Castro Pires et al., 2018; Gyogluu et 
al., 2018; Slattery et al., 2001, 2004). Considering the biological and agricultural 
potential of the use of mutualistic microbes it is necessary to identify conditions 
that are tolerated by N-fixing rhizobia and those that maximise or limit their 
beneficial activities. 
5.3.1 Competitiveness of fungal symbionts in natural soils 
During the initial trials for these experiments the co-inoculation of the 
rhizobial strains with S. indica was not successful in natural soils, despite the 
successful co-inoculation in perlite. As a result, S. indica did not exert any 
beneficial effects in M. truncatula. Similarly, the results of this experiment align 
with previous research on the suppression of fungi by the natural soil microbiome 
(Wilson et al., 2007), and on arbuscular mycorrhiza fungi being suppressed by 
Acidobacteria (Svenningsen et al., 2018), a bacterial taxon abundant in the soil 
types used in this experiment (8-13% of all reads). In addition, S. indica was 
recently shown to depend on thiamine-producing bacteria for vegetative growth 
(Jiang et al., 2018). Interestingly, most fungi cannot produce thiamine indicating 
the need for different inoculation strategies for beneficial fungi. Experiments on 
bacterial and fungal establishment at the different developmental stages of 
Medicago plants has revealed that fungi establish colonisation of the endosphere at 
later developmental stages than bacteria (Mougel et al., 2006). All the above, along 
with the knowledge that bacteria dominate all plant compartments (Hacquard et al., 
2015) might have contributed to the reduced competitiveness of S. indica in this 
system. In addition, even though rhizobia are known for their growth promoting 
properties (Vacheron et al., 2013), the results of this experiment show that they 
might interact differently with the host in dependency of natural microbiome and 
soil types. This observation highlights the necessity of field-based experiments in 
order to understand the behaviour of these complex interactions in natural 
systems. 
5.3.2 Efficiency of Sinorhizobium species varies and also differs depending on 
the soil type 
Sinorhizobium species used to inoculate the Medicago trancatula are well 
studied (Galibert et al., 2001; Jones et al., 2007; Marx et al., 2016). While S. meliloti 
1021 is the most common species studied in association with Medicago species 
(Zhao et al., 2012), it was recently demonstrated that strain 1021 is less efficient 
compared to the addition of external nitrogen, therefore might not be the most 
efficient nitrogen-fixing bacteria for Medicago truncatula (Terpolilli et al., 2008). 
This was confirmed by this present study, as it had the smallest plant growth 
promotion effect in low N high P soil type and no significant growth promotion in 
low NP and high NP soil type, in comparison to the mock-treated plants. This might 
be due to inefficient compatibility with the plant host as mentioned before 
(Terpolilli et al., 2008), or due to the weak competitiveness of this strain against the 
soil microbiome. The inoculant S. medicae 419 promotes growth more efficiently 
that the 1021 strain, however, there is no additive effect in high NP soil type, 
something that was observed only with the 1022 strain. According to competition 
experiments by Rangin et al. (2008) some S. medicae strains are less competitive 
than certain S. meliloti strains, which might be case for S. medicae 419 in high 
nutrient environments such as the high NP soil type. In addition, Garau et al. (2005) 
showed that S. medicae 419 is more efficient in acidic soils. Absence of significant 
growth promotion effect of S. medicae 419 was observed only in the soil with the 
most alkaline pH, the high NP soil type, which may explain the absence of the 
enhancing effect of this strain. Moreover, the success of S. meliloti 1022 to nodulate 
host plants could be due to its ability to recruit plant beneficial microbes in 
dependency of soil type and not necessarily the plant genotype (Leite et al., 2016). 
Moreover, since colonisation success of rhizobia is dependent on soil factors 
(Slattery et al., 2001, 2004) it is important to characterise the efficiency of the 
commonly used rhizobial species in different environments.  
5.3.3 Each soil type is characterised by distinct microbial communities  
The three soil types studied here did not simply have different biochemical 
characteristics (edaphic factors), but also possess distinct soil microbiomes. Low 
NP and low N high P soil types had similar bacterial community structures, while 
high NP soil type differed from both soils. This might be explained by similar 
biochemical characteristics of low NP and low N high P soil types. For instance, it 
is known that increased N content results in an alteration to the microbial 
community and consequently its enzymatic activity as a whole, with increased 
biomass of gram negative bacteria and decrease of labile C in the soil (Cusack et 
al., 2011). Fungal communities differed between all soil types indicating a higher 
dependency or specificity of soil fungal microbiomes and its soil environment as 
observed previously (Smith et al., 2014). The OTU richness (alpha diversity) of the 
bacterial community in the high NP soil type was significantly higher at the end of 
the experiment (63 dai) as compared to the input soil, and all the samples from low 
NP and low N high P soil type, and irrespective of the presence of the plant; most 
likely due to a higher nutrient availability (e.g. nitrate) in this soil (Curd et al., 
2018). In contrast, the number of observed fungal OTUs was lower in the high NP 
soil type, which might be a result of the bacterial proliferation (Mackie and 
Wheatley, 1999). Moreover, the suppression of fungi has been associated with the 
presence of Acidobacteria in natural soil (Svenningsen et al., 2018), a bacterial 
phylum that is present in all soils used in this experiments, and had increased 
relative abundance in the high NP soil type. A common characteristic among all 
soil types is the gradient reduction of OTU numbers towards the root endosphere. 
OTU number tends to reduce at locations in close proximity to the root as has been 
reported before (Shi et al., 2015) and reflects the required specialisation of microbes 
and their ability to manipulate host processes for colonisation. 
5.3.4 Strong effect of S. meliloti 1022 on the bacterial community structure 
but not on the fungal community structure in the endosphere compartment 
S. meliloti 1022 has a strong effect on the bacterial community mainly on the 
endosphere compartment and to a lesser extent in the rhizosphere, while there was 
no observed effect of the rhizobial inoculant in the soil microbiome. The 
endosphere compartment sampled in this project included the interior microbiome 
of the nodules. Therefore, the observed shift is highly due to the high accumulation 
of rhizobia in the endosphere. Studies have similarly shown that nodules consist of 
microbiomes that are distinct from microbiomes of the rhizosphere/endosphere 
(Leite et al., 2016; Xiao et al., 2017; Zgadzaj et al., 2016). The microbiome of the 
nodule has been associated with plant growth enhancement, as the plant can recruit 
plant beneficial microbes (Velzquez et al., 2017). This might also contribute to the 
high growth-promoting activity of S. meliloti 1022. The absence of any effect of 
the rhizobial inoculant on fungal communities in any of the analysed compartments 
could be due to different niche competition requirements of bacteria and fungi 
(Rousk et al., 2008). Nodules represent a tissue which is quite different from the 
main root and the distinct microbiome composition of roots vs. nodules suggests 
more specific changes, for example, the recruitment of beneficial microbes inside 
the nodule (Leite et al., 2016; Velzquez et al., 2017). In future work, nodules might 
be an interesting location to mine for novel microbes with plant growth promoting 
effects. 
It was not possible to identify S. meliloti 1022-specific sequences directly in the 
samples, due to the large number of rhizobia present in soils. However, one 
bacterial OTU was particularly abundant in the bacterial community. This is OTU2, 
which contributed 12% to the differences observed among all samples (Table 5.5) 
and more than 40% to the differences observed between mock and S. meliloti 1022 
samples in the endosphere (Table 5.6). When OTU2 was investigated it shows 
100% similarity to Sinorhizobium meliloti strain (Figure S5.2), and thus, it is likely 
to belong to Sinorhizobium meliloti 1022. It is important for future work to design 
primers to distinguish this strain from other rhizobia, to enable quantification in the 
samples, relative to plant DNA. This would also make it possible to determine the 
efficiency of inoculation in each soil type. The design of such primers (also 
applicable to natural soil samples) is challenging considering the lack of genome 
information but could be aided by the sequence data from OTU2 here.  
5.3.5 Strong effect of S. meliloti 1022 on the bacterial community composition 
but not on the fungal community composition in the endosphere 
compartment 
The bacterial community composition was affected in the presence of S. 
meliloti 1022 in all soil types, particularly in the plant endosphere with alpha-
Proteobacteria being at the centre of those changes. This effect can be associated 
with the presence of S. meliloti 1022 in the root (Figure 5.14). However, the alpha-
Proteobacteria also dominate the endosphere of mock treated plants. Taken these 
together, the strong effect of S. meliloti 1022 in the endosphere may be a result of 
a synergistic effect of the rhizobial inoculant with the native, soil-derived rhizobial 
species. According to experiments on root microbiomes at different developmental 
stages, Proteobacteria were identified to be very rapid colonisers, making them 
robust competitors uninfluenced by the environmental and edaphic factors (Yuan 
et al., 2015). Proteobacteria are robust colonisers, comparatively taking over from 
the rest of the bacteria (Shi et al., 2015), highlighting the close association of this 
order with the root. 
S. meliloti 1022 has no obvious effect on fungal community structures and 
compositions in any compartments. Rhizobia are commonly studied for their 
association with arbuscular mycorrhiza (Wang et al., 2011; Xie et al., 2016b) 
mainly because their genetic requirements for symbiosis with the plant are partially 
common between the two taxa (Parniske, 2000). Since this fungal taxon was mainly 
absent from the soils used, rhizobia seem to not influence strongly the rest of the 
fungal taxa. In turn, soil type had the strongest effect on fungal communities in all 
analysed samples. Differences in the abundance of species of Sordariomycetes were 
most obvious, followed by differences in Dothideomycetes in the endosphere and 
Eurotiomycetes in the rhizosphere. All three orders belong to the phylum of 
Ascomycota which comprises the majority of the fungal reads and therefore 
highlights a well-known association with Medicago truncatula plants (Mahmoudi 
et al., 2019). Sordariomycetes is one of the largest order of Ascomycota with 
members following different lifestyles ranging from plant endophytes, saprotrophs 
to pathogens. The nature of interaction of detected Sordariomycetes with Medicago 
truncatula is however unknown. Surprisingly, arbuscular mycorrhiza species from 
the order of Glomeromycetes were not overrepresented in analysed samples 
although they have been described as having strong associations with Medicago 
truncatula and rhizobia (An et al., 2004; Mougel et al., 2006; Oldroyd, 2005). The 
high percentage of unassigned fungal taxa has been discussed before and might 
reflect the high number of uncharacterised fungal species in nature (Mahmoudi et 
al., 2019). 
5.3.6 S. meliloti 1022 promotes plant growth irrespectively of the soil 
characteristics 
The significant correlations between edaphic factors, plant C, N, K and 
aboveground dry weight, in the presence and the absence of S. meliloti 1022, 
highlight the beneficial effect of the rhizobial inoculant (Figure 5.22). Despite the 
strong correlation of the plant dry weight with soil characteristics (pH, conductivity, 
soil CN, soil available phosphate and nitrate, soil C%) in the absence of S. meliloti 
1022, there was no strong correlation between those in the presence of S. meliloti 
1022. This makes S. meliloti 1022 a highly efficient and competitive strain in soils 
even if there are varying levels of nitrate and phosphate  it is beneficial in diverse 
soils. Notably, it is suggested that plants might be cultivated with their compatible 
rhizobia for highest colonisation efficiency and beneficial activities, instead of 
solely relying on native rhizobia (Thrall et al., 2000). These findings highlight the 
necessity for studies identifying beneficial microbes that are compatible with plant 
species under a diversity of environmental conditions, in order to be able to use 
PGPR strains most effectively in agriculture (Sergaki et al., 2018).  
The correlations between soil and plant nutrient characteristics also changed 
in the presence of S. meliloti 1022, in comparison to mock-treated. Soil pH, soil 
C:N ratio, soil C% and soil N% are positively correlated as expected (Rezaei and 
Gilkes, 2005), and plant K is also positively correlated. This indicates a strong 
correlation of the individual factors describing the soil ecosystem. However, direct 
links between pH and microbiome are difficult to be made as pH affects many 
processes in the system including soil C and N availability (Griffiths et al., 2011). 
The negative correlation of soil pH, soil C:N ratio, soil C% and soil N% with plant 
C% indicates that as plant C% increases, the soil nutrients decrease, as they are 
likely used towards for plant growth. Soil and root microbes have been reported to 
affect aboveground parts of plants by supporting nutrient supply and resistance to 
pathogens (Kopriva et al., 2017; Laksmanan et al., 2014; Liu et al., 2007). 
Therefore, the presence of S. meliloti 1022 enables plants to make better use of 
certain soil factors either directly by S. meliloti 1022 or indirectly as a result of S. 
meliloti 1022 altering the microbiome or root system architecture (Li et al., 2016b), 
irrespectively of the soil type.  
5.3.7 Soil characteristics differently affect the bacterial and fungal 
community structure 
The higher soil pH, conductivity, total C and available N (NO3-) of the high 
NP soil type are correlated with observed changes in soil bacterial and fungal 
community structure (Figures 5.23). The fungal community structure in low NP soil 
type is associated with a decrease of all edaphic factors and a slight increase of N% 
in the soil. The correlation of those soil factors with microbial communities have 
been previously observed, with soil conductivity, C, N and P in particular affecting 
the abundance of certain bacterial and fungal groups in the soil (Xue et al., 2018). 
This makes sense as they are determinants of microbial nutrition and proliferation. 
These correlations indicate the strong effect of the soil factors on shaping the 
microbiome as the nutrient abundance enables the proliferation of microbes that 
might be eliminated in nutrient depleted conditions due to competition (Hibbing et 
al., 2010; Jones et al., 2018).  
High levels of available phosphate in the low N high P soil type strongly 
affected fungal community structures. Fabiaska et al. (2018) have observed similar 
shifts in fungal communities as a result of phosphorus availability in the soil, 
usually driven by the plant, in order to increase phosphorus acquisition. 
Furthermore, they observed a role of the plant phosphate starvation response in the 
interaction of the fungi with the plant. Limited phosphate availability leads to a 
phosphate starvation response in plants, which affects the establishment of fungi in 
the root (Breuillin et al., 2010; Fabiaska et al., 2018; Nagy et al., 2009), and 
essentially may be the main driver of the observed differences in the fungal 
community. Further studies on the mechanistic understanding of these changes 
would assist in maximising the beneficial effect of soil fungal communities on plant 
phosphorus acquisition by the plants. 
The soil available P (PO43-) in low N high P soil type is strongly decreased 
at the end of the experiment in the presence and the absence of S. meliloti 1022. 
Soil available P is mobilised and acquired by the roots to be used for plant growth 
(Shen et al., 2011). Hence, this was not observed in the other two soil types. 
Similarly, the soil nitrate was found to be reduced at the end of the experiment. It 
is likely taken up by the plants as indicated, in particular, by higher N contents in 
plants inoculated with S. meliloti 1022. These changes highlight the agricultural 
importance of this microbe. As in agricultural fields, plant-fixed nitrogen would be 
transferred to the soil with post-harvest plant biomass that remains in the field, 
significantly enhancing the soil available nitrogen for the next crop generations. 
Soil conductivity also plays a role in microbiome structure. Conductivity is 
determined by the clay and salt content, as well as the mineral content, which 
essentially shape the environmental conditions for the microbes in the soil, such as 
the availability of substrate, air and water (Xue et al., 2018). The reduction of soil 
conductivity in the low N high P and high NP soil types at the end of the experiment 
could be due to the reduction of the soil elements that plants have taken up to grow. 
This effect would also occur for the available soil N (NO3-), which is probably used 
to the same extent by any plant irrespective of treatments. The significantly 
increased levels of nitrogen in the plant inoculated with S. meliloti 1022, in 
comparison to mock-treated, might therefore indicate the utilisation of other forms 
of nitrogen such as atmospheric N fixed by S. meliloti 1022 (Stern, 1993).  
Since success of rhizobial inoculants is dependent on soil factors (Slattery 
et al., 2001, 2004), it is important to characterise the efficiency of the commonly 
used rhizobial inoculants in different environments. Our study demonstrated the 
limitations of commonly studied rhizobial strains based on the presented finding 
with different UK soil types. The robustness of S. meliloti 1022 in supporting 
Medicago trancatula A17 in different UK soil types with varying nutrient 
availability makes the strain 1022 a highly performing rhizobial inoculant with 
potential for use in UK agriculture. Moreover, this works raises further questions 
on the mechanisms underlying our observations, which could open new strategies 
for utilising rhizobia and soil microbiomes as tools to sustainably improve 
agricultural crop production and soil health.  
Chapter 6: Discussion 
6.1 Outlook 
A major challenge ahead of us is the eco-sustainable production of food 
under the prospect of an increasing world population (9.5 billion people by 2050), 
climate change and continuous loss of arable land (Conforti, 2011). Such challenge 
demands innovative and sustainable solutions especially for agricultural crop 
production. My thesis work aimed to provide an integrated approach, from studying 
plant-microbe interactions at the molecular level, to a simplistic approach for 
studying microbiomes and finally to a large-scale study of agricultural relevance. 
This work provides an insight into the potential of such approaches and their 
limitations. Additionally, this work contributes towards strengthening our 
fundamental understanding of microbe-microbe and plant-microbe interactions, in 
anticipation of sustainably improving agricultural crop production. 
6.2 The potential of (S. indica) effectors on the establishment of 
fungal colonisation and in engineering plant microbiomes 
Microbes have the ability to manipulate plant processes through 
phytohormones (Spaepen et al., 2007) and the root-associated microbiome can 
cause an induction of phytohormones (Yuan et al., 2015). Understanding the 
mechanisms underlying the interaction might help to i) manipulate microbiomes, 
and ii) generate new tools for agriculture. Expressing fungal effectors in 
Arabidopsis, transiently in a protoplast system and stably in planta, I demonstrated 
the strong effect of single effectors on plant growth and auxin signalling. These 
results triggered new approaches for tackling the initial biological question. For 
instance, investigating the role of effectors in the establishment of S. indica in 
Arabidopsis roots in the presence of the core microbiome, or in Medicago 
truncatula roots in the presence of the natural microbiome was shown to be 
relevant, such that they could be developed as agricultural vaccines (Laere et al., 
2016) that have an improved competitiveness in the field.  
As shown in Chapter 3, one single S. indica effector can have a substantial 
effect on Arabidopsis growth, by altering the auxin signalling pathway, which is 
involved in many fundamental processes of plant growth, health and interaction 
with microbes (Barker and Tagu, 2000; Vadassery et al., 2008; Vanneste and Friml, 
2009). This effect indicates that S. indica affects an important process of its host 
plant. The plant root is a dynamic environment and effectors could help microbes, 
like S. indica, to compete and establish their presence within a microbial 
community. Akum et al. (2015), for example, showed that an S. indica effector 
protein (PIIN_08944) is involved in the establishment of the fungus in plant roots 
by affecting pattern-triggered immunity and the salicylic acid signalling pathway. 
The suppressive activity of S. indica against root and leaf plant pathogens is well 
known and achieved by the ability of the fungus to enhance plant immunity (Kari 
Dolatabadi et al., 2012; Molitor et al., 2011; Molitor and Kogel, 2009; Serfling et 
al., 2007). By manipulating the hosts signalling pathways, the fungal endophyte 
could also assist in the recruitment of microbes. S. indica can alter metabolism and 
signalling of phytohormones (Aslam et al., 2019) that have been found to modulate 
the ability of soil microbes to colonise roots (Haney and Ausubel, 2015; Lebeis et 
al., 2015). In this respect, it is interesting that S. indica supports the growth of a 
biotrophic oomycete, potentially through effector-driven alterations of the host 
signalling (Akum et al., 2015). This indicates the significance of effectors serving 
a beneficial fungus to get established in the competitive rhizosphere/endosphere 
habitat and to support another unrelated microbe. However, can such singular 
effector-driven activities affect root microbiomes? The assessment of the role of 
the whole S. indica effector repertoire and of other beneficial organisms can help 
in understanding the mechanisms and the full potential of such microbes in 
generating an environment that is not only beneficial for plants but for a broader 
spectrum of the microbial community. As a result, we might learn which plant and 
microbe-derived factors and responses can shape microbial communities. 
Microbial effectors, thus, can be tools - not only to understand the 
interactions of microbes with plants  but also to have an impact on the composition 
of the microbial community by using the plant. A plant is able to alter the 
microbiome and the environment through hormonal signalling and root exudates, 
attracting or repulsing certain microbes (Leach et al., 2017). For example, Badri et 
al. (2013a) applied Arabidopsis root exudates to root associated microbiome and 
observed that each compound induces the growth of microbes, as well as that the 
root exudates synergistically determine the community composition. Using a 
different approach, Lebeis et al. (2015) demonstrated that the signalling pathway of 
the hormone salicylic acid is involved in the modulation of microbial recruitment 
by the root, moderating the colonisation of specific microbial groups. Therefore, 
the ability of S. indica to alter plant processes can outline strategies to engineer 
plant microbiomes, enriched in beneficial microbes. More studies on how microbial 
effectors may influence the microbiome would enable the identification of key 
effectors with valuable activities for agricultural crop production. 
My work presents a robust high-throughput approach to identify effectors 
that can redirect plant signalling. This screening approach should be followed up 
by identifying host proteins interacting with interesting effectors via methods such 
as Yeast-2-Hybrid or affinity tandem mass spectrometry (Mukhtar et al., 2011; 
Vasilescu et al., 2004; Weling et al., 2014). Such methods that allow the study of 
multiple interactions between microbial effectors and plant targets simultaneously 
will be essential for the identification of suitable candidates for further experiments, 
from the plethora of effectors that exist in nature. Following the initial identification 
of promising effector candidates with defined activities, the complexity of the 
experiments needs to be increased in order to unravel all different aspects of the 
mode of action. Akum et al. (2015) identified the involvement of a S. indica effector 
in different processes of Arabidopsis plants, using a fungal mutant lacking the 
effector of interest and a plant line over-expressing this effector. Using this material 
in gnotobiotic system would be a strategy to identify the role of effectors in altering 
microbial communities and to study and uncover underlying mechanisms. 
However, the genetic manipulation of filamentous fungi has been challenging due 
to the low efficiencies and flexibility of current methods (Shi et al., 2017). Various 
novel genome editing tools have recently been developed (Wang et al., 2017b), with 
CRISPR/Cas being the most promising approach for editing fungal genomes. The 
development of CRISPR/Cas technology will assist in the exploitation of the 
potential of fungi (Wang et al., 2017b). With such a method, fungal effector 
sequences can be altered in very defined ways (e.g. knock-out, motif editing, etc.) 
and used to unravel their role in plant manipulation and in changing plant 
microbiomes. For example, generating S. indica strains lacking the two effector 
candidates identified in Chapter 3, and testing them in a gnotobiotic system with a 
synthetic microbial community (as described in Chapter 4), may reveal the 
involvement of these effectors in S. indica establishment within the plant root and 
how that further affects other microbes or microbiomes.  
The study of effectors will reveal fundamental and conserved plant 
processes that are affected by effectors from phylogenetically distantly related 
microbes (Win et al., 2012). The characterisation of S. indica effectors may help 
identifying common strategies of beneficial microbes to manipulate host plants. 
Besides this, microbial effectors can be a valuable tool to dissect the signalling 
pathways and unravel fundamental principles of plant biology and immunity (Feng 
and Zhou, 2012).  
Another aspect in this respect is the potential effect of microbial effectors 
on less obvious processes, such as pest control (Casteel and Hansen, 2014). It has 
been shown that microbes alter plant perception of herbivores and support plant 
immunity against herbivores (Ceja-Navarro et al., 2015; Giron et al., 2016). 
Furthermore, Badri et al. (2013) showed that the root microbiome can affect plant 
leaf metabolomes, which influences insect feeding behaviour, and inhibition of its 
herbivorous activity. Microbes that live in symbioses with pests can secrete 
effectors into the saliva of insects to suppress plant immunity and to induce a 
metabolic reprograming in plants in order to create the appropriate nutritional 
environment for the insect (Body et al., 2013; Kaiser et al., 2010). This research 
highlights the role of effectors in the metabolic manipulation of the host as an 
ecological competitive advantage. Moreover, it outlines the importance of effectors 
in multi-kingdom organism interactions and their economic potential in the 
suppression of diseases and pests in agriculture.  
In the effort to increase the complexity of effectome studies, the role of the 
effectors should be assessed in the context of a microbial community. Do effectors 
from different microbes have a synergistic effect on altering plant processes? For 
example, Zolla et al. (2013) showed that soil microbiome induces drought 
perception by the plant, as well as the induction of the drought tolerance signalling 
pathway, affecting the expression of drought related marker genes. Microbial 
effectors have been found to affect the drought signalling pathway (Rajput et al., 
2015). Therefore, effectors may be playing a key role in this induction of the 
drought tolerance signalling pathway by the microbiome. Since drought is a major 
constrain for agriculture, particularly for farmers with limited access to water 
(Molden, 2013), identifying microbiomes that confer drought tolerance, or 
tolerance to biotic and abiotic stresses, as well as their mechanism of action, would 
be of high economic importance, improving crop tolerance and yield in challenging 
conditions.  
6.3 Gnotobiotic system as a tool in microbiome research  
Gnobiotitic systems have been proven to be very valuable in dissecting 
complex processes within multi-organism interactions (such as microbiomes) and 
to answer highly specific questions (Durn et al., 2018; Herrera Paredes et al., 
2018). Such systems, in combination with minimal or synthetic microbial 
communities, give the flexibility to alter multiple different factors of the ecosystem 
in a very targeted way, such as soil characteristics, environmental conditions, the 
composition and complexity of the microbial community (Vorholt et al., 2017). 
These characteristics make gnotobiotic systems an ideal tool for studying the 
effectome in a microbiome context as mentioned above, but also the complex 
interactions within microbial communities and between plants and microbiomes. 
6.3.1 Potential and limitations of gnotobiotic systems as reproducible tools to 
study the microbiome and basic interactions 
Microbiome research has mainly been descriptive and is often short in 
providing insights in to the function of members of the community (Busby et al., 
2017). The use of gnotobiotic systems and synthetic communities have brought a 
revelation to the microbiome research, and as indicated in this work (Chapter 4), 
has a high rate of robustness and reproducibility when it is compared with similar 
studies. The system enabled me to observe the high competitiveness of the 
Arabidopsis core bacterial community against beneficial and pathogenic fungal 
endophytes, pre-inoculated in the root (Chapter 4). This experiment showcased that 
the bacterial community comes to a similar balance after a certain period of time 
irrespective of the initial treatments. Similarly, using such an experimental set up, 
researchers were able to show altered functionality of microbes without changing 
their relative abundance (Hartman et al., 2017), as well as the collapse of the 
microbial community with the removal of a single strain from the system (Niu et 
al., 2017). It indicates that gnotobiotic systems in combination with synthetic 
communities are a powerful approach to advance our understanding of microbial 
community dynamics and function. 
The individual components of an ecosystem have a role in its function, and 
if the aim is to improve plant growth and health, a clear understanding of the most 
crucial ecosystem members is important. Interestingly, Durn et al. (2018) 
concluded that the maximum plant growth is achieved in the presence of a diversity 
of microbes comprising bacteria, fungi and oomycetes. The experimental set up of 
gnotobiotic system and the use of synthetic communities, could assist in gaining a 
better understanding of the dynamics of microbiome and its interaction with plants. 
This approach would be particularly helpful for uncovering mechanisms that have 
been proved to be challenging in microbiome research and seen as difficult to be 
studied with the traditional, descriptive approaches. For example, DNA-based 
approaches provide information of the microbial abundances but not about their 
activity; e.g. more than 90% of microbial community members are inactive or 
dormant (Fierer, 2017). On the other hand, rare microbiome members, contributing 
less than 0.1% to the overall relative abundance, belong to the striking 91% of the 
metabolically active microbes in and around the plant root (Dawson et al., 2017), 
highlighting the importance of the low abundant microbiome members in the 
systems processes and the functionality of the community. Rare species are 
considered as key players in the community that drive ecosystem function (Jousset 
et al., 2017). In this respect, gnotobiotic systems would be excellent tools to study 
the role of rare microbes in the microbiome, as well as the sequence of community 
assembly (Fukami and Morin, 2003), which can be a major determinant of 
biodiversity and productivity of the system. In addition, other organisms including 
viruses, archaea, nematodes, and insects play important roles for the ecosystem 
diversity and function (Adam et al., 2017; Castillo et al., 2017; Elhady et al., 2017; 
Pratama and van Elsas, 2018), suggesting the necessity for more holistic and 
comprehensive studies of multitrophic interactions. 
Considering the above observations when studying microbiomes, one 
should be careful on the conclusions made from an experiment in gnotobiotic 
systems, and generally when making associations between microbiome and plant 
phenotypes. Especially considering the limitations of the system used and the 
influence of other factors affecting the ecosystems balance (Vorholt et al., 2017). 
Vorholt et al. (2017) suggested that understanding of such fundamental principles 
requires reproducible experimental approaches which allow to change specific 
factors, such as environmental/growth conditions, composition and diversity of 
communities, gene modifications, in order to be able to create links between made 
changes vs. observed effects or phenotypes. In addition, such experimental 
approaches including metagenome analyses should be complemented with other 
methods, such as transcriptomics, proteomics, metabolomics and metaphenomics 
(Sergaki et al., 2018; Vorholt et al., 2017). As highlighted by my work in Chapter 
3, effectors alter the auxin signalling pathway leading to substantial changes in 
plant growth and responses to high levels of auxin, as well as their potential effect 
in plant-microbe interactions. Therefore, depending on the scientific question, it 
might be worthwhile to include the analysis of microbial effectors (Uhse and 
Djamei, 2018) and hormones as a complement in microbiome research to advance 
our understanding of underlying ecological interactions.  
6.3.2 Approaches to advance our understanding of microbial communities 
In recent years, various approaches have been used to study plant 
microbiomes, including metagenome analyses to receive the genetic potential of 
microbiomes (Ofek-Lalzar et al., 2014). Efforts have been made to extract RNA 
from roots, aiming at identifying metabolically active microbes and their 
involvement in plant pathways (Chaparro et al., 2014; Turner et al., 2013; Yergeau 
et al., 2014). Metatranscriptomics, as a functional expression analysis, can be 
combined with other methods to enhance our understanding of interactions. For 
example, Chaparro et al. (2013) could associate the root microbiome with the 
metabolome of Arabidopsis at different developmental stages, using 
pyrosequensing of the microbiome mRNA in the rhizosphere and GC-MS to 
identify the metabolic profile of the plant. This approach revealed the functional 
genes of the community that could be correlated with plant metabolites. Turner et 
al. (2013) used metagenomic and metatranscriptomic profiling of microbiomes, as 
well as plant mutants, in order to identify multi-kingdom differences in the 
abundance as well as their metabolic capabilities (e.g. methylotrophy, cellulose 
degradation, H2 oxidation). Such studies indicate that combining metagenomics and 
metatranscriptomics can enable us to functionally characterise microbiomes and to 
unravel the role of microbes in altering defined plant processes.  
Unlike RNA which has a short turnover time (Prosser, 2015), proteins have 
a higher level of stability in the environment (Armengaud et al., 2012). Using 
metaproteomics, we can capture expressed proteins and thus, metabolic signature 
and activities in a given sample (Heyer et al., 2015; Wilmes and Bond, 2006). 
Exoproteomics or exometaproteomics, in particular, focus on the ecologically more 
important proteins involved in microbe  microbe and plant - microbe interactions 
(Armengaud et al., 2012; Lidbury et al., 2016). This approach would be very 
interesting to use in the experiments with Medicago truncatula and Sinorhizobium 
spp., and the natural soil to gain a deeper insight into the biochemical processes 
within the system. The downside of this approach is that it requires sufficient 
amounts of material (Johnson-Rollings et al., 2014) which may be difficult to obtain 
for certain experimental set ups in addition to analytical challenges such as the 
correct assignment of detected peptides based on public databases and the required 
computational power (Muth et al., 2013, 2016; Timmins-Schiffman et al., 2017). 
The size of my experiment did not allow such an approach, but it would be of high 
relevance to be used in future experiments in order to disprove function-based 
hypotheses. Moreover, meta(exo)proteomics could be an excellent tool for 
identifying extracellular enzymes involved in plant  microbe interactions and in 
phosphate mobilization within roots (Lidbury et al., 2016). 
Along with the employment of a combination of methods to improve our 
understanding of fundamental functional principles in microbiomes, time course 
experiments can provide an insight into the timeline of interactions and reveal 
mechanisms involved in each step of an interaction. It is known that plant 
development significantly affects the composition of the rhizobiome (Chaparro et 
al., 2014; Rasche et al., 2006). Investigating further the microbial composition at 
different developmental stages could provide vital information on microbiome 
recruitment processes and the dynamics underlying the establishment of plant-
microbe/microbe-microbe interactions over time (Qiao et al., 2017; Yuan et al., 
2015). Such approaches would also help to better understand the establishment of 
core microbiomes in Arabidopsis roots in experiments using gnotobiotic systems, 
as well as the dynamic changes of natural soil microbiomes when exposed to 
Medicago truncatula roots inoculated with S. meliloti 1022.  
6.3.3 Challenges in microbiome analysis 
Due to the fast development of microbiome research, a lot of discussion 
arises on the appropriate approach for the analysis of microbiome data (Buttigieg 
and Ramette, 2014; Paliy and Shankar, 2016; Ramette, 2007; Song et al., 2018). 
Uncovering the earths biodiversity is becoming a communal effort (Alivisatos et 
al., 2015), however, the diversity of data collection and analysis methods remains 
a big challenge for microbiome research (Thompson et al., 2017). This technical 
variation can lead to inconclusive results when comparing different studies. Venter 
et al. (2016) observed that different methods for microbiome analyses showed 
different outcomes. In addition, a high number of biological replicates is necessary 
to apply statistical tools that determine significant factors in studies in the field of 
microbial ecology and to ensure validity and reproducibility of experiments with 
high complexity. The Earth Microbiome project, as a collaborative effort to capture 
earths microbial diversity (Gilbert et al., 2014b), continuously critically evaluates 
the methods used for this purpose (Gilbert et al., 2014a). 
There are different methods available for microbiome data analyses with 
different advantages and disadvantages (Di Bella et al., 2013). Nearing et al. (2018) 
did a comparative analysis of different analysis pipelines and concluded that all 
different approaches lead to a similar community structure. However, the number 
of observed species significantly differed depending on the pipeline, as well as the 
alpha diversity. This aspect would be important if rare microbiome members are 
most important for a study (Nearing et al., 2018). In my work, I was looking for 
major shifts caused by the inoculant. Therefore, the pipeline used (QIIME1) was 
sufficient to answer hypotheses. If I was looking for certain, low abundant species, 
the DADA2 pipeline (Callahan et al., 2016) would be better suited as it can detect 
a higher number of species due to the machine learning approach it uses (Nearing 
et al., 2018). Nevertheless, the analytic approach should be critically evaluated for 
each individual experiment and in dependence of the research objective. Using 
standardised/universal sampling and analysis protocols would help achieving 
higher reproducibility and compatibility of the research (Butt and Haller, 2017). 
6.4 The necessity of a fundamental understanding of individual 
microbes properties, capabilities and lifestyles - Approaches to 
ensure inoculant competitiveness 
Microbes have a broad spectrum of capabilities and the best exploitation of 
the gnotobiotic systems potential could be achieved with the advancement of our 
fundamental understanding of microbes lifestyle, responses to the environment, 
genetic and functional potential (Sergaki et al., 2018). The employment of methods 
that can characterize microbiomes more accurately down to the genus level and 
beyond are highly necessary. For example, in my work, it was not possible to 
identify many of the Rhizobiales species beyond the order level, due to limitations 
in taxonomy assignment, which makes the exploration of microbial diversity and 
function more difficult. Furthermore, I showed the highly variable efficiency of 
different strains that belonged to the same genus, which highlights the necessity for 
functional characterisation of individual species, genera or even strains. As 
Schlaeppi and Bulgarelli (2015) suggested, in order to achieve that, large-scale, 
high-throughput techniques are needed. 
6.4.1 The case of Serendipita indica 
The use of the synthetic communities was found to be an excellent tool to 
study basic microbe interactions at the community level. It assisted in finding the 
inefficiency of the spore inoculation method used for S. indica, which was further 
proved to be true under natural conditions. Rabiey et al. (2017) demonstrated the 
strong potential of S. indica as an agricultural inoculant for UK soils, with strong 
effects on wheat growth, soil microbial community diversity and long-term survival 
in the soil without the plant under UK weather conditions. However, the inoculation 
method for their experiments was mixing fungal spores and mycelium with the soil 
(Rabiey et al., 2017), similarly used in other studies (Anith et al., 2018; Das et al., 
2012; Kumar et al., 2009; Narayan et al., 2017). This method might ensure the 
establishment of S. indica in plants, but the feasibility of using such a technique in 
agriculture and in larger scale experiments, should be carefully examined, 
particularly for the large mycelium quantities it would require. 
While S. indica has been studied extensively in its association with plants 
(Arma et al., 2012; Banhara et al., 2015b; Cosme et al., 2016; Jacobs et al., 2011; 
Lahrmann et al., 2013; Qiang et al., 2012b; Rabiey et al., 2017; Schfer et al., 2009; 
Vadassery et al., 2008; Varma et al., 2012), there are only a few studies on its 
interaction with other microbes. Meena et al. (2010) showed that S. indica had a 
synergistic effect with Pseudomonas striata, enhancing the bacterias proliferation 
and increasing chickpea biomass. A similar effect was observed by Anith et al. 
(2015), who showed that the co-inoculation of the fungus with Bacillus pumilus 
improved the growth of tomato seedling. In all cases, the combined effect of the 
fungus and the inoculant was stronger than the effect of the single inoculation, 
something that I did not observe in my experiments suggesting a lower 
competitiveness of S. indica in my experimental set-up. Similarly, Kumar Bhuyan 
et al. (2015) showed that different strains of a plant beneficial bacteria, Azotobacter 
chroococcum, had contrasting effects on the growth of the fungus in the absence of 
a plant. They demonstrated that under the same experimental conditions, two of the 
tested strains had opposite effects on fungal growth. While Azotobacter 
chroococcum strain WR5 promoted S. indica growth, Azotobacter chroococcum 
strain M4 inhibited its growth. These findings show the complexity of microbial 
interactions and the necessity for a combination of approaches to study them. 
Regarding S. indica, I observed in my experiments that its proliferation in plant 
roots was inhibited in the presence of the synthetic microbial community in the 
gnotobiotic system, as well as in the presence of the natural microbiome. In order 
to understand this effect, it would be important to study the interaction of S. indica 
with microbiomes. One approach could be to build an interaction network as 
demonstrated by Helfrich et al. (2018) based on bipartite interactions between the 
fungus and members of the synthetic community. Using such a high-throughput 
approach, it is possible to study pairwise interactions of microbes on plates, 
identifying inhibitory, neutral or auxotrophic relationship between microbes. This 
could potentially be used in the design of experiments with synthetic communities 
in order to be able to decompose all the microbial interactions within the 
community.  
A more detailed, functional characterisation of S. indica growth and 
interaction with other microbes would assist in understanding the nature of 
interactions between S. indica and other microbes under different conditions. Such 
an effort was made by Jiang et al. (2018), who investigated the bipartite interaction 
of the fungus with the beneficial microbe Bacillus subtilis. They demonstrated that 
S. indica is auxotrophic for thiamine, which has a role in carbon cycling, and that 
the presence of Bacillus subtillis could recapitulate the auxotrophic growth of the 
fungus in thiamine-free media. In addition, they found that this auxothrophic 
interaction was present only when microbial inoculation was separated in space and 
time. It highlighted how different aspects of microbial interactions and the 
importance of their spatial and temporal organisation within the system may 
determine the outcome of microbial interactions in the microbiome. 
6.4.2 The case of Colletotrichum tolfidiae 
Colletotrichum tolfidiae is characterised as plant growth and nutrition 
enhancing microbe (Hiruma et al., 2016) However, when used in my gnotobiotic 
system, it had a negative effect on Arabidopsis plants. Studies on Colletotrichum 
spp. have shown that plant derived signals are able to reprogram fungal gene 
expression and determine the interaction with plants. In addition, the pathogenicity 
of the microbe was also found to be linked to the effector repertoire of the fungus 
(OConnell et al., 2012). Combining the gnotobiotic system approach with 
metatranscriptomics and effectomics would unravel the mechanisms underlying the 
potential transition of C. tolfidiae between beneficial and pathogenic lifestyle. 
The lifestyle transitions of microbes between mutualism and parasitism 
have been a major concern. For example, fungal endophytes that are recognised as 
pathogens, such as Fusarium graminearum, can exist inside the plant root without 
causing any disease symptoms (Lofgren et al., 2018). Interestingly, Fusarium 
species were found in all UK agricultural soil types used in my experiments, as well 
as in the roots of Medicago truncatula. In fact, they were found to contribute up to 
the 5% of the observed differences in the fungal community of the M. truncatula 
endosphere, with increased relative abundance in the presence of S. meliloti 1022. 
Considering the strong growth promotion by the rhizobial strain, Fusarium species 
may even play an important role in this beneficial effect. Furthermore, even 
Sebacinales, the order that S. indica belongs to, is considered to have evolved from 
a saprotrophic ancestor (Garnica et al., 2016; Wei et al., 2016). It is suggested that 
fungi that are closely related to pathogens or saprotrophs maintain certain 
pathogenic traits. However, the underlying mechanism driving the transition 
between pathogenicity and mutualism is unknown (Fesel and Zuccaro, 2016). My 
experiments, showing the detrimental effect of beneficial C. tolfidiae on 
Arabidopsis plants, highlight the necessity to understand such mechanisms, as well 
as the need for an improved understanding of the whole range of genetic and 
functional capabilities of microbes. Furthermore, we need to assess the level of the 
expression of those capabilities when microbes are grown individually, but also in 
association with plants or other microbes and under different environmental 
conditions. This effort will enable a more accurate and efficient use of microbes in 
agriculture, and an engineering of microbiomes in a more predictable way.  
6.4.3 The case of Sinorhizobium spp. 
Sinorhizobium species are used in agriculture as beneficial bioagents. My 
experiments showed varying efficiencies of different Sinorhizobium strains in three 
representative UK soil types (Chapter 3.3). The well-studied Sinorhizobium meliloti 
strain 1021 was found to be the least efficient in improving growth of Medicago 
truncatula, irrespective of soil type and nitrate availability. These findings align 
with those from Terpolilli et al. (2008), who demonstrated the low efficiency of S. 
meliloti 1021, using 8 different Medicago species. In this study, plants treated with 
strain 1021 were found to have lower dry weight and shoot N content compared to 
the N-treated plants and formed less active nodules in comparison to S. medicae 
419 (Terpolilli et al., 2008). 
While it has been discussed that plant species should be matched with the 
appropriate inoculants (Thrall et al., 2000), my work shows that the soil type plays 
a key role in their efficiency to enhance growth. S. medicae 419 appeared as a highly 
efficient strain at low pH, but this effect was less strong at higher pH. Therefore, 
for higher inoculant efficiency, not only the host plant genotype should be 
considered, but also edaphic factors of the field site. These findings highlight the 
necessity for field-based or field soil-based studies, testing different plant hosts and 
environmental conditions in order to assess the efficiency and the suitability of an 
inoculant.  
This work presents evidence of the complexity of microbial interactions 
within a given community and with the environment, which can disturb the 
expected performance of certain microbes. The reduced competitiveness of S. 
indica, the detrimental effect of the previously shown beneficial C. tolfidiae and the 
varying efficiency of Sinorhizobium species indicate current gaps in our knowledge 
and understanding of microbe  microbe and plant  microbe interactions. 
Fundamental understanding of the genomic and functional capabilities of microbes, 
as individuals and as part of microbial communities, will accelerate our 
understanding of microbial interactions, recruitment pattern by the plant and their 
function in a given ecosystem. 
6.5 Future approaches to examine and exploit microbial bioagents 
for agricultural application 
Microbiome research has shown that unexplored diversity could be a 
substantial biotechnological source (De Souza et al., 2016). De Souza et al. (2016) 
suggest that studies that focus on specific microbial groups will miss their collective 
contributions to processes such as nitrogen fixation, and that the microbial diversity 
within the root may play an important role in nitrogen fixation. Along these lines, 
S. meliloti 1022 was found to alter bacterial community structures and 
compositions, as well as to enhance plant growth and to increase N content in the 
aboveground plant tissue in different soil types with varying P and N content. On 
the other hand, it is known that high nitrogen levels in soil can inhibit nodulation 
(Van Noorden et al., 2016). It might indicate that S. meliloti 1022 assists in the 
recruitment of microbes that improve growth and N acquisition from the soil. This 
ability of S. meliloti 1022 indicate the potential of microbes to improve plant growth 
nutrition in ways that are usually disregarded. Moreover, Thonar et al. (2017) 
demonstrated that the combination of three inoculants (Trichoderma, 
Pseudomonas, and Bacillus strains) in a field experiment increased maize growth 
and nutrient acquisition. Understanding the role of each individual microbe, their 
mode of action and how they perform in combination with other microbes will 
allow us to identify combinations of microbes under different or specific 
soil/environmental conditions to maximise plant health and production. 
Particularly, for improving nitrogen fixation, more thorough research is 
needed to understand the complex interactions with plants and within nodules. 
Notably, Zgadzaj et al. (2016) showed that the nodule has a very distinct 
microbiome and that symbiosis drives the establishment of specific microbes with 
potential growth promoting traits. Such beneficial microbes might also support the 
plant growth promotion by S. meliloti 1022 in my experiments, particularly in the 
high nitrate soil, where nodulation might have been inhibited, yet the growth 
promotion in the presence of the inoculant was clear. Nodule microbiomes may 
harbour novel mechanisms to sustain plant growth and nutrition acquisition as well 
as supporting other microbes involved in establishing and maintaining nodulation. 
As previously mentioned, the comprehensive genetic and functional 
characterisation of individual microbes, as well as the characterisation of their 
interactions are essential to advance our knowledge about the full spectrum of 
microbiome functions. In vitro assessment of plant growth promoting traits/genes 
is not necessarily translated into a plant phenotype. Similarly, genes found to have 
no function under laboratory conditions may play key roles in a community context 
and modulate competitive interactions or/and support the establishment of 
symbiosis under field conditions (Poole et al., 2018). Whole genome sequencing of 
microbial isolates collections and the use of synthetic microbial communities in the 
gnotobiotic system in combination with plant lines with genetic variation are 
promising strategies for the identification of such traits in strains and encourage the 
discovery of new plant growth promoting genes (Finkel et al., 2017). For example, 
whole genome analysis of Paenibacillus polymixa revealed genes related to IAA 
production, compound important for plant manipulation (Xie et al., 2016a). In 
addition, studying transcriptome or proteome responses of microbes as part of 
complex plant microbiome and exposed to stressful conditions can provide essential 
information of community assembly and plant growth promoting processes 
(Fernndez et al., 2013; Lidbury et al., 2016; Mauchline et al., 2006). For example, 
Lidbury et al. (2016) examined the responses of agriculturally relevant 
Pseudomonas strain in low phosphate conditions using comparative exoproteomics, 
revealing key proteins of the different strains involved in their growth promoting 
activity in low phosphate conditions.  
In recent years, new tools and methods have been developed to study 
microbe-microbe and plant-microbe interactions. For example, with the use of bio-
reporters for sugars, polyols, amino and organic acids, or flavonoids in a Rhizobium 
spp. mutants, in combination with metabolomics and transcriptomics, Pini et al. 
(2017) were able to describe the development of rhizobia-legume symbioses in 
space and time. Such approaches can help us in unravelling plant-microbe dynamics 
in the rhizosphere as well as in the identification of compounds (e.g. proteins, 
metabolites) involved in those interactions. Furthermore, microfluidic systems 
using plants and fluorescent microbes allow spatio-temporal analysis of microbial 
interactions in the root and provide information on the establishment of microbes 
and the competition between them (Massalha et al., 2017). Both approaches would 
be useful for understanding of the establishment of S. indica and the rhizobial 
strains in the presence of other microbes, as well as the recruitment of certain 
microbes by the inoculants. However, the experimental set up of those may have 
certain limitations on the hypothesis that can be tested. 
6.6 Transferring knowledge from the lab to the field 
Even though experiments using bipartite interactions under controlled 
conditions have increased our understanding of processes involved in microbial 
interactions, they give little information on the processes that occur under natural 
settings (de Boer, 2017). This also applies to plant-microbe interactions as shown 
from my experiments, involving Medicago truncatula, Serendipita indica, 
Sinorhizobium and agricultural soils, where the microbes did not perform as 
expected. Serendipita indica did not promote plant growth as expected, while 
Sinorhizobium species behaved very differently depending on the soil type. In 
particular, the well-studied S. meliloti strain 1021 was found to have no growth-
promoting effect in all soil types. This also holds true for arbuscular mycorrhizal 
fungi, which are well-known plant-growth promoting microbes. However, certain 
species can inhibit plant growth under conditions such as low temperature, light and 
even low phosphorus availability (Johnson et al., 1997; Smith and Smith, 1996). 
Moreover, it was recently shown that arbuscular mycorrhizae can be suppressed by 
the soil microbiome (Svenningsen et al., 2018). While there is an increasing interest 
in using microbes that can utilise soil P that is unavailable for plants, their use in 
the field remains limited, as the dynamics within the natural ecosystem is still 
poorly explored (Richardson, 2002). In addition, the observed growth promotion 
by microbial inoculants may not be a consequence of an attribute observed in the 
laboratory, such as phosphorus mobilisation (Richardson, 2002). Instead, it could 
be due to the recruitment of other beneficial microbes. This may be the case for the 
highly efficient S. meliloti strain 1022, which improves plant growth and N 
acquisition even in soil types with high N content, potentially through the 
recruitment of other beneficial microbes. Taken together, there is an urgent need 
for applying lab-gained knowledge in the field.  
Transferring knowledge from the laboratory to the field, would mean that 
farming practices should also be taken into account. It is known that crop rotation 
has a positive impact on plant yield, which could be a result of changes in the 
microbiome composition. Hilton et al. (2018) demonstrated the significant effect of 
crop rotation on the composition of bacterial and fungal communities. In addition, 
studies have shown that crop rotation increases microbial diversity and richness as 
different plants alter soil characteristics in different ways (Venter et al., 2016). In 
my study, mainly high NP soil type had a cultivation history with different crops, 
resulting in a distinct microbiome and higher bacterial species richness, increased 
nutrient content (perhaps due to mineral fertilisation) and higher plant yield of 
mock-treated plants. In contrast, the field from which I obtained the low NP soil 
type was uncultivated while the low N high P soil type was used for winter wheat 
for two consecutive years. This possibly resulted to a reduced fertilizer input, and 
consequently reduction of nitrogen, as well as the formation of bacterial 
communities with similar structure. Furthermore, Li et al., (2019) found that 
monocropping caused a reduction of microbial diversity, an enrichment of rare 
microbiomes and a loss of microbial traits associated with plant growth 
enhancement, e.g. underrepresentation of plant growth promoting microbes with 
function in nutrient metabolism and phytohormones biosynthesis. These findings 
highlight the impact of farming practices on microbiome  associated traits that can 
affect crop production. 
6.7 Future perspectives  
There is the need for microbiome research strategies with a clear focus on 
the functional characterisation of microbial communities in order to exploit the full 
potential of microbiome activities for agricultural crop production (Figure 4.1). In 
order to do this, isolation and functional characterisation of microbes is needed, as 
well as of all the organisms of the ecosystem, e.g. plant-related nematodes, viruses, 
and insects, as they may contribute to certain processes of the ecosystem (Brussard, 
1997). To do this, the employment of high throughput assays that will increase the 
speed of the screening would be necessary, targeting different aspects of microbial 
fitness and parameters that affect the assembly of microbiomes. For example, 
cytology-based approaches, such as the microplate-reader system that enables the 
visualization of gene expression during microbial bipartite interactions (Hennessy 
et al., 2017), is a promising high-throughput screening tool to dissect microbial 
interactions. Such approach could also reveal components of microbial interactions 
that can potentially have commercial value, such as antibiotics (Tyc et al., 2014). 
Furthermore, studying the response of individual microbes to plant microbiome or 
to abiotic stresses, using combination of approaches (e.g., proteomics, 
transcriptomics), can reveal genes associated with plant growth promotion 
properties and microbial recruitment (Fernndez et al., 2013; Lidbury et al., 2016; 
Martino et al., 2018; Mauchline et al., 2006). The identification of such genes/traits 
could be excellent tools in manipulating microbiomes, plant growth and health.  
 Characterised microbes can build the basis for the construction of synthetic 
communities by combining microbial strains with different activities and design 
communities with varying levels of complexity. Gnotobiotic system can serve as 
robust tools to study the activities of such communities (e.g. on plant fitness), as 
it allows to change and test defined parameters, and is particularly informative 
when coupled with other approaches such as omics-based analyses. Gnotobiotic 
systems can be the first step in transferring this knowledge to the field, where other 
aspects, such as farming parameters including crop rotation, tillage, etc. can be 
tested. In addition, universal standards should be applied for microbiome research 
in order ensure reliability and reproducibility of results and their biological 
relevance.  
Figure 6.1: Multi-scale approaches for microbiome research. The generation of 
microbial isolates collections enables the increase of our fundamental 
understanding of microbes and their use in the gnotobiotic system as synthetic 
microbial communities. This system allows the use of various experimental 
approaches to study plant-microbe interactions and test specific hypothesis. The 
knowledge from these laboratory/greenhouse experimental approaches should be 
tested in the field and further apply it to improve agriculture. [Arabidopsis plants] 
illustrations courtesy of somersault18:24, Creative Commons license CC BY-NC-
SA 4.0 
Synthetic 
communities
Genetic manipulation
 of the plant
 of microbes
Time course 
experiments to study 
system dynamics
Environmental Factors
Combination of omics
Multitrophic 
interactions
Microbiome 
engineering to 
improve 
agriculture
Generation of 
new agricultural 
and medicinal 
products 
Test this knowledge 
in the field
- Succession of 
inoculants
- Long-term 
experiments
- Effect of farming 
practices
Laboratory/Greenhouse based 
experimental approaches Field experiments Applications
Fundamental 
understanding of microbes
- Genetic and functional 
characterization of 
individual microbes 
- Bipartite interactions
Metabolically active 
and inactive organisms
Interaction between 
bellow ground -
aboveground
Gnotobiotic system
Sterile system
6.8 General conclusions  
The conclusions of this integrated approach to study plant-microbe interactions are 
as follows:  
The study of S. indica effectors using a combinational approach, gave an insight to 
strategies for the establishment of fungal colonisation within the root. This study 
opens new potential for manipulation of plants and microbiomes that can be 
achieved through mechanistic understanding of the microbial effectors activity. 
The key conclusions of this chapter are: 
- Single S. indica effectors alter auxin hormonal signaling 
- Effectors confer a competitive advantage to the fungus 
- Potential of deploying microbial effectors to manipulate crops 
The use of a synthetic microbial community and plants inoculated with fungal 
endophytes in a gnotobiotic system revealed competition relationships among 
microbes giving the following conclusions: 
- The gnotobiotic system is a reproducible tool to study to deconstruct the 
microbiome and study basic interactions  complement with other methods 
- S. indica promotes growth, however, when it is in a microbiome context, the 
method of inoculation matters.  
- C. tolfidiae can have detrimental effect on plant survival, which is reverted 
by the Arabidopsis core bacterial community 
- Arabidopsis core bacterial community structure is similar in all treatments 
within this system, indicating the robustness of the core microbiome.  
Increasing the complexity of the experimental set up, the efficiency of three 
Sinorhizobium strains to increase M. truncatula yield and nitrogen content was 
evaluated using three agricultural UK soil types. Increasing the output of this 
experiment, the fungal and bacterial communities were examined, along with the 
soil and aboveground plant tissue chemical characteristics. This experimental set 
up gave agriculturally relevant conclusions: 
- S. meliloti 1022 is the most efficient growth promoting rhizobia symbiont for 
Medicago trancatula A17 among S. medicae 419 and S. meliloti 1021 in three 
different soil types with variable nutrient availabilities.  
- S. meliloti 1022 has an additive effect on Medicago trancatula A17 growth 
in high nitrate conditions.  
- Edaphic factors affect fungal and bacterial soil community structures. 
- The rhizobial inoculant influences the composition of bacterial communities 
in the endosphere in all soil types while it had no effect on the fungal 
community in any compartment (soil, rhizophere, endosphere). 
- S. meliloti 1022 supports plant nitrogen supply. 
- The presence of S. meliloti 1022 has greater effect on the plant growth than 
the edaphic factors. 
- S. meliloti 1022 potentially enhances plant yield in a different way in the high 
NP soil type than in the low NP and low N high P soil type, potentially 
through recruitment of beneficial microbes into the root. 
The work presented in this thesis gives meaningful and promising insights 
for the improvement of crop production. Research is being directed towards 
agricultural applications by characterising microbiomes and their functions in 
sustainably improving crop production systems. This has a huge impact, 
comparable to that of human probiotics. Such applications of microbiome research 
include the host-mediated microbiome engineering to sustainably improve 
agriculture, though the genetic selection or manipulation of plant to recruit 
beneficial or disease-suppressive microbes (Mueller and Sachs, 2015; Raaijmakers 
and Mazzola, 2016). Other aspects of microbiome engineering can be atomisation 
of beneficial microbes into the flowers in order to support the growth of the next 
generation of plants (Mitter et al., 2017), multi-generation selection of microbiome 
(Panke-Buisse et al., 2015) and direct seed, seedling, soil, endosphere or plant 
wound inoculation of beneficial microbiome (Orozco-Mosqueda et al., 2018) have 
all demonstrated excellent potential to sustainably improve agriculture. My work 
on S. indica effectors, the gnotobiotic system testing individual effectors and the 
evidence for the robustness of S. meliloti as M. truncatula inoculant in natural soils 
give an insight into the potential of these approaches in microbiome research and 
in agriculture as well as creating a basis for further research.  
Appendix 
Table S2.1: Index primers used for the Medicago microbiome libraries.  
Table S2.2: Number of reads before and after the analysis of the microbiome 
sequencing data 
Index primers (all 5'-3')
S502 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACCTCTCTATTCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S503 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACTATCCTCTTCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S505 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACGTAAGGAGTCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S506 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACACTGCATATCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S507 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACAAGGAGTATCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S508 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACCTAAGCCTTCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S510 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACCGTCTAATTCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S511 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACTCTCTCCGTCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S513 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACTCGACTAGTCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S515 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACTTCTAGCTTCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S516 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACCCTAGAGTTCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S517 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACGCGTAAGATCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S518 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACCTATTAAGTCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S520 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACAAGGCTATTCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S521 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACGAGCCTTATCGTCGGCAGCGTC
S522 AATGATACGGCGACCACCGAGATCTACACTTATGCGATCGTCGGCAGCGTC
N701 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATTCGCCTTAGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N702 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATCTAGTACGGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N703 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATTTCTGCCTGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N704 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATGCTCAGGAGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N705 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATAGGAGTCCGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N706 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATCATGCCTAGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N707 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATGTAGAGAGGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N710 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATCAGCCTCGGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N711 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATTGCCTCTTGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N712 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATTCCTCTACGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N714 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATTCATGAGCGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N715 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATCCTGAGATGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N716 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATTAGCGAGTGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N718 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATGTAGCTCCGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N719 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATTACTACGCGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N720 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATAGGCTCCGGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N721 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATGCAGCGTAGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N722 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATCTGCGCATGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N723 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATGAGCGCTAGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N724 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATCGCTCAGTGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N726 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATGTCTTAGGGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
N727 CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATACTGATCGGTCTCGTGGGCTCGG
M. truncatula
bacteria
M. truncatula
fungi
A. thaliana
bacteria
A. thaliana
fungi
Number of raw 
reads
23.6 million 27.8 million 18.5 million
Number of reads 
after filtering
5.9 million 12.9 million 9.3 million
Number of reads in 
OTU table
1.9 million 8.9 million 5.2 million 1.7 million
Table S3.1: List of S. indica effectors gene names with the number used in the 
screening process.  
# in screen GeneName
1 PIIN_00011
2 PIIN_00073
3 PIIN_00112
4 PIIN_00113
5 PIIN_00199
6 PIIN_00200
7 PIIN_00225
8 PIIN_00455
9 PIIN_00561
10 PIIN_00602
11 PIIN_00740
12 PIIN_01005
13 PIIN_01255
14 PIIN_01377
15 PIIN_01379
16 PIIN_01577
17 PIIN_01719
18 PIIN_01768
19 PIIN_01892
20 PIIN_01931
21 PIIN_02015
22 PIIN_02096
23 PIIN_02227
24 PIIN_02492
25 PIIN_02570
26 PIIN_02571
27 PIIN_02572
28 PIIN_02598
29 PIIN_02649
30 PIIN_02839
31 PIIN_02849
32 PIIN_03075
33 PIIN_03088
34 PIIN_03188
35 PIIN_03190
36 PIIN_03222
37 PIIN_03271
38 PIIN_03283
39 PIIN_03459
40 PIIN_03461
41 PIIN_03467
42 PIIN_03691
43 PIIN_03806
44 PIIN_03863
45 PIIN_04084
46 PIIN_04114
47 PIIN_04206
48 PIIN_04207
49 PIIN_04219
50 PIIN_04220
# in screen GeneName
51 PIIN_04270
52 PIIN_04291
53 PIIN_04301
54 PIIN_04539
55 PIIN_04661
56 PIIN_04685
57 PIIN_04931
58 PIIN_04932
59 PIIN_04941
60 PIIN_05021
61 PIIN_05094
62 PIIN_05098
63 PIIN_05217
64 PIIN_05242
65 PIIN_05338
66 PIIN_05452
67 PIIN_05670
68 PIIN_05674
69 PIIN_05848
70 PIIN_05864
71 PIIN_05865
72 PIIN_05872
73 PIIN_05875
74 PIIN_05879
75 PIIN_05932
76 PIIN_05933
77 PIIN_06047
78 PIIN_06133
79 PIIN_06305
80 PIIN_06398
81 PIIN_06410
82 PIIN_06443
83 PIIN_06535
84 PIIN_06568
85 PIIN_06796
86 PIIN_06837
87 PIIN_06901
88 PIIN_07076
89 PIIN_07104
90 PIIN_07138
91 PIIN_07145
92 PIIN_07212
93 PIIN_07327
94 PIIN_07333
95 PIIN_07381
96 PIIN_07425
97 PIIN_07657
98 PIIN_07672
99 PIIN_07915
100 PIIN_07917
# in screen GeneName
101 PIIN_07952
102 PIIN_08029
103 PIIN_08228
104 PIIN_08307
105 PIIN_08375
106 PIIN_08513
107 PIIN_08516
108 PIIN_08524
109 PIIN_08623
110 PIIN_08672
111 PIIN_08714N
112 PIIN_08768
113 PIIN_08836
114 PIIN_08972
115 PIIN_08982
116 PIIN_09044
117 PIIN_09051
118 PIIN_09175
119 PIIN_09181
120 PIIN_09206
121 PIIN_09321
122 PIIN_09409
123 PIIN_09466
124 PIIN_09504
125 PIIN_09625
126 PIIN_09643
127 PIIN_09644
128 PIIN_09658
129 PIIN_09723
130 PIIN_09744
131 PIIN_09791
132 PIIN_09887
133 PIIN_09899
134 PIIN_09929
135 PIIN_09968
136 PIIN_10187
137 PIIN_10216
138 PIIN_10223
139 PIIN_10467
140 PIIN_10493
141 PIIN_10643
142 PIIN_10951
143 PIIN_10962
144 PIIN_10989
145 PIIN_11103
146 PIIN_11297
147 PIIN_11336
148 PIIN_11572
149 PIIN_11578
150 PIIN_11654
Table S3.2: Raw data from the protoplast screening of the top effector candidates. 
difference to LUC expression of eV under mock 
treatment (%)
difference to LUC expression of eV under NAA 
treatment (%)
effector mean SD SE t-test effector mean SD SE t-test
SIE_87 -71.35 40.52 28.65 0.10 SIE_83 -222.29 0.91 0.64 0.00
SIE_144 -46.30 75.95 53.70 0.42 SIE_7 -214.83 38.32 27.10 0.01
SIE_149 -43.41 10.13 7.16 0.02 SIE_149 -92.83 0.65 0.46 0.38
SIE_16 -33.06 13.83 9.78 0.05 SIE_87 -91.84 1.32 0.94 0.38
SIE_67 -25.38 5.41 3.82 0.02 SIE_67 -91.33 3.14 2.22 0.39
SIE_24 -23.01 13.43 9.50 0.08 SIE_16 -90.42 13.54 9.58 0.40
SIE_7 -19.88 0.10 0.07 0.00 SIE_88 -83.12 1.37 0.97 0.44
SIE_56 -18.25 2.99 2.12 0.07 SIE_148 -80.57 0.95 0.67 0.01
SIE_83 -15.56 1.91 1.35 0.15 SIE_24 -79.24 3.56 2.52 0.47
SIE_88 -2.90 15.48 10.95 0.33 SIE_56 -76.60 6.55 4.63 0.05
eV -0.09 0.28 0.09 SIE_76 -35.52 91.19 64.48 0.54
SIE_148 32.66 0.59 0.42 0.01 SIE_59 -5.79 22.23 15.72 0.64
SIE_111 39.30 6.36 4.50 0.05 eV 0.00 0.00 0.00
SIE_69 41.63 12.60 8.91 0.40 SIE_81 5.29 23.16 16.38 0.78
SIE_126 50.07 12.35 8.73 0.03 SIE_64 7.13 23.83 16.85 0.98
SIE_9 64.30 33.53 23.71 0.16 SIE_9 23.66 73.33 51.85 0.60
SIE_76 69.96 3.77 2.67 0.16 SIE_69 46.06 31.89 22.55 0.38
SIE_64 78.08 26.48 18.73 0.10 SIE_126 49.26 36.85 26.06 0.58
SIE_75 82.35 2.16 1.52 0.11 SIE_10 56.60 11.50 8.13 0.04
SIE_81 83.51 16.87 11.93 0.13 SIE_75 57.80 4.97 3.51 0.14
SIE_59 103.54 21.99 15.55 0.04 SIE_144 61.42 12.27 8.68 0.38
SIE_10 479.72 117.20 82.88 0.03 SIE_111 107.10 51.34 36.30 0.13
Figure S3.1: Normalized luciferase expression relative to eV GFP in control and 
NAA treated protoplasts. Luciferase expression is presented as percentage (%) of 
the luciferase expression of protoplasts transformed with the eV under the 
respective treatment; A) Mock or B) NAA treatment. Mean values are shown with 
standard errors. 
88 eV
59 eV
Table S4.1: Sequence of OTU1 as identified by Qiime1 software 
Figure S4.1: Relative abundance of each family in the matrix and root samples 
treated with S. indica, C. tofieldiae or no fungi.  
RA is represented using stacked bar plot of the calculated means of rarefied reads. 
Family
Flavobacteriaceae
Pseudomonadaceae
Comamonadaceae
Rhizobiaceae
Xanthomonadaceae
Caulobacteraceae
Phyllobacteriaceae
Bradyrhizobiaceae
Hyphomicrobiaceae
Sphingomonadaceae
Microbacteriaceae
Erythrobacteraceae
Paenibacillaceae
Cellulomonadaceae
other
Matrix Root
Figure S5.1: Growth curves of Medicago trancatula plants growing in different soil 
types, with different treatments. Mean values of dry aboveground weight (in g) are 
plotted for 4 time points, at 46dai, 56dai, 63dai and 70dai. 
46dai 56dai 63dai 70dai
High NP
S.indica
S.m. 419
S.m. 419 + S.i.
S.m. 1022
S.m. 1022 + S.i.
46dai 56dai 63dai 70dai
Low N high NP
S.indica
S.m. 419
S.m. 419 + S.i.
S.m. 1022
S.m. 1022 + S.i.
46dai 56dai 63dai 70dai
Low NP
S.indica
S.m. 419
S.m. 419 + S.i.
S.m. 1022
S.m. 1022 + S.i.
Figure S5.2: Result from bacterial OTU2 alignment with available genomes on 
BLAST platform. 
References 
Abel, S., and Theologis, A. (1994). Transient transformation of Arabidopsis leaf 
protoplasts: a versatile experimental system to study gene expression. Plant J. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.1994.00421.x. 
Adam, P. S., Borrel, G., Brochier-Armanet, C., and Gribaldo, S. (2017). The growing tree 
of Archaea: New perspectives on their diversity, evolution and ecology. ISME J. 
doi:10.1038/ismej.2017.122. 
Akinrinde, E. A., Iroh, L., Obigbesan, G. O., Hilger, T., Romheld, V., and Neumann, G. 
(2006). Differential expression of aluminium tolerance mechanisms in cowpea 
genotypes under phosphorus limitation. J. Appl. Sci. doi:10.3923/jas.2006.854.859. 
Akum, F. N., Steinbrenner, J., Biedenkopf, D., Imani, J., and Kogel, K.-H. (2015). The 
Piriformospora indica effector PIIN_08944 promotes the mutualistic Sebacinalean 
symbiosis. Front. Plant Sci. 6, 112. doi:10.3389/fpls.2015.00906. 
Alivisatos, A. P., Blaser, M. J., Brodie, E. L., Chun, M., Dangl, J. L., Donohue, T. J., et 
al. (2015). A unified initiative to harness Earths microbiomes. Science (80-. ). 
doi:10.1126/science.aac8480. 
Anderson, R. G., Deb, D., Fedkenheuer, K., and McDowell, J. M. (2015). Recent 
Progress in RXLR Effector Research. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 
doi:10.1094/mpmi-01-15-0022-cr. 
An, J. M., Kiss, G. B., Riely, B. K., Penmetsa, R. V., Oldroyd, G. E. D., Ayax, C., et al. 
(2004). Medicago truncatula DMI1 Required for Bacterial and Fungal Symbioses in 
Legumes. Science (80-. ). doi:10.1126/science.1092986. 
Anith, K. N., Aswini, S., Varkey, S., Radhakrishnan, N. V., and Nair, D. S. (2018). Root 
colonization by the endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica improves growth, 
yield and piperine content in black pepper (Piper nigurm L.). Biocatal. Agric. 
Biotechnol. doi:10.1016/j.bcab.2018.03.012. 
Anith, K. N., Sreekumar, A., and Sreekumar, J. (2015). The growth of tomato seedlings 
inoculated with co-cultivated Piriformospora indica and Bacillus pumilus. 
Symbiosis. doi:10.1007/s13199-015-0313-7. 
Arma, A. V, Herameti, I. S., Ripathi, S. T., Rasad, R. P., As, A. D., Harma, M. S., et al. 
(2012). The symbiotic fungus Piriformospora indica: Review, in Fungal 
Associations, 2nd Edition doi:10.1007/978-3-642-30826-0_13. 
Armengaud, J., Christie-Oleza, J. A., Clair, G., Malard, V., and Duport, C. (2012). 
Exoproteomics: Exploring the world around biological systems. Expert Rev. 
Proteomics. doi:10.1586/epr.12.52. 
Aslam, M. M., Karanja, J., and Bello, S. K. (2019). Piriformospora indica colonization 
reprograms plants to improved P-uptake, enhanced crop performance, and 
biotic/abiotic stress tolerance. Physiol. Mol. Plant Pathol. 
doi:10.1016/j.pmpp.2019.02.010. 
Bacon, C. W., Hinton, D. M., and Mitchell, T. R. (2017). Is Quorum Signaling by 
Mycotoxins a New Risk-Mitigating Strategy for Bacterial Biocontrol of Fusarium 
verticillioides and Other Endophytic Fungal Species? J. Agric. Food Chem. 
doi:10.1021/acs.jafc.6b03861. 
Badri, D. V., Chaparro, J. M., Zhang, R., Shen, Q., and Vivanco, J. M. (2013a). 
Application of natural blends of phytochemicals derived from the root exudates of 
arabidopsis to the soil reveal that phenolic-related compounds predominantly 
modulate the soil microbiome. J. Biol. Chem. doi:10.1074/jbc.M112.433300. 
Badri, D. V., Zolla, G., Bakker, M. G., Manter, D. K., and Vivanco, J. M. (2013b). 
Potential impact of soil microbiomes on the leaf metabolome and on herbivore 
feeding behavior. New Phytol. doi:10.1111/nph.12124. 
Bai, Y., Mller, D. B., Srinivas, G., Garrido-Oter, R., Potthoff, E., Rott, M., et al. (2015). 
Functional overlap of the Arabidopsis leaf and root microbiota. Nature. 
doi:10.1038/nature16192. 
Baker, B., Zambryski, P., Staskawicz, B., and Dinesh-Kumar, S. P. (1997). Signaling in 
plant-microbe interactions. Science (80-. ). doi:10.1126/science.276.5313.726. 
Bakker, M. G., Manter, D. K., Sheflin, A. M., Weir, T. L., and Vivanco, J. M. (2012). 
Harnessing the rhizosphere microbiome through plant breeding and agricultural 
management. Plant Soil. doi:10.1007/s11104-012-1361-x. 
Balser, T. C., and Firestone, M. K. (2005). Linking microbial community composition 
and soil processes in a California annual grassland and mixed-conifer forest. 
Biogeochemistry. doi:10.1007/s10533-004-0372-y. 
Banhara, A., Ding, Y., Khner, R., Zuccaro, A., and Parniske, M. (2015a). Colonization 
of root cells and plant growth promotion by Piriformospora indica occurs 
independently of plant common symbiosis genes. Front. Plant Sci. 6, 111. 
doi:10.3389/fpls.2015.00667. 
Banhara, A., Ding, Y., Zuccaro, A., and Parniske, M. (2015b). Common Symbiosis 
Genes S I V O. 6, 111. doi:10.3389/fpls.2015.00667. 
Bari, R., Bari, R., Jones, J. D. G., and Jones, J. D. G. (2009). Role of plant hormones in 
plant defence responses. Plant Mol. Biol. 69, 47388. doi:10.1007/s11103-008-
9435-0. 
Barker, D. G., Bianchi, S., Blondon, F., Datte, Y., Duc, G., Essad, S., et al. (1990). 
Medicago truncatula, a model plant for studying the molecular genetics of the 
Rhizobium-legume symbiosis. Plant Mol. Biol. Report. doi:10.1007/BF02668879. 
Barker, S., and Tagu, D. (2000). The Roles of Auxins and Cytokinins in Mycorrhizal 
Symbioses. J. Plant Growth Regul. doi:10.1007/s003440000021. 
Bashiardes, S., Godneva, A., Elinav, E., and Segal, E. (2018). Towards utilization of the 
human genome and microbiome for personalized nutrition. Curr. Opin. Biotechnol. 
doi:10.1016/j.copbio.2017.11.013. 
Beals, E. W. (1984). Bray-curtis ordination: An effective strategy for analysis of 
multivariate ecological data. Adv. Ecol. Res. doi:10.1016/S0065-2504(08)60168-3. 
Becker, K., Fischer, M., Heier, T., Waller, F., Achatz, B., Baltruschat, H., et al. (2005). 
The endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica reprograms barley to salt-stress 
tolerance , disease resistance , and higher yield. 102, 1338613391. 
Berendsen, R. L., Pieterse, C. M. J., and Bakker, P. A. H. M. (2012). The rhizosphere 
microbiome and plant health. Trends Plant Sci. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2012.04.001. 
Berg, G. (2009). Plant-microbe interactions promoting plant growth and health: 
Perspectives for controlled use of microorganisms in agriculture. Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol. doi:10.1007/s00253-009-2092-7. 
Berg, G., and Hallmann, J. (2007). Control of Plant Pathogenic Fungi with Bacterial 
Endophytes, in Microbial Root Endophytes doi:10.1007/3-540-33526-9_4. 
Bertin, C., Yang, X., and Weston, L. A. (2003). The role of root exudates and 
allelochemicals in the rhizosphere. Plant Soil. doi:10.1023/A:1026290508166. 
Bianco, C., Imperlini, E., Calogero, R., Senatore, B., Amoresano, A., Carpentieri, A., et 
al. (2006a). Indole-3-acetic acid improves Escherichia colis defences to stress. 
Arch. Microbiol. doi:10.1007/s00203-006-0103-y. 
Bianco, C., Imperlini, E., Calogero, R., Senatore, B., Pucci, P., and Defez, R. (2006b). 
Indole-3-acetic acid regulates the central metabolic pathways in Escherichia coli. 
Microbiology. doi:10.1099/mic.0.28765-0. 
Body, M., Kaiser, W., Dubreuil, G., Casas, J., and Giron, D. (2013). Leaf-Miners Co-opt 
Microorganisms to Enhance their Nutritional Environment. J. Chem. Ecol. 
doi:10.1007/s10886-013-0307-y. 
Boivin, S., Fonouni-Farde, C., and Frugier, F. (2016). How Auxin and Cytokinin 
Phytohormones Modulate Root Microbe Interactions. Front. Plant Sci. 
doi:10.3389/fpls.2016.01240. 
Bolger, A. M., Lohse, M., and Usadel, B. (2014). Trimmomatic: A flexible trimmer for 
Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btu170. 
Boller, T., and He, S. Y. (2009). Innate immunity in plants: An arms race between pattern 
recognition receptors in plants and effectors in microbial pathogens. Science (80-. ). 
doi:10.1126/science.1171647. 
Bonfante, P., and Desir, A. (2017). Who lives in a fungus? the diversity, origins and 
functions of fungal endobacteria living in Mucoromycota. ISME J. 
doi:10.1038/ismej.2017.21. 
Breuillin, F., Schramm, J., Hajirezaei, M., Ahkami, A., Favre, P., Druege, U., et al. 
(2010). Phosphate systemically inhibits development of arbuscular mycorrhiza in 
Petunia hybrida and represses genes involved in mycorrhizal functioning. Plant J. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2010.04385.x. 
Browne, H. P., Forster, S. C., Anonye, B. O., Kumar, N., Neville, B. A., Stares, M. D., et 
al. (2016). Culturing of unculturable human microbiota reveals novel taxa and 
extensive sporulation. Nature. doi:10.1038/nature17645. 
Brundrett, M. C. (2002). Coevolution of roots and mycorrhizas of land plants. New 
Phytol. doi:10.1046/j.1469-8137.2002.00397.x. 
Brussard, L. (1997). Biodiversity and Ecosystem Functioning in Soil. Ambio. 
Bulgarelli, D., Garrido-Oter, R., Mnch, P. C. C., Weiman, A., Drge, J., Pan, Y., et al. 
(2015). Structure and Function of the Bacterial Root Microbiota in Wild and 
Domesticated Barley. Cell Host Microbe 17, 392403. 
doi:10.1016/j.chom.2015.01.011. 
Bulgarelli, D., Rott, M., Schlaeppi, K., Ver Loren van Themaat, E., Ahmadinejad, N., 
Assenza, F., et al. (2012). Revealing structure and assembly cues for Arabidopsis 
root-inhabiting bacterial microbiota. Nature 488, 915. doi:10.1038/nature11336. 
Bulgarelli, D., Schlaeppi, K., Spaepen, S., van Themaat, E. V. L., and Schulze-Lefert, P. 
(2013). Structure and Functions of the Bacterial Microbiota of Plants. Annu. Rev. 
Plant Biol. 64, 807838. doi:10.1146/annurev-arplant-050312-120106. 
Busby, P. E., Soman, C., Wagner, M. R., Friesen, M. L., Kremer, J., Bennett, A., et al. 
(2017). Research priorities for harnessing plant microbiomes in sustainable 
agriculture. PLoS Biol. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.2001793. 
Buttigieg, P. L., and Ramette, A. (2014). A guide to statistical analysis in microbial 
ecology: A community-focused, living review of multivariate data analyses. FEMS 
Microbiol. Ecol. doi:10.1111/1574-6941.12437. 
Butt, L. F., and Haller, D. (2017). Functional relevance of microbiome signatures: The 
correlation era requires tools for consolidation. J. Allergy Clin. Immunol. 
doi:10.1016/j.jaci.2017.02.010. 
Callahan, B. J., McMurdie, P. J., Rosen, M. J., Han, A. W., Johnson, A. J. A., and 
Holmes, S. P. (2016). DADA2: High-resolution sample inference from Illumina 
amplicon data. Nat. Methods. doi:10.1038/nmeth.3869. 
Camehl, I., Sherameti, I., Venus, Y., Bethke, G., Varma, A., Lee, J., et al. (2010). 
Ethylene signalling and ethylene-targeted transcription factors are required to 
balance beneficial and nonbeneficial traits in the symbiosis between the endophytic 
fungus Piriformospora indica and Arabidopsis thaliana. New Phytol. 185, 1062
1073. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.2009.03149.x. 
Caporaso, J. G., Kuczynski, J., Stombaugh, J., Bittinger, K., Bushman, F. D., Costello, E. 
K., et al. (2010). QIIME allows analysis of high-throughput community sequencing 
data. Nat. Methods. doi:10.1038/nmeth.f.303. 
Carvalhais, L. C., Dennis, P. G., Fedoseyenko, D., Hajirezaei, M. R., Borriss, R., and 
Von Wirn, N. (2011). Root exudation of sugars, amino acids, and organic acids by 
maize as affected by nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, and iron deficiency. J. Plant 
Nutr. Soil Sci. doi:10.1002/jpln.201000085. 
Carvalhais, L. C., Muzzi, F., Tan, C.-H., Hsien-Choo, J., and Schenk, P. M. (2013). Plant 
growth in Arabidopsis is assisted by compost soil-derived microbial communities. 
Front. Plant Sci. 4, 235. doi:10.3389/fpls.2013.00235. 
Casteel, C. L., and Hansen, A. K. (2014). Evaluating Insect-Microbiomes at the Plant-
Insect Interface. J. Chem. Ecol. doi:10.1007/s10886-014-0475-4. 
Castillo, J. D., Vivanco, J. M., and Manter, D. K. (2017). Bacterial Microbiome and 
Nematode Occurrence in Different Potato Agricultural Soils. Microb. Ecol. 
doi:10.1007/s00248-017-0990-2. 
Ceja-Navarro, J. A., Vega, F. E., Karaoz, U., Hao, Z., Jenkins, S., Lim, H. C., et al. 
(2015). Gut microbiota mediate caffeine detoxification in the primary insect pest of 
coffee. Nat. Commun. doi:10.1038/ncomms8618. 
Chaparro, J. M., Badri, D. V., Bakker, M. G., Sugiyama, A., Manter, D. K., and Vivanco, 
J. M. (2013). Root Exudation of Phytochemicals in Arabidopsis Follows Specific 
Patterns That Are Developmentally Programmed and Correlate with Soil Microbial 
Functions. PLoS One. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0055731. 
Chaparro, J. M., Badri, D. V., and Vivanco, J. M. (2014). Rhizosphere microbiome 
assemblage is affected by plant development. ISME J. doi:10.1038/ismej.2013.196. 
Chaparro, J. M., Sheflin, A. M., Manter, D. K., and Vivanco, J. M. (2012). Manipulating 
the soil microbiome to increase soil health and plant fertility. Biol. Fertil. Soils. 
doi:10.1007/s00374-012-0691-4. 
Chapman, M. G., and Underwood, A. J. (1999). Ecological patterns in multivariate 
assemblages: Information and interpretation of negative values in ANOSIM tests. 
Mar. Ecol. Prog. Ser. doi:10.3354/meps180257. 
Charvet-Candela, V., Hitchin, S., Reddy, M. S., Cournoyer, B., Marmeisse, R., and Gay, 
G. (2002). Characterization of a Pinus pinaster cDNA encoding an auxin up-
regulated putative peroxidase in roots. Tree Physiol. doi:10.1093/treephys/22.4.231. 
Chen, Z., Agnew, J. L., Cohen, J. D., He, P., Shan, L., Sheen, J., et al. (2007). 
Pseudomonas syringae type III effector AvrRpt2 alters Arabidopsis thaliana auxin 
physiology. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. doi:10.1073/pnas.0704901104. 
Cheng, T., Xu, C., Lei, L., Li, C., Zhang, Y., and Zhou, S. (2016). Barcoding the 
kingdom Plantae: New PCR primers for ITS regions of plants with improved 
universality and specificity. Mol. Ecol. Resour. doi:10.1111/1755-0998.12438. 
Conforti, P. (2011). Looking ahead in world food and agriculture: Perspectives to 2050. 
Confraria, A., and Baena-Gonzlez, E. (2016). Using Arabidopsis protoplasts to study 
cellular responses to environmental stress, in Methods in Molecular Biology 
doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-3356-3_20. 
Cook, D. R. (1999). Medicago truncatula - A model in the making Curr. Opin. Plant 
Biol. doi:10.1016/S1369-5266(99)80053-3. 
Corral-Lugo, A., Daddaoua, A., Ortega, A., Espinosa-Urgel, M., and Krell, T. (2016). 
Rosmarinic acid is a homoserine lactone mimic produced by plants that activates a 
bacterial quorum-sensing regulator. Sci. Signal. 9, ra1. 
doi:10.1126/scisignal.aaa8271. 
Cosme, M., Lu, J., Erb, M., Stout, M. J., Franken, P., and Wurst, S. (2016). A fungal 
endophyte helps plants to tolerate root herbivory through changes in gibberellin and 
jasmonate signaling. New Phytol. 211, 10651076. doi:10.1111/nph.13957. 
Costacurta, A., and Vanderleyden, J. (1995). Synthesis of phytohormones by plant-
associated bacteria. Crit. Rev. Microbiol. doi:10.3109/10408419509113531. 
Couto, D., and Zipfel, C. (2016). Regulation of pattern recognition receptor signalling in 
plants. Nat. Rev. Immunol. doi:10.1038/nri.2016.77. 
Creus, C. M., Graziano, M., Casanovas, E. M., Pereyra, M. A., Simontacchi, M., 
Puntarulo, S., et al. (2005). Nitric oxide is involved in the Azospirillum brasilense-
induced lateral root formation in tomato. Planta. doi:10.1007/s00425-005-1523-7. 
Cui, F., Wu, S., Sun, W., Coaker, G., Kunkel, B., He, P., et al. (2013). The Pseudomonas 
syringae Type III Effector AvrRpt2 Promotes Pathogen Virulence via Stimulating 
Arabidopsis Auxin/Indole Acetic Acid Protein Turnover. PLANT Physiol. 
doi:10.1104/pp.113.219659. 
Cui, H., Tsuda, K., and Parker, J. E. (2014). Effector-Triggered Immunity: From 
Pathogen Perception to Robust Defense. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-arplant-050213-040012. 
Curd, E. E., Martiny, J. B. H., Li, H., and Smith, T. B. (2018). Bacterial diversity is 
positively correlated with soil heterogeneity. Ecosphere. doi:10.1002/ecs2.2079. 
Cusack, D. F., Silver, W. L., Torn, M. S., Burton, S. D., and Firestone, M. K. (2011). 
Changes in microbial community characteristics and soil organic matter with 
nitrogen additions in two tropical forests. Ecology. doi:10.1890/10-0459.1. 
Das, A., Kamal, S., Shakil, N. A., Sherameti, I., Oelmller, R., Dua, M., et al. (2012). 
The root endophyte fungus Piriformospora indica leads to early flowering, higher 
biomass and altered secondary metabolites of the medicinal plant, Coleus forskohlii. 
Plant Signal. Behav. 7, 103112. doi:10.4161/psb.7.1.18472. 
Davies, P. J. (2010). Plant hormones: Biosynthesis, signal transduction, action. 
doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-2686-7. 
Dawson, W., Hr, J., Egert, M., van Kleunen, M., and Peste, M. (2017). A small number 
of low-abundance bacteria dominate plant species-specific responses during 
rhizosphere colonization. Front. Microbiol. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.00975. 
Day, D. A., Poole, P. S., Tyerman, S. D., and Rosendahl, L. (2001). Ammonia and amino 
acid transport across symbiotic membranes in nitrogen-fixing legume nodules. Cell. 
Mol. Life Sci. doi:10.1007/PL00000778. 
de Boer, W. (2017). Upscaling of fungalbacterial interactions: from the lab to the field. 
Curr. Opin. Microbiol. doi:10.1016/j.mib.2017.03.007. 
De Boer, W., Klein Gunnewiek, P. J. A., Kowalchuk, G. A., and Van Veen, J. A. (2001). 
Growth of Chitinolytic Dune Soil -Subclass Proteobacteria in Response to 
Invading Fungal Hyphae. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. doi:10.1128/AEM.67.8.3358-
3362.2001. 
de Castro Pires, R., dos Reis Junior, F. B., Zilli, J. E., Fischer, D., Hofmann, A., James, 
E. K., et al. (2018). Soil characteristics determine the rhizobia in association with 
different species of Mimosa in central Brazil. Plant Soil. doi:10.1007/s11104-017-
3521-5. 
De Souza, R. S. C., Okura, V. K., Armanhi, J. S. L., Jorrn, B., Lozano, N., Da Silva, M. 
J., et al. (2016). Unlocking the bacterial and fungal communities assemblages of 
sugarcane microbiome. Sci. Rep. doi:10.1038/srep28774. 
Dean, R., Van Kan, J. A. L., Pretorius, Z. A., Hammond-Kosack, K. E., Di Pietro, A., 
Spanu, P. D., et al. (2012). The Top 10 fungal pathogens in molecular plant 
pathology. Mol. Plant Pathol. doi:10.1111/j.1364-3703.2011.00783.x. 
Dennis, P. G., Miller, A. J., and Hirsch, P. R. (2010). Are root exudates more important 
than other sources of rhizodeposits in structuring rhizosphere bacterial 
communities? FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. doi:10.1111/j.1574-6941.2010.00860.x. 
DeSantis, T. Z., Hugenholtz, P., Larsen, N., Rojas, M., Brodie, E. L., Keller, K., et al. 
(2006). Greengenes, a chimera-checked 16S rRNA gene database and workbench 
compatible with ARB. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. doi:10.1128/AEM.03006-05. 
Deshmukh, S. D., and Kogel, K. H. (2007). Piriformospora indica protects barley from 
root rot caused by Fusarium graminearum. J. Plant Dis. Prot. 
doi:10.1007/BF03356227. 
Deshmukh, S., Huckelhoven, R., Schafer, P., Imani, J., Sharma, M., Weiss, M., et al. 
(2006a). The root endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica requires host cell death 
for proliferation during mutualistic symbiosis with barley. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.0605697103. 
Deshmukh, S., Huckelhoven, R., Schafer, P., Imani, J., Sharma, M., Weiss, M., et al. 
(2006b). The root endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica requires host cell death 
for proliferation during mutualistic symbiosis with barley. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.0605697103. 
Deveau, A., Bonito, G., Uehling, J., Paoletti, M., Becker, M., Bindschedler, S., et al. 
(2018). Bacterial - Fungal Interactions: ecology, mechanisms and challenges. FEMS 
Microbiol. Rev., 335352. doi:10.1093/femsre/fuy008. 
Dharmasiri, N., Dharmasiri, S., Weijers, D., Lechner, E., Yamada, M., Hobbie, L., et al. 
(2005). Plant development is regulated by a family of auxin receptor F box proteins. 
Dev. Cell. doi:10.1016/j.devcel.2005.05.014. 
Di Bella, J. M., Bao, Y., Gloor, G. B., Burton, J. P., and Reid, G. (2013). High throughput 
sequencing methods and analysis for microbiome research. J. Microbiol. Methods. 
doi:10.1016/j.mimet.2013.08.011. 
Djamei, A., Schipper, K., Rabe, F., Ghosh, A., Vincon, V., Kahnt, J., et al. (2011). 
Metabolic priming by a secreted fungal effector. Nature. doi:10.1038/nature10454. 
Dlugosz, E. M., Lenaghan, S. C., and Stewart, C. N. (2016). A Robotic Platform for 
High-throughput Protoplast Isolation and Transformation. J. Vis. Exp. 
doi:10.3791/54300. 
Dodds, P. N., and Rathjen, J. P. (2010). Plant immunity: towards an integrated view of 
plant-pathogen interactions. Nat. Rev. Genet. 11, 539548. doi:10.1038/nrg2812. 
Doyle, J. J., and Doyle, J. L. (1987). A rapid DNA isolation procedure for small 
quantities of fresh leaf tissue. Phytochem. Bull. 
Draft, A., Mendgen, K., Macia, J. G., Lopez-llorca, L. V, Production, C., Single, F., et al. 
(2011). Barley Bits. Society 44, 263268. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
313X.2009.03887.x.zation. 
Dubuis, C., Keel, C., and Haas, D. (2007). Dialogues of root-colonizing biocontrol 
pseudomonads, in New Perspectives and Approaches in Plant Growth-Promoting 
Rhizobacteria Research doi:10.1007/978-1-4020-6776-1_7. 
Duffy, B. K., Ownley, B. H., Weller, D. M., and et al. (1997). Soil Chemical and Physical 
Properties Associated with Suppression of Take-all of Wheat by Trichoderma 
koningii. Phytopathology. doi:10.1094/PHYTO.1997.87.11.1118. 
Dumbrell, A. J., Nelson, M., Helgason, T., Dytham, C., and Fitter, A. H. (2010). Relative 
roles of niche and neutral processes in structuring a soil microbial community. 
ISME J. doi:10.1038/ismej.2009.122. 
Durn, P., Thiergart, T., Garrido-Oter, R., Agler, M., Kemen, E., Schulze-Lefert, P., et al. 
(2018). Microbial Interkingdom Interactions in Roots Promote Arabidopsis 
Survival. Cell. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2018.10.020. 
Earley, K. W., Haag, J. R., Pontes, O., Opper, K., Juehne, T., Song, K., et al. (2006). 
Gateway-compatible vectors for plant functional genomics and proteomics. Plant J. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2005.02617.x. 
Edgar, R. C. (2010). Search and clustering orders of magnitude faster than BLAST. 
Bioinformatics. doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btq461. 
Edgar, R. C. (2013). UPARSE: Highly accurate OTU sequences from microbial amplicon 
reads. Nat. Methods. doi:10.1038/nmeth.2604. 
Egamberdieva, D., Wirth, S. J., Alqarawi, A. A., Abd-Allah, E. F., and Hashem, A. 
(2017). Phytohormones and beneficial microbes: Essential components for plants to 
balance stress and fitness. Front. Microbiol. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.02104. 
Elhady, A., Gin, A., Topalovic, O., Jacquiod, S., Srensen, S. J., Sorribas, F. J., et al. 
(2017). Microbiomes associated with infective stages of root-knot and lesion 
nematodes in soil. PLoS One. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0177145. 
Ericksen, P. J., Ingram, J. S. I., and Liverman, D. M. (2009). Food security and global 
environmental change: emerging challenges. Environ. Sci. Policy. 
doi:10.1016/j.envsci.2009.04.007. 
Fabiaska, I., Gerlach, N., Almario, J., and Bucher, M. (2018). Plant-mediated effects of 
soil phosphorus on the root-associated fungal microbiota in Arabidopsis thaliana. 
New Phytol. doi:10.1111/nph.15538. 
Feng, F., and Zhou, J. M. (2012). Plant-bacterial pathogen interactions mediated by type 
III effectors. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2012.03.004. 
Fernndez, M., Conde, S., Duque, E., and Ramos, J.-L. (2013). In vivo gene expression 
of Pseudomonas putida KT2440 in the rhizosphere of different plants. Microb. 
Biotechnol. doi:10.1111/1751-7915.12037. 
Fesel, P. H., and Zuccaro, A. (2016). Dissecting endophytic lifestyle along the 
parasitism/mutualism continuum in Arabidopsis. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 
doi:10.1016/j.mib.2016.05.008. 
Fierer, N. (2017). Embracing the unknown: Disentangling the complexities of the soil 
microbiome. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2017.87. 
Finkel, O. M., Castrillo, G., Herrera Paredes, S., Salas Gonzlez, I., and Dangl, J. L. 
(2017). Understanding and exploiting plant beneficial microbes. Curr. Opin. Plant 
Biol. doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2017.04.018. 
Fournier, J., Timmers, A. C. J., Sieberer, B. J., Jauneau, A., Chabaud, M., and Barker, D. 
G. (2008). Mechanism of Infection Thread Elongation in Root Hairs of Medicago 
truncatula and Dynamic Interplay with Associated Rhizobial Colonization. PLANT 
Physiol. doi:10.1104/pp.108.125674. 
Frey-Klett, P., Burlinson, P., Deveau, A., Barret, M., Tarkka, M., and Sarniguet, A. 
(2011). Bacterial-Fungal Interactions: Hyphens between Agricultural, Clinical, 
Environmental, and Food Microbiologists. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 
doi:10.1128/MMBR.00020-11. 
Fu, J., Liu, H., Li, Y., Yu, H., Li, X., Xiao, J., et al. (2011). Manipulating Broad-
Spectrum Disease Resistance by Suppressing Pathogen-Induced Auxin 
Accumulation in Rice. PLANT Physiol. doi:10.1104/pp.110.163774. 
Fukami, T., and Morin, P. J. (2003). Productivity-biodiversity relationships depend on the 
history of community assembly. Nature. doi:10.1038/nature01785. 
Gage, D. J. (2004). Infection and invasion of roots by symbiotic, nitrogen-fixing rhizobia 
during nodulation of temperate legumes. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 68, 280300. 
doi:10.1128/MMBR.68.2.280-300.2004. 
Galibert, F., Finan, T. M., Long, S. R., Phler, A., Abola, P., Ampe, F., et al. (2001). The 
composite genome of the legume symbiont Sinorhizobium meliloti. Science (80-. ). 
doi:10.1126/science.1060966. 
Gamas, P., Brault, M., Jardinaud, M. F., and Frugier, F. (2017). Cytokinins in Symbiotic 
Nodulation: When, Where, What For? Trends Plant Sci. 
doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2017.06.012. 
Gao, X., and Kolomiets, M. V. (2009). Host-derived lipids and oxylipins are crucial 
signals in modulating mycotoxin production by fungi. Toxin Rev. 
doi:10.1080/15569540802420584. 
Garau, G., Reeve, W. G., Brau, L., Deiana, P., Yates, R. J., James, D., et al. (2005). The 
symbiotic requirements of different Medicago spp. suggest the evolution of 
Sinorhizobium meliloti and S. medicae with hosts differentially adapted to soil pH. 
Plant Soil. doi:10.1007/s11104-005-0374-0. 
Garg, N., and Geetanjali (2009). Symbiotic nitrogen fixation in legume nodules: Process 
and signaling: A review, in Sustainable Agriculture doi:10.1007/978-90-481-2666-
8_32. 
Garnett, T. (2013). Food sustainability: Problems, perspectives and solutions. in 
Proceedings of the Nutrition Society doi:10.1017/S0029665112002947. 
Garnica, S., Riess, K., Schn, M. E., Oberwinkler, F., and Setaro, S. D. (2016). 
Divergence times and phylogenetic patterns of sebacinales, a highly diverse and 
widespread fungal lineage. PLoS One. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0149531. 
Gelsomino, A., Keijzer-Wolters, A. C., Cacco, G., and Van Elsas, J. D. (1999). 
Assessment of bacterial community structure in soil by polymerase chain reaction 
and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis. J. Microbiol. Methods. 
doi:10.1016/S0167-7012(99)00054-8. 
Ghaffari, M. R., Ghabooli, M., Khatabi, B., Hajirezaei, M. R., Schweizer, P., Salekdeh, 
G. H., et al. (2016). Metabolic and transcriptional response of central metabolism 
affected by root endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica under salinity in barley. 
Plant Mol. Biol. 90, 699717. doi:10.1007/s11103-016-0461-z. 
Gibson, K. E., Kobayashi, H., and Walker, G. C. (2008). Molecular Determinants of a 
Symbiotic Chronic Infection. Annu. Rev. Genet. 
doi:10.1146/annurev.genet.42.110807.091427. 
Gilbert, J. A., Jansson, J. K., and Knight, R. (2014a). The Earth Microbiome project: 
successes and aspirations. BMC Biol. doi:10.1186/s12915-014-0069-1. 
Gilbert, J. A., Jansson, J. K., and Knight, R. (2014b). The Earth Microbiome project. 
BMC Biol. doi:10.1155/2015/606389. 
Gill, S. S., Gill, R., Trivedi, D. K., Anjum, N. A., Sharma, K. K., Ansari, M. W., et al. 
(2016). Piriformospora indica: Potential and Significance in Plant Stress Tolerance. 
Front. Microbiol. 7, 120. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2016.00332. 
Giron, D., Huguet, E., Stone, G. N., and Body, M. (2016). Insect-induced effects on 
plants and possible effectors used by galling and leaf-mining insects to manipulate 
their host-plant. J. Insect Physiol. doi:10.1016/j.jinsphys.2015.12.009. 
Glick, B. R. (2015). Beneficial plant-bacterial interactions. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-
13921-0. 
Gonzalez, I., Djean, S., Martin, P., and Baccini, A. (2015). CCA: An R Package to 
Extend Canonical Correlation Analysis . J. Stat. Softw. doi:10.18637/jss.v023.i12. 
Good, A. G., and Beatty, P. H. (2011). Fertilizing nature: A tragedy of excess in the 
commons. PLoS Biol. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001124. 
Goodrich, J. K., Davenport, E. R., Clark, A. G., and Ley, R. E. (2017). The Relationship 
Between the Human Genome and Microbiome Comes into View. Annu. Rev. Genet. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-genet-110711-155532. 
Griffiths, R. I., Thomson, B. C., James, P., Bell, T., Bailey, M., and Whiteley, A. S. 
(2011). The bacterial biogeography of British soils. Environ. Microbiol. 
doi:10.1111/j.1462-2920.2011.02480.x. 
Gyogluu, C., Mohammed, M., Jaiswal, S. K., Kyei-Boahen, S., and Dakora, F. D. (2018). 
Assessing host range, symbiotic effectiveness, and photosynthetic rates induced by 
native soybean rhizobia isolated from Mozambican and South African soils. 
Symbiosis. doi:10.1007/s13199-017-0520-5. 
Haas, D., and Dfago, G. (2005). Biological control of soil-borne pathogens by 
fluorescent pseudomonads. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. doi:10.1038/nrmicro1129. 
Hacquard, S., Garrido-Oter, R., Gonzlez, A., Spaepen, S., Ackermann, G., Lebeis, S., et 
al. (2015). Microbiota and Host Nutrition across Plant and Animal Kingdoms. Cell 
Host Microbe 17, 603616. doi:10.1016/j.chom.2015.04.009. 
Hacquard, S., Kracher, B., Hiruma, K., Mnch, P. C., Garrido-Oter, R., Thon, M. R., et 
al. (2016). Survival trade-offs in plant roots during colonization by closely related 
beneficial and pathogenic fungi. Nat. Commun. 7, 11362. 
doi:10.1038/ncomms11362. 
Hagen, G., and Guilfoyle, T. (2002). Auxin-responsive gene expression: Genes, 
promoters and regulatory factors. Plant Mol. Biol. doi:10.1023/A:1015207114117. 
Hammer, ., Harper, D., and Ryan, P. (2001). Past: Paleontological statistics software 
package for education and data analysis. Paleontol. Electron. 
doi:10.1016/j.bcp.2008.05.025. 
Haney, C. H., and Ausubel, F. M. (2015). Plant microbiome blueprints. Science (80-. ). 
doi:10.1126/science.aad0092. 
Harrach, B. D., Baltruschat, H., Barna, B., Fodor, J., and Kogel, K.-H. (2013). The 
Mutualistic Fungus Piriformospora indica Protects Barley Roots from a Loss of 
Antioxidant Capacity Caused by the Necrotrophic Pathogen Fusarium culmorum. 
Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. doi:10.1094/MPMI-09-12-0216-R. 
Harris, J. (2009). Soil microbial communities and restoration ecology: Facilitators or 
followers? Science (80-. ). doi:10.1126/science.1172975. 
Hartman, K., van der Heijden, M. G. A., Roussely-Provent, V., Walser, J. C., and 
Schlaeppi, K. (2017). Deciphering composition and function of the root microbiome 
of a legume plant. Microbiome. doi:10.1186/s40168-016-0220-z. 
Hartman, K., van der Heijden, M. G. A., Wittwer, R. A., Banerjee, S., Walser, J. C., and 
Schlaeppi, K. (2018). Cropping practices manipulate abundance patterns of root and 
soil microbiome members paving the way to smart farming. Microbiome. 
doi:10.1186/s40168-017-0389-9. 
Hartmann, A., Rothballer, M., Hense, B. A., and Schrder, P. (2014). Bacterial quorum 
sensing compounds are important modulators of microbe-plant interactions. Front. 
Plant Sci. doi:10.3389/fpls.2014.00131. 
Hartmann, A., Schmid, M., van Tuinen, D., and Berg, G. (2009). Plant-driven selection of 
microbes. Plant Soil. doi:10.1007/s11104-008-9814-y. 
Hassan, S., and Mathesius, U. (2012). The role of flavonoids in root-rhizosphere 
signalling: Opportunities and challenges for improving plant-microbe interactions. 
J. Exp. Bot. doi:10.1093/jxb/err430. 
Hayat, R., Ali, S., Amara, U., Khalid, R., and Ahmed, I. (2010). Soil beneficial bacteria 
and their role in plant growth promotion: A review. Ann. Microbiol. 
doi:10.1007/s13213-010-0117-1. 
Helfrich, E. J. N., Vogel, C. M., Ueoka, R., Schfer, M., Ryffel, F., Mller, D. B., et al. 
(2018). Bipartite interactions, antibiotic production and biosynthetic potential of the 
Arabidopsis leaf microbiome. Nat. Microbiol. doi:10.1038/s41564-018-0200-0. 
Hellweg, C., Phler, A., and Weidner, S. (2009). The time course of the transcriptomic 
response of Sinorhizobium meliloti 1021 following a shift to acidic pH. BMC 
Microbiol. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-9-37. 
Hennessy, R. C., Stougaard, P., and Olsson, S. (2017). A microplate reader-based system 
for visualizing transcriptional activity during in vivo microbial interactions in space 
and time. Sci. Rep. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-00296-4. 
Herrera Paredes, S., Gao, T., Law, T. F., Finkel, O. M., Mucyn, T., Teixeira, P. J. P. L., et 
al. (2018). Design of synthetic bacterial communities for predictable plant 
phenotypes. PLoS Biol. doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.2003962. 
Heyer, R., Kohrs, F., Reichl, U., and Benndorf, D. (2015). Metaproteomics of complex 
microbial communities in biogas plants. Microb. Biotechnol. doi:10.1111/1751-
7915.12276. 
Hibbing, M. E., Fuqua, C., Parsek, M. R., and Peterson, S. B. (2010). Bacterial 
competition: Surviving and thriving in the microbial jungle. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 
doi:10.1038/nrmicro2259. 
Hilbert, M., Voll, L. M., Ding, Y., Hofmann, J., Sharma, M., and Zuccaro, A. (2012). 
Indole derivative production by the root endophyte piriformospora indica is not 
required for growth promotion but for biotrophic colonization of barley roots. New 
Phytol. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.2012.04275.x. 
Hilton, S., Bennett, A. J., Chandler, D., Mills, P., and Bending, G. D. (2018). Preceding 
crop and seasonal effects influence fungal, bacterial and nematode diversity in 
wheat and oilseed rape rhizosphere and soil. Appl. Soil Ecol. 
doi:10.1016/j.apsoil.2018.02.007. 
Hiruma, K., Gerlach, N., Sacristn, S., Nakano, R. T., Hacquard, S., Kracher, B., et al. 
(2016). Root Endophyte Colletotrichum tofieldiae Confers Plant Fitness Benefits 
that Are Phosphate Status Dependent. Cell. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2016.02.028. 
Hodge, A., Berta, G., Doussan, C., Merchan, F., and Crespi, M. (2009). Plant root 
growth, architecture and function. Plant Soil. doi:10.1007/s11104-009-9929-9. 
Hogenhout, S. A., Van der Hoorn, R. A. L., Terauchi, R., and Kamoun, S. (2009). 
Emerging Concepts in Effector Biology of Plant-Associated Organisms. Mol. Plant-
Microbe Interact. doi:10.1094/mpmi-22-2-0115. 
Hper, H., Steinberg, C., and Alabouvette, C. (1995). Involvement of clay type and pH in 
the mechanisms of soil suppressiveness to fusarium wilt of flax. Soil Biol. Biochem. 
doi:10.1016/0038-0717(94)00238-V. 
Howieson, J. G., and Ewing, M. A. (1986). Acid tolerance in the Rhizobium meliloti - 
Medicago symbiosis. Aust. J. Agric. Res. doi:10.1071/AR9860055. 
Howieson, J. G., OHara, G. W., and Carr, S. J. (2000). Changing roles for legumes in 
Mediterranean agriculture: Developments from an Australian perspective. F. Crop. 
Res. doi:10.1016/S0378-4290(99)00081-7. 
Jacobs, S., Zechmann, B., Molitor, A., Trujillo, M., Petutschnig, E., Lipka, V., et al. 
(2011). Broad-Spectrum Suppression of Innate Immunity Is Required for 
Colonization of Arabidopsis Roots by the Fungus Piriformospora indica. Plant 
Physiol. 156, 726740. doi:10.1104/pp.111.176446. 
JEFFRIES, P., DODD, J. C., JEGER, M. J., and PLUMBLEY, R. A. (1990). The biology 
and control of Colletotrichum species on tropical fruit crops. Plant Pathol. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-3059.1990.tb02512.x. 
Jez, J. M., Lee, S. G., and Sherp, A. M. (2016). The next green movement: Plant biology 
for the environment and sustainability. Science (80-. ). 
doi:10.1126/science.aag1698. 
Jiang, X., Zerfa, C., Feng, S., Eichmann, R., Asally, M., Schfer, P., et al. (2018). 
Impact of spatial organization on a novel auxotrophic interaction among soil 
microbes. ISME J. doi:10.1038/s41396-018-0095-z. 
Johnson-Rollings, A. S., Wright, H., Masciandaro, G., Macci, C., Doni, S., Calvo-Bado, 
L. A., et al. (2014). Exploring the functional soil-microbe interface and exoenzymes 
through soil metaexoproteomics. ISME J. doi:10.1038/ismej.2014.130. 
Johnson, N. C., Graham, J. H., and Smith, F. A. (1997). Functioning of mycorrhizal 
associations along the mutualism-parasitism continuum. New Phytol. 
doi:10.1046/j.1469-8137.1997.00729.x. 
Johri, A. K., Oelmller, R., Dua, M., Yadav, V., Kumar, M., Tuteja, N., et al. (2015). 
Fungal association and utilization of phosphate by plants: Success, limitations, and 
future prospects. Front. Microbiol. 6, 113. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2015.00984. 
Jones, D. L., Magthab, E. A., Gleeson, D. B., Hill, P. W., Snchez-Rodrguez, A. R., 
Roberts, P., et al. (2018). Microbial competition for nitrogen and carbon is as 
intense in the subsoil as in the topsoil. Soil Biol. Biochem. 
doi:10.1016/j.soilbio.2017.10.024. 
Jones, J. D. G. G., and Dangl, J. L. (2006). The plant immune system. Nature 444, 323
329. doi:10.1038/nature05286. 
Jones, K. M., Kobayashi, H., Davies, B. W., Taga, M. E., and Walker, G. C. (2007). How 
rhizobial symbionts invade plants: The Sinorhizobium - Medicago model. Nat. Rev. 
Microbiol. doi:10.1038/nrmicro1705. 
Jousset, A., Bienhold, C., Chatzinotas, A., Gallien, L., Gobet, A., Kurm, V., et al. (2017). 
Where less may be more: How the rare biosphere pulls ecosystems strings. ISME J. 
doi:10.1038/ismej.2016.174. 
K. R. Clarke (1993). Non-parametric multivariate analyses of changes in community 
structure. Aust. J. Ecol. doi:10.1071/WR9840181. 
Kaiser, W., Huguet, E., Casas, J., Commin, C., and Giron, D. (2010). Plant green-island 
phenotype induced by leaf-miners is mediated by bacterial symbionts. Proc. R. Soc. 
B Biol. Sci. doi:10.1098/rspb.2010.0214. 
Kamoun, S. (2006). A Catalogue of the Effector Secretome of Plant Pathogenic 
Oomycetes. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. doi:10.1146/annurev.phyto.44.070505.143436. 
Kanchiswamy, C. N., Malnoy, M., and Maffei, M. E. (2015). Chemical diversity of 
microbial volatiles and their potential for plant growth and productivity. Front. 
Plant Sci. doi:10.3389/fpls.2015.00151. 
Kari Dolatabadi, H., Mohammadi Goltapeh, E., Mohammadi, N., Rabiey, M., Rohani, N., 
and Varma, A. (2012). Biocontrol potential of root endophytic fungi and 
Trichoderma species against Fusarium wilt of lentil under in vitro and greenhouse 
conditions. J. Agric. Sci. Technol. 
Kazan, K. (2013). Auxin and the integration of environmental signals into plant root 
development. Ann. Bot. doi:10.1093/aob/mct229. 
Kazan, K., and Manners, J. M. (2009). Linking development to defense: auxin in plant-
pathogen interactions. Trends Plant Sci. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2009.04.005. 
Keim, J., Mishra, B., Sharma, R., Ploch, S., and Thines, M. (2014). Root-associated fungi 
of Arabidopsis thaliana and Microthlaspi perfoliatum. Fungal Divers. 
doi:10.1007/s13225-014-0289-2. 
Kia, S. H., Glynou, K., Nau, T., Thines, M., Piepenbring, M., and Maci-Vicente, J. G. 
(2017). Influence of phylogenetic conservatism and trait convergence on the 
interactions between fungal root endophytes and plants. ISME J. 
doi:10.1038/ismej.2016.140. 
Koornneef, A., and Pieterse, C. M. J. (2008). Cross Talk in Defense Signaling. PLANT 
Physiol. doi:10.1104/pp.107.112029. 
Kopittke, P. M. (2016). Role of phytohormones in aluminium rhizotoxicity. Plant Cell 
Environ. doi:10.1111/pce.12786. 
Kopriva, S., Succurro, A., Jacoby, R., Koprivova, A., and Peukert, M. (2017). The Role 
of Soil Microorganisms in Plant Mineral NutritionCurrent Knowledge and Future 
Directions. Front. Plant Sci. doi:10.3389/fpls.2017.01617. 
Koranda, M., Kaiser, C., Fuchslueger, L., Kitzler, B., Sessitsch, A., Zechmeister-
Boltenstern, S., et al. (2014). Fungal and bacterial utilization of organic substrates 
depends on substrate complexity and N availability. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 
doi:10.1111/1574-6941.12214. 
Kremer, J. M., Paasch, B. C., Rhodes, D., Thireault, C., Froehlich, J. E., Schulze-Lefert, 
P., et al. (2018). FlowPot axenic plant growth system for microbiota research. 
bioRxiv. doi:10.1101/254953. 
Kumar Bhuyan, S., Bandyopadhyay, P., Kumar, P., Kumar Mishra, D., Prasad, R., 
Kumari, A., et al. (2015). Interaction of Piriformospora indica with Azotobacter 
chroococcum. Sci. Rep. doi:10.1038/srep13911. 
Kumar, M., Yadav, V., Tuteja, N., and Johri, A. K. (2009). Antioxidant enzyme activities 
in maize plants colonized with Piriformospora indica. Microbiology. 
doi:10.1099/mic.0.019869-0. 
Kunkel, B. N., and Brooks, D. M. (2002). Cross talk between signaling pathways in 
pathogen defense. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. doi:10.1016/S1369-5266(02)00275-3. 
Kunkel, B. N., and Harper, C. P. (2018). The roles of auxin during interactions between 
bacterial plant pathogens and their hosts. J. Exp. Bot. doi:10.1093/jxb/erx447. 
Laere, E., Ling, A. P. K., Wong, Y. P., Koh, R. Y., Mohd Lila, M. A., and Hussein, S. 
(2016). Plant-Based Vaccines: Production and Challenges. J. Bot. 
doi:10.1155/2016/4928637. 
Lahrmann, U., Ding, Y., Banhara, A., Rath, M., Hajirezaei, M. R., Dhlemann, S., et al. 
(2013). Host-related metabolic cues affect colonization strategies of a root 
endophyte. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 110, 1396570. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1301653110. 
Laksmanan, V., Selvaraj, G., and Bais, H. (2014). Functional soil microbiome: 
Belowground solutions to an aboveground problem. Plant Physiol. 166, 689700. 
doi:10.1104/pp.114.245811. 
Lareen, A., Burton, F., Scha, P., and Schfer, P. (2016). Plant root-microbe 
communication in shaping root microbiomes. Plant Mol. Biol., 575587. 
doi:10.1007/s11103-015-0417-8. 
Larrainzar, E., Gil-Quintana, E., Seminario, A., Arrese-Igor, C., and Gonzlez, E. M. 
(2014). Nodule carbohydrate catabolism is enhanced in the Medicago truncatula 
A17-Sinorhizobium medicaewsm419 symbiosis. Front. Microbiol. 
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2014.00447. 
Leach, J. E., Triplett, L. R., Argueso, C. T., and Trivedi, P. (2017). Communication in the 
Phytobiome. Cell. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2017.04.025. 
Lebeis, S. L., Paredes, S. H., Lundberg, D. S., Breakfield, N., Gehring, J., McDonald, M., 
et al. (2015). Salicylic acid modulates colonization of the root microbiome by 
specific bacterial taxa. Science (80-. ). doi:10.1126/science.aaa8764. 
Lee, J. H., Wood, T. K., and Lee, J. (2015). Roles of indole as an interspecies and 
interkingdom signaling molecule. Trends Microbiol. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2015.08.001. 
Lee, Y. C., Johnson, J. M., Chien, C. T., Sun, C., Cai, D., Lou, B., et al. (2011). Growth 
promotion of Chinese cabbage and Arabidopsis by Piriformospora indica is not 
stimulated by mycelium-synthesized auxin. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 
doi:10.1094/MPMI-05-10-0110. 
Leite, J., Fischer, D., Rouws, L. F. M., Fernandes-Jnior, P. I., Hofmann, A., Kublik, S., 
et al. (2016). Cowpea Nodules Harbor Non-rhizobial Bacterial Communities that 
Are Shaped by Soil Type Rather than Plant Genotype. Front. Plant Sci. 
doi:10.3389/fpls.2016.02064. 
Lenaghan, S. C., and Neal Stewart, C. (2019). An automated protoplast transformation 
system, in Methods in Molecular Biology doi:10.1007/978-1-4939-8991-1_26. 
Leveau, J. H. J., and Preston, G. M. (2008). Bacterial mycophagy: Definition and 
diagnosis of a unique bacterial-fungal interaction. New Phytol. doi:10.1111/j.1469-
8137.2007.02325.x. 
Levy, A., Salas Gonzalez, I., Mittelviefhaus, M., Clingenpeel, S., Herrera Paredes, S., 
Miao, J., et al. (2018). Genomic features of bacterial adaptation to plants. Nat. 
Genet. doi:10.1038/s41588-017-0012-9. 
Li, N., Alfiky, A., Vaughan, M. M., and Kang, S. (2016a). Stop and smell the fungi: 
Fungal volatile metabolites are overlooked signals involved in fungal interaction 
with plants. Fungal Biol. Rev. doi:10.1016/j.fbr.2016.06.004. 
Li, X. (2016). A Transient Expression Assay Using Arabidopsis Mesophyll Protoplasts. 
BIO-PROTOCOL. doi:10.21769/bioprotoc.70. 
Li, X., Jousset, A., de Boer, W., Carrin, V. J., Zhang, T., Wang, X., et al. (2019). 
Legacy of land use history determines reprogramming of plant physiology by soil 
microbiome. ISME J. doi:10.1038/s41396-018-0300-0. 
Li, X., Zeng, R., and Liao, H. (2016b). Improving crop nutrient efficiency through root 
architecture modifications. J. Integr. Plant Biol. doi:10.1111/jipb.12434. 
Lidbury, I. D. E. A., Murphy, A. R. J., Scanlan, D. J., Bending, G. D., Jones, A. M. E., 
Moore, J. D., et al. (2016). Comparative genomic, proteomic and exoproteomic 
analyses of three Pseudomonas strains reveals novel insights into the phosphorus 
scavenging capabilities of soil bacteria. Environ. Microbiol. doi:10.1111/1462-
2920.13390. 
Lincoln, C. (1990). Growth and Development of the axr1 Mutants of Arabidopsis. 
PLANT CELL ONLINE. doi:10.1105/tpc.2.11.1071. 
Liu, J., Maldonado-Mendoza, I., Lopez-Meyer, M., Cheung, F., Town, C. D., and 
Harrison, M. J. (2007). Arbuscular mycorrhizal symbiosis is accompanied by local 
and systemic alterations in gene expression and an increase in disease resistance in 
the shoots. Plant J. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2007.03069.x. 
Ljung, K. (2013). Auxin metabolism and homeostasis during plant development. 
Development. doi:10.1242/dev.086363. 
Lofgren, L. A., LeBlanc, N. R., Certano, A. K., Nachtigall, J., LaBine, K. M., Riddle, J., 
et al. (2018). Fusarium graminearum: pathogen or endophyte of North American 
grasses? New Phytol. doi:10.1111/nph.14894. 
Lozupone, C. A., and Knight, R. (2007). Global patterns in bacterial diversity. 104. 
Lundberg, D. S., Lebeis, S. L., Paredes, S. H., Yourstone, S., Gehring, J., Malfatti, S., et 
al. (2012a). Defining the core Arabidopsis thaliana root microbiome. Nature. 
doi:10.1038/nature11237. 
Lundberg, D. S., Lebeis, S. L., Paredes, S. H., Yourstone, S., Gehring, J., Malfatti, S., et 
al. (2012b). Defining the core Arabidopsis thaliana root microbiome. Nature 488, 
8690. doi:10.1038/nature11237. 
Mackey, D., Belkhadir, Y., Alonso, J. M., Ecker, J. R., Dangl, J. L., Hall, R. K., et al. 
(2003). Arabidopsis RIN4 is a target of the type III virulence effector AvrRpt2 and 
modulates RPS2-mediated resistance. Cell 112, 379389. doi:10.1016/S0092-
8674(03)00040-0. 
Mackie, A. E., and Wheatley, R. E. (1999). Effects and incidence of volatile organic 
compound interactions between soil bacterial and fungal isolates. Soil Biol. 
Biochem. doi:10.1016/S0038-0717(98)00140-0. 
Mahmoudi, N., Cruz, C., Mahdhi, M., Mars, M., and Caeiro, M. F. (2019). Arbuscular 
mycorrhizal fungi in soil, roots and rhizosphere of Medicago truncatula: diversity 
and heterogeneity under semi-arid conditions. PeerJ 7, e6401. 
doi:10.7717/peerj.6401. 
Mansfield, J., Genin, S., Magori, S., Citovsky, V., Sriariyanum, M., Ronald, P., et al. 
(2012). Top 10 plant pathogenic bacteria in molecular plant pathology. Mol. Plant 
Pathol. doi:10.1111/j.1364-3703.2012.00804.x. 
Mari, S., Rebeki, A., Petrovi, S., and Lonari, Z. (2016). PEARSONS OR 
SPEARMANS CORRELATION COEFFICIENT - WHICH ONE TO USE? 
Poljoprivreda. doi:10.18047/poljo.21.2.8. 
Martnez-Hidalgo, P., and Hirsch, A. M. (2017).  The Nodule Microbiome: N 2 -Fixing 
Rhizobia Do Not Live Alone . Phytobiomes J. doi:10.1094/pbiomes-12-16-0019-
Martnez-Viveros, O., Jorquera, M. ., Crowley, D. ., Gajardo, G., and Mora, M. . (2010). 
Mechanisms and Practical Considerations Involved in Plant Growth Promotion By 
Rhizobacteria. J. soil Sci. plant Nutr. doi:10.4067/S0718-95162010000100006. 
Martino, E., Morin, E., Grelet, G. A., Kuo, A., Kohler, A., Daghino, S., et al. (2018). 
Comparative genomics and transcriptomics depict ericoid mycorrhizal fungi as 
versatile saprotrophs and plant mutualists. New Phytol. doi:10.1111/nph.14974. 
Marx, H., Minogue, C. E., Jayaraman, D., Richards, A. L., Kwiecien, N. W., Siahpirani, 
A. F., et al. (2016). A proteomic atlas of the legume Medicago truncatula and its 
nitrogen-fixing endosymbiont Sinorhizobium meliloti. Nat. Biotechnol. 
doi:10.1038/nbt.3681. 
Massalha, H., Korenblum, E., Malitsky, S., Shapiro, O. H., and Aharoni, A. (2017). Live 
imaging of rootbacteria interactions in a microfluidics setup. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1618584114. 
Mathur, J., Koncz, C., and Szabados, L. (1995). A simple method for isolation, liquid 
culture, transformation and regeneration of Arabidopsis thaliana protoplasts. Plant 
Cell Rep. doi:10.1007/BF00233637. 
Mauchline, T. H., Chedom-Fotso, D., Chandra, G., Samuels, T., Greenaway, N., 
Backhaus, A., et al. (2015). An analysis of Pseudomonas genomic diversity in take-
all infected wheat fields reveals the lasting impact of wheat cultivars on the soil 
microbiota. Environ. Microbiol. doi:10.1111/1462-2920.13038. 
Mauchline, T. H., Fowler, J. E., East, A. K., Sartor, A. L., Zaheer, R., Hosie, A. H. F., et 
al. (2006). Mapping the Sinorhizobium meliloti 1021 solute-binding protein-
dependent transportome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. doi:10.1073/pnas.0606673103. 
McDonald, D., Price, M. N., Goodrich, J., Nawrocki, E. P., Desantis, T. Z., Probst, A., et 
al. (2012). An improved Greengenes taxonomy with explicit ranks for ecological 
and evolutionary analyses of bacteria and archaea. ISME J. 
doi:10.1038/ismej.2011.139. 
McMurdie, P. J., and Holmes, S. (2014). Waste Not, Want Not: Why Rarefying 
Microbiome Data Is Inadmissible. PLoS Comput. Biol. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003531. 
Meena, K. K., Mesapogu, S., Kumar, M., Yandigeri, M. S., Singh, G., and Saxena, A. K. 
(2010). Co-inoculation of the endophytic fungus Piriformospora indica with the 
phosphate-solubilising bacterium Pseudomonas striata affects population dynamics 
and plant growth in chickpea. Biol. Fertil. Soils. doi:10.1007/s00374-009-0421-8. 
Mendes, R., Garbeva, P., and Raaijmakers, J. M. (2013). The rhizosphere microbiome: 
Significance of plant beneficial, plant pathogenic, and human pathogenic 
microorganisms. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. 37, 634663. doi:10.1111/1574-
6976.12028. 
Mergaert, P., Uchiumi, T., Alunni, B., Evanno, G., Cheron, A., Catrice, O., et al. (2006). 
Eukaryotic control on bacterial cell cycle and differentiation in the Rhizobium-
legume symbiosis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. doi:10.1073/pnas.0600912103. 
Mille-Lindblom, C., Fischer, H., and Tranvik, L. J. (2006). Antagonism between bacteria 
and fungi: Substrate competition and a possible tradeoff between fungal growth and 
tolerance towards bacteria. Oikos. doi:10.1111/j.2006.0030-1299.14337.x. 
Miller, M. B., and Bassler, B. L. (2002). Quorum Sensing in Bacteria. Annu. Rev. 
Microbiol. doi:10.1146/annurev.micro.55.1.165. 
Mitter, B., Pfaffenbichler, N., Flavell, R., Compant, S., Antonielli, L., Petric, A., et al. 
(2017). A new approach to modify plant microbiomes and traits by introducing 
beneficial bacteria at flowering into progeny seeds. Front. Microbiol. 
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.00011. 
Molden, D. (2013). Water for food water for life: A Comprehensive assessment of water 
management in agriculture. doi:10.4324/9781849773799. 
Molina-Favero, C., Creus, C. M., Simontacchi, M., Puntarulo, S., and Lamattina, L. 
(2008). Aerobic nitric oxide production by Azospirillum brasilense Sp245 and its 
influence on root architecture in tomato. Mol. Plant. Microbe. Interact. 
doi:10.1094/MPMI-21-7-1001. 
Molitor, A., and Kogel, K. H. (2009). Induced resistance triggered by Piriformospora 
indica. Plant Signal. Behav. doi:10.4161/psb.4.3.7814. 
Molitor, A., Zajic, D., Voll, L. M., Pons-Khnemann, J., Samans, B., Kogel, K.-H., et al. 
(2011).  Barley Leaf Transcriptome and Metabolite Analysis Reveals New Aspects 
of Compatibility and Piriformospora indica Mediated Systemic Induced Resistance 
to Powdery Mildew . Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. doi:10.1094/mpmi-06-11-0177. 
Mougel, C., Offre, P., Ranjard, L., Corberand, T., Gamalero, E., Robin, C., et al. (2006). 
Dynamic of the genetic structure of bacterial and fungal communities at different 
developmental stages of Medicago truncatula Gaertn. cv. Jemalong line J5. New 
Phytol. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.2006.01650.x. 
Mueller, U. G., and Sachs, J. L. (2015). Engineering Microbiomes to Improve Plant and 
Animal Health. Trends Microbiol. 23, 606617. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2015.07.009. 
Mukhtar, M. S., Carvunis, A. R., Dreze, M., Epple, P., Steinbrenner, J., Moore, J., et al. 
(2011). Independently evolved virulence effectors converge onto hubs in a plant 
immune system network. Science (80-. ). doi:10.1126/science.1203659. 
Mller, D. B., Vogel, C., Bai, Y., and Vorholt, J. A. (2016). The Plant Microbiota: 
Systems-Level Insights and Perspectives. Annu. Rev. Genet. doi:10.1146/annurev-
genet-120215-034952. 
Muth, T., Benndorf, D., Reichl, U., Rapp, E., and Martens, L. (2013). Searching for a 
needle in a stack of needles: Challenges in metaproteomics data analysis. Mol. 
Biosyst. doi:10.1039/c2mb25415h. 
Muth, T., Renard, B. Y., and Martens, L. (2016). Metaproteomic data analysis at a 
glance: advances in computational microbial community proteomics. Expert Rev. 
Proteomics. doi:10.1080/14789450.2016.1209418. 
Nagy, R., Drissner, D., Amrhein, N., Jakobsen, I., and Bucher, M. (2009). Mycorrhizal 
phosphate uptake pathway in tomato is phosphorus-repressible and transcriptionally 
regulated. New Phytol. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02721.x. 
Nannipieri, P., Ceccherini, M. T., Renella, G., Ascher, J., Pietramellara, G., and Landi, L. 
(2003). Microbial diversity and soil functions. Eur. J. Soil Sci. doi:10.1046/j.1351-
0754.2003.0556.x. 
Narayan, O. P., Verma, N., Singh, A. K., Oelmller, R., Kumar, M., Prasad, D., et al. 
(2017). Antioxidant enzymes in chickpea colonized by Piriformospora indica 
participate in defense against the pathogen Botrytis cinerea. Sci. Rep. 
doi:10.1038/s41598-017-12944-w. 
Naseem, M., Kaltdorf, M., and Dandekar, T. (2015). The nexus between growth and 
defence signalling: auxin and cytokinin modulate plant immune response pathways. 
J. Exp. Bot. 66, 48854896. doi:10.1093/jxb/erv297. 
Naser, V., and Shani, E. (2016). Auxin response under osmotic stress. Plant Mol. Biol. 
doi:10.1007/s11103-016-0476-5. 
Navarro, L., Dunoyer, P., Jay, F., Arnold, B., Dharmasiri, N., Estelle, M., et al. (2006). A 
plant miRNA contributes to antibacterial resistance by repressing auxin signaling. 
Science (80-. ). doi:10.1126/science.1126088. 
Nearing, J. T., Douglas, G. M., Comeau, A. M., and Langille, M. G. I. (2018). Denoising 
the Denoisers: an independent evaluation of microbiome sequence error-correction 
approaches. PeerJ. doi:10.7717/peerj.5364. 
Niu, B., Paulson, J. N., Zheng, X., and Kolter, R. (2017). Simplified and representative 
bacterial community of maize roots. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.1616148114. 
Novk, O., Hnykov, E., Sairanen, I., Kowalczyk, M., Pospil, T., and Ljung, K. 
(2012). Tissue-specific profiling of the Arabidopsis thaliana auxin metabolome. 
Plant J. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2012.05085.x. 
OConnell, R. J., Thon, M. R., Hacquard, S., Amyotte, S. G., Kleemann, J., Torres, M. F., 
et al. (2012). Lifestyle transitions in plant pathogenic Colletotrichum fungi 
deciphered by genome and transcriptome analyses. Nat. Genet. 
doi:10.1038/ng.2372. 
Ofek-Lalzar, M., Sela, N., Goldman-Voronov, M., Green, S. J., Hadar, Y., and Minz, D. 
(2014). Niche and host-associated functional signatures of the root surface 
microbiome. Nat. Commun. doi:10.1038/ncomms5950. 
Oldroyd, G. E. D. (2005). Peace Talks and Trade Deals. Keys to Long-Term Harmony in 
Legume-Microbe Symbioses. PLANT Physiol. doi:10.1104/pp.104.057661. 
Oldroyd, G. E. D., Murray, J. D., Poole, P. S., and Downie, J. A. (2011). The Rules of 
Engagement in the Legume-Rhizobial Symbiosis. Annu. Rev. Genet. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-genet-110410-132549. 
Op De Beeck, M., Lievens, B., Busschaert, P., Declerck, S., Vangronsveld, J., and 
Colpaert, J. V. (2014). Comparison and validation of some ITS primer pairs useful 
for fungal metabarcoding studies. PLoS One. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0097629. 
Orozco-Mosqueda, M. del C., Rocha-Granados, M. del C., Glick, B. R., and Santoyo, G. 
(2018). Microbiome engineering to improve biocontrol and plant growth-promoting 
mechanisms. Microbiol. Res. doi:10.1016/j.micres.2018.01.005. 
Ortz-Castro, R., Contreras-Cornejo, H. A., Macas-Rodrguez, L., and Lpez-Bucio, J. 
(2009). The role of microbial signals in plant growth and development. Plant 
Signal. Behav. 4, 701712. doi:10.4161/psb.4.8.9047. 
Paliy, O., and Shankar, V. (2016). Application of multivariate statistical techniques in 
microbial ecology. Mol. Ecol. doi:10.1111/mec.13536. 
Panke-Buisse, K., Poole, A. C., Goodrich, J. K., Ley, R. E., and Kao-Kniffin, J. (2015). 
Selection on soil microbiomes reveals reproducible impacts on plant function. ISME 
J. 9, 9809. doi:10.1038/ismej.2014.196. 
Park, J. E., Park, J. Y., Kim, Y. S., Staswick, P. E., Jeon, J., Yun, J., et al. (2007). GH3-
mediated auxin homeostasis links growth regulation with stress adaptation response 
in Arabidopsis. J. Biol. Chem. doi:10.1074/jbc.M610524200. 
Parnell, J. J., Berka, R., Young, H. A., Sturino, J. M., Kang, Y., Barnhart, D. M., et al. 
(2016). From the Lab to the Farm: An Industrial Perspective of Plant Beneficial 
Microorganisms. Front. Plant Sci. doi:10.3389/fpls.2016.01110. 
Parniske, M. (2000). Intracellular accommodation of microbes by plants: A common 
developmental program for symbiosis and disease? Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. 
doi:10.1016/S1369-5266(00)00088-1. 
Parniske, M. (2008). Arbuscular mycorrhiza: The mother of plant root endosymbioses. 
Nat. Rev. Microbiol. doi:10.1038/nrmicro1987. 
Paterson, E., Sim, A., Osborne, S. M., and Murray, P. J. (2011). Long-term exclusion of 
plant-inputs to soil reduces the functional capacity of microbial communities to 
mineralise recalcitrant root-derived carbon sources. Soil Biol. Biochem. 
doi:10.1016/j.soilbio.2011.05.006. 
Patten, C. L., and Glick, B. R. (1996). Bacterial biosynthesis of indole-3-acetic acid. Can. 
J. Microbiol. 42, 207220. doi:10.1139/m96-032. 
Pedrotti, L., Mueller, M. J., and Waller, F. (2013). Piriformospora indica Root 
Colonization Triggers Local and Systemic Root Responses and Inhibits Secondary 
Colonization of Distal Roots. PLoS One 8, e69352. 
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0069352. 
Peiffer, J. A., Spor, A., Koren, O., Jin, Z., Tringe, S. G., Dangl, J. L., et al. (2013). 
Diversity and heritability of the maize rhizosphere microbiome under field 
conditions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. doi:10.1073/pnas.1302837110. 
Perfect, S. E., Hughes, H. B., OConnell, R. J., and Green, J. R. (1999). Colletotrichum: 
A model genus for studies on pathology and fungal-plant interactions. Fungal 
Genet. Biol. doi:10.1006/fgbi.1999.1143. 
Petre, B., Joly, D. L., and Duplessis, S. (2014). Effector proteins of rust fungi. Front. 
Plant Sci. doi:10.3389/fpls.2014.00416. 
Pham, G. H., Kumari, R., Singh, A., Malla, R., Prasad, R., Sachdev, M., et al. (2008). 
Axenic culture of symbiotic fungus piriformospora indica, in Plant Surface 
Microbiology doi:10.1007/978-3-540-74051-3_30. 
Pieterse, C. M. J. J., Zamioudis, C., Berendsen, R. L., Weller, D. M., Van Wees, S. C. M. 
M., and Bakker, P. A. H. M. H. M. (2014). Induced systemic resistance by 
beneficial microbes. Annu. Rev. Phytopathol. 52, 34775. doi:10.1146/annurev-
phyto-082712-102340. 
Pineda, A., Zheng, S. J., van Loon, J. J. A., Pieterse, C. M. J., and Dicke, M. (2010). 
Helping plants to deal with insects: The role of beneficial soil-borne microbes. 
Trends Plant Sci. doi:10.1016/j.tplants.2010.05.007. 
Pini, F., East, A. K., Appia-Ayme, C., Tomek, J., Karunakaran, R., Mendoza-Surez, M., 
et al. (2017). Bacterial Biosensors for in Vivo Spatiotemporal Mapping of Root 
Secretion. Plant Physiol. doi:10.1104/pp.16.01302. 
Poole, P., Ramachandran, V., and Terpolilli, J. (2018). Rhizobia: From saprophytes to 
endosymbionts. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2017.171. 
Pratama, A. A., and van Elsas, J. D. (2018). The Neglected Soil Virome - Potential 
Role and Impact. Trends Microbiol. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2017.12.004. 
Prosser, J. I. (2015). Dispersing misconceptions and identifying opportunities for the use 
of omics in soil microbial ecology. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. 
doi:10.1038/nrmicro3468. 
Prusty, R., Grisafi, P., and Fink, G. R. (2004). The plant hormone indoleacetic acid 
induces invasive growth in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
doi:10.1073/pnas.0400659101. 
Qiang, X., Weiss, M., Kogel, K. H., and Schfer, P. (2012a). Piriformospora indica-a 
mutualistic basidiomycete with an exceptionally large plant host range. Mol. Plant 
Pathol. 13, 508518. doi:10.1111/j.1364-3703.2011.00764.x. 
Qiang, X., Zechmann, B., Reitz, M. U., Kogel, K.-H. K.-H., Schfer, P., and Schafer, P. 
(2012b). The mutualistic fungus Piriformospora indica colonizes Arabidopsis roots 
by inducing an endoplasmic reticulum stress-triggered caspase-dependent cell death. 
Plant Cell 24, 794809. doi:10.1105/tpc.111.093260. 
Qiao, Q., Wang, F., Zhang, J., Chen, Y., Zhang, C., Liu, G., et al. (2017). The Variation 
in the Rhizosphere Microbiome of Cotton with Soil Type, Genotype and 
Developmental Stage. Sci. Rep. doi:10.1038/s41598-017-04213-7. 
Qiu, X., Kulasekara, B. R., and Lory, S. (2009). Role of horizontal gene transfer in the 
evolution of pseudomonas aeruginosa virulence. Genome Dyn. 
doi:10.1159/000235767. 
Raaijmakers, J. M., and Mazzola, M. (2016). Soil immune responses. Science (80-. ). 
doi:10.1126/science.aaf3252. 
Raaijmakers, J. M., Paulitz, T. C., Steinberg, C., Alabouvette, C., and Monne-Loccoz, 
Y. (2009). The rhizosphere: A playground and battlefield for soilborne pathogens 
and beneficial microorganisms. Plant Soil. doi:10.1007/s11104-008-9568-6. 
Rabiey, M., Ullah, I., Shaw, L. J., and Shaw, M. W. (2017). Potential ecological effects 
of Piriformospora indica, a possible biocontrol agent, in UK agricultural systems. 
Biol. Control. doi:10.1016/j.biocontrol.2016.10.005. 
Rafiqi, M., Ellis, J. G., Ludowici, V. A., Hardham, A. R., and Dodds, P. N. (2012). 
Challenges and progress towards understanding the role of effectors in plant-fungal 
interactions. Curr. Opin. Plant Biol. doi:10.1016/j.pbi.2012.05.003. 
Rafiqi, M., Jelonek, L., Akum, N. F., Zhang, F., and Kogel, K.-H. (2013). Effector 
candidates in the secretome of Piriformospora indica, a ubiquitous plant-associated 
fungus. Front. Plant Sci. doi:10.3389/fpls.2013.00228. 
Rajput, N. A., Zhang, M., Shen, D., Liu, T., Zhang, Q., Ru, Y., et al. (2015). 
Overexpression of a Phytophthora Cytoplasmic CRN Effector Confers Resistance to 
Disease, Salinity and Drought in Nicotiana benthamiana. Plant Cell Physiol. 
doi:10.1093/pcp/pcv164. 
Ramette, A. (2007). Multivariate analyses in microbial ecology. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 
doi:10.1111/j.1574-6941.2007.00375.x. 
Rangin, C., Brunel, B., Cleyet-Marel, J. C., Perrineau, M. M., and Bna, G. (2008). 
Effects of Medicago truncatula genetic diversity, rhizobial competition, and strain 
effectiveness on the diversity of a natural Sinorhizobium species community. Appl. 
Environ. Microbiol. doi:10.1128/AEM.01107-08. 
Rasche, F., Hdl, V., Poll, C., Kandeler, E., Gerzabek, M. H., Van Elsas, J. D., et al. 
(2006). Rhizosphere bacteria affected by transgenic potatoes with antibacterial 
activities compared with the effects of soil, wild-type potatoes, vegetation stage and 
pathogen exposure. in FEMS Microbiology Ecology doi:10.1111/j.1574-
6941.2005.00027.x. 
Rasmussen, T. B., Skindersoe, M. E., Bjarnsholt, T., Phipps, R. K., Christensen, K. B., 
Jensen, P. O., et al. (2005). Identity and effects of quorum-sensing inhibitors 
produced by Penicillium species. Microbiology. doi:10.1099/mic.0.27715-0. 
Reddy, S. M., Hitchin, S., Melayah, D., Pandey, A. K., Raffier, C., Henderson, J., et al. 
(2006). The auxin-inducible GH3 homologue Pp-GH3.16 is downregulated in Pinus 
pinaster root systems on ectomycorrhizal symbiosis establishment. New Phytol. 
doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.2006.01677.x. 
Reeve, W. G., Bru, L., Castelli, J., Garau, G., Sohlenkamp, C., Geiger, O., et al. (2006). 
The Sinorhizobium medicae WSM419 IpiA gene is transcriptionally activated by 
FsrR and required to enhance survival in lethal acid conditions. Microbiology. 
doi:10.1099/mic.0.28764-0. 
Rezaei, S. A., and Gilkes, R. J. (2005). The effects of landscape attributes and plant 
community on soil physical properties in rangelands. Geoderma. 
doi:10.1016/j.geoderma.2004.07.011. 
Rhodes, C. J. (2013). Feeding and healing the world: Through regenerative agriculture 
and permaculture. Sci. Prog. doi:10.3184/003685012X13504990668392. 
Richardson, A. E. (2002). Prospects for using soil microorganisms to improve the 
acquisition of phosphorus by plants. Funct. Plant Biol. doi:10.1071/pp01093. 
Rotenberg, D., Cooperband, L., and Stone, A. (2005). Dynamic relationships between 
soil properties and foliar disease as affected by annual additions of organic 
amendment to a sandy-soil vegetable production system. Soil Biol. Biochem. 
doi:10.1016/j.soilbio.2004.12.006. 
Rousk, J., Demoling, L. A., Bahr, A., and Bth, E. (2008). Examining the fungal and 
bacterial niche overlap using selective inhibitors in soil. FEMS Microbiol. Ecol. 
doi:10.1111/j.1574-6941.2008.00440.x. 
Snchez-Caizares, C., Jorrn, B., Poole, P. S., and Tkacz, A. (2017). Understanding the 
holobiont: the interdependence of plants and their microbiome. Curr. Opin. 
Microbiol. doi:10.1016/j.mib.2017.07.001. 
Santner, A., and Estelle, M. (2009). Recent advances and emerging trends in plant 
hormone signalling. Nature. doi:10.1038/nature08122. 
Schfer, P., Pfiffi, S., Voll, L. M., Zajic, D., Chandler, P. M., Waller, F., et al. (2009). 
Manipulation of plant innate immunity and gibberellin as factor of compatibility in 
the mutualistic association of barley roots with Piriformospora indica. Plant J. 59, 
461474. doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2009.03887.x. 
Schechter, L. M., Vencato, M., Jordan, K. L., Schneider, S. E., Schneider, D. J., and 
Collmer, A. (2007).  Multiple Approaches to a Complete Inventory of Pseudomonas 
syringae pv. tomato DC3000 Type III Secretion System Effector Proteins . Mol. 
Plant-Microbe Interact. doi:10.1094/mpmi-19-1180. 
Schilling, L., Matei, A., Redkar, A., Walbot, V., and Doehlemann, G. (2014). Virulence 
of the maize smut Ustilago maydis is shaped by organ-specific effectors. Mol. Plant 
Pathol. doi:10.1111/mpp.12133. 
Schlaeppi, K., and Bulgarelli, D. (2015). The Plant Microbiome at Work. Mol. Plant-
Microbe Interact. doi:10.1094/MPMI-10-14-0334-FI. 
Schmidt, R., Etalo, D. W., Jager, V. de, Gerards, S., Zweers, H., Boer, W. de, et al. 
(2016). Microbial small talk: Volatiles in fungal-bacterial interactions. Front. 
Microbiol. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2015.01495. 
Schmittgen, T. D., and Livak, K. J. (2008). Analyzing real-time PCR data by the 
comparative C(T) method. Nat. Protoc. 
Selin, C., de Kievit, T. R., Belmonte, M. F., and Fernando, W. G. D. (2016). Elucidating 
the role of effectors in plant-fungal interactions: Progress and challenges. Front. 
Microbiol. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2016.00600. 
Sepkoski, J. J. (1988). Alpha, beta, or gamma: Where does all the diversity go? 
Paleobiology. doi:10.1017/S0094837300011969. 
Serfling, A., Wirsel, S. G. R., Lind, V., and Deising, H. B. (2007).  Performance of the 
Biocontrol Fungus Piriformospora indica on Wheat Under Greenhouse and Field 
Conditions . Phytopathology. doi:10.1094/phyto-97-4-0523. 
Sergaki, C., Lagunas, B., Lidbury, I., Gifford, M. L., and Schfer, P. (2018). Challenges 
and Approaches in Microbiome Research: From Fundamental to Applied. Front. 
Plant Sci. doi:10.3389/fpls.2018.01205. 
Shen, J., Zhang, W., Yuan, L., Zhang, F., Bai, Z., Zhang, J., et al. (2011). Phosphorus 
Dynamics: From Soil to Plant. PLANT Physiol. doi:10.1104/pp.111.175232. 
Shen, Q., Liu, Y., and Naqvi, N. I. (2018). Fungal effectors at the crossroads of 
phytohormone signaling. Curr. Opin. Microbiol. 46, 16. 
doi:10.1016/j.mib.2018.01.006. 
Shi, S., Nuccio, E., Herman, D. J., Rijkers, R., Estera, K., Li, J., et al. (2015). 
Successional trajectories of rhizosphere bacterial communities over consecutive 
seasons. MBio. doi:10.1128/mBio.00746-15. 
Shi, T. Q., Liu, G. N., Ji, R. Y., Shi, K., Song, P., Ren, L. J., et al. (2017). CRISPR/Cas9-
based genome editing of the filamentous fungi: the state of the art. Appl. Microbiol. 
Biotechnol. doi:10.1007/s00253-017-8497-9. 
Simons, M., van der Bij, A. J., Brand, I., de Weger, L. A., Wijffelman, C. A., and 
Lugtenberg, B. J. (1996). Gnotobiotic system for studying rhizosphere colonization 
by plant growth-promoting Pseudomonas bacteria. Mol. Plant. Microbe. Interact. 
Sirrenberg, A., Gbel, C., Grond, S., Czempinski, N., Ratzinger, A., Karlovsky, P., et al. 
(2007). Piriformospora indica affects plant growth by auxin production. Physiol. 
Plant. doi:10.1111/j.1399-3054.2007.00983.x. 
Slattery, J. F., Coventry, D. R., and Slattery, W. J. (2001). Rhizobial ecology as affected 
by the soil environment. Aust. J. Exp. Agric. doi:10.1071/EA99159. 
Slattery, J. F., Pearce, D. J., and Slattery, W. J. (2004). Effects of resident rhizobial 
communities and soil type on the effective nodulation of pulse legumes. in Soil 
Biology and Biochemistry doi:10.1016/j.soilbio.2004.04.015. 
Smith, B. E. (2002). Nitrogenase reveals its inner secrets. Science (80-. ). 
doi:10.1126/science.1076659. 
Smith, F. A., and Smith, S. E. (1996). Mutualism and Parasitism: Diversity in Function 
and Structure in the Arbuscular (VA) Mycorrhizal Symbiosis. Adv. Bot. Res. 
doi:10.1016/S0065-2296(08)60055-5. 
Smith, M. E., Talbot, J. M., Vilgalys, R., Glassman, S. I., Smith, D. P., Peay, K. G., et al. 
(2014). Endemism and functional convergence across the North American soil 
mycobiome. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. doi:10.1073/pnas.1402584111. 
Snelders, N. C., Kettles, G. J., Rudd, J. J., and Thomma, B. P. H. J. (2018). Plant 
pathogen effector proteins as manipulators of host microbiomes? Mol. Plant Pathol. 
doi:10.1111/mpp.12628. 
Song, E. J., Lee, E. S., and Nam, Y. Do (2018). Progress of analytical tools and 
techniques for human gut microbiome research. J. Microbiol. doi:10.1007/s12275-
018-8238-5. 
Sorefan, K., Girin, T., Liljegren, S. J., Ljung, K., Robles, P., Galvn-Ampudia, C. S., et 
al. (2009). A regulated auxin minimum is required for seed dispersal in Arabidopsis. 
Nature. doi:10.1038/nature07875. 
Spaepen, S., and Vanderleyden, J. (2011). Auxin and plant-microbe interactions. Cold 
Spring Harb. Perspect. Biol. doi:10.1101/cshperspect.a001438. 
Spaepen, S., Vanderleyden, J., and Remans, R. (2007). Indole-3-acetic acid in microbial 
and microorganism-plant signaling. FEMS Microbiol. Rev. doi:10.1111/j.1574-
6976.2007.00072.x. 
Sprent, J. I., Ardley, J., and James, E. K. (2017). Biogeography of nodulated legumes and 
their nitrogen-fixing symbionts. New Phytol. doi:10.1111/nph.14474. 
Staswick, P. E. (2005). Characterization of an Arabidopsis Enzyme Family That 
Conjugates Amino Acids to Indole-3-Acetic Acid. PLANT CELL ONLINE. 
doi:10.1105/tpc.104.026690. 
Stern, W. R. (1993). Nitrogen fixation and transfer in intercrop systems. F. Crop. Res. 
doi:10.1016/0378-4290(93)90121-3. 
Strehmel, N., Mnchgesang, S., Herklotz, S., Krger, S., Ziegler, J., and Scheel, D. 
(2016). Piriformospora indica stimulates root metabolism of arabidopsis thaliana. 
Int. J. Mol. Sci. 17. doi:10.3390/ijms17071091. 
Stringlis, I. A., Proietti, S., Hickman, R., Van Verk, M. C., Zamioudis, C., and Pieterse, 
C. M. J. (2018). Root transcriptional dynamics induced by beneficial rhizobacteria 
and microbial immune elicitors reveal signatures of adaptation to mutualists. Plant 
J. doi:10.1111/tpj.13741. 
Stubbendieck, R. M., Vargas-Bautista, C., and Straight, P. D. (2016). Bacterial 
communities: Interactions to scale. Front. Microbiol. 
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2016.01234. 
Sukumar, P., Legu, V., Vayssires, A., Martin, F., Tuskan, G. A., and Kalluri, U. C. 
(2013). Involvement of auxin pathways in modulating root architecture during 
beneficial plant-microorganism interactions. Plant, Cell Environ. 
doi:10.1111/pce.12036. 
Sun, J., Cardoza, V., Mitchell, D. M., Bright, L., Oldroyd, G., and Harris, J. M. (2006). 
Crosstalk between jasmonic acid, ethylene and Nod factor signaling allows 
integration of diverse inputs for regulation of nodulation. Plant J. 
doi:10.1111/j.1365-313X.2006.02751.x. 
Svenningsen, N. B., Watts-Williams, S. J., Joner, E. J., Battini, F., Efthymiou, A., Cruz-
Paredes, C., et al. (2018). Suppression of the activity of arbuscular mycorrhizal 
fungi by the soil microbiota. ISME J. doi:10.1038/s41396-018-0059-3. 
Syed Ab Rahman, S. F., Singh, E., Pieterse, C. M. J., and Schenk, P. M. (2018). 
Emerging microbial biocontrol strategies for plant pathogens. Plant Sci. 
doi:10.1016/j.plantsci.2017.11.012. 
Teale, W. D., Paponov, I. A., and Palme, K. (2006). Auxin in action: Signalling, transport 
and the control of plant growth and development. Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 
doi:10.1038/nrm2020. 
Terpolilli, J., Hill, Y., Tian, R., Howieson, J., Bru, L., Goodwin, L., et al. (2013). 
Genome sequence of Ensifer meliloti strain WSM1022; a highly effective 
microsymbiont of the model legume Medicago truncatula A17. Stand. Genomic Sci. 
doi:10.4056/sigs.4608286. 
Terpolilli, J. J., OHara, G. W., Tiwari, R. P., Dilworth, M. J., and Howieson, J. G. 
(2008). The model legume Medicago truncatula A17 is poorly matched for N 2 
fixation with the sequenced microsymbiont Sinorhizobium meliloti 1021. New 
Phytol. doi:10.1111/j.1469-8137.2008.02464.x. 
Thijs, S., De Beeck, M. O., Beckers, B., Truyens, S., Stevens, V., Van Hamme, J. D., et 
al. (2017). Comparative evaluation of four bacteria-specific primer pairs for 16S 
rRNA gene surveys. Front. Microbiol. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2017.00494. 
Thompson, L. R., Sanders, J. G., Mcdonald, D., Amir, A., Ladau, J., Locey, K. J., et al. 
(2017). A communal catalogue reveals Earth  s multiscale microbial diversity. Nat. 
Publ. Gr. 551, 457463. doi:10.1038/nature24621. 
Thonar, C., Lekfeldt, J. D. S., Cozzolino, V., Kundel, D., Kulhnek, M., Mosimann, C., 
et al. (2017). Potential of three microbial bio-effectors to promote maize growth and 
nutrient acquisition from alternative phosphorous fertilizers in contrasting soils. 
Chem. Biol. Technol. Agric. doi:10.1186/s40538-017-0088-6. 
Thrall, P. H., Burdon, J. J., and Woods, M. J. (2000). Variation in the effectiveness of 
symbiotic associations between native rhizobia and temperate Australian legumes: 
Interactions within and between genera. J. Appl. Ecol. doi:10.1046/j.1365-
2664.2000.00470.x. 
Timmins-Schiffman, E., May, D. H., Mikan, M., Riffle, M., Frazar, C., Harvey, H. R., et 
al. (2017). Critical decisions in metaproteomics: Achieving high confidence protein 
annotations in a sea of unknowns. ISME J. doi:10.1038/ismej.2016.132. 
Tiwari, R. P., Reeve, W. G., Dilworth, M. J., and Glenn, A. R. (1996). Acid tolerance in 
Rhizobium meliloti strain WSM419 involves a two-component sensor-regulator 
system. Microbiology. doi:10.1099/13500872-142-7-1693. 
Tkacz, A., Cheema, J., Chandra, G., Grant, A., and Poole, P. S. (2015). Stability and 
succession of the rhizosphere microbiota depends upon plant type and soil 
composition. ISME J. doi:10.1038/ismej.2015.41. 
Tkacz, A., and Poole, P. (2015). Role of root microbiota in plant productivity. J. Exp. 
Bot. doi:10.1093/jxb/erv157. 
Toljander, J. F., Santos-Gonzlez, J. C., Tehler, A., and Finlay, R. D. (2008). Community 
analysis of arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and bacteria in the maize 
mycorrhizosphere in a long-term fertilization trial. in FEMS Microbiology Ecology 
doi:10.1111/j.1574-6941.2008.00512.x. 
Tranvan, H., Habricot, Y., Jeannette, E., Gay, G., and Sotta, B. (2000). Dynamics of 
symbiotic establishment between an IAA-overproducing mutant of the 
ectomycorrhizal fungus Hebeloma cylindrosporum and Pinus pinaster. Tree Physiol. 
doi:10.1093/treephys/20.2.123. 
Tseng, T. T., Tyler, B. M., and Setubal, J. C. (2009). Protein secretion systems in 
bacterial-host associations, and their description in the Gene Ontology. BMC 
Microbiol. doi:10.1186/1471-2180-9-S1-S2. 
Tsitsigiannis, D. I., and Keller, N. P. (2007). Oxylipins as developmental and host-fungal 
communication signals. Trends Microbiol. doi:10.1016/j.tim.2007.01.005. 
Tudzynski, B., and Sharon, A. (2013). Biosynthesis, Biological Role and Application of 
Fungal Phytohormones, in Industrial Applications doi:10.1007/978-3-662-10378-
Turner, T. R., Ramakrishnan, K., Walshaw, J., Heavens, D., Alston, M., Swarbreck, D., 
et al. (2013). Comparative metatranscriptomics reveals kingdom level changes in 
the rhizosphere microbiome of plants. ISME J. doi:10.1038/ismej.2013.119. 
Tyc, O., van den Berg, M., Gerards, S., van Veen, J. A., Raaijmakers, J. M., de Boer, W., 
et al. (2014). Impact of interspecific interactions on antimicrobial activity among 
soil bacteria. Front. Microbiol. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2014.00567. 
Uchida, N., Takahashi, K., Iwasaki, R., Yamada, R., Yoshimura, M., Endo, T. A., et al. 
(2018). Chemical hijacking of auxin signaling with an engineered auxin-TIR1 pair. 
Nat. Chem. Biol. doi:10.1038/nchembio.2555. 
Udvardi, M., and Poole, P. S. (2013). Transport and Metabolism in Legume-Rhizobia 
Symbioses. Annu. Rev. Plant Biol. doi:10.1146/annurev-arplant-050312-120235. 
Uhse, S., and Djamei, A. (2018). Effectors of plant-colonizing fungi and beyond. PLOS 
Pathog. doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1006992. 
Vacheron, J., Desbrosses, G., Bouffaud, M.-L., Touraine, B., Monne-Loccoz, Y., 
Muller, D., et al. (2013). Plant growth-promoting rhizobacteria and root system 
functioning. Front. Plant Sci. doi:10.3389/fpls.2013.00356. 
Vadassery, J., Ritter, C., Venus, Y., Camehl, I., Varma, A., Shahollari, B., et al. (2008). 
The Role of Auxins and Cytokinins in the Mutualistic Interaction Between 
Arabidopsis and Piriformospora indica. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 
doi:10.1094/MPMI-21-10-1371. 
Vahabi, K., Dorcheh, S. K., Monajembashi, S., Westermann, M., Reichelt, M., 
Falkenberg, D., et al. (2016). Stress promotes arabidopsis - Piriformospora indica 
interaction. Plant Signal. Behav. 11, 112. doi:10.1080/15592324.2015.1136763. 
van Brussel, A. A. N., Tak, T., Boot, K. J. M., and Kijne, J. W. (2007).  Autoregulation of 
Root Nodule Formation: Signals of Both Symbiotic Partners Studied in a Split-Root 
System of Vicia sativa subsp. nigra . Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. 
doi:10.1094/mpmi.2002.15.4.341. 
van Loon, L. C., Bakker, P. A. H. M., and Pieterse, C. M. J. (2002). SYSTEMIC 
RESISTANCE INDUCED BY RHIZOSPHERE BACTERIA. Annu. Rev. 
Phytopathol. doi:10.1146/annurev.phyto.36.1.453. 
van Noorden, G. E., Kerim, T., Goffard, N., Wiblin, R., Pellerone, F. I., Rolfe, B. G., et 
al. (2007). Overlap of Proteome Changes in Medicago truncatula in Response to 
Auxin and Sinorhizobium meliloti. PLANT Physiol. doi:10.1104/pp.107.099978. 
Van Noorden, G. E., Verbeek, R., Dinh, Q. D., Jin, J., Green, A., Ng, J. L. P., et al. 
(2016). Molecular signals controlling the inhibition of nodulation by nitrate in 
Medicago truncatula. Int. J. Mol. Sci. doi:10.3390/ijms17071060. 
van Puyvelde, S., Cloots, L., Engelen, K., Das, F., Marchal, K., Vanderleyden, J., et al. 
(2011). Transcriptome Analysis of the Rhizosphere Bacterium Azospirillum 
brasilense Reveals an Extensive Auxin Response. Microb. Ecol. 
doi:10.1007/s00248-011-9819-6. 
Vance, C. P., Uhde-Stone, C., and Allan, D. L. (2003). Phosphorus aquisition and use: 
critical adaptations by plants for securing a nonrewable resource. New Phytol. 
doi:10.1046/j.1469-8137.2003.00695.x. 
Vanneste, S., and Friml, J. (2009). Auxin: A Trigger for Change in Plant Development. 
Cell. doi:10.1016/j.cell.2009.03.001. 
Varma, A., Bakshi, M., Lou, B., Hartmann, A., and Oelmueller, R. (2012). 
Piriformospora indica: A Novel Plant Growth-Promoting Mycorrhizal Fungus. 
Agric. Res. doi:10.1007/s40003-012-0019-5. 
Vartoukian, S. R., Palmer, R. M., and Wade, W. G. (2010). Strategies for culture of 
unculturable bacteria. FEMS Microbiol. Lett. doi:10.1111/j.1574-
6968.2010.02000.x. 
Vasilescu, J., Guo, X., and Kast, J. (2004). Identification of protein-protein interactions 
using in vivo cross-linking and mass spectrometry. Proteomics. 
doi:10.1002/pmic.200400856. 
Velzquez, E., Carro, L., Flores-Flix, J. D., Martnez-Hidalgo, P., Menndez, E., 
Ramrez, M. H. B., et al. (2017). The legume nodule microbiome: A source of 
plant growth-promoting bacteria, in Probiotics and Plant Health doi:10.1007/978-
981-10-3473-2_3. 
Venter, Z. S., Jacobs, K., and Hawkins, H. J. (2016). The impact of crop rotation on soil 
microbial diversity: A meta-analysis. Pedobiologia (Jena). 
doi:10.1016/j.pedobi.2016.04.001. 
Vikram, A., Jayaprakasha, G. K., Jesudhasan, P. R., Pillai, S. D., and Patil, B. S. (2010). 
Suppression of bacterial cell-cell signalling, biofilm formation and type III secretion 
system by citrus flavonoids. J. Appl. Microbiol. doi:10.1111/j.1365-
2672.2010.04677.x. 
Vleeshouwers, V. G. A. A., and Oliver, R. P. (2015). Effectors as Tools in Disease 
Resistance Breeding Against Biotrophic, Hemibiotrophic, and Necrotrophic Plant 
Pathogens. Mol. Plant-Microbe Interact. doi:10.1094/MPMI-10-13-0313-
TA.testissue. 
Vorholt, J. A., Vogel, C., Carlstrm, C. I., and Mller, D. B. (2017). Establishing 
Causality: Opportunities of Synthetic Communities for Plant Microbiome Research. 
Cell Host Microbe. doi:10.1016/j.chom.2017.07.004. 
Vurukonda, S. S. K. P., Vardharajula, S., Shrivastava, M., and SkZ, A. (2016). 
Enhancement of drought stress tolerance in crops by plant growth promoting 
rhizobacteria. Microbiol. Res. doi:10.1016/j.micres.2015.12.003. 
Wagner, R. D. (2008). Effects of microbiota on GI health: Gnotobiotic research. Adv. 
Exp. Med. Biol. doi:10.1007/978-0-387-09550-9_4. 
Wang, J., Yang, B., An, Y., Marquez-Lago, T., Leier, A., Wilksch, J., et al. (2017a). 
Systematic analysis and prediction of type IV secreted effector proteins by machine 
learning approaches. Brief. Bioinform. doi:10.1093/bib/bbx164. 
Wang, S., Chen, H., Tang, X., Zhang, H., Chen, W., and Chen, Y. Q. (2017b). Molecular 
tools for gene manipulation in filamentous fungi. Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol. 
doi:10.1007/s00253-017-8486-z. 
Wang, X., Pan, Q., Chen, F., Yan, X., and Liao, H. (2011). Effects of co-inoculation with 
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi and rhizobia on soybean growth as related to root 
architecture and availability of N and P. Mycorrhiza. doi:10.1007/s00572-010-0319-
Wang, X. X., Wang, X., Sun, Y., Cheng, Y., Liu, S., Chen, X., et al. (2018). Arbuscular 
mycorrhizal fungi negatively affect nitrogen acquisition and grain yield of maize in 
a N deficient soil. Front. Microbiol. doi:10.3389/fmicb.2018.00418. 
Warmink, J. A., Nazir, R., Corten, B., and van Elsas ., J. D. (2011). Hitchhikers on the 
fungal highway: The helper effect for bacterial migration via fungal hyphae. Soil 
Biol. Biochem. doi:10.1016/j.soilbio.2010.12.009. 
Wehner, N., Herfert, J., Drge-Laser, W., and Weiste, C. (2017). High-throughput 
protoplast trans-activation (PTA) screening to define transcription factors in auxin-
mediated gene regulation, in Methods in Molecular Biology doi:10.1007/978-1-
4939-6831-2_16. 
Weiss, M., Selosse, M. A., Rexer, K. H., Urban, A., and Oberwinkler, F. (2004). 
Sebacinales: A hitherto overlooked cosm of heterobasidiomycetes with a broad 
mycorrhizal potential. Mycol. Res. doi:10.1017/S0953756204000772. 
Wei, M., Skorov, Z., Garnica, S., Riess, K., Martos, F., Krause, C., et al. (2011). 
Sebacinales everywhere: Previously overlooked ubiquitous fungal endophytes. 
PLoS One 6, e16793. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0016793. 
Wei, M., Waller, F., Zuccaro, A., and Selosse, M.-A. A. (2016). Sebacinales  one 
thousand and one interactions with land plants. New Phytol., 161. 
doi:10.1111/NPH.13977. 
Weiss, S., Xu, Z. Z., Peddada, S., Amir, A., Bittinger, K., Gonzalez, A., et al. (2017). 
Normalization and microbial differential abundance strategies depend upon data 
characteristics. Microbiome. doi:10.1186/s40168-017-0237-y. 
Weiste, C., and Drge-Laser, W. (2014). The Arabidopsis transcription factor bZIP11 
activates auxin-mediated transcription by recruiting the histone acetylation 
machinery. Nat. Commun. 5, 3883. doi:10.1038/ncomms4883. 
Wertz, S., Degrange, V., Prosser, J. I., Poly, F., Commeaux, C., Freitag, T., et al. (2006). 
Maintenance of soil functioning following erosion of microbial diversity. Environ. 
Microbiol. doi:10.1111/j.1462-2920.2006.01098.x. 
Weling, R., Epple, P., Altmann, S., He, Y., Yang, L., Henz, S. R., et al. (2014). 
Convergent targeting of a common host protein-network by pathogen effectors from 
three kingdoms of life. Cell Host Microbe. doi:10.1016/j.chom.2014.08.004. 
Whipps, J. M. (2001). Microbial interactions and biocontrol in the rhizosphere. J. Exp. 
Whitman, W. B., Coleman, D. C., and Wiebe, W. J. (1998). Perspective Prokaryotes: 
The unseen majority. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 
Wilmes, P., and Bond, P. L. (2006). Metaproteomics: Studying functional gene 
expression in microbial ecosystems. Trends Microbiol. 
doi:10.1016/j.tim.2005.12.006. 
Wilson, G. W. T., Hetrick, B. A. D., and Kitt, D. G. (2007). Suppression of Mycorrhizal 
Growth Response of Big Bluestem by Non-Sterile Soil. Mycologia. 
doi:10.2307/3807630. 
Win, J., Chaparro-Garcia, A., Belhaj, K., Saunders, D. G. O., Yoshida, K., Dong, S., et al. 
(2012). Effector biology of plant-associated organisms: Concepts and perspectives. 
Cold Spring Harb. Symp. Quant. Biol. doi:10.1101/sqb.2012.77.015933. 
Woodward, A. W., and Bartel, B. (2005). Auxin: Regulation, action, and interaction. Ann. 
Bot. doi:10.1093/aob/mci083. 
Wu, M., Wei, Q., Xu, L., Li, H., Oelmller, R., and Zhang, W. (2018). Piriformospora 
indica enhances phosphorus absorption by stimulating acid phosphatase activities 
and organic acid accumulation in Brassica napus. Plant Soil. doi:10.1007/s11104-
018-3795-2. 
Xiao, X., Chen, W., Zong, L., Yang, J., Jiao, S., Lin, Y., et al. (2017). Two cultivated 
legume plants reveal the enrichment process of the microbiome in the 
rhizocompartments. Mol. Ecol. doi:10.1111/mec.14027. 
Xie, J., Shi, H., Du, Z., Wang, T., Liu, X., and Chen, S. (2016a). Comparative genomic 
and functional analysis reveal conservation of plant growth promoting traits in 
Paenibacillus polymyxa and its closely related species. Sci. Rep. 
doi:10.1038/srep21329. 
Xie, Z. P., Staehelin, C., Vierheilig, H., Wiemken, A., Jabbouri, S., Broughton, W. J., et 
al. (2016b). Rhizobial Nodulation Factors Stimulate Mycorrhizal Colonization of 
Nodulating and Nonnodulating Soybeans. Plant Physiol. 
doi:10.1104/pp.108.4.1519. 
Xin, X. F., Kvitko, B., and He, S. Y. (2018). Pseudomonas syringae: What it takes to be a 
pathogen. Nat. Rev. Microbiol. doi:10.1038/nrmicro.2018.17. 
Xu, L., Wu, C., Oelmller, R., and Zhang, W. (2018). Role of Phytohormones in 
Piriformospora indica-Induced Growth Promotion and Stress Tolerance in Plants: 
More Questions Than Answers. Front. Microbiol. 9, 113. 
doi:10.3389/fmicb.2018.01646. 
Xue, P. P., Carrillo, Y., Pino, V., Minasny, B., and McBratney, A. B. (2018). Soil 
Properties Drive Microbial Community Structure in a Large Scale Transect in South 
Eastern Australia. Sci. Rep. doi:10.1038/s41598-018-30005-8. 
Yang, S., Zhang, Q., Guo, J., Charkowski, A. O., Glick, B. R., Ibekwe, A. M., et al. 
(2007). Global effect of indole-3-acetic acid biosynthesis on multiple virulence 
factors of Erwinia chrysanthemi 3937. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 
doi:10.1128/AEM.01770-06. 
Yergeau, E., Sanschagrin, S., Maynard, C., St-Arnaud, M., and Greer, C. W. (2014). 
Microbial expression profiles in the rhizosphere of willows depend on soil 
contamination. ISME J. doi:10.1038/ismej.2013.163. 
Yuan, J., Chaparro, J. M., Manter, D. K., Zhang, R., Vivanco, J. M., and Shen, Q. (2015). 
Roots from distinct plant developmental stages are capable of rapidly selecting their 
own microbiome without the influence of environmental and soil edaphic factors. 
Soil Biol. Biochem. doi:10.1016/j.soilbio.2015.07.009. 
Zahran, H. H. (1999). Rhizobium-legume symbiosis and nitrogen fixation under severe 
conditions and in an arid climate. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 
Zgadzaj, R., Garrido-Oter, R., Jensen, D. B., Koprivova, A., Schulze-Lefert, P., and 
Radutoiu, S. (2016). Root nodule symbiosis in Lotus japonicus drives the 
establishment of distinctive rhizosphere, root, and nodule bacterial communities. 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. doi:10.1073/PNAS.1616564113. 
Zhang, J., Shao, F., Li, Y., Cui, H., Chen, L., Li, H., et al. (2007). A Pseudomonas 
syringae Effector Inactivates MAPKs to Suppress PAMP-Induced Immunity in 
Plants. Cell Host Microbe. doi:10.1016/j.chom.2007.03.006. 
Zhao, H., Li, M., Fang, K., Chen, W., and Wang, J. (2012). In silico insights into the 
symbiotic nitrogen fixation in sinorhizobium meliloti via metabolic reconstruction. 
PLoS One. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0031287. 
Zipfel, C. (2014). Plant pattern-recognition receptors. Trends Immunol. 
doi:10.1016/j.it.2014.05.004. 
Zolla, G., Badri, D. V., Bakker, M. G., Manter, D. K., and Vivanco, J. M. (2013). Soil 
microbiomes vary in their ability to confer drought tolerance to Arabidopsis. Appl. 
Soil Ecol. doi:10.1016/j.apsoil.2013.03.007. 
Zuccaro, A., Lahrmann, U., Gldener, U., Langen, G., Pfiffi, S., Biedenkopf, D., et al. 
(2011). Endophytic life strategies decoded by genome and transcriptome analyses of 
the mutualistic root symbiont Piriformospora indica. PLoS Pathog. 7. 
doi:10.1371/journal.ppat.1002290. 
	Insert from: "WRAP_Coversheet_Theses_new.pdf"
	http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/149015
	Insert from: "WRAP_Coversheet_Theses_new.pdf"
	http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/149016
