WRAP_Coversheet_Theses_PhD
warwick.ac.uk/lib-publications  
A Thesis Submitted for the Degree of PhD at the University of Warwick 
Permanent WRAP URL: 
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/151131  
Copyright and reuse:                     
This thesis is made available online and is protected by original copyright.  
Please scroll down to view the document itself.  
Please refer to the repository record for this item for information to help you to cite it. 
Our policy information is available from the repository home page.  
For more information, please contact the WRAP Team at: wrap@warwick.ac.uk  
http://go.warwick.ac.uk/lib-publications
http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/151131
mailto:wrap@warwick.ac.uk
Analyzing the molecular basis of plant 
root responses to the environment 
Liam Walker 
Doctor of Philosophy 
University of Warwick 
School of Life Sciences 
September 2019
Table of contents: 
 List of abbreviations                V 
 List of figures                 VII 
 Acknowledgements                IX 
 Declaration                                                                                        X 
 Summary                 XI 
Chapter 1: Introduction        1 
 Plant root architecture and the environment    1 
 Lateral root formation enables plants to adapt to their environment 1 
  Stages of lateral root morphogenesis    2 
Factors influencing root system architecture   4 
Nodulation is a symbiosis between legumes and nitrogen-fixing 
bacteria         6 
Nodule organogenesis requires co-ordination between the 
epidermis and cortex      6 
Molecular activation of the nodulation pathway   9 
  Regulation of the nodulation pathway    13 
Determinants of host-symbiont specificity during nodulation 15 
Plant possess multiple layers of defences to protect them from 
pathogens         18 
MAMP-triggered immunity recognizes chemical signatures of 
microorganisms that may be associated with pathogens 19 
DAMP-triggered immunity of plants responds to endogenous 
signals indicative of pathogen activity    19 
Effector-triggered immunity counteracts attempts by pathogens 
to subvert the host immune system    20 
Signal transduction from the perception of danger to the 
expression of defence-related genes    21 
Defence responses leading to protective immunity  22 
Fluorescence activated cell sorting facilitates the study of complex 
developmental processes in plants     23 
 Methods for isolating single cell types in plants    24 
 Methodology of FACS      25 
FACS as a tool for studying plant roots     26 
Aims and rationale for work in the thesis     29 
Chapter 2: Methods        30 
Plant material and growth conditions     30 
 Arabidopsis thaliana      30 
 Medicago truncatula      30 
Plant treatments        31 
A. thaliana treatment with nitrogen or S. meliloti   31 
M. truncatula treatment with flg22, R. solanacearum or S. 
medicae        32 
 Cell sorting         33 
Protoplast generation and Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting 
(FACS)        33 
 Molecular methods        34 
  cDNA synthesis       34 
  qPCR         34 
  Microarray analysis        35 
  RNAseq processing       35 
 Bioinformatics and statistics      36 
  Normalization and quality assessment of microarray data  36 
  Determination and clustering of differentially expressed genes 
  Gene regulatory network inference and analysis   37 
  RNAseq data processing      38 
Chapter 3: Regulation of gene expression by nitrogen and rhizobia 
underpinning lateral root emergence in Arabidopsis thaliana   39 
 Introduction         39 
  Control of nitrate metabolism in the model plant A. thaliana  39 
  Nitrate transporter systems in A. thaliana    40 
  The primary nitrate response     41 
  Mutants affecting root architecture     43 
  Aims         44 
 Results and discussion       45 
Cells of the cortex and pericycle exhibit highly specific and 
dynamic gene expression through time     45 
Responses to nitrogen are highly cell type specific and occur 
outside-to-inside        48 
Molecular changes underpinning root architecture changes in A. 
thaliana mediated by S. meliloti      52 
Expression of cell identity markers is maintained during 
environmental responses       54 
Understanding how cortical and pericycle gene expression is co-
ordinated using network inference     56 
Insights into co-ordination of nitrate responses from PN/CN 
networks         61 
Analysis of networks of rhizobia-responsive transcripts  66 
Conclusions:        68 
Chapter 4: Molecular changes underpinning friend vs. foe recognition 
in legume roots         70 
 Introduction         70 
Complex interactions between the legume nodulation machinery 
and the plant immune system are required for establishment of 
root nodules        70 
Ralstonia solanacearum is a broad-spectrum phytopathogen 
associated with characteristic wilting in a wide variety of plant 
species        72 
Molecular determinants contributing to R. solanacearum 
pathogenicity        72 
R. solanacearum as a model for legume-pathogen interactions 
Aims         75 
 Results         75 
R. solanacearum is able to infect and induce wilting in M. 
truncatula        76 
Identifying marker genes for symbiosis and defence  80 
Using RNAseq to identify rhizobia- and ralstonia-responsive 
genes         86 
 Discussion         92 
R. solanacearum is able to induce bacterial wilt in M. truncatula 
S. medicae strain WSM419 induces expression of ENOD11 and 
NIN in M. truncatula roots      93 
Putative defence markers do not respond to ralstonia, rhizobia 
or flg22        94 
Interplay between circadian rhythms and plant defence 96 
Insights into nitrogen metabolism in M. truncatula  97 
Identification of defence-associated genes in M. truncatula 98 
Interpreting early responses to rhizobia                                 100 
Interplay between defence and symbiosis in M. truncatula    102 
Conclusions                                                                            103 
Chapter 5: General discussion                                                                 105 
Insights into how the environment shapes plant root architecture 
 Future directions of this research                                                      106 
  Characterizing rhizobia responsive genes in non-legumes.   106 
  Towards identifying defence markers in M. truncatula           107 
Application of fluorescence activated cell sorting to non-
Arabidopsis species                                                                 108 
Broader impact of findings                                                      109 
References                                                                                                  111 
List of abbreviations: 
ABA  ABscisic Acid 
AON  Autoregulation Of Nodulation 
BP  Base Pairs 
CCaMK  Calcium-CalModulin dependent protein Kinase 
CHX  CycloHeXimide 
CLE  CLAVATA/Embryo-surrounding region 
DAI  Days After Inoculation 
DAMP  Damage-Associated Molecular Pattern 
DE  Differential Expression 
DEX  DexaMethasone 
DNA  Deoxyribose Nucleic Acid 
EPS  Extracellular Polymeric Substances 
ETI  Effector-Triggered Immunity 
FACS  Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting 
GFP  Green Fluorescent Protein 
GMO  Genetically Modified Organism 
GO  Gene Ontology 
GR  Glucocorticoid Receptor 
GUS  -GlUcuronidaSe 
INTACT  Isolation of Nuclei TAgged in specific Cell Types 
IT  Infection Thread 
JA  Jasmonic Acid 
PEP  Plant Elicitor Peptide 
PRR  Pattern Recognition rReceptor 
LCO - LipoChitoOligosaccharides 
LPS  LipoPolySaccharide 
LR  Lateral Root 
LRR  Leucine-Rich Repeat 
MAMP  Microbe-Associated Molecular Pattern 
MAPK  Mitogen-activated protein kinase 
miRNA  microRNA 
MTI  MAMP-Triggered Immunity 
NCR  Nodule Cysteine-Rich 
NFR  Nod Factor Receptor 
NIN  Nodule INception 
NLR  Nucleotide-binding and Leucine-rich Repeats 
NORK  NOdulation Receptor Kinase 
NRE  Nitrate-Responsive Element 
PNR  Primary Nitrate Response 
PRR  Pattern Recognition Receptor 
RFP  Red Fluorescent Protein 
RNA  Ribose Nucleic Acid 
ROS  Reactive Oxygen Species 
RT-qPCR  Real Time quantitative Polymerase Chain Reaction 
SA  Salicylic Acid 
SCR  SCARECROW 
SHR  SHORT-ROOT 
SYMRK  SYMbiosis Receptor Kinase 
TARGET  Transient Assay Reporting Genome-wide Effects of Transcription 
factors 
TF  Transcription Factor 
TML  Too Much Love 
TRAP  Translating Ribosome Affinity Purification 
WAK  Wall-associated kinase  
List of figures and tables: 
Chapter 1: 
Figure 1.1: Stages of lateral root emergence in A. thaliana. 
Figure 1.2: Stages of indeterminant nodule formation. 
Figure 1.3: Key genes involved in activation of the nodulation pathway in M. 
truncatula. 
Figure 1.4: Mechanisms of plant defence. 
Figure 1.5: Fluorescence activated cell sorting of plant protoplasts. 
Chapter 2: 
Table 2.1: Thermocycler conditions for qPCR. 
Chapter 3: 
Figure 3.1: Regulation of select genes during nitrate responses in A. thaliana. 
Figure 3.2. Overview of experimental design. 
Figure 3.3. The response of pericycle and cortical cells of the A. thaliana root 
to nitrogen. 
Figure 3.4. The root architecture and transcriptome response of A. thaliana to 
rhizobia. 
Figure 3.5: Expression of cortex and pericycle cell type specific enriched 
genes during environmental change. 
Figure 3.6: Causal transcription network of changes over time in untreated 
pericycle cells. 
Figure 3.7: Causal transcription network of changes over time in untreated 
cortex cells. 
Figure 3.8: Co-ordination of the nitrate response in the cortex and pericycle 
Figure 3.9: Causal transcription network of changes over time in pericycle cells 
treated with S. meliloti. 
Figure 3.10: Causal transcription network of changes over time in cortex cells 
treated with S. meliloti. 
Table 3.1: Statistical analysis of network inference. 
Chapter 4: 
Figure 4.1: Overview of experimental design. 
Figure 4.2: Phenotype of M truncatula plants infected with R. solanacearum. 
Figure 4.3: Phenotypic effects of nitrogen treatment and S. medicae 
inoculation on growth in M. truncatula. 
Figure 4.4: Expression of symbiosis marker genes NIN and ENOD11 in M. 
truncatula roots. 
Figure 4.5: Expression of putative FLS2 homolog Medtr4g094610 in M. 
truncatula roots. 
Figure 4.6: Expression of putative defence marker genes in response to flg22. 
Figure 4.7: Principal component analysis of samples used in RNAseq 
experiments. 
Figure 4.8: Differentially expressed genes in response to R. solanacearum and 
S. medicae inoculation 3 and 12 hours after inoculation. 
Table 4.1: Primer sequences used for RT-qPCR analysis. 
Table 4.2: Differential gene expression induced by ralstonia or rhizobia 
inoculation. 
Acknowledgements: 
Although the work set out in this thesis is predominantly my own, I could not 
have achieved this without the help and advice of countless others. I am 
indebted to Gary Grant from the Phytobiology Facility for his work in providing 
me with materials to conduct my experiments and support for the growth and 
propagation of my plant material during this project. I would also like to thank 
Jumoke (Esther) Ogunniyi and Plagie Ratchinski who assisted me with some 
of my labwork. 
 I would also like to thank all of the people who have helped me with the 
bioinformatic aspects of my project. Dr. Charlotte Rich provided me with 
invaluable guidance on identifying homologs of genes in other species and 
Luke Richards, Dr. Mark Walsh and Javier Antunez-Sanchez for their 
guidance and patience in dealing with my questions during the analysis of my 
RNAseq data. 
I am particularly grateful to Dr. Ruth Schfer and all the other members 
(especially Dr. Alonso Javier Pardal-Bermejo, Cantu Bar and Dr. Rob Maple) 
of lab C030 through the years who have been at hand to offer me advice of 
technical procedures during my time in the lab. I would also like to record my 
thanks to my second supervisor, Dr. Sascha Ott, and the members of my 
advisory panel, Dr. Steve Jackson and Dr. Jose Gutierrez-Marcos for their 
feedback throughout my project. 
Finally, I wish to dedicate my final acknowledgements to the two people 
who have helped me the most during my studies. I wish to thank my 
supervisor, Dr. Miriam Gifford for giving me the chance to take on this project, 
her constant guidance and feedback on my experiments and her concern not 
just on my research but my wellbeing and career development. I also send my 
gratitude and admiration to my esteemed colleague Dr. Beatriz Lagunas for 
her patience and generosity with her time, her interest in my work and for her 
invaluable guidance over the years.  
Declaration: 
This thesis is submitted to the University of Warwick in support of my 
application for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy. It has been composed by 
myself and has not been submitted in any previous application for any degree. 
The work presented (including data generated and data analysis) was carried 
out by the author except in the cases outlined below: 
The results contained in Chapter 3: Regulation of gene expression by 
nitrogen and rhizobia underpinning lateral root emergence in Arabidopsis 
thaliana are part of a published work and as such contains contributions from 
others as detailed in the Author Contributions of the publication (Walker et al., 
2017). Laboratory work for these experiments were conducted by Jesper 
Grnlund, Sanjeev Kumar, Jo Hulsman and Dhaval Patel. Ying Wang, Dafyd 
Jenkins and Clare Boddington were responsible for network inference, 
clustering and producing lists of differentially expressed genes from these 
experiments. Subsequent interpretation and analysis of this data is my own 
work.   
Summary: 
As sessile organisms, plants must be able to adapt to and exploit their 
environment in order to survive. A key aspect of this is the ability of plants to 
remodel their root system architecture in order to carry out the essential 
functions of providing anchorage and nutrient and water uptake from the 
surrounding soil. Soil typically contains a huge variety of microorganisms 
which will likely include species which are potentially harmful or beneficial to 
the plant, as well as a range of abiotic conditions.  
 One way in which plants can adapt their root systems in response to 
their environment is via the formation of new lateral roots. Lateral roots 
generally emerge perpendicularly to the primary root or other lateral roots and 
increase the surface area of the root system and the range of exploration. 
Genes involved in the regulation of lateral root formation in Arabidopsis 
thaliana were investigated by using fluorescence activated cell sorting over a 
timecourse. Gene expression changes over time in response to nitrogen 
application or Sinorhizobium meliloti inoculation, both of which are associated 
with the regulation of lateral root development, were investigated in cells of the 
pericycle, from which lateral roots derive, and an overlaying cell type, the 
cortex. Gene expression was found to be highly cell-type specific between the 
two cell types and this was conserved during environmental responses. 
 The formation of root nodules by legumes represents another 
quintessential example of a modification of the root to adapt to the 
environment. During conditions of nitrogen starvation, the plant can form 
structures on the root which can be colonized by symbiotic nitrogen-fixing 
bacteria in the soil called rhizobia. In the nodule, atmospheric nitrogen is 
reduced by the bacteria and utilized by the host plant. The intersection 
between plant defence responses and symbiosis was investigated in the 
model legume Medicago truncatula to try and identify genes involved in 
distinguishing rhizobia as symbionts rather than as pathogens. Putative novel 
markers of defence and symbiosis were identified that may underpin this 
transition.
Chapter 1: Introduction 
Plant root architecture and the environment: 
Plant roots are important for providing anchorage to the soil and facilitating 
nutrient and water uptake. In order to optimize their root systems for these 
functions, plants must be able to fine tune their root system architecture in 
response to their environment (Lynch, 1995). This need to fine tune is further 
complicated by the need to respond to a wide range of short-term biotic and 
abiotic stresses which affect resource allocation as well as growth. Plant 
root systems are capable of an exquisite level of plasticity and this serves as 
a mechanism by which they can adapt to their environment. As part of this 
mechanism, the plant must continue to integrate a multitude of diverse and 
often antagonistic signals when making developmental decisions. The 
molecular basis of this mechanism is the differential expression (DE) of genes; 
different environmental conditions will lead to the activation or repression of 
specific transcription factors (TFs) which in turn leads to different patterns of 
gene expression, the activity of which facilitates different developmental 
outcomes. 
 Much research has been carried out towards understanding the 
molecular basis of how plants regulate various developmental processes 
during environmental responses but this research is made difficult by the 
nature of these responses. Many of these responses occur over relatively long 
periods and involve different cell types maintaining vastly different 
transcriptional programs whilst still working in a concerted fashion.  
Lateral root formation enables plants to adapt to their environment:  
As sessile organisms, plants must source all the nutrients they need for growth 
from their local environment. The majority of nutrients plants require for growth 
are obtained from the soil so it is one of the primary functions of the root system 
to maximize the uptake of these. Plants meet this goal by ensuring their roots 
grow in the direction of nutrients. Growing from only a single (primary) root 
would reduce the likelihood of finding nutrients in addition to providing 
extremely poor anchorage. Therefore, plants are able to induce branching in 
their root systems to maximize soil exploration and nutrient uptake. The 
formation of these branches, or lateral roots (LR), is a highly regulated process 
controlled by a diverse range of stimuli including nutrient status, abiotic 
stresses and even interactions with microorganisms in the rhizosphere that 
can both positively and negatively influence the morphogenesis of new LRs 
(Benkova and Bielach, 2010). 
Stages of lateral root morphogenesis: LR formation involves forming an 
entirely new organ from an initially very small number of cells. LR initiation 
originates deep inside the root and thus requires co-ordinated action between 
multiple different root cell types for the root to eventually emerge through 
overlaying tissues. Because LR formation is best understood within the plant 
Arabidopsis thaliana (Figure 1.1), the following information is based on LR 
formation in this model. However, the mechanism appears to be highly 
conserved across other higher plant species such as Medicago truncatula 
(Herrbach et al., 2014). 
LR formation can be considered to begin with the specification of a 
founder cell. Accumulation of the plant hormone auxin in a single cell of the 
xylem pole pericycle is sufficient to drive differentiation into a founder cell by 
activation of the transcription factor (TF) GATA23. (De Rybel et al., 2010; 
Dubrovsky et al., 2008).  Cells which have adopted founder identity (as 
controlled by GATA23 expression) then start to undergo changes. The nucleus 
migrates to a pole of the cell which then begins to divide asymmetrically, 
producing unevenly sized daughter cells and giving rise to a structure called 
the lateral root primordia (De Smet et al., 2006). At this stage, the process may 
be aborted by the alteration of cytokinin signalling which is able to inhibit 
founder cell division (Laplaze et al., 2007).  
Figure 1.1: Stages of lateral root emergence in A. thaliana. Lateral root 
formation begins with the specification of founder cells (A) in the pericycle. 
These founder cells begin to divide (B) both radially and periclinally to form a 
lateral root primordia (C). Continued cell division lead to the expansion of the 
primordia and its emergence through overlaying tissues (D) before the lateral 
root primordia develops its own active meristem (E) and commences 
outgrowth into the surrounding environment. Adapted from Banda et al (Banda 
et al., 2019).  
Broadly, the next stage of LR development is outgrowth. After several rounds 
of cell division, a dome shaped structure is formed as additional pericycle cells 
distort the structure of the overlaying tissues. Once the primordia is several 
cell layers deep it develops its own meristem (Laskowski et al., 1995). At this 
stage the emergence of a new LR is not inevitable as the LR primordia is still 
subject to regulation by the overlaying cells and stress signalling. The plant 
hormone abscisic acid (ABA) is responsible for inducing quiescence of LRs 
(De Smet et al., 2003). This may be mediated by the MYB93 TF which is 
induced by ABA and expressed specifically in the endodermis overlaying LR 
primordia and serves to inhibit LR emergence (Gibbs and Coates, 2014; Gibbs 
et al., 2014). 
 Following outgrowth is emergence when the LR primordia irreversibly 
commits to becoming a LR and breaks through the overlaying tissues. 
Crossing the epidermis represents a particular challenge due to the presence 
of a lignin diffusion barrier called the Casparian strip that exists between 
endodermal cells. Selective breakages in the Casparian strip and shrinkage of 
endodermal cells allows the primordia to traverse the endodermis without 
affecting the integrity of overlaying cells and still protecting the vasculature 
from diffusion (Vermeer et al., 2014). Auxin signalling via the cortical and 
epidermal auxin transporter LAX3 (Auxin1-like protein 3) leads to loss of cross-
linking between cells allowing the LR to grow through the now separated cells 
in these layers (Peret et al., 2009). 
Now free from the mechanical constraints of the overlaying tissue, the 
new LR is able to grow outwards into the environment, enabling the plant to 
forage for resources. Although LRs predominantly arise from the primary root, 
it is possible for LRs to initiate from an existing LR, giving rise to second or 
even third order LRs. It should be noted that it is also possible, although rare, 
for roots functionally analogous to LRs to emerge from the shoot in some 
species, including A. thaliana (Gutierrez et al., 2012). These roots, called 
adventitious roots, are usually formed in response to mechanical or 
environmental stress (Bellini et al., 2014). 
Factors influencing root system architecture: Plants integrate a diverse 
range of cues when regulating when and where to form new LRs. One of the 
most potent external stimuli that influences root architecture is the form and 
availability of nutrients, particularly nitrogen in the form of nitrate. Proliferating 
roots towards areas rich in a key nutrient (foraging) is crucial for plants to adapt 
to their environment. The formation of new LRs is understood to be induced 
following a transition from deplete to replete nitrate (Linkohr et al., 2002; 
Walker et al., 2017; Zhang and Forde, 1998). A MADS box TF, ANR1 
(Arabidopsis Nitrate-Regulated 1), has been shown to be essential for 
orchestrating this response by stimulating lateral root emergence (Gan et al., 
2005; Zhang and Forde, 1998).  Conversely, LR initiation is repressed under 
low nitrate. As this phenotype is lost in a mutant of nitrate transporter nrt2.1, it 
seems NRT2.1 (Nitrate Transporter 2.1) mediates this inhibition, suggesting it 
has an additional function as a nitrate sensor (Little et al., 2005). 
 Water foraging and osmotic stress also influence root architecture 
significantly. Osmotic stress has been shown to repress (via the action of ABA) 
LR formation in A. thaliana (Deak and Malamy, 2005) and the cereals Zea 
mays and Hordeum vulgare (Babe et al., 2012). More recent work in the latter 
two species has suggested that the repression may be specific to LRs not in 
contact with water. This is via a response termed xerobranching which occurs 
when ABA accumulates in root sections near air spaces in the soil and 
prevents LR primordia initiation (Orman-Ligeza et al., 2018). LRs are known 
to preferentially emerge from the root towards water sources 
(hydropatterning). Hydropatterning is auxin-dependent but is unaffected in 
ABA mutants which suggests that it is a distinct process from the 
aforementioned water stress response (Bao et al., 2014). Subsequent work 
has shown this depends on LBD16 (Lob domain-containing protein 16) 
expression in founder cells which itself depends on the TF ARF7 (Auxin 
Response Factor 7); when roots are exposed to air SUMOlyation of ARF7 
disrupts it binding to LBD16 and auxin signalling is disrupted (Orosa-Puente 
et al., 2018). 
 The effects of salinity on LR development depend on the severity of the 
salt stress. Mild salt stress seems to promote LR morphogenesis whilst more 
severe salt stress is inhibitory (Galvan-Ampudia and Testerink, 2011). The 
mechanism relating to salt perception is not well understood but LR initiation 
is mediated by auxin accumulation in the primordia as typical in unstressed 
conditions (Zhao et al., 2011; Zolla et al., 2010) whilst higher salt 
concentrations induce accumulation of ABA and thus push the balance in 
favour of quiescence (Duan et al., 2013). 
 In addition to abiotic factors, biotic factors may also influence root 
plasticity. A retardation of systemic growth is a commonly observed phenotype 
of plants undergoing defence responses, possibly due to the plant reallocating 
resources from growth to defence. This is distinct from pathogenesis (for 
example a biotrophic pathogen diverting resources from the plant) as the same 
phenotype is observed in response to treatment with the immunogenic peptide 
flg22 which activates innate immunity but is harmless to the plant (Gomez-
Gomez et al., 1999). Phenotypes have also been reported in some non-
pathogenic plant-microbe interactions; for instance, treatment with the 
rhizobial symbiont Sinorhizobium meliloti triggers the emergence of new LRs 
at the expense of elongation in A. thaliana (Walker et al., 2017). 
Nodulation is a symbiosis between legumes and nitrogen-fixing 
bacteria: 
The formation of root nodules by leguminous plants represents another 
example of plants altering their root systems in response to their environment. 
The family Fabaceae (legumes) is set apart for almost all of the rest of the 
plant kingdom by the ability of most of its family members to enter symbiosis 
with soil-dwelling nitrogen fixing bacteria called rhizobia. During this symbiosis 
(nodulation) the bacteria physically colonize specialized structures on the plant 
root called nodules where they reduce atmospheric nitrogen into forms that 
can be utilized by the host plant (Oldroyd, 2013). 
Nodule organogenesis requires co-ordination between the epidermis 
and cortex: Similarly to lateral root formation, nodule morphogenesis is a 
process that requires the concerted action of multiple cell types (Figure 1.2). 
Nodulation typically exhibits a high degree of species specificity with different 
rhizobial strains showing preference to colonizing particular host species and 
vice-versa (Albrecht et al., 1999). Although the majority of these interactions 
are characterized by a similar set of events, nodulation is best characterized 
in the model legumes Medicago truncatula and Lotus japonicus so subsequent 
information is predominantly based on the events from these models. 
Figure 1.2: Stages of indeterminant nodule formation. (A) Cross-section 
of a plant root showing individual cell types comprising different layers of the 
root; stele (purple), pericycle (red), endodermis (blue), cortex (orange) and 
endodermis (green). (B) Nodulation is initiated when, in nitrate-deplete 
conditions, the plant root secretes flavonoids into the rhizosphere. These are 
detected by nearby rhizobia which respond by secreting Nod factors and are 
chemoattracted into close proximity of the plant root hairs of epidermal cells. 
(C) Nod factor perception by the plant results in calcium ion spiking in 
epidermal cells and the induction of a suite of nodulation-specific signaling and 
transcription factor genes that lead to both root hair curling that encircles the 
rhizobia, and initiation of cell division within underlying cortical cells. (D) 
Trapped bacteria are able to invade the root through a structure called an 
Rhizobia
Nod factors
Flavonoids Root hair
curling
Infection thread
formation
Root nodule
infection thread leading to invasion of underlying cortical cells. Rhizobial 
invasion triggers rapid cell division in the cortex. As the developing nodule 
continues to grow it breaks through the overlaying endodermis. (E) Rhizobia 
differentiate into specialized nitrogen-fixing bacteroids and assimilate 
atmospheric nitrogen for use by their host plant, receiving carbon-based 
compounds derived from photosynthesis in return. The nodule continues to 
grow and can eventually exceed the diameter of the root it derived from. 
Nodulation begins with signalling cross-talk between legume root hair cells 
and rhizobia in the soil secreting flavonoids and Nod factors respectively 
(described in more detail below). This signalling culminates in chemoattraction 
of the bacteria into close proximity of epidermal root hairs (Bauer and Caetano-
Anolls, 1990). As a result of Nod factor-induced localized inhibition of growth 
at root hair tips, root hairs are induced to curl, creating a pocket in which 
rhizobia may become trapped (Esseling et al., 2003). Rhizobia then gain entry 
into the root hair by localized cell wall degradation which is thought to be host-
mediated (Xie et al., 2012). Cytoskeletal rearrangements occur in the root hair, 
giving rise to a structure called an infection thread (Timmers et al., 1999). By 
dividing towards the root, the bacteria in the IT are able to traverse the infection 
thread which ultimately extends into underlying cortical cells (Gage, 2004). 
Concurrent with root hair curling and infection thread formation in the 
epidermis is de-differentiation and division of the first two layers of underlying 
cortical cells giving rise to a nodule primordia which will become the nodule 
meristem (Patriarca et al., 2004). The nodule continues to grow in size and 
can eventually host as many as 10
 bacteria (Downie, 2014). However, there 
is a distinction between legumes in which this meristem is transient 
(determinant nodulators) or maintained (indeterminant nodulators). The 
nodules of indeterminately nodulating species, such as M. truncatula, are 
therefore able to persist indefinitely whilst determinant nodules formed by 
species including L. japonicus eventually senesce (Gibson et al., 2008). 
Bacteria in the nodule primordia are enclosed within a membrane by 
endocytosis, becoming an organelle called the symbiosome (Brewin, 2004). 
Bacteria in the symbiosome usually differentiate into specialized nitrogen-
fixing bacteroids, losing their ability to replicate in the process (Oke and Long, 
1999). Inside the nodule, bacteria use the enzyme nitrogenase to break down 
atmospheric dinitrogen into ammonia which is provided to the host plant whilst 
anaerobic conditions in the symbiosome protect the enzyme from oxygen 
(Hunt and Layzell, 1993). Accumulated ammonia is used by the host plant for 
nitrogen nutrition whilst the bacteria obtain fixed carbon from photosynthesis 
in exchange (Kaschuk et al., 2009). The level of ammonia/carbon exchange is 
highly regulated over the course of nodule development. 
Molecular activation of the nodulation pathway: During times of nitrate 
paucity, compounds called flavonoids are exudated from the root of the host 
plant into the rhizosphere. These flavonoids are able to diffuse across rhizobial 
membranes and into the cell (Fisher and Long, 1992). Upon flavonoid 
perception, rhizobia activate transcription of a set of genes (Nod genes) 
orchestrated by nodulation protein D (nodD) binding to the nod box of these 
genes. The principle result of this transcription programme is the production 
and secretion of lipochitooligosaccharides (LCO) compounds called Nod 
factors (Schlaman et al., 1992). Although the primary function of flavonoids 
during the symbiosis is the activation of Nod factor production in rhizobia, they 
are also essential to endogenous processes in legumes including repression 
of auxin transport and activation of genes involved in the nodulation pathway 
(Subramanian et al., 2007).  
Nod factors are crucial in reprogramming the host plant to begin forming 
nodulation (Figure 1.3). Nod factors are recognized by RLK proteins 
homologous to the A. thaliana chitin receptor CERK1 (Chitin Elicitor Receptor 
Kinase 1). The Nod factor receptors (NFR) NFR1 and NFR5 were first 
identified in L. japonicus (Madsen et al., 2003; Radutoiu et al., 2003) and their 
orthologs, LYK3 (Smit et al., 2007) and NFP (Nod factor perception) (Amor et 
al., 2003) respectively were later found in the M. truncatula genome. Unlike 
most RLKs, NFR5/NFP (Fliegmann and Bono, 2015; Mbengue et al., 2010) 
lacks an active kinase domain, suggesting that both receptors must interact 
for Nod factor perception with NFR5/NFP functioning as a signalling receptor 
and NFR1/LYK3 as an entry receptor. The exact mechanism of by which these 
receptors function is not fully understood but they are known to co-localize at 
the plasma membrane (Moling et al., 2014). Some targets immediately 
downstream of these receptors are beginning to be identified. LYK3 is able to 
phosphorylate LYR3 (Fliegmann and Bono, 2015) although the significance of 
this interaction is unclear. NFR5 has been shown by co-immunoprecipitation 
to associate with the cytoplasmic kinase NiCK4 (NFR5-interacting 
Cytoplasmic Kinase) which is then able to phosphorylate NFR1 and NFR5 
(Wong et al., 2019). Nod factor signalling must be maintained through 
subsequent infection thread formation and also maintained in nodules for the 
symbiosis to be successful as later stages of nodulation are also induced by 
Nod factor impression (Timmers et al., 1998). 
Although Nod factors are usually considered indispensable for 
nodulation there are examples which contradict this. For instance, some 
species of legume are nodulated in the absence of Nod factor (and thus 
without an infection thread) when the bacteria directly invade through 
naturally-occurring gaps in the epidermis via a process termed crack entry 
(Sprent, 2008). However, examples of invasion without infection threads that 
still depend on Nod factors also exist (Acosta-Jurado et al., 2016; Liang et al., 
2019). Some rhizobia that normally do depend on Nod factors for infection are 
still able to induce nodulation in their absence; a Nod factor-deficient mutant 
of Bradyrhizobium elkanii was still able to, possibly also via crack entry, weakly 
nodulate soybean and this interaction was dependent on the intact expression 
of a type III secretion system by the bacteria (Okazaki et al., 2013). More 
rarely, some rhizobia are able to directly infect epidermal cells via a 
mechanism termed intracellular infection. This process is distinct from crack 
entry as it occurs independently of natural gaps, with the bacteria using other 
methods to gain access, possibly by degrading epidermal cell walls (Ibanez et 
al., 2017). Finally, some mutants are able to be nodulated in the absence of 
Nod factors or even rhizobia. For example, constitutive activation of the 
CCaMK protein (Calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase, discussed below) by 
removal of its autoinhibitory domain is sufficient to induce spontaneous nodule 
organogenesis, giving rise to non-functional nodules devoid of rhizobia 
(Gleason et al., 2006; Tirichine et al., 2006). 
Downstream of NFRs, are more proteins involved in the nodulation 
pathway. The first of these is the protein SYMRK (Symbiosis receptor kinase, 
L. japonicus (Stracke et al., 2002))/NORK (Nodulation receptor kinase, M. 
truncatula; also called Doesnt Make Infections 2 (DMI2) (Endre et al., 2002)). 
It operates downstream of Nod factor receptors and is responsible for 
transducing Nod factor perception into nuclear calcium oscillations 
(Charpentier and Oldroyd, 2013). This Ca
 spiking is dependent on the ion 
channels CASTOR and POLLUX (Charpentier et al., 2008) and the 
nucleoporin NUP133 (Kanamori et al., 2006) in L. japonicus or DMI1 in M. 
truncatula (Peiter et al., 2007). 
The calcium ion flux is detected by the nuclear-localized CCaMK in L. 
japonicus or the orthologous DMI3 in M. truncatula (Weidmann et al., 2004). 
Upon binding calcium, the resulting conformational change exposes a 
threonine residue which is then phosphorylated, activating the protein (Singh 
et al., 2012). CCaMK/DMI3 is found in complex with its target CYCLOPS/IPD3 
(Messinese et al., 2007; Yano et al., 2008) which it then phosphorylates. 
The active CCaMK/DMI3 and CYCLOPS/IPD3 complex activates 
downstream targets that in turn induce nodulation-related gene transcription. 
The GRAS family TFs NSP1 (Smit et al., 2005) and NSP2 (Kalo et al., 2005) 
are the best characterized of these nodulation regulatory genes. The two 
proteins dimerize and activate expression of both early nodulin genes and 
additional TFs (Hirsch et al., 2009). One such component is the essential 
ERN1/ERN2 complex (Cerri et al., 2012; Hirsch et al., 2009; Middleton et al., 
2007) which is implicated in infection thread formation (Kawaharada et al., 
2017). Nodule inception (NIN) is also a key regulator of nodulation (Marsh et 
al., 2007) and has recently been found to be highly conserved not just in 
legume species, but also non-legumes that are able to nodulate including 
Parasponia andersonii and Casuarina glauca (Clavijo et al., 2015; van Velzen 
et al., 2018). NIN is known to have multiple roles during nodulation, including 
activation of the CRE1 cytokinin receptor. Cytokinin signalling is known to 
promote nodule inception (Gamas et al., 2017) in the cortex but actually 
antagonizes  processes associated with further infection in the epidermis, 
suggesting it has a role in feedback inhibition of the nodulation pathway 
(Vernie et al., 2015; Yoro et al., 2014). 
Figure 1.3: Key genes involved in activation of the nodulation pathway 
in M. truncatula. Initial perception of rhizobial Nod factors is mediated by the 
NFP/LYK3 receptor complex in the epidermis. The receptor complex activates 
NORK leading to opening of the DMI1 ion channel and nuclear calcium influx. 
Calcium influx activates the DMI3/IPD3 complex which leads to the activation 
Common SYM pathway
(NORK)
Nuclear calcium influx
(DMI1)
Detection of calcium
spiking (DMI3/IPD3)
Calcium
spiking
Transcription
factors (NIN,
NSP1, NSP2)
Transcription
factors (NIN,
ERN1, ERN2)
Infection thread
formation
Division of
cortical cells
Nod factor
secretion
Nod factor
receptor
(NFP/LYK3)
of transcription factors associated with nodulation. Transcription factor activity 
in the epidermis enables infection by rhizobia whilst driving cell division in the 
cortex and later inhibiting further infection thread formation. Adapted from 
Lagunas et al (Lagunas et al., 2015). 
Regulation of the nodulation pathway: Nodulation incurs significant costs 
for legumes in terms of resources and is accordingly very tightly regulated to 
maximize the benefits to the host. Similarly, rhizobial activity is controlled 
according to resource allocation to the symbiosomes. Control of nodulation 
does not simply consist of a binary passage or blockage of nodulation; 
legumes are able to finetune nodule numbers to best balance their energy 
needs. Nodulation is able to be moderated at all stages of the symbiosis 
including once active nodules have developed (Ferguson et al., 2019). 
The main benefit legumes derive from the symbiosis is available 
nitrogen, thus it does not make sense for the plant to form nodules during a 
surfeit of nitrogen. Therefore, nodulation is primarily regulated through the 
availability of nitrogen although this shares mechanisms with the 
autoregulation of nodulation pathway (Okamoto and Kawaguchi, 2015). It has 
long been known that nodule formation is inhibited in high nitrate 
concentrations but the mechanisms behind this are not well understood and 
may vary between legume species (Mortier et al., 2012; Omrane and 
Chiurazzi, 2009). Plants grown in a high nitrate environment remain resistant 
to rhizobial colonization for several days after transfer to low nitrogen (Omrane 
et al., 2009). Flavonoids may be a possible mechanism controlling this; the 
expression and diversity of flavonoids can be reduced in replete nitrate 
conditions which could consequently reduce plant-rhizobia interactions (Cho 
and Harper, 1991).  Both nitrate and ammonia act to inhibit rhizobial perception 
at some point between root hair curling and cortical cell division (Barbulova et 
al., 2007; van Noorden et al., 2016). Additionally, the size and activity of 
existing nodules is also rapidly reduced in higher nitrate conditions and this is 
likely mediated by cutting off the supply of photosynthates to the nodule 
(Fujikake et al., 2003). 
 In addition to direct nitrate-mediated inhibition, legumes also use a 
feedback inhibition pathway called autoregulation of nodulation (AON). AON 
involves induction of CLAVATA3/embryo-surrounding region (CLE) peptides 
by rhizobia which inhibit additional infection (Reid et al., 2011). In M. truncatula 
these peptides are called CLE12 and CLE13 (Mortier et al., 2010) with close 
orthologs identified in other legume species including L. japonicus (Nishida et 
al., 2016; Okamoto et al., 2009), Glycine max and Phaseolus vulgaris 
(Ferguson et al., 2014). In L. japonicus, the production of CLE peptides is 
known to occur via the previously discussed TF NIN (Soyano et al., 2014). 
Functional CLE peptides are first synthesized as much longer pre-cursors 
before they are cleaved to peptides 12-13 amino acids in length (Hastwell et 
al., 2015) and then further chemically modified via arabinosylation (Corcilius 
et al., 2017; Hastwell et al., 2019; Okamoto et al., 2013). The mature CLE 
peptides are then transported by the vasculature to the shoots where the CLE 
receptor is expressed (Magori and Kawaguchi, 2009). In M. truncatula the CLE 
receptor is called SUNN (Super numerary nodules) and its mutation results in 
a hypernodulation phenotype as the plant loses its ability to regulate nodule 
number (Schnabel et al., 2005). Analogous receptors have been identified in 
Pisum sativum, L. japonicus (Krusell et al., 2002; Nishimura et al., 2002), 
Glycine max (Searle et al., 2003) and P. vulgaris (Ferguson et al., 2014). Upon 
activation of the CLE receptor an unknown signal originates in the shoots and 
travels to the roots, again via the vasculature, where it is able to antagonize 
further nodule development. Very little is known about the subsequent steps 
aside of studies in the L. japonicus hypernodulating mutant too much love 
(tml). TML is known to act specifically in the root downstream of CLE receptor 
HAR1 (Hypernodulation Aberrant Root formation 1) and likely functions by 
targeting unknown protein(s) for degradation by the 26s proteasome pathway 
(Magori et al., 2009; Takahara et al., 2013). 
The plant also responds to and integrates hormonal cues in order to 
inhibit nodulation when conditions are not conducive to nodulation. The plant 
hormone ethylene is a potent inhibitor of nodulation likely due to its role in 
signalling for other stresses (Stougaard, 2000). The defence-associated 
hormone jasmonic acid (JA) has been demonstrated to inhibit nodulation in M. 
truncatula (Sun et al., 2006) and L. japonicus (Nakagawa and Kawaguchi, 
2006) seemingly by inhibiting the early nodulation apparatus but acting 
independently of any direct effect on rhizobial wellbeing. The role of another 
defence-associated hormone, salicylic acid (SA), is less clear. Although 
traditionally thought to be an inhibitor of nodulation only in indeterminately 
nodulating species (van Spronsen et al., 2003), external SA application has 
been shown to inhibit nodulation in the determinant nodulator L. japonicus. 
Reducing SA accumulation in these plants by expression of the bacterial 
salicylate hydroxylase gene nahG also leads to increased nodulation (Stacey 
et al., 2006). 
Finally, various environmental stresses have negative effects on the 
fitness of both symbiotic partners and these lead to inhibition of nodulation. 
This allows the plant to conserve resources for coping with the stress although 
the mechanisms underpinning this are even less well understood than for 
other forms of inhibition. Low soil pH leads to reduced nutrient availability and 
increased accumulation of toxic metal ions which reduce the effectiveness of 
nitrogen fixing symbiosis. In Glycine max, systemic repression of nodulation 
acting via the CLE receptor from the AON pathway has been reported thus 
providing a mechanism for controlling nodulation in acidic soils (Lin et al., 
2012). High soil salinity severely harms rhizobial nitrogen fixing efficiency and 
many legumes exhibit reduced nodule numbers and nitrogen fixation as a 
coping mechanism (Manchanda and Garg, 2008). Drought stress also leads 
to reduced nodulation even when the plant is able to maintain photosynthate 
supply to nodules, suggesting this may simply reflect reduced demand for 
nitrates due to reduced growth and that drought stress is able to feed into the 
AON pathway (Streeter, 2003). 
Determinants of host-symbiont specificity during nodulation: Nodulation 
represents a significant cost to legumes in terms of providing fixated carbon to 
bacteroids in nodules. An optimal strategy is for the plant to only participate in 
symbiosis with bacteria that fix nitrogen efficiently in return. However, a 
lifestyle closer to parasitism (cheating) may be more beneficial from the 
perspective of the bacteria if it able to sequester carbon whilst providing little 
or no nitrogen fixation in return. Cheating is especially a consideration in some 
legume-rhizobia interactions were bacteroids are terminally differentiated and 
therefore fixing nitrogen occurs a huge fitness cost to the rhizobial population 
as a whole (Denison and Kiers, 2004). Therefore, it is important for legumes 
not just to be able distinguish between commensals, symbionts and pathogens 
but also to differentiate between individual symbionts on the basis of their 
compatibility with the plant (Clua et al., 2018). 
 The first opportunity to discriminate between symbiotic partners is 
during the initial signalling events between the plant and rhizobia. Across the 
legume family there is enormous diversity in flavonoids although not all are 
involved in nodulation (Cooper, 2007). Flavonoids serve as the primary 
determinant of rhizobial host range based on their ability to activate NodD 
expression in the bacteria (Liu and Murray, 2016; Wang et al., 2012). This has 
been demonstrated elegantly using a NodD null mutant of S. meliloti 
transformed with NodD plasmids from other rhizobia species. Different 
combinations of flavonoids were required to induce Nod gene expression 
depending on the source of NodD complementation (Peck et al., 2006). 
 The ability of the host plant to recognize Nod factors during the initial 
cross-talk between the two parties is also a determinant of host range as 
subsequent events require expression of nodulation-related genes in the plant. 
Although Nod factors share the same basic structures, they can be extensively 
modified by the bacteria which has given rise to diversity of Nod factors across 
rhizobial species (Long, 1996). Removing the nod genes of Rhizobium 
leguminosarum abolished its ability to form nodules with its natural host 
Trifolium refens. Subsequent transfer of a plasmid bearing the nod genes from 
S. meliloti permitted symbiosis with Medicago alfafa, a natural host of the 
donor rhizobia (Debelle et al., 1988). This applies equally to the host plant; 
transformation of M. truncatula with Nod factor receptors from L. japonicus 
facilitates symbiosis with rhizobia which are normally not compatible including 
Mesorhizobium loti (Radutoiu et al., 2007). 
Plant defence responses, or rather the ability to overcome these, is also 
thought to play a role in rhizobial compatibility. Surface and 
exopolysaccharides of rhizobia are often required for suppression of plant 
defence responses. Mutant strains of S. meliloti that do not produce the 
exopolysaccharide succinoglycan are not able to initiate infection threads 
during symbiosis with M. alfafa (Cheng and Walker, 1998). Some rhizobia are 
known to use type III or IV secretion systems to deliver effector proteins into 
target cells and aid infection. It has been theorized that some legumes may 
have evolved resistance (R) proteins that detect these effectors and activate 
defences, thus serving as another mechanism of control of host range (Deakin 
and Broughton, 2009). This is exemplified by the Rj2 and Rfg1 genes in 
Glycine max which encode R proteins that block nodulation with certain strains 
of Bradyrhizobium japonicum and Sinorhizobium fredii respectively (Yang et 
al., 2010). 
Although host/symbiont selection typically occurs prior to infection, 
mechanisms exist to select for preferential rhizobia post-infection. For 
instance, some legumes species including G. max, M. alfalfa and P. sativum 
are able to punish rhizobia in nodules that fail to fix nitrogen by cutting off the 
supply of photosynthates to that nodule or altering the oxygen permeability of 
the nodule (Kiers et al., 2003; Oono et al., 2011). 
Nodule cysteine-rich (NCR) peptides are also thought to be important 
determinants of host range in some indeterminant nodule forming legumes. 
The M. truncatula genome encodes more than 700 NCR peptides which are 
short sequences of amino acids related to antimicrobial defensins (Pan and 
Wang, 2017). S. meliloti strain Rm41 is able to form nitrogen fixing nodules in 
the M. truncatula ecotype DZA315 but not A17. This has been shown to be at 
least partially due to each ecotype possessing different versions of one NCR, 
NFS2, which has antimicrobial activity in only the latter case (Wang et al., 
2017). Interestingly, mutants deficient in another NCR family member, 
NCR169, fail to fix nitrogen in nodules infected with either S. meliloti 1021 or 
S. medicae 419 (Horvath et al., 2015). This suggests that despite the very 
large number of family members, a single peptide can still be functionally non-
redundant and that they have functions beyond simply supressing the 
populations of less favoured rhizobial species. S. meliloti B800 forms nitrogen 
fixing nodules in M. truncatula ecotype A17 but deficient ones in ecotype A20. 
This S. meliloti strain possesses the peptidase hrrP that is able to cleave some 
NCR peptides. It is possible that the phenotype in the former case is due to 
A17 possessing NCRs not targeted by this peptidase allowing it to keep 
bacteroids differentiated at the expense of their proliferation (Price et al., 
2015). 
Plant possess multiple layers of defences to protect them from 
pathogens: 
Plants can be attacked by pathogens that try to obtain nutrients from living 
(biotrophic pathogens) or dead (necrotrophic pathogens) cells. Plants rely 
entirely on innate immunity to protect themselves from these threats. This 
immune system is complex and consists of multiple layers that act to minimize 
harm to the plant at different stages of pathogenesis (Figure 1.4). Defence 
responses arising from immunity from the plant can be either local to sites of 
invasion and wounding or systemic. (Boller and Felix, 2009). The components 
and regulation of these pathways is best understood in A. thaliana so most of 
the information in this section is based on this model. However, it is thought to 
be highly conserved across higher plants (Staal and Dixelius, 2007). 
Figure 1.4: Mechanisms of plant defence. Receptors at the cell surface 
have evolved to recognize features of microbes (MAMPs) such as flagellin and 
chitin and activate pathways leading to defence responses upon their 
perception. Pathogens have been found to secrete effectors into plant cells to 
enhance virulence of interfere with the immune response. These effectors, or 
symptoms of their activity, may be recognized by cytoplasmic receptors which 
also can activate defence responses. Another class of receptors exist that 
recognize endogenous signals associated with wounding of the plant (DAMPs) 
which are also able to trigger immunity. Adapted from Boller and Felix, 2009. 
MAMP-triggered immunity recognizes chemical signatures of 
microorganisms that may be associated with pathogens: The first element 
of plant immunity is MAMP-triggered immunity (MTI). MTI consists of a range 
of pattern recognition receptors (PRRs) that identify conserved features of 
bacteria and other microbes, pathogenic or otherwise. Recognition of ligands 
by these PRRs induces an intracellular signalling cascade that results in 
protective immunity in most circumstances. 
 Bacterial flagellin has long been known to induce defence responses in 
A. thaliana and this is mediated by the PRR FLS2 (Flagellin-sensitive 2) in A. 
thaliana (Gomez-Gomez and Boller, 2000). A specific 22 amino acid epitope 
(flg22) contained within flagellin acts as a portent MAMP and is responsible 
for binding FLS2 (Chinchilla et al., 2006) and that FLS2 has to form 
heterodimers with BAK1 to elicit downstream signalling (Chinchilla et al., 
2007). Chitin from fungal cell walls is also a MAMP and this is detected by the 
CERK1-LYK5 PRR complex (Cao et al., 2014; Miya et al., 2007; Petutschnig 
et al., 2010). The highly conserved bacterial elongation factor EF-Tu also has 
MAMP activity and its recognition is conserved in Brassicaceae. It is perceived 
by the receptor EFR in A. thaliana (Zipfel et al., 2006). 
DAMP-triggered immunity of plants responds to endogenous signals 
indicative of pathogen activity: In the event that MTI is not successful in 
restricting attack by a pathogen, another layer of immunity revolves around 
the detection of host-derived molecules called damage-associate molecular 
patterns (DAMPs). These elicitors are released during cell damage or death 
and therefore serve as an additional mechanism for activating defence 
responses (Yamaguchi and Huffaker, 2011). 
 The plant elicitor peptides (PEPs) are a family of DAMPs consisting of 
7 peptides in A. thaliana and is thought to be conserved in many plant species 
(Huffaker et al., 2006). A. thaliana possesses two receptors for PEPs called 
PEPR1 and PEPR2 and both mutant studies and binding assays show partial 
redundancy between them. AtPEP treatment activates defence responses and 
enhances disease resistance to pathogens. (Krol et al., 2010; Yamaguchi et 
al., 2010; Yamaguchi et al., 2006). 
 DAMP perception seems to activate immunity by the same pathways 
as MAMP perception. This suggests that DAMPs have evolved to increase the 
diversity of mechanisms by which plants can detect danger and to amplify 
existing immune responses, increasing the likelihood of a protective immune 
response (Yamaguchi and Huffaker, 2011). This theory is supported by 
induction of MTI leading to enhanced transcription of both PEP pre-cursors 
and PEP receptors (Ross et al., 2014; Yamaguchi et al., 2010). 
Effector-triggered immunity counteracts attempts by pathogens to 
subvert the host immune system: Plant-pathogen interactions represent 
what is often termed an evolutionary arms race between the host and microbe. 
Some pathogens use proteins called effectors to circumvent host immunity 
and enhance virulence. Plants have in turn developed receptors termed 
resistance (R) proteins that can detect either the presence or activity of these 
pathogen effectors.  This system is called effector-triggered immunity (ETI) 
and represents another key layer of plant innate immunity (Cui et al., 2015). 
 Pathogen effectors are diverse and so R proteins must be exquisitely 
specific, often recognizing the effector of a single species or even strain of 
pathogen. These R proteins belong to a family of receptors conserved 
throughout the plant kingdom called nucleotide-binding domain and leucine-
rich repeats (NLR/LRR) proteins (Jacob et al., 2013). There are two modes of 
action by which NLRs may recognize effectors. Direct recognition occurs when 
the cognate ligand of an R protein is a bacterial effector and indirect 
recognition describes the perception of modification to endogenous proteins 
as a result of pathogen effector activity rather than the effector itself (Rafiqi et 
al., 2009). In either case, the receptors are thought to function as dimers 
although it is unclear if this is their native form or if this is induced by ligand 
recognition. Active receptors then instigate transcriptional reprogramming, 
leading to a defence response (Cui et al., 2015). The complex co-evolution of 
host and pathogen is reflected in ETI; just as a plant might evolve an R protein 
recognizing an effector, the pathogen may then evolve an effector to supress 
the activity of that protein and this new effector could also become a target for 
the plant. In some cases, R proteins actually enhance the virulence of 
pathogens, especially in the case of necrotrophic pathogens which depend on 
host cell death to source nutrients (Lorang et al., 2007). 
 An example of direct recognition is provided by the oomycete 
Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis effector ATR1 and its corresponding NLR 
RPP1. The LRR domain of RPP1 binds to the effector and activates an 
immune response (Krasileva et al., 2010). The RIN4/RSP2/RPM1 model of 
indirect effector recognition provides an example of the potential complexity of 
ETI. The product of the RIN4 gene is involved in signalling the closure of 
stomatal openings, a barrier to leaf pathogen entry (Liu et al., 2009a; Liu et al., 
2009b). The effector proteins AvrB and AvrRpm1 of the pathogen 
Pseudomonas syringae DC3000 phosphorylate and inactivate RIN4 (Kim et 
al., 2005b; Mackey et al., 2002). RPM1 confers resistance to these two 
effectors, likely through detecting these modifications and activating immune 
responses (Mackey et al., 2002). Another Pseudomonas syringae effector, 
AvrRpt2, is able to cleave and inactivate RIN4 (Kim et al., 2005a; Mackey et 
al., 2003). Expression of the RPS2 gene by the host plant confers resistance 
to AvrRpt2 and is able to associate with RIN4. RSP2 signalling is only induced 
in the absence of RIN4 suggesting that it responds to the elimination of this 
protein rather than the effector itself (Axtell and Staskawicz, 2003). 
Signal transduction from the perception of danger to the expression of 
defence-related genes: Plant immunity integrates a wide range of cues at the 
recognition stages but the responses downstream of these receptors are less 
specific. There are two main defence pathways in plants based around 
phytohormone signalling; the salicylic acid pathway (SA) is associated with 
defence against biotrophic pathogens and the jasmonic acid (JA)/ethylene 
pathway is usually active against necrotrophic pathogens. Both pathways are 
usually considered to be mutually antagonistic (Bari and Jones, 2009). 
The activity of mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPK) is crucial in 
transducing signals between active receptors and downstream TFs. MAPKs 
act at the bottom of cascades, usually depending on activating 
phosphorylation from a MAPK kinase (MAP2K) which may in turn require 
activation by an upstream kinase (MAP3K) (Pitzschke et al., 2009). The A. 
thaliana genome encodes 60 MAP3Ks, 10 MAP2Ks and 20 MAPKs 
(Rasmussen et al., 2012). 
The best characterized MAPKs are MAPK3, MAPK4 and MAPK6. 
MAPK3/MAPK6 are thought to function together at the end of one cascade 
(Ren et al., 2008) and MAPK4 in another (Gao et al., 2008). All of these are 
strongly linked to co-ordination of immunity in both PTI and ETI responses. 
For instance, all three are induced by flagellin (Bethke et al., 2009; Droillard et 
al., 2004) whilst MAPK3 is induced by purified effectors from the oomcyetes 
Phytophthora parasitica, Pythium aphanidermatum and Phytophthora sojae 
(Qutob et al., 2006), MAPK6 by the fungal pathogen Alternaria brassicae 
(Kannan et al., 2012) and MAPK4 and MAPK6 are induced by harpin (an 
immunogenic compound) secreted by Psuedomonas syringae (Desikan et al., 
2001). 
Activated MAPKs are then responsible for regulating TFs to co-ordinate 
the immune response. The best studied of these belong to the WRKY family 
of TFs. Following initial activation, some WRKY TFs are able to up-regulate 
their own expression and that of other family members by cross-regulation 
(Eulgem and Somssich, 2007) Both MAPK4 and MAPK3/MAPK6 cascades 
are known to activate WRKY33 (Andreasson et al., 2005; Mao et al., 2011). 
Interestingly, in the former case, the mechanism of WRKY33 activation is not 
phosphorylation, but release from complex with MAPK4/MKS1 when the 
MAPK is phosphorylated (Qiu et al., 2008).  wrky33 mutants do not form 
protective immune response to the necrotrophic fungal pathogen Botrytis 
cinereal and WRKY33 overexpression results in increased resistance. 
Conversely, the response to Pseudomonas syringae is unaffected with over-
expressing lines actually showing enhanced susceptibility (Zheng et al., 2006). 
This highlights the antagonism between the necrotrophic and biotrophic 
pathogen defence pathways. 
Defence responses leading to protective immunity: Upon activation of TFs 
in the innate immune pathway, cells will begin transcriptional reprogramming 
towards immunity and this cumulates in defence mechanisms that lead to 
blockage of entry or denial of resources to pathogens. 
 One of the most immediate outcomes of defence activation is the 
production of reactive oxygen species (ROS). This results in an oxidative burst 
that prevents colonization by many pathogens. Although the high levels of 
ROS are themselves likely to be harmful to pathogens it is thought that 
localized cell death and cross-linking of host proteins attributable to oxidative 
burst is the primary mechanism of resistance (Bolwell, 1999). 
 Many plants are capable of the production of antimicrobial secondary 
metabolites called phytoalexins. In A. thaliana the most important phytoalexin 
is camalexin (Bednarek et al., 2011). Camalexin is toxic to some bacteria and 
fungi, likely by disrupting cell wall integrity (Glawischnig, 2007). Although such 
proteins have not yet been identified in A. thaliana, some crop species have 
been reported to secrete antimicrobial enzymes such as chitinase and -1,3-
glucanase which degrade fungal cell walls (Mauch et al., 1988). 
 Cell wall reinforcement is another defence mechanism effective against 
some pathogens. Deposition of the polysaccharide callose is one of the 
hallmarks of plant defence responses. Cell walls can be impregnated with 
callose, lignin and extensin proteins to protect healthy cells from invasion and 
to seal off infected cells  (Hematy et al., 2009). 
Fluorescence activated cell sorting facilitates the study of complex 
developmental processes in plants: 
A key aspect of multicellularity is that it enables differentiation of cells into 
specialized types within organisms. These different cell types may then take 
on distinct functions allowing far greater complexity as the concerted action of 
many different cell types can give rise to tissues and organs which can in turn 
de-differentiate in specific locations to form new organs such as lateral roots 
and nodules. This specialization is underpinned by differential expression and 
activity of genes. 
As discussed previously, responses to both abiotic and biotic 
(symbionts and pathogens) stimuli involve a high degree of cell type 
specificity. Therefore, methods which allow unique cell types to be separately 
analyzed offer great insight into processes involving co-ordinated actions 
across multiple cell types. 
Methods for isolating single cell types in plants: One approach to enable 
specific tissues to be studied is laser capture microdissection. A thin polymer 
film is attached to a tissue of interest and a microscope operator is able to use 
a laser to fuse the film to cells of the underlying tissue. By precise laser 
operation, it is possible to fuse specific clusters of cells to the film. When the 
film is removed, only fused cells will remain attached and these can then be 
analysed (Emmert-Buck et al., 1996). 
Isolation of nuclei tagged in specific cell types (INTACT) is a method 
that specifically purifies the nuclei of individual cell types. This protocol utilizes 
plants transformed with a construct consisting of the first 111 amino acids of 
the A. thaliana RanGAP1 protein (which is sufficient for targeting to the nuclear 
envelope), a fluorophore and a peptide which is recognized by the Escherichia 
coli biotin ligase BirA. If the biotin ligase is also be expressed in parallel to the 
construct then biotin is produced, allowing recovery of transformed nuclei with 
streptavidin-coated magnetic beads. Analysis of nuclear RNA or DNA is then 
possible (Deal and Henikoff, 2011). 
Whilst INTACT captures nuclear mRNAs, RNAs associated with 
cytoplasmic ribosomes can be profiled using translating ribosome affinity 
purification (TRAP). In this method, the ribosomes of a specific cell type are 
tagged with GFP. Cells can then be dissociated and lysed and GFP-tagged 
ribosomes can be purified by the use of anti-GFP antibodies attached to 
beads. mRNAs associated with ribosomes bound to the bead can then be 
recovered and sequenced (Heiman et al., 2014).  
Recent advances in the resolution of RNAseq has facilitated 
transcriptomic profiling of single cells. The advent of Drop-seq allows this to 
be performed for thousands of cells in parallel. Primers containing a unique 
barcode are delivered on microparticles to cells suspended in droplets which 
are then lysed. Cellular mRNAs bind to the microparticle creating a complex 
called a STAMP. STAMPS are then subject to reverse transcription, 
amplification and RNA sequencing. Barcode analysis then resolves the cell 
from which each profile originated (Macosko et al., 2015). 
An alternative method to isolate single cells is fluorescence activated 
cell sorting (FACS). FACS is a technique that is used to segregate populations 
of cells based on their fluorescence characteristics. Cells in liquid suspension 
are injected into a stream of pressurized saline sheath fluid which is then 
vibrated and broken into droplets. Either prior to, or just after, droplets breaking 
off from the stream, suspended cells are interrogated by lasers and those 
which fluoresce within a user-determined set of parameters are deflected out 
of the stream by electrically charged plates and into a collection tube and are 
thus sorted. 
Methodology of FACS: FACS facilitates the study of plant processes at the 
cell type-specific level and thus provides insights into plant biology that can be 
obscured at the whole organism or organ level, especially in the cases where 
genes show mixed patterns of induction and repression between cell types. 
FACS is particularly well suited to studying developmental processes within 
each layer of the plant root. Transgenic lines can be generated expressing a 
fluorophore, such as GFP, in a single cell type (Carter et al., 2013). A liquid 
suspension of plant cells can be achieved by a process called protoplast 
generation in which root or leaf material is treated with cellulose- and pectin-
degrading enzymes that digest cell walls such that cells become protoplasts 
and no longer adhere to one another. The cell suspension can then be subject 
to FACS (Figure 1.5) and the purified cell type of interest can be subject to a 
range of downstream analysis (Birnbaum et al., 2005). Although FACS has 
predominantly been used to study the transcriptome of single cell types, 
studies characterising the metabolome (Moussaieff et al., 2013), proteome 
(Petricka et al., 2012) and chromatin structure (Frerichs et al., 2019) of a 
developing A. thaliana root demonstrate the feasibility of other applications. 
Figure 1.5: Fluorescence activated cell sorting of plant protoplasts. A cell 
sorter consists of a fluidics system that facilitates the flow of a saline sheath 
fluid through the machine. Pressurized sheath fluid travels through the 
machine to the nozzle. Separately, a sample containing particles or cells of 
interest (protoplasts in this case) is drawn up through the sample line to the 
nozzle. The sample is drawn at a slightly higher pressure, resulting in the 
sample being injected directly into the centre of the stream through a process 
termed hydrodynamic focusing. As the stream exits the nozzle it is vibrated at 
high frequency, leading to formation of droplets from the stream. Droplets pass 
through a laser aligned to a detector behind the stream allowing the 
characteristics of particles/cells in each droplet to be determined (such as 
forward scatter, side scatter and fluorescence). If the fluorescence of an object 
fits a user-determined set of parameters of fluorescence intensity, termed 
gating, an electrical charge is applied to that droplet. Due to saline nature of 
the sheath fluid forming the outside of protoplast-containing droplets, this is 
sufficient to deflect the droplet when it passes the charged electrical plates. 
This deflection diverts the droplet into a collection tube. Upon conclusion of 
the sort, this receptacle will contain gated cells or particles of interest which 
can then be used for subsequent analysis. 
FACS as a tool for studying plant roots: For the reasons explained above, 
FACS is an excellent tool for investigating root development. The first such 
published study in plants used A. thaliana transgenic lines with GFP 
expression localized to epidermis, cortex and endodermis, endodermis, stele 
and lateral root caps to isolate and transcriptomically profile the 
aforementioned cell types amongst different zones along the length of the root 
and thus at different developmental stages (Birnbaum et al., 2003). In addition 
to providing insight into key genes and hormone networks involved in root 
development, this also proved the viability of FACS as a tool to study root 
development at tissue specific level. It also identified that only a subset of 
genes (~250) consistently exhibit changes in expression in response to 
protoplast generation; these must be accounted for during such studies. This 
study has since been followed up with additional cell types and developmental 
zones to provide a higher resolution data set for the entirety of the plant root 
(Brady et al., 2007). 
Since then, there are numerous examples of studies using FACS to 
better understand root biology. Some of these have focused on transcriptome 
responses to environmental changes in specific cell types and how this 
influences root development. The response of many root cell types to high 
salinity stress have been characterized (Dinneny et al., 2008; Geng et al., 
2013) in addition to acidity and sulfur deficiency (Iyer-Pascuzzi et al., 2011) 
and the transition from a deplete to replete nitrate environment (Alvarez et al., 
2014; Gifford et al., 2008). Finally, the response of cortex and pericycle cell 
types to the immunogenic peptide flg22 and DAMP PEP1 has also been 
investigated (Rich et al., 2019). These studies found that although there is a 
degree of conservation of environmental responses between distinct cell 
types, the predominant component of these responses is cell type-specific. 
Because of the applicability of FACS as a tool to study root 
development, studies have also focused on plant hormones, including the key 
regulator of development, auxin. Localized concentrations of auxin has been 
measured throughout the root (Petersson et al., 2009) and changes in gene 
expression in response to auxin subsequently identified (Bargmann et al., 
2013b). Cells of the quiescent centre, where auxin levels were found to be 
highest and from where other root cell types arise, have also been isolated 
and transcriptomically profiled using FACS (Nawy et al., 2005). Finally, the 
role of ACR4 (Arabidopsis CRINKLY4) in sorted pericycle cells has been 
probed, implicating this gene in regulating founder cell division during LR 
development (De Smet et al., 2008).  
A novel application of FACS is transient assay reporting genome-wide 
effects of transcription factors (TARGET). In this approach, protoplasts are 
transfected with a plasmid carrying RFP as a fluorescent marker and a fusion 
protein of the TF interest with a glucocorticoid receptor (GR). By applying DEX, 
the TF can be moved to the nucleus on command therefore allowing the TF to 
interact with its targets. FACS can be used to isolate RFP+ (and therefore 
transfected with TF-GR fusion) which are then transcriptomically profiled to 
identify genes induced by the TF. By comparing protoplasts treated with or 
without the translation inhibitor CHX, direct and indirect targets of the TF can 
be discriminated against (Bargmann et al., 2013a). This approach has been 
used to identify targets of the transcription factor HRS1 (Hypersensitivity to 
low P
-elicited primary root shortening 1) in root protoplasts which is known to 
be important in regulating the response to nitrate (Medici et al., 2015). 
Aims and rationale for work in the thesis: 
Because LRs originate in the pericycle, it is likely that there are vast 
transcriptional differences between the pericycle and cell types following the 
application of a treatment that induces LR formation. To test this hypothesis, 
cells of the pericycle, as the site of LR emergence, and cells of the overlaying 
cortex were analyzed over time (Chapter 3: Regulation of gene expression by 
nitrogen and rhizobia underpinning lateral root emergence in Arabidopsis 
thaliana). In addition to monitoring untreated cells, the response to nitrate 
provision which is strongly linked to developmental changes in roots and the 
root architecture-modifying legume symbiont Sinorhizobium meliloti was also 
explored. The resulting dataset was both cell type-specific and longitudinal 
allowing these responses to be analyzed in an unprecedented level of detail. 
 The formation of root nodules of legumes represents another example 
of an adaptation of a plant root system to the environment. In this case, the 
plant must integrate both abiotic (nitrogen starvation) and biotic stimuli 
(rhizobia) to enable the outcome of nodule formation. The plant must also 
allow the rhizobia to enter, and colonize, the root without permitting this to be 
used as a route for pathogens to attack the plant. Suppression of defence 
responses is essential for nodulation to be maximized and it is likely that 
changes in gene expression are responsible for this transition from a state of 
defence to symbiosis by selectively dampening immune responses to in 
response to rhizobia. To identify these genes, the response to the model 
legume Medicago truncatula to the nitrogen fixing symbiont Sinorhizobium 
medicae and the pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum were analyzed in parallel 
to identify genes which are involved in the discrimination of symbionts and 
pathogens (Chapter 4: Molecular changes underpinning friend vs. foe 
recognition in legume roots) by comparing symbiotic and defence responses.  
Chapter 2: Methods 
Plant material and growth conditions: 
Arabidopsis thaliana: A. thaliana GFP-expressing lines in the Col-0 
background to mark the cortex (ProCo2:YFPH2B line (Heidstra et al., 2004)) 
or pericycle (E3754 enhancer trap GFP line (Gifford et al., 2008)) were used. 
Approximately 400 seeds per plate were surface-sterilized in 100% ethanol for 
5 minutes, 7 % sodium hypochlorite solution for 5 minutes and washed 5 times 
in sterile water. Sterilized seeds were then sown on 0.7 cm strips of autoclave-
sterilized brown growth pouch paper (CYGTM Germination Pouch, West St. 
Paul, MN, USA) on 0.8% agar plates containing a basal 1x Murashige and 
Skoog (MS) growth medium (Sigma-Aldrich M0529), supplemented with 
sucrose (30 mM), CaCl
 (1.5 mM), MgSO
 (0.75 mM), KH
 (0.625 mM) 
and 0.3 mM NH
; adjusted to pH 5.7 with KOH. Plates were sealed with 
microporous tape, seeds stratified for 2 days at 4C in the dark, then plates 
placed in opaque (black polythene) covers (Bagman of Cantley, Lingwood, 
Norfolk, UK) and grown in a Sanyo growth chamber (MLR-351H, Sanyo, E&E 
Europe BV, Loughborough, UK) with a 16/8 h photoperiod at 50 mmol m
at a constant 22 C. 
Medicago truncatula: Seeds of M. truncatula ecotype A17 were scarified in 
95% sulfuric acid for 25-30 mins until dark spots appeared on all seeds. 
Sulfuric acid was removed and replaced with 10 ml of water followed by 2 more 
subsequent wash steps. Seeds were then surface sterilized in 7 % sodium 
hypochlorite solution for 5 minutes and washed 8 times in sterile water. Seeds 
were then sown onto plates containing 1.5% water agar. 1 drop of sterile water 
was added to each seed and left until completely soaked up. This step was 
repeated a further 2 times. Two growth pouches (CYG
 Germination Pouch, 
Mega International, Newport, MN, USA) were added to the lid of the plate and 
soaked with sterile water before the plates were sealed with microporous tape. 
Plates were kept at 4 C for seed stratification for 2 days and then transferred 
to a growth chamber at 24 C for 2 days in the dark. 
 Seedlings with a radial length of >2 cm were transferred to pots 
containing perlite with a ~ 1 cm layer of vermiculite on top. Pots were watered 
with nutrient solution (1 mM CaCl
, 1 mM KH
, 75 M FeNaEDTA, 1mM 
, 0.25 mM K
, 6 M MnSO
, 20 M H
, 1 M ZnSO
, 0.5 M 
, 50 nM CoSO
, 0.1 M Na
, adjusted to pH 6.5-6.8 with KOH) 
with (replete nitrate mock, ralstonia-treated or flg22-treated) or without 
(deplete nitrate mock or rhizobia-treated) 15 mM ammonium nitrate. Pots were 
also incubated at 24 C with a 16/8 hour photoperiod at 50 mmol m
. After 
1 day in pots, seedlings were mock-treated, treated with Ralstonia 
solanacearum, treated with Sinorhizobium meliloti or treated with flg22 (see 
treatment regimes below) at dawn. Whole root systems were sampled 
immediately prior to treatment and 30 minutes, 1 hour, 3 hours, 6 hours, 12 
hours, 1 day, 2 days, 4 days, 6 days, 9 days and 12 days after treatment and 
immediately flash frozen and stored at -80 C. 
Plant treatments: 
A. thaliana treatment with nitrogen or S. meliloti: After 9 days in the growth 
chamber, treatments were carried out at dawn (= time 0). To prepare the 
Sinorhizobium meliloti solution, 50 mL of TY/Ca2+ medium (5 g/L Bacto-
tryptone, 3 g/L Yeast extract, 6 mM CaCl
) (Journet et al., 2001) was 
inoculated with a single colony of S. meliloti and incubated for 26 h at 28 C 
and 220 rpm to an OD
 of 12. Cells were harvested by centrifugation (4000 
rpm, 10 min, 4C) and re-suspended in water to a final OD
 of 0.01. To carry 
out the treatments, seedling strips were removed from plates, then briefly 
immersed (10 seconds) in liquid deplete N medium (as plates but with no agar) 
and placed on a fresh plate (Untreated (U), or briefly immersed in liquid replete 
N medium (as plates but with no agar and with 5 mM NH
) and placed on 
a fresh 5 mM NH
 plate (N treatment), or briefly immersed (10 seconds) 
in a solution of S. meliloti and placed on a fresh deplete NH
 plate. Plates 
were then re-sealed with microporous tape, replaced in opaque (black 
polythene) covers, and returned to the Sanyo growth chamber. At hourly time 
points 0 (immediately before transfer, at dawn), 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 
20, 24, 36 and 48 h after transfer, whole roots were harvested for protoplast 
generation and FACS by cutting roots just below the growth pouch paper strip. 
The whole experiment was carried out in at least biological triplicate with 
seedlings for each biological replicate grown independently (in a non-
overlapping time period). Each replicate sample (for each time point in each 
time series) consisted of the pooled harvested roots from ~200 GFP-
expressing seedlings (destructive sampling) grown on the same plate. Each 
replicate sample was considered independently within subsequent analysis. 
M. truncatula treatment with flg22, R. solanacearum or S. medicae: S. 
medicae strain WSM419 (kindly provided by Jason Terpolilli, Murdoch 
University) was grown on Ty/Ca
 plates (20 mM HEPES, 0.5% tryptone, 0.3% 
yeast extract, 6 mM CaCl
 and 1.5% bactoagar adjusted to pH 6.8-7.0 with 
KOH and supplemented with 50 g/ml chloramphenicol) for 2 days at 28 C. 
Liquid cultures were obtained by inoculating a single colony into 10 ml liquid 
Ty/Ca
 medium (as above including chloramphenicol, minus agar) for 2 days 
in a shaking incubator at 28 C and 220 rpm. Cultures were then centrifuged 
for 10 mins at 2880 rcf and 4 C before the pellet was re-suspended in sterile 
water and diluted to a final OD
 of 0.05. 
R. solanacearum strain GMI1000 was grown on BGT media (1% 
bactopeptone, 0.5% glucose, 0.1% yeast extract, 0.1% casamino acids, 
0.0005% tetrazolium chloride, 1.5% agar and adjusted to pH 7.2) for 2 days at 
28 C (Boucher et al., 1985). Liquid cultures were obtained by inoculating a 
single red colony (red colour indicating virulence (Boucher et al., 1985)) into 
liquid BGT media (as above, minus agar) for 2 days in a shaking incubator at 
28 C for 2 days. Cultures were then centrifuged for 10 mins at 2880 rcf and 4 
C before the pellet was re-suspended in sterile water and diluted to a final 
 of 0.8. 
For flg22 assays, plants were treated with a 100 nM flg22 solution. For 
all treatments, plants were treated by dispensing a volume of 250 l 
flg22/inoculant on the perlite in extremely close proximity to the root or directly 
onto the root during flg22 treatment. 
Cell sorting: 
Protoplast generation and Fluorescence Activated Cell Sorting (FACS): 
Harvested roots were bundled and cut into lengths of approximately 23 mm 
into a 70 m cell strainer in a small petri dish containing protoplast-generating 
solution (600 mM mannitol, 2 mM MES hydrate, 10 mM KCl, 2 mM CaCl
mM MgCl
 and 0.1% BSA, pH adjusted to 5.7 with Tris HCl) with 1.5% 
cellulase R-10 (Phytotechlab), 1.2% cellulase RS (Sigma), 0.2% macerozyme 
R-10 (Phytotechlab), 0.12% pectinase (Phytotechlab)). The petri dishes were 
placed on an orbital shaker at 200 rpm for 1 hour then cells harvested by 
centrifugation (5 mins at 1200 rpm at room temperature), resuspended in 500 
L protoplast-generating solution lacking enzymes, then filtered through a 40 
m cell strainer to break up large clumps of protoplasts. 
Protoplasts were sorted using a BD Influx cell sorter (BD Biosciences) 
fitted with a 100 m nozzle, using FACS-Flow (BD Biosciences) as sheath 
fluid. Pressure was maintained at 20 psi (sheath) and 2121.5 psi (sample), 
drop frequency was set to 39.5 kHZ, which yielded an event rate of <4000; 
these are optimal settings on a BD influx cell sorter for this type of protoplasts 
(Gifford et al., 2008). To optimize alignment of lasers and detectors, Calibrite 
Beads (BD Biosciences) suspended in FACS-Flow were used, and to optimize 
sort settings, BD Accudrop Fluorescent Beads (BD Biosciences) suspended 
in FACS-Flow were used. GFP positive protoplasts were identified using a 488 
nm argon laser by plotting the output from the 580 nm/30 nm, bandpass filter 
(orange) vs. the 530 nm/40 nm bandpass filter (green). GFP/YFP positive 
protoplasts were in the high 530 nm/low 580 nm population, with non-GFP 
protoplasts in the low 530 nm/low 580 nm population and dead/dying 
protoplasts and debris in the high 580 nm population (Gronlund et al., 2012). 
At least 10,000 GFP positive protoplasts were sorted using methods shown 
previously to preserve endogenous gene expression levels (Birnbaum et al., 
2003; Gifford et al., 2008). Sorted protoplasts were directly sorted into Qiagen 
RLT lysis buffer containing 1% (v:v) - mercaptoethanol, mixed and 
immediately frozen at 80C for RNA extraction (methods according to (Gifford 
et al., 2008)). 
Molecular methods: 
RNA extraction: For A. thaliana samples, RNA was extracted from sorted 
cells using the Qiagen RNeasy RNA Kit, and DNase treatment carried out 
using the Qiagen DNase Kit. The quantity and quality of RNA was checked 
with a Bioanalyzer 2100 RNA 6000 Pico Total RNA Kit (Agilent Technologies). 
For M. truncatula samples, frozen root material was homogenized using a 
mortar and pestle before extraction of RNA using a Monarch RNA MiniPrep 
Kit (New England Biolabs) according to the manufacturers protocol, including 
an on-column DNase treatment. Absence of contaminating genomic DNA was 
confirmed by PCR using primers directed against the gene Medtr3g091400. 
RNA was stored at -80 C. 
cDNA synthesis: For A. thaliana samples, cDNA was amplified from RNA 
using   reactions of the Ovation Pico WTA System V2 Kit (NuGEN 
Technologies Inc., San Carlos, CA, USA) according to the quick protocol. 
Post-amplification purification of cDNA was performed using the QIAquick 
PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen). For M. truncatula samples, reverse transcription 
was performed using ProtoScript II cDNA synthesis kit (New England Biolabs) 
according to the manufacturers instructions using 300 ng of total RNA. cDNA 
was stored at -20 C. 
qPCR: Primers for qPCR were designed with the following parameters: primer 
melting temperature between 59 and 61C (60C optimum), product size 50-
250 BP and a GC content of between 45-55% (50% optimum). qPCR was 
performed in 96 well plates using SYBR Green JumpStart Taq ReadyMix 
(Sigma-Aldrich). Each sample for analysis was loaded into 3 separate wells 
with 9 l final reaction volume per well. Thermocycler conditions are displayed 
in Table 2.1. Expression of genes of interest was normalized against the 
reference genes Medtr3g091400, Medtr7g116940 and Medtr7g089120 (Kakar 
et al., 2008) and differential expression of treated samples relative to mock 
samples was calculated using the C
 method, a derivation of the C
 (Livak 
and Schmittgen, 2001). Significant differences between treated and mock 
samples were calculated using the Students t-test. 
Temperature/Time (mins) 
95 C 
10:00 
95 C 
60 C 
95 C 
60 C 
95 C 
Table 2.1: Thermocycler conditions for qPCR. 
Microarray analysis: 0.5 g NuGEN-amplified cDNA was labeled using the 
NimbleGen One-Color Cy3 Labeling Kit, and 4 g of this was hybridized using 
the GeneChip Hybridization Kit on NimbleGen A. thaliana 12 x 135k probe 
microarrays designed for the full TAIR-10 annotation A. thaliana genome 
(design OID 37507; this can be found by searching GPL18735 in the Gene 
Expression Omnibus NCBI store (Roche Applied Science, Upper Bavaria, 
Germany)). OID has 131,524 probes designed against 27,143 genes in the A. 
thaliana genome; 3,675 genes had multiple probes along their length to 
determine expression of 31,524 gene transcripts (an average of 2.19 and up 
to 4 gene models each for these genes). Arrays were imaged using an MS200 
microarray scanner using only the 480 nm laser and the autogain feature of 
the NimbleScan software; all according to the manufacturers instructions. 
Grids were aligned automatically then manually verified. Raw probe (xys) and 
gene level unnormalized data were obtained using NimbleScan. Expression 
data from the arrays can be found by searching for GSE91379 in the Gene 
Expression Omnibus NCBI store. 
RNAseq processing: Extracted RNA from three replicates of samples from 
roots treated with R. solanacearum and S. medicae 3 and 12 hours after 
treatment were sent for sequencing using an Illumina NovoSeq 6000 
(Novogene UK). Replete nitrate mock and deplete nitrate mock T=0 samples 
were used respectively as references for R. solanacearum and S. meliloti 
samples. Selection of mRNAs was performed on the basis of poly(A)-
purification. Sequencing was paired end and unstranded with a read length of 
150 BP and a depth of sequencing of at least 20 million reads/sample. Raw 
data was obtained in the form of .fq.gz files for each pair of each sample. 
Bioinformatics and statistics: 
Normalization and quality assessment of microarray data: The xys 
(NimbleGen) files, which store array coordinates and observed intensities, 
were imported with the Bioconductor oligo package (Carvalho and Irizarry, 
2010) using the annotation package pd.120110.athal.mg.expr installed 
through the pdInfoBuilder package. The RMA algorithm, that performs 
background subtraction, quantile normalization and summarization via median 
polish, was applied to the raw data of expression arrays to obtain the log
normalized gene expression levels. All arrays for pericycle and cortex were 
normalized together, and arrays were assessed for quality implemented by the 
Bioconductor package arrayQualityMetrics (Kauffmann et al., 2009). An object 
of class ExpressionSet, which was generated by the oligo package, was 
inputted to the arrayQualityMetrics package then a utility report created. To 
generate a robust total dataset, outlier arrays were removed based on the 
between array distances (using the sum of distances Sa as the quality metric; 
with a cutoff of 337), boxplot (using Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic Ka as the 
quality metric; with a cutoff of 0.063) and MA-plot (using Hoeffding's statistic 
Da as the quality metric; with a cutoff of 0.15). 
Determination and clustering of differentially expressed genes: 
Differentially expressed (DE) genes within each time series were obtained 
using the software BATS (Angelini et al., 2008) and robustness of assignment 
confirmed using the independent method of gradient analysis (Breeze et al., 
2011). The BATS input file for each time series contains the rescaled log
expression values such that the vector of log
 expression values of each gene 
has mean zero and variance one. Genes were considered to be DE if their 
Bayes Factors in the BATS output file were less than a threshold (log
 Bayes 
Factor >3), which was determined by the histogram of log
 of Bayes Factors 
and the regression plots of gene expression levels from BATS. Differentially 
expressed genes between treatments in each cell type were obtained using 
Gaussian process modelling implemented in the software GP2S (Stegle et al., 
2010). In the GP2S input file, the log
 expression levels of each gene for the 
two time series were rescaled such that their mean was zero and their variance 
was one. GP2S assigned each gene a Bayes Factor that equals the difference 
between the likelihood of the expression level of a gene in two treatments 
being sampled from different Gaussian processes and that from the same 
Gaussian process. 
Immediate responding genes were defined as those with |x
| > 
) for gene transcription time series x
, i.e., the absolute value of the 
change in the first time point being larger than 
 times the time series 
standard deviation. Furthermore, fast and downstream responding genes 
were defined as genes that were not immediate responders, but had a 
dramatic change within 2 or 6 h of treatment (sd(x
) > 
x sd(x
), sd(x
 x sd(x
)). The remaining genes not in any of these three classes were 
designated late. Clusters were further defined as up-regulated or down-
regulated if their expression increased or decreased at this point of differential 
expression. The thresholds 
, and 
 were chosen, then clusters were 
visually inspected to confirm separation of the clusters into the appropriate 
classes. 
Hierarchical clustering of the differentially expressed genes was 
performed using SplineCluster (Heard et al., 2005). The mean expression 
levels of biological replicates of a DE gene at each time point in a time series 
was used as input. A reallocation function was implemented to reallocate 
outliers of each cluster into other more appropriate clusters at each 
agglomerative step. A prior precision value was determined after trying 
different values and comparing their effects on clusters. Standard error of the 
mean was plotted on all graphs of gene expression. 
Gene regulatory network inference and analysis: The Bioconductor 
package GRENITS (Wang et al., 2014) was used for gene regulatory network 
inference using the mean expression levels of biological replicates (as outlined 
above) for each DE gene at each time point from 0 to 16 hours. Genes that 
were DE within time series (as calculated using BATS) were used as input, 
then genes DE when comparing treatment and untreated control samples 
(GP2S) were identified within those networks. GRENITS gave the posterior 
probability of each directed link between two genes. A link probability threshold 
was chosen based on the confidence required for assigning links, then a link 
in the gene regulatory network was assigned if its posterior probability was 
greater than or equal to the link probability threshold. Predicted edges were 
compared with the interactions found by O'Malley et al. using ampDAP-Seq 
and DAP-Seq (O'Malley et al., 2016) where possible. 
RNAseq data processing: Initial quality control of raw reads was performed 
using FastQC. Raw reads were then subject to trimming and adaptor removal 
using Trimmomatic v0.33 (Bolger et al., 2014) with the following parameters; 
LEADING = 20, TRAILING = 20, SLIDINGWINDOW = 4:20, MINLENGTH = 
75 and using PHRED33 quality scores. FastQC was again used for quality 
control of the clean reads. 
 Alignment of trimmed reads was performed using STAR (Dobin et al., 
2013) using only paired reads. The index files for STAR were generated  with 
files of the M. truncatula genome (Tang et al., 2014) and the M. truncatula 
genome annotation 4.0v2  with the sjdbOverhang parameter set to 149 (read 
length -1). 
Raw counts data for 50,443 genes in the M. truncatula genome was 
obtained from the alignment files using LiBiNorm (Dyer et al., 2019) in htseq-
compatible mode again using the genome annotation Mt4.0v2 with 
intersection mode set to strict. Differential expression analysis was conducted 
using DESeq2 (Love et al., 2014). Genes were considered DE if they exhibited 
a log
 fold change not between 2 and -2 and a Bonferroni-corrected P-value 
<0.05. Lists of DE genes generated from DESeq2 were queried for 
overrepresented processes using AgriGOv2 (Tian et al., 2017). Locus ID V4.0 
(JCVI) was used as a background and GO terms were considered significantly 
overrepresented a Bonferroni-adjusted P-value <0.05 was returned. 
Chapter 3: Regulation of gene expression by nitrogen and rhizobia 
underpinning lateral root emergence in Arabidopsis thaliana 
Introduction: 
Control of nitrate metabolism in the model plant A. thaliana: 
Nitrogen is essential for plant growth due to its incorporation in amino acids 
and nucleotides. Most plant species rely entirely on deriving nitrogen required 
for growth from nitrate or ammonia from the soil and thus its availability is a 
common limiting factor for growth (reviewed by Crawford, 1995). Plants have 
adapted elaborate strategies to regulate their uptake and storage of nitrate 
and in the longer term can alter their root architecture to adapt to levels of 
nitrate availability (Krouk et al., 2010a). 
Figure 3.1: Regulation of select genes during nitrate responses in A. 
thaliana. Select transcription factors associated with the primary nitrate 
response of A. thaliana (shaded blue) and genes associated with the transport 
and metabolism of nitrate (shaded orange) are displayed as nodes. Edges 
denote reported regulatory interactions with arrowheads indicating positive 
regulation. Adapted from Vidal et al (Vidal et al., 2015). 
bZIP1 NLP7NLP6 SPL9
NRT2.2NRT2.1
NRT1.1
HHO1HRS1
Nitrate transporter systems in A. thaliana: Upon nitrate provision, its uptake 
into plant roots is mediated by nitrate transporters. There are two mechanisms 
of nitrate uptake mediated by different classes of nitrate transporters in plants; 
high affinity (HATS) and low affinity (LATS) transport systems with the former 
further divided along the lines of constitutively expressed or inducible 
transporters. In A. thaliana, there are four characterized families of nitrate 
transporters; NRT1/PTR, NRT2, CLC and SLAC1/SLAH. Although collectively 
these families encompass 73 genes, not all are functional in nitrate transport. 
Very little is known about the latter two families and they are not thought to be 
involved in uptake of nitrate in the root (Krapp et al., 2014). 
 The NRT1/PTR family consists of 53 proteins involved in the transport 
of various molecules (Krapp et al., 2014). Nitrate transporters belonging to this 
family are considered low affinity nitrate transporters with the exception of 
NRT1.1 which is capable of transitioning to high affinity nitrate transport upon 
phosphorylation of a cytoplasmic threonine residue (Liu and Tsay, 2003). 
NRT1.2 is also implicated in nitrate transport into the root (Huang et al., 1999). 
Although it has not been observed to be involved in nitrate uptake, knockout 
of NRT1.5 results in a reduction (although not elimination) of root-to-shoot 
nitrate transport, suggesting a role in this process. As this protein is expressed 
in the pericycle, it likely functions, possibly alongside NRT1.8, in loading nitrate 
into the xylem for transport to aerial tissues (Chen et al., 2012; Lin et al., 2008). 
NRT1.6 is expressed in seeds which show reduced nitrate accumulation in its 
absence. It is therefore likely that this protein is responsible for loading nitrate 
from the plant into developing seeds (Almagro et al., 2008). NRT1.7 is 
expressed in leaf tissues and seems to be involved in loading nitrate into the 
phloem of old leaves for reallocation to younger leaves (Fan et al., 2009). 
 The NRT2 family consists of seven genes and all have been designated 
as high affinity transporters specifically for nitrate (Orsel et al., 2002). All 
NRT2s except NRT2.7 have been demonstrated to interact with an additional 
protein, NAR2.1 and this interaction enhances their function as nitrate 
transporters in some cases (Kotur et al., 2012). NRT2.4 has a very high affinity 
for nitrate, suggesting it is responsible for nitrate uptake under conditions of 
enduring nitrate starvation (Kiba et al., 2012). However, when nitrate is 
available, NRT2.1 is responsible for the bulk of its transport into the root with 
a more minor role for NRT2.2 (Li et al., 2007). Like NRT1.1, NRT2.1 also 
seems to function as a nitrate sensor and represses LR emergence during 
nitrate starvation but a mechanism has not yet been described by which this 
is achieved (Little et al., 2005). 
The primary nitrate response: When nitrate becomes available, it induces a 
massive reprogramming of transcription termed the primary nitrate response 
(PNR). This transcriptional response still occurs in the absence of nitrate 
reductase activity or the presence of protein synthesis inhibitors which 
suggests that it is directly induced by nitrate as opposed to any of its 
derivatives (Medici and Krouk, 2014). This pathway has become much better 
understood (Figure 3.1) since the discovery of the nitrate responsive element 
(NRE) in the promoter of the nitrate response marker gene NIR1 which has 
accelerated the discovery of transcription factors involved in regulating this 
response (Konishi and Yanagisawa, 2010). 
 One key component found to be involved in the PNR is SPL9 
(SQUAMOSA PROMOTER BINDING-LIKE 9). This gene was identified by a 
time series approach monitoring transcriptome variation during very early 
nitrate responses which was in turn used to infer networks (Krouk et al., 
2010c). SLP9 was found to be expressed within 10 minutes of nitrate 
provision, and amongst its targets there were known markers of the nitrate 
response. Although SLP9 mutants do not show any obvious phenotypes, likely 
due to redundancy in the N-response network, overexpression resulted in 
increased expression of the targets it was predicted to regulate (Krouk et al., 
2010c). 
 The TF NLP7 (Nodule Inception-like protein 7) is also a major 
component of the PNR. nlp7 mutants are deficient in nitrate assimilation 
regardless of availability and as such produce phenotypes resembling nitrate-
starved plants (Castaings et al., 2009). Conversely, its overexpression results 
in increased nitrate uptake even under nitrate-limiting conditions (Yu et al., 
2016). NLP7 has been demonstrated to very rapidly control hundreds of genes 
upon nitrate provision, amongst which nitrate-responsive genes are highly 
over-represented. NLP7 is not transcriptionally induced by nitrate but rather 
seems to be retained in the nucleus in its presence (Marchive et al., 2013). 
Collectively, this demonstrates NLP7 is critical in co-ordinating the PNR. 
Another related protein, NLP6, is also thought to be important as it has been 
demonstrated to bind to  the NRE and its constitutive suppression prevents 
regulation of normally nitrate-responsive genes (Konishi and Yanagisawa, 
2013). 
 The ANR1 TF is another key transcriptional regulator of the PNR. 
Because its expression is increased in NLP7 overexpressing mutants, it is 
thought to function downstream of NLP7 (Yu et al., 2016). Whilst little is known 
about the targets of ANR1, its importance is seen in the failure of plants to 
produce LRs in response to nitrate in its absence (Gan et al., 2005; Remans 
et al., 2006; Zhang and Forde, 1998). 
 HRS1 and its homolog HHO1 (HRS1 homolog 1) (Marchive et al., 
2013), which are implicated in nitrate responses, are also downstream of 
NLP7 (Alvarez et al., 2014). These genes are thought to be partially redundant 
and are responsible for suppressing primary root elongation during 
phosphorus starvation only in the presence of nitrate. Additionally, genes 
regulated by HRS1 have been identified using the TARGET approach 
described in Chapter 1 (Medici et al., 2015). HRS1 is nitrate-inducible and 
represses many genes associated with nitrate starvation, such as the 
previously described nitrate transporter NRT2.4. This is consistent with a 
possible role in signalling recovery from nitrate starvation (Kiba et al., 2018). 
 The TFs TGA4 and TGA1 were identified as components of the PNR 
by a data-mining approach. Both are transcriptionally induced by nitrate and 
double mutants for both genes produce a similar LR phenotype to ANR1 
mutants. Amongst their inferred targets are the nitrate transporters NRT2.1 
and NRT2.2 (Alvarez et al., 2014). 
 Mutations in the TF bZIP1 have been demonstrated to perturb nitrate 
signalling in a number of studies including (Obertello et al., 2010). Subsequent 
experiments combining approaches to identify genes induced by its transient 
induction and the DNA sequences that it binds through ChIP-seq have shown 
that bZIP1 (basic Leucine Zipper domain 1) is also implicated in the PNR due 
to overlap between its putative targets and nitrate responsive genes (Para et 
al., 2014). 
Aside from TFs, other genes found to be important in the PNR are 
responsible for processing nitrate itself. The nitrate reductase enzymes NIA1 
and NIA2 are responsible for converting nitrate to nitrite which is subsequently 
converted to ammonia by the nitrite reductase NIR1. These genes are 
commonly used as markers for the PNR and are regulated by most of the TFs 
described previously (Yanagisawa, 2014). Additionally, nitrate transporters 
involved in nitrate influx are themselves up-regulated, likely as a positive 
feedback mechanism to increase nitrate uptake. These include NRT1.1 (which 
is essential for the activation of the PNR in the first place), NRT2.1 and NRT2.2 
(Vidal et al., 2015). 
Mutants affecting root architecture: One common reverse-genetics 
approach to identify genes involved in the regulation of root development is to 
study the root architecture phenotypes of mutants that show increased or 
reduced expression of a particular gene. Two of the most significant mutants 
found so far to affect A. thaliana root organisation are scarecrow (scr) and 
short-root (shr). Both of these genes are involved in regulating asymmetric cell 
divisions during root development and plants show dramatically altered root 
patterning in their absence. Both shr and scr mutants only form a single layer 
of cells between the epidermis and cortex. This mutant layer in shr does not 
express endodermal identity markers, implicating SHR in specifying cells of 
the endodermis whilst the corresponding layer in scr mutants exhibits cortical 
and endodermal markers, suggesting SCR functions specifically during the 
division of these layers (Di Laurenzio et al., 1996; Helariutta et al., 2000). 
Although shr mutants are able to initiate LR primordia, abnormal patterning is 
also present in lateral roots in addition to defects in elongation (Lucas et al., 
2011). 
 Due to its role as a positive regulator of LR patterning, there are 
numerous mutants in the auxin pathway which display altered root 
architecture. The Auxin/Indole-3-Acetic Acid (Aux/IAA) family of proteins act 
as be negative regulators of auxin signalling. Gain of function mutation of IAA3 
(Tian and Reed, 1999), IAA14 (Fukaki et al., 2002), IAA19 (Tatematsu et al., 
2004) and IAA28 (Rogg et al., 2001) all result in plants that exhibit stunted 
growth and are almost completely unable to form lateral roots. Expression of 
GATA23 rescues this phenotype, suggesting that GATA23 acts 
antagonistically of IAA28 (De Rybel et al., 2010). The TFs ARF7 and ARF19 
and their downstream targets LBD16 and LBD29 are positive regulators of LR 
formation. Thus, arf7arf19 double mutants are defective in lateral root 
formation and LBD16/LBD19 overexpression partially rescues this phenotype 
(De Rybel et al., 2010; Okushima et al., 2007). LR outgrowth regulator MYB93 
mutants exhibit increased LR density whilst the opposite phenotype is 
observed in overexpressing lines (Gibbs et al., 2014). 
 In addition to their role in transducing defence responses in plants, 
there is also strong evidence that MAPK cascades are crucial in 
developmental responses. Mutants affected in expression of MEKK1, a kinase 
upstream of MAPK4, show severe dwarfism and late lethality (Ichimura et al., 
2006). mpk4 mutants also exhibit a similar phenotype although the seedling 
lethality was temperature dependent rather than constitutively lethal (Gao et 
al., 2008). MAPK3 and MAPK6 are also important in plant development, 
evidenced by the fact that mpk3-mpk6 double exhibit embryonic lethality 
(Wang et al., 2007). 
 As visited previously, transporters involved in root nitrate uptake and 
some of their downstream targets also have significant effects on root 
architecture. In addition to its role in nitrate uptake, NRT1.1 is also important 
in sensing and signalling of the nitrate status of the plant as it facilitates the 
release of auxin from LR primordia, thus preventing their emergence. Because 
the auxin transport activity of NRT1.1 is repressed by nitrate, the protein 
inhibits LR emergence only in deplete nitrate conditions (Krouk et al., 2010b). 
Mutation of genes that function downstream of NRT1.1 result in plants with 
altered root architecture. ANR1 mutants fail to proliferate LRs in response to 
nitrate (Zhang and Forde, 1998) whilst NLP7 mutants have increased LR 
density (Castaings et al., 2009). The lateral root initiation 1 A. thaliana mutant 
(lin1)/NRT2.1 was found to constitutively form LRs even in the presence of 
high sucrose/low nitrate conditions which normally strongly repress outgrowth 
(Little et al., 2005; Malamy and Ryan, 2001).  
Aims: Previous work in the Gifford lab had been carried out to profile 
untreated, nitrate-treated or S. meliloti-treated A. thaliana roots at a range of 
timepoints up to 2 days after treatment as both of these treatments alter root 
architecture. These roots were subject to protoplast generation and FACS to 
isolate cells of the pericycle and cortex and subsequent transcriptome analysis 
using microarray profiling. This chapter sets out the data analysis conducted 
in order to identify regulators of root architecture remodelling, and contributing 
to the publication of this work in (published in Walker et al., 2017). 
Results and Discussion: 
Cells of the cortex and pericycle exhibit highly specific and dynamic 
gene expression through time: To identify transcriptional changes during, 
and therefore possibly underpinning, root architecture reshaping, cells of the 
pericycle (as the site of lateral root emergence) and cortex (an overlaying cell 
type) were sampled and transcriptomically profiled. This was perormed using 
protoplast generation followed by FACS of cell-type specific A. thaliana 
seedlings sampled over a range of timepoints from dawn (0 hours) up to 48 
hours after nitrogen treatment or rhizobial inoculation (Figure 3.2A-E, see 
methods). Microarrays comprising probes designed against 31,524 transcripts 
of the A. thaliana TAIR10 annotation transcriptome were used. Untreated 
roots, roots treated with a replete level of ammonium nitrate (5mM NH
and roots inoculated with the bacterium S. meliloti (rhizobia) were sampled. S. 
meliloti is an organism normally associated with nitrogen fixing symbiosis in 
legumes, but it also induces root architecture changes in A. thaliana (as shown 
in (Walker et al., 2017)). Following quality control, a final set containing 236 
comparable quality arrays (126 for pericycle and 110 for cortex) over the 6 
treatments and 14 time points (average replication of 2.95 samples per time 
point) with at least 2 replicates per time point was used for analysis. 
Transcriptome data was normalized and then Bayesian Analysis of Time 
Series (BATS) (Angelini et al., 2008) was used to identify transcripts that 
exhibit differential expression (DE) during each experiment (over time within 
each time series). For subsequent experiments (nitrogen and rhizobia 
responses, discussed later) DE genes were computed both within the 
rhizobia/replete N experiment and relative to the baseline established in the 
PU and CU experiments (see methods) using Gaussian Process 2 Sample 
(GP2S) (Stegle et al., 2010). This dual analysis was necessary to differentiate 
between genes that were DE during the experiment because of circadian 
effects (e.g. clock-related genes) and those that are actually DE between 
experiments (i.e. nitrogen or rhizobia responsive). 
Figure 3.2. Overview of experimental design. (A) Diagrammatic 
representation of an A. thaliana root with different cell types labelled. (B-C) 
Confocal microscopy images of A. thaliana root where marker lines express 
GFP in the cortex (B) or the pericycle (C). Scale bars represent 25 m. (D) 
Timepoints used for sampling in the study. (E) Diagrammatic representation 
of sampling workflow including protoplast generation, FACS and microarray 
analysis. (F) Venn diagram showing the differentially expressed (DE) 
transcripts within the untreated time series in the cortex (CU) and pericycle 
(PU); (G, Key to timings assigned to genes through clustering; red  immediate 
(0-1 h), orange  fast (1-2 h), yellow  downstream (2-6 h) and blue late (6+ 
h).  (H-I) Numbers of differentially expressed transcripts over time in the cortex 
(H) and the pericycle (I) with timing of first significant change in expression 
denoted by the colour coding set out in (G). (J) Core regulated transcripts 
including log
 expression plots of the clock genes LHY and CCA1 showing the 
similarity of their expression between pericycle and cortex cells. Error bars 
represent standard error with an average sample size of 2.95 replicates. 
Adapted from Walker et al (Walker et al., 2017). 
Next, a clustering-based approach was employed (Figure 3.2G, see methods) 
to identify the timing and direction (up or downregulated) with which transcripts 
are first DE in during the experiments and categorized these as immediate 
(within 1 h), fast (1-2 h), downstream (2-6 h) and late (6 h+). In the pericycle, 
genes are almost exclusively designated as immediate or fast responders 
(Figure 3.2I; 48% immediate, 49% fast, 2% downstream and 1% late) although 
these genes may exhibit multiple changes in expression over the experiment 
with latter changes not captured by this approach. By contrast, patterns of 
expression in cortical cells are more varied with around half of transcripts not 
DE until more than 2 hours after the start of the experiment (Figure 3.2H; 29% 
immediate, 21% fast, 42% downstream and 7% late). 
Whilst the majority of the transcriptome (31,524 transcripts were 
assayed by these arrays) does not change in expression during the timescale 
of these experiments in the untreated pericycle (PU) or the untreated cortex 
(CU) over time, thousands of transcripts do. 4,692 and 2,041 DE transcripts 
change over time in untreated cells of the pericycle and cortex respectively 
(Figure 3.2F). Amongst these DE transcripts, a high degree of cell type 
specificity is observed with only 291 genes being DE in both cell types. This 
group of core transcripts includes the transcription factors LHY (Late 
elongated hypocotyl) and CCA1 (Circadian clock-associated 1) (Figure 3.2J) 
which are key regulators of the plant circadian rhythm (Mizoguchi et al., 2002) 
and PRR5 (Pseudo-Response Regulator 5), PRR9 and ELF4 (Early Flowering 
4) which are also established to be involved with the circadian clock (Hsu and 
Harmer, 2014). Also present are the histone chaperones NRP1 (NAP1-related 
protein 1) and NRP2 which are conserved throughout multicellular eukaryotic 
evolution. Both proteins are involved in nucleosome assembly and have roles 
in root proliferation (Gonzalez-Arzola et al., 2017; Zhu et al., 2006). 
TORNADO2 is also DE in both cell types and is a member of tetraspanin family 
of membrane proteins which are key in many aspects of plant development 
including regulating meristem identity and root hair patterning (Cnops et al., 
2006). The data shows that, although the changes in gene expression in cells 
of the cortex and pericycle of seedlings are largely unique, both of these cell 
types maintain regulation over time of a number of genes that regulate 
essential processes including the setting of circadian rhythms and growth and 
developmental processes across the root. 
As these cells are from untreated roots and therefore not directly 
responding to a stimulus, it seems that the pericycle shows more dynamic 
patterns of gene expression as exemplified by the greater number (2.3 times 
as many DE genes during the experiment) and faster nature of changes of 
expression (with almost all the genes DE within 2 hours) seen after dawn. This 
could possibly be explained by increased mitotic activity in the pericycle as the 
site of lateral root emergence (Casimiro et al., 2003) as these seedlings would 
be beginning to form lateral roots. 
Responses to nitrogen are highly cell type specific and occur outside-
to-inside: Nitrogen provision is known to stimulate root architecture changes 
in plants including an increase in the formation of new lateral roots (Zhang and 
Forde, 1998). This phenotype was replicated in these experiments (Figure 
3.3A). Therefore, plants were treated with replete ammonium nitrate to identify 
transcripts that could be associated with root architecture remodelling. To 
carry out an N-treatment, seedlings were transferred to plates containing 5 
mM NH
, then roots and cells transcriptionally profiled as during the 
untreated timeseries before nitrogen responsive genes were computed using 
GP2S.  
 A total of 2,832 and 2,854 nitrogen-responsive DE transcripts 
were identified in the pericycle (PN) and cortex (CN) respectively, of which 
only 450 were DE in both cell types (Figure 3.3E), suggesting that the high 
degree of cell type specificity seen during the baseline experiments is 
maintained during the response to nitrate.  
Figure 3.3. The response of pericycle and cortical cells of the A. thaliana 
root to nitrogen. (A) A. thaliana seedlings grown on 0.3 mM ammonium 
nitrate  and seedlings 4 days after transfer to 5 mM ammonium nitrate. Scale 
bars represent 1 cm. (B-D) Number of transcripts differentially expressed in 
response to nitrate treatment in the pericycle (D) and cortex (C). Colours 
denote first statistically significant change in expression; red  immediate (0-1 
h), orange  fast (1-2 h), yellow  downstream (2-6 h) and blue late (6+ h). (E) 
Numbers of nitrate responsive transcripts in each cell type, highlighting the 
core of 450 transcripts that are differentially expressed in both cell types. 
0         500       1000       1500      2000       2500      3000 
0         500       1000       1500      2000       2500      3000 
N-regulated in pericycle
N-regulated in cortex
Nitrogen
Responses
N-reg pericycle
N-reg cortex
0              96     
Hours after
N treatment
NRT2.5
NRT3.1
AMT1;1
NRT2.1
bZIP1
AMT1;5
NRT3.1
NRT2.3
NRT1.1
108 transcripts295 transcripts
47 transcripts
cortex = pericycle pericycle 
then cortex
cortex then pericycle
Nitrogen responses
- bZIP1, AMT1.1
Response to ABA stimulus 
Active trans-membrane
transporter activity
Response to karrikinTranslation
Response to abiotic
stimulus: N/ABA
Glucosyl-transferase
activity; NLP8
Translation
NRT 3.1, ERF1
Markers of the response to nitrogen are annotated where the arrow indicates 
direction of expression (up = up-regulated, down = down-regulated) and 
colours are as in (C) and (D). NRT3.1 is differentially regulated in the cortex 
and pericycle. (F) Delineation of response timings of the 450 nitrate-
responsive genes that are DE in both cell types, highlighting a predominance 
of differential expression in the cortex before the pericycle. Adapted from 
Walker et al (Walker et al., 2017). 
To validate the efficacy of the nitrogen treatment, a list of 50 commonly 
nitrogen-responsive genes in the root from a meta-analysis (Canales et al., 
2014) was searched for in the expression data from PN and CN. 31 of these 
genes were found to be regulated in PN/CN data (7 in PN only, 13 in CN and 
13 in both). Considering the data consists of only two cell types and these 
marker genes were identified from whole roots, this suggests that the nitrogen 
responses observed during PN and CN are robust but also that common 
nitrogen-responsive genes tend to be regulated in many root cell types. 
The categorization of DE genes by clustering and their assignment to 
timing categories was used to help understand the response to nitrogen. Of 
the 2,382 nitrogen-regulated transcripts in the pericycle there is a mixture of 
rapid and slower responses (Figure 3.3C; 28% immediate, 22% fast, 4% 
downstream and 45% late) whilst the response in the cortex is dominated by 
early changes in gene expression (Figure 3.3D; 66% immediate, 21% fast, 7% 
downstream and 6% late). This suggests that the response to nitrogen is faster 
and more dynamic in the cortex, which is opposite to the pattern observed in 
untreated cells of over the same timescale (PU vs CU). 
This trend for faster responses in the cortex is also apparent when 
looking at the core 450 transcripts that are responsive to nitrogen in both cell 
types (Figure 3.3E-F). 108 of these transcripts are DE with the same timing in 
both cell types but not necessarily the same direction (73 show identical 
regulation whilst 35 are DE at the same time but in opposite directions). 295 
transcripts were DE in both cell types but first in the cortex before the pericycle. 
47 transcripts were DE in both cell types, but first in the pericycle. This is 
suggestive of a signal transduction event originating in either the epidermis or 
lateral root cap (which was not profiled and therefore not represented in the 
timeseries data) or the cortex and being perceived within the root to at least 
the pericycle. Nitrate itself may be transported into the root in solution through 
both cell layers and through intracellular spaces since it can rapidly permeate 
root structures such as that of A. thaliana seedlings (Dechorgnat et al., 2011). 
By the first timepoint sampled after treatment (1 hour) nitrate should already 
be present (Krouk et al., 2010c) throughout the root suggesting this is a 
genuine signal transduction event rather than simply a delayed response due 
to nitrate reaching the pericycle later than the cortex. 
The 450 DE core nitrogen responsive genes include many known 
markers for the response to nitrogen (Figure 3.3E) such as bZIP1 which is 
immediately upregulated in both cell types. AtbZIP1 is transcription factor that 
has been demonstrated to have an important role in co-ordinating downstream 
responses to nitrogen (Obertello et al., 2010) and an inferred target of bZIP1, 
NLP3, is also present (Para et al., 2014). Also part of the core N-response is 
AMT;1,1 (fast downregulated in both cell types) which functions as a high 
affinity ammonium transporter (Loque et al., 2006). A NIN-like protein, NLP8, 
is down-regulated in both cell types. NLP8 is associated with the regulation of 
seed germination in response to nitrate (Yan et al., 2016) but mutants in this 
gene have also been demonstrated to exhibit reduced growth in response to 
nitrogen, suggesting a role in N-assimilation in seedlings (Walker et al., 2017). 
Many genes that are associated with transport and metabolism of 
nitrate during the PNR are up-regulated in the cortex and/or downregulated in 
the pericycle. NRT3.1, which functions as a high affinity nitrate transporter 
(Okamoto et al., 2006) is immediately upregulated in the cortex but late 
downregulated in the pericycle. In the cortex, there is upregulation of the 
glutamine synthetase GS2 (Cruz et al., 2006), the key nitrate transporters 
NRT2.1 and NRT2.2 (Li et al., 2007) and the nitrate reductase NIR1 (Konishi 
and Yanagisawa, 2010). In the pericycle, the nitrite reductase and PNR gene 
NIA1 (Konishi and Yanagisawa, 2011), is downregulated, in addition to nitrate 
transporters NRT2.1 and NRT2.5 and the ammonium transporter AMT1;5. 
This indicates that there are differences in the response to nitrogen 
between the two cell types; genes associated with the PNR are typically up-
regulated in the cortex but repressed in the pericycle. At the whole root level 
these genes are activated in response to nitrate provision (Vidal et al., 2015) 
so the negative trend in the pericycle would be obscured if analysis was carried 
out at the whole organ level. This highlights the importance of cell type specific 
analysis for uncovering biologically relevant gene regulatory mechanisms.  
Molecular changes underpinning root architecture changes in A. 
thaliana mediated by S. meliloti: S. meliloti is a N-fixing bacterium that 
associates with legumes such as M. alfalfa and M. truncatula and is commonly 
studied due to this role in nodulation. However, there is evidence that non-
legumes, including A. thaliana, are able to perceive and respond to rhizobia 
and the Nod factors they produce (Liang et al., 2013). S. meliloti (rhizobia) 
treatment induces changes in root architecture in A. thaliana (Figure 3.4A-B) 
with inoculated seedlings producing more, but on average shorter, lateral 
roots, relative to uninoculated plants. Therefore, rhizobia was also included as 
a treatment in these experiments to ask if there were common or distinct gene 
expression changes underlying these two types of root architecture 
responses. 
 Following a similar experimental design to that described for the 
nitrogen treatment timeseries described above, the transcriptome of cortical 
and pericycle cells was profiled over time after inoculation with rhizobia. A total 
of 3,552 and 2,748 rhizobia responsive transcripts were identified in the 
pericycle (PR) and cortex (CR) respectively. As with the nitrate treatment, only 
a small (202) proportion of transcripts were regulated in both cell types (Figure 
3.4C). The pericycle response exhibited only a very small proportion of 
changes within 2 hours (2% immediate, 2% fast, 23% downstream and 73% 
late) whilst the speed of changes in expression consist of a mix of early and 
late responses in the cortex (47% immediate, 9% fast, 10% downstream and 
44% late) as was the case with the nitrate response. 
 Rhizobia are known to elicit short-lived transcription of genes 
associated with immunity in legumes during the early stages of nodulation 
(Kouchi et al., 2004; Libault et al., 2010; Lohar et al., 2006). This may be due 
to the presence of microbe-associated molecular patterns (MAMPs) present 
in the cell walls of rhizobia which could elicit a defence response despite 
rhizobia not being a pathogen. To test if rhizobia induced immunity in A. 
thaliana, the PR and CR data was compared to a list of differentially expressed 
genes obtained from FACS-isolated cortex and pericycle cells 1 hour after 
treatment with 1 M flg22 (Rich et al., 2019). Flg22 is a highly immunogenic 
peptide derived from bacterial flagellin that is able to induce expression of 
defence-related genes in plants (Navarro et al., 2004). 
Figure 3.4. The root architecture and transcriptome response of A. 
thaliana to rhizobia. (A) A. thaliana seedlings 4 days after mock (left) or S. 
meliloti (right) inoculation. Scale bars represent 1 cm. (B) Average length of 
lateral roots (left) and average number of lateral roots (right) for A. thaliana 
seedlings 3 days after mock (white) or S. meliloti (grey) inoculation. n=16, error 
bars represent standard error and asterisks denote a significance level of 
P<0.05 as calculated by t-test. (C) Number of transcripts differentially 
expressed in response to rhizobia treatment in the cortex and pericycle. 
Colours denote first statistically significant change in expression; red  
immediate (0-1 h), orange  fast (1-2 h), yellow  downstream (2-6 h) and blue 
late (6+ h). Adapted from Walker et al (Walker et al., 2017). 
0         500       1000       1500      2000       2500      3000 
0         500       1000       1500      2000       2500      3000    3500
Rhizobia-regulated in cortex
Rhizobia-regulated in pericycle
 rhizobia
rhizobia
The Rich et al. 2019 dataset (biorx number 302448) consisted of a list of 166 
flg22-responsive genes in the cortex and 121 flg22-responsive in the pericycle. 
Only a small proportion of these were also found to be DE in PR/CR data 
(pericycle  8 of 121; 7% and cortex - 38 of 166; 23%). However, some marker 
genes of defence responses are present in both the PR and CR response lists, 
including FLS2. FLS2 is the primary receptor for flg22 and is responsible for 
inducing innate immunity downstream of flg22 perception (Sun et al., 2013). 
Interestingly, the flagellin of another rhizobial species, M. loti, has been 
demonstrated not to possess MAMP activity in the flg22-sensitive legume L. 
japonicus (Lopez-Gomez et al., 2012) but it is unclear if this is the case for the 
flagellin of other rhizobia. Of the genes common between both flg22- and 
rhizobia-response datasets in the cortex, the majority (27 of 38; 71%) were 
determined to be immediately rhizobia responsive on the basis of their cluster 
membership, in line with rapid activation in response to flg22. Of the genes 
conserved in both datasets in the pericycle, all but one are classified as late. 
Collectively, the response to rhizobia in the cortex appears to partially 
resemble a plant defence response whilst the pericycle response to rhizobia 
is distinct from the flg22 response.  
Expression of cell identity markers is maintained during environmental 
responses: Based on the numbers of DE transcripts, these experiments 
suggest that although there are common elements of environmental 
responses between cell types, cell types maintain their identities following a 
change in the environment. To further explore this, all lists of DE genes were 
queried with lists of genes that are defined as cell type specifically enriched 
(CTSE) genes for the cortex and the pericycle (Bargmann et al., 2013b). 
CTSEs are genes that exhibit preferential expression in a single cell type and 
therefore can be considered as an extension of cell type identity. This dataset 
included 85 and 168 genes identified as CTSEs in the pericycle and cortex 
respectively. However, these lists were constructed at the gene level, rather 
than the gene model level as in the data presented here. Therefore, the 
Bargmann lists were expanded (and three genes not present on the 
microarray were removed; At1g24280, At4g36670 and At5g42600) to include 
all gene models of these CTSEs represented on the microarrays. This gave a 
total of 104 CTSE transcripts in the pericycle and 194 in the cortex to use for 
analysis. 
 A significant proportion of the CTSEs from both cell types (Figure 3.5A-
B) were not differentially expressed during any of the timeseries experiments, 
and also retained their cell type specific expression  their expression was 
enriched in the cell type that they were identified in in the Bargmann et al. 2013 
work. However, many (60/104 in the pericycle; 58% and 110/194 in the cortex; 
57%) did show differential expression during at least one experiment, including 
a small proportion (pericycle 7%, cortex 14%) of CTSEs identified as cortex- 
or pericycle-associated that were nitrogen/rhizobia responsive in the other cell 
type. This does not necessarily suggest that cell identity is affected during the 
treatments, since these genes still predominantly showed preferential cell type 
specific expression. However, it does suggest that CTSEs (and therefore cell 
identity) could exhibit plasticity during environmental changes. 
Figure 3.5: Expression of cortex and pericycle cell type specific enriched 
genes during environmental change. A-B) Charts showing the proportion of 
194 transcripts identified as cortex (A) CTSEs and 100 transcripts identified 
as pericycle CTSEs (B). Transcripts annotated as enriched do not show 
differential expression within any time series whilst those annotated as 
dynamic to a cell type show differential expression in the untreated 
timecourse for that cell type. Transcripts labelled as responsive are DE 
Pericycle 
enriched
Cortex
enriched
Pericycle
dynamic
Cortex
enriched
dynamic
Cortex
enriched  
Rhiz-response
Cortex
enriched  
N+Rhiz
response
Cortex
dynamic
Pericycle
enriched
dynamic
Pericycle
enriched  
N-response
Pericycle
enriched  
Rhiz-response
Cortex
enriched
responsive
CTSEs
Cortex CTSEs Pericycle CTSEs
0124 6 8 10 1214 16 20 24 36 48 h 0124 6 8 10 1214 16 20 24 36 48 h
following nitrogen or rhizobia treatment. Adapted from Walker et al (Walker et 
al., 2017). 
Overall, this reinforces the hypothesis that the cortex and pericycle both 
maintain their distinct cell identities but these are able to be modulated during 
environmental responses. 
Understanding how cortical and pericycle gene expression is co-
ordinated using network inference: An interpretation of the data presented 
above is that the pericycle and the cortex show a very high degree of cell type 
specificity in terms of their gene expression in untreated cells and that this is 
maintained during responses to nitrogen and rhizobia. But neither cell type is 
directly exposed to either stimulus and it therefore seems unlikely that these 
highly cell type specific responses could occur without some degree of co-
ordination at the whole root level. To identify regulators of these responses, 
causal transcription networks were generated (see methods) for all the 
experiments. Causal transcription networks can be inferred from timeseries 
data to predict regulatory interaction between differentially expressed genes 
and thus help in visualizing how responses are regulated. Since the network 
inference algorithm has to have samples with consistent spacing between 
timepoints (sampling every 2 hours), only data up to 16 hours after inoculation 
were used for network inference. Previously described analysis of the timing 
of gene responses (where most responses at least first occurred in the first 
few hours) suggests that this time period contains the most pertinent 
information for understanding these responses. 
Network inference assigns transcripts as regulatory nodes if they are 
transcriptional regulators. In total 2,460 genes (2,946 transcripts) from the 
arrays used were assigned to be putative regulators. This was based on 
known or putative TF activity using data from the NCBI Conserved Domains 
database indicating the presence of conserved protein domains indicative of 
DNA binding combined with gene annotations (Gene Ontology and TAIR), 
indicative of regulatory effect. 
Each network connected hundreds of genes via regulatory connections, 
or edges (Table 3.1). The networks inferred from gene expression data in the 
cortex show different network architectures to those for the pericycle, based 
on analysis of the network degree, betweenness and connectivity. In spite of 
the networks in the pericycle and cortex consisting of similar edge to node 
ratios, the pericycle networks tend to be dominated by fewer, larger nodes 
although this would be expected to some extent given the higher number of 
nodes in some of the pericycle networks. This is particularly evident when 
looking at the largest hubs in each network. A hub can be defined as a node 
with a large number of inferred targets.  The three largest hubs in each 
pericycle network (PU; 71, 66 and 53, PN; 76, 75 and 48, PR 84, 44 and 39) 
are larger than all of the equivalent 3 hubs in the cortex networks (CU; 37, 36 
and 34 CN; 34, 27 and 24, CR 28, 24 and 17). 
Network PU PN PR CU CN CR 
Nodes 1651 1557 785 898 981 892 
Edges 1974 2018 1099 1271 1348 1147 
DAP-seq 
validation 
61 of 
52 of 
48 of 216 64 of 
73 of 100 61 of 289 
Treatment 
responsive 
(43%) 
388 (49%) N/A 
(78%) 
(76%) 
Response 
timing 
(%I/F/D/L) 
N/A 1/2/5/82 17/26/5/51 N/A 66/18/7/9 55/9/5/31 
Table 3.1: Statistical analysis of network inference. Comparison of 
features of networks inferred from each timecourse experiment across a range 
of categories. Nodes: number of regulators present in each network. Edges: 
number of regulatory actions inferred between nodes in each network. DAP-
seq validation: Number of edges validated in each network by a DAP-seq 
dataset (O'Malley et al., 2016) expressed as a proportion of the total number 
of edges present in both the OMalley dataset and the network for which the 
comparison is being made. Treatment responsive: the proportion of nodes 
in each network that were identified as exhibiting significant DE relative to 
untreated cells. Response timing: percentages of nodes that were 
designated immediate (0-1 h), fast (1-2 h), downstream (2-6 h) or late (6+ h) 
responders to treatment expressed as a proportion of total treatment 
responsive genes in that network. 
To validate the node-node edge connections inferred from expression data, 
edges predicted in the networks were compared with those identified from a 
study predicting transcription factor binding sites using DAP-seq (O'Malley et 
al., 2016). Although many edges in the networks were not tested in this study, 
a proportion of edges were present in both datasets (Table 3.1). Across the 
networks, between 19-73% of interactions were conserved giving confidence 
in the edge prediction by network inference when the absence of whole root 
data from these experiments is considered. 
The networks were then analysed to understand how processes 
change within the cortex and pericycle over time and in response to the 
nitrogen and rhizobial treatments. The PU (Figure 3.6) and CU (Figure 3.7) 
networks are constructed from expression data of cells not responding to a 
specific treatment, and therefore these networks provide an insight into 
developmental changes occurring in the cortex and pericycle of growing 
seedlings. The key plant circadian clock genes CCA1 and LHY are 
represented in both networks. CCA1 has 3 targets in the PU network and 11 
in the CU network whilst LHY has 12 and 7 respectively. The genes inferred 
to be regulated by both CCA1 and LHY are unique in both cell types, 
highlighting that both cell types have distinct identities. 
 The nitrate-responsive gene TGA1 was found to be the fifth-largest hub 
in the CU network with 32 outgoing edges and 2 incoming edges. The two TFs 
inferred to regulate TGA1 are WRKY36 (positively) and TGA4 (negatively). 
This is curious because TGA1 and TGA4 are associated with the PNR 
(Alvarez et al., 2014) and defence responses (Kesarwani et al., 2007) although 
this does not exclude other roles. Both proteins are thought to be functionally 
redundant so the idea that TGA4 is a transcriptional repressor of TGA1 is novel 
and may represent a negative feedback mechanism. Another gene associated 
with nitrate responses, HHO1 (1 regulator, 3 targets), is present in the CU 
network but not the PU network, suggesting that it has a cell type specific role. 
"AtTLP11, TLP11 "
GATA17
AT1G20640
"anac084,
NAC084 " 
"ANAC004,
NAC004 " 
AHL20
"WRKY51,
ATWRKY51 " 
"KNAT6, KNAT6L, 
KNAT6S " 
AT1G10585
AT5G63700
"WRKY41,
AtWRKY41 " 
AT1G27660
"AtMYB18,
MYB18 " 
"JAZ7, TIFY5B "
"IAA7, AXR2 "
AT4G16610
"RGL1, RGL "
AT1G62975
"ATMYC2,
RD22BP1, JAI1, 
JIN1, MYC2, ZBF1 
bHLH093
"STZ, ZAT10 "
AT5G59570
AT4G25400
"ERF5, ATERF-5, 
ATERF5 " 
AT1G29160
"ATXR5, SDG15 "
AT1G49560
"AtTLP1, TLP1 "
AT2G06020
"HD2A, ATHD2A, 
HDA3, HDT1 " 
"MYB62,
AtMYB62,
BW62B, BW62C " 
"AT-HSFB2B,
HSFB2B " 
"WRKY39,
ATWRKY39 " 
"AtTLP2, TLP2 "
AT4G28800
AT2G45680
AT2G33550
AT2G42660
AT4G27310
AT3G25790TGA1
ERF104
"IAA28, IAR2 "
CYCH;1
"TGA4, OBF4 "
"WRKY36,
ATWRKY36 " 
AT1G18335
AT5G06250
"AXR3, IAA17 "
"HMGB1, NFD1 "
"MYB51,
AtMYB51,
BW51A, BW51B, 
HIG1 " 
AT3G45610
AT4G27900"HY5, TED 5 "
AT2G47210
BLH11
"UNE8, ATHAP2B, 
HAP2B, NF-YA2 " 
AT3G04590
AT4G05170
"VIM1, ORTH2 "
"ATY13,
ATMYB31, MYB31 
"MYB36,
AtMYB36 " 
ARF11
"ARR10, RR10 "
"ANAC068, NTM1 
"APRR9, PRR9, 
TL1 " 
"WRKY59,
ATWRKY59 " 
AT3G13040
"MYB64,
AtMYB64 " 
AT2G47890
"MYB12,
ATMYB12, PFG1 " "ZCW32, BPE, 
BPEub " 
"anac082, VNI1, 
NAC082 " 
"ERF12, ATERF12 "
AT2G43140
"ETC3, CPL3 "
"TCX2, ATTCX2 "
"ABI5, GIA1 "
DREB26
AT1G03080
NF-YA8
AT1G75710
"AT-HSFA6B,
HSFA6B " 
AHL19
AT2G42280
AT3G09600
AT4G36710
AT4G22820
AT5G09850
AT2G40350
"TEM1, EDF1 "
AT5G25190
AT2G14760
AT4G13040
"ARR17, RR17 "
AT2G28200
"TGA9, bZIP21 "
"WRKY62,
ATWRKY62 " 
"APRR5, PRR5 "
AT5G18550
Figure 3.6: Causal transcription network of changes over time in 
untreated pericycle cells. For simplicity, the network is visualized as a 
regulatory backbone with only nodes displayed that are predicted to regulate 
at least one target and with the size of nodes increasing with the number of 
outgoing edges. Nodes not connected to the main network with fewer than 2 
regulatory interactions are omitted. Edges with arrow heads denote positive 
regulation and edges with flat heads denote negative regulation. 
Figure 3.7: Causal transcription network of changes over time in 
untreated cortex cells. For simplicity, the network is visualized as a 
regulatory backbone with only nodes displayed that are predicted to regulate 
at least one target and with the size of nodes increasing with the number of 
outgoing edges. Nodes not connected to the main network with fewer than 2 
regulatory interactions are omitted. Edges with arrow heads denote positive 
regulation and edges with flat heads denote negative regulation.  
"AtTLP11, TLP11 "
GATA17
AT1G20640
"anac084,
NAC084 " 
"ANAC004,
NAC004 " 
AHL20
"WRKY51,
ATWRKY51 " 
"KNAT6, KNAT6L, 
KNAT6S " 
AT1G10585
AT5G63700
"WRKY23,
ATWRKY23 " 
"WRKY41,
AtWRKY41 " 
AT1G27660
"AtMYB18,
MYB18 " 
"JAZ7, TIFY5B "
"IAA7, AXR2 "
"PCL1, LUX ""EPR1, RVE7 "
AT3G59580
AT4G16610
"RGL1, RGL "
AT1G62975
"ATMYC2,
RD22BP1, JAI1, 
JIN1, MYC2, ZBF1 
bHLH093
"STZ, ZAT10 "
AT5G59570
AT4G25400
"ERF5, ATERF-5, 
ATERF5 " 
AT1G29160
"ATXR5, SDG15 "
AT1G49560
"AtTLP1, TLP1 "
AT2G06020
"HD2A, ATHD2A, 
HDA3, HDT1 " 
"MYB62,
AtMYB62,
BW62B, BW62C " 
"AT-HSFB2B,
HSFB2B " 
"WRKY39,
ATWRKY39 " 
"AtTLP2, TLP2 "
AT4G28800
AT2G45680
AT2G33550
AT2G42660
AT4G27310
AT3G25790TGA1
ERF104
"IAA28, IAR2 "
CYCH;1
"TGA4, OBF4 "
"WRKY36,
ATWRKY36 " 
AT1G18335
AT5G06250
"AXR3, IAA17 "
"HMGB1, NFD1 "
"MYB51,
AtMYB51,
BW51A, BW51B, 
HIG1 " 
AT3G45610
AT4G27900"HY5, TED 5 "
AT2G47210
BLH11
"UNE8, ATHAP2B, 
HAP2B, NF-YA2 " 
AT3G04590
AT4G05170
"VIM1, ORTH2 "
"ATY13,
ATMYB31, MYB31 
"MYB36,
AtMYB36 " 
ARF11
"ARR10, RR10 "
"ANAC068, NTM1 
"APRR9, PRR9, 
TL1 " 
"WRKY59,
ATWRKY59 " 
AT3G13040
"MYB64,
AtMYB64 " 
AT2G47890
"MYB12,
ATMYB12, PFG1 " "ZCW32, BPE, 
BPEub " 
"anac082, VNI1, 
NAC082 " 
"ERF12, ATERF12 "
AT2G43140
"ETC3, CPL3 "
"TCX2, ATTCX2 "
"ABI5, GIA1 "
DREB26
AT1G03080
NF-YA8
AT1G75710
"AT-HSFA6B,
HSFA6B " 
AHL19
AT2G42280
AT3G09600
AT4G36710
AT4G22820
AT5G09850
AT2G40350
"TEM1, EDF1 "
AT5G25190
AT2G14760
AT4G13040
"ARR17, RR17 "
AT2G28200
"TGA9, bZIP21 "
"WRKY62,
ATWRKY62 " 
"APRR5, PRR5 "
AT5G18550
Insights into co-ordination of nitrate responses from PN/CN networks: 
Networks for nitrate and rhizobia responses were constructed based on genes 
DE within a time series (DE genes calculated by BATS) as opposed those DE 
between time series (those calculated by GP2S). This was because network 
connections over time within each treatment could involve genes that change 
in response to treatments but also genes that must be present but whose 
expression does not significantly change after treatment. Therefore, to enable 
visualization of the genes that do change due to treatment, these nodes were 
colour-coded in the networks to distinguish between this. GOrilla (Eden et al., 
2009) was then used to query the networks for overrepresentation of GO 
terms. To focus on understanding the higher order of regulation of the rhizobial 
and nitrogen responses, networks were visualized as regulatory backbone 
networks where only nodes with at least one target are displayed and the size 
of the shown nodes scales with larger nodes predicted to have more targets. 
Identification of nitrogen or rhizobia responsive genes within their 
respective networks reveals a much higher proportion of genes regulated in 
the cortex networks to be treatment responsive than in the pericycle (Table 
3.1). This suggests that environmental responses in the pericycle potentially 
show less plasticity than those in the cortex. The N-response in the pericycle 
(Figure 3.6B) seems to be regulated by many genes that are not directly N-
responsive but are nonetheless are important in co-ordinating the response. 
The majority of genes in the cortex network (Figure 3.6A) are N-responsive. 
When analysing response timings, a much higher proportion of expression 
changes occur first within 2 hours of treatment (CN: 84% vs PN: 3% and CR: 
64% vs PR: 43%) in the cortex than the pericycle (Table 3.1). This shows that 
the trend for faster responses to nitrogen or rhizobia seen amongst DE genes 
of the cortex relative to the pericycle (Figure 3.3B, Figure 3.3D, Figure 3.4C) 
is also conserved in their respective networks. 
Figure 3.8: Co-ordination of the nitrate response in the cortex and pericycle. A-B) Regulatory backbone visualization of inferred 
casual transcription networks in the cortex (A) and pericycle (B) during response to nitrate. The network is constrained to only show 
nodes that have at least one outgoing edge and the size of nodes is scaled with larger nodes possessing more outgoing edges. C) 
Conserved transcription factor hubs present in both networks are arranged together. Overrepresentation of gene ontologies amongst 
a hub and its targets is denoted by shading. Colours denote first statistically significant change in expression; red  immediate (0-1 
h), orange  fast (1-2 h), yellow  downstream (2-6 h) and blue late (6+ h). Edges with arrow heads denote positive regulation and 
edges with flat heads denote negative regulation. Adapted from Walker et al (Walker et al., 2017).
Because genes involved in the PNR are well characterized in A. thaliana, it is 
possible to query the PN/CN networks for these genes. This means that the 
PNR, which is a process co-ordinated across the whole root can be assessed 
at the cell type level. bZIP1 is present and functions as a key hub in both cortex 
and pericycle networks (7 outgoing edges in PN and 17 in CN). Most of the 
targets of bZIP1 in either network are not functionally associated with nitrate 
responses but the ammonium transporter AMT1;2 is repressed in the cortex, 
which is consistent with its downregulation of genes involved in ammonium 
transport seen elsewhere in the data. The NIN-like protein NLP3 is present in 
both networks (2 targets in PN, 17 in CN). NIN-like proteins are a family of TFs 
thought to be evolutionarily related to highly conserved legume symbiosis 
regulator NIN and are known to be important in nitrate responses in A. thaliana 
(Konishi and Yanagisawa, 2013). 
Many genes associated with PNR are present in only one network, 
suggesting that their effects are actually cell type specific. NRT3.1 is up-
regulated only in the CN network by two TFs, one of which is another NIN-like 
protein, NLP9. However, NLP9 itself is also present in the pericycle where it 
has 30 inferred targets, suggesting it is a key hub gene in the nitrogen 
response in this cell type, despite not being differentially expressed between 
the PU and PN timeseries. Also exclusive to the PN network is TGA1 which 
has 11 targets. The presence of TGA1 in the PN network is noteworthy 
because it is also one of largest hubs in CU network but is not present in the 
PU network at all, suggesting it may have very different roles between the two 
cell types, with a role in the N-response in the pericycle but not the cortex. 
Also, of particular interest is the expression of HRS1 and its homolog HHO1. 
HRS1 is only present in the PN network where it is induced by one TF and 
repressed by another and has six targets of its own. HHO1 however is only 
connected in the CN network where it has 8 outgoing edges. 
Not present in either network are numerous genes that which are 
known to be markers of the PNR including NRT1.1, NRT2.1, NRT2.2, NIA1, 
NIA2, and NIR1 (Vidal et al., 2015). It is likely that these genes are missing 
since they are part of whole root responses that are more strongly expressed 
in other cell types such as the epidermis or endodermis which are absent in 
this study. 
Because these networks were formed from genes DE within an 
experiment, the clock genes CCA1 and LHY are present in the nitrate networks 
of both cell types. Using the combination of BATS and GP2S DE lists it is 
possible to discriminate between circadian influences on rhizobial and N 
responses and changes in gene expression due to circadian rhythms in 
general. LHY only has 2 targets in the PN network and both are not nitrogen-
responsive but 17 of 21 targets in the CN network are. For CCA1, 1 of its 6 
targets is nitrogen responsive in the PN network whilst 8 of 9 targets are N-
regulated in the CN network. This would suggest that these two clock genes 
assume additional regulatory roles during nitrogen responses in the cortex. 
When evaluating the PN/CN networks to understand the plants 
response to N (Figure 3.8A-B) only a small proportion (222) of the total nodes 
(981 and 1557 in the cortex and pericycle respectively) in each network are 
conserved between both networks. However, when nodes and their targets 
are queried for overrepresented GO terms, in order to assess to what extent 
biological processes and molecular functions are distinctly regulated (Figure 
3.8). Some similar processes are observed in both cell types; for instance, 
there are two different modules in both networks which regulate distinct sets 
of genes associated with JA responses. There are 11 transcription factors are 
conserved between, and are N-responsive in, the CN and PN networks (Figure 
3.8C). The majority (8 of 11) of these showed a cortex then pericycle 
preference in terms of timing of expression changes, supporting the proposed 
mechanism discussed earlier of signal transduction through the cell types of 
the root during the response to nitrate (Figure 3.3F). 
This suggests that different sets of genes, which may be considered 
functionally redundant at the whole root level, regulate common functions 
within the two cell types and therefore can be considered functionally distinct 
on the basis of the timing and spatial location of their expression and this 
assertion is supported by data at the gene family level (Walker et al., 2017).  
AT4G39160
"ARR1, RR1 "
AT4G01260
AT5G14140
DUO1 HYH
AT1G29950
"APRR5, PRR5 "
TINY2
"MYB117,
AtMYB117, LOF1 
AT3G60110
AT2G42150
"ATMYB48,
ATMYB48-3,
MYB48 " 
AT2G47210
"AtIDD2, IDD2 "
"ATET2, ET2 "
AT4G31615
"EZA1, SWN, 
SDG10 " 
MBD10
AT5G05330
"BRC1, TCP18, 
ATTCP18 " 
AT4G00990
AT5G65320
"HMGB1, NFD1 "
"EEL, ATBZIP12, 
DPBF4 " 
"WRKY23,
ATWRKY23 " 
"ARR24, RR24 "
AT5G48890
AT1G49560
AGL87
AT2G16210
AT5G08520
AT4G10940
"ATMYB69,
MYB69 " AT3G59580
"HMGB2, HMG 
BETA 1, NFD2, 
NFD02 " 
AT1G24220
WOX10
"WRKY46,
ATWRKY46 " 
AT5G53420
AT1G67310
CHR11
"SHP1, AGL1 "
AT3G57480
"LUG, RON2 "
"CAL, CAL1, 
AGL10 " 
"GAI, RGA2 "
"AT-HSFB2A,
HSFB2A " 
AT1G55650
AT2G17180AT2G33550
"WRKY28,
ATWRKY28 " AT3G19070
"LHY, LHY1 "
AT1G05615
AT2G43140
TRFL6AT3G54390
AGL67
AT5G24050
"BNQ2, BHLH134 "
AGL34 TOE2
NF-YA10
"ATHB51, LMI1, 
HB51 " 
AT5G46710
"LAS, SCL18 "
bHLH093
AT2G23060
"ANAC034,
ANAC035, LOV1, 
NAC035 " 
AT1G76580
AT3G53820
AT1G72740
AT5G54630
GATA13
AT5G04840
AT5G06250
"ATMYB68,
MYB68 " 
AT5G45580
AT5G38690
AT3G61230
GYRB3
AT3G07565
"EMB93,
SOLDAT10 " 
"EFS, SDG8, 
CCR1, ASHH2, 
LAZ2 " "JAZ12, TIFY3B "
AT2G37000
AT2G33350
AT1G10120
Figure 3.9: Causal transcription network of changes over time in 
pericycle cells treated with S. meliloti. For simplicity, the network is 
visualized as a regulatory backbone with only nodes displayed that are 
predicted to regulate at least one target and with the size of nodes increasing 
with the number of outgoing edges. Nodes not connected to the main network 
with fewer than 2 regulatory interactions are omitted. Edges with arrow heads 
denote positive regulation and edges with flat heads denote negative 
regulation. 
Analysis of networks of rhizobia-responsive transcripts: The response to 
rhizobia in A. thaliana cortical cells seems to share some elements with 
defence responses as determined by comparison with flg22-regulated gene 
expression. Because this cannot be said to be true of the pericycle, the PR 
(Figure 3.9) and CR (Figure 3.10) networks were examined more closely.  
In line with finding both clock genes CCA1 and LHY to be DE in both 
CR and PR timeseries, they were both found to be within both PR and CR 
networks. CCA1 has 10 targets in PR (1 of which is also rhizobia-responsive) 
and 7 in PR (6 of which are also rhizobia-responsive) whilst LHY has 5 (1 of 
which is also rhizobia-responsive) and 9 (8 of which is also rhizobia-
responsive) respectively. This supports the findings of analysis of the N-
response networks in these transcription factors are involved in environmental 
responses in the cortex but not in the pericycle whilst also reflecting the wider 
trend that a higher proportion of genes in the CN/CR network are treatment-
responsive than their counterparts in the pericycle (Table 3.1).
AT5G61590
"RGL1, RGL "
AT1G77920
GATA4
"ERF5, ATERF-5, 
ATERF5 " 
"ABI5, GIA1 "
AT3G02790
AT5G45580
AT1G77640
AT5G63700
AT2G43140
"RAP2.9, DEAR5 "
AT1G75710
"AHL1, ATAHL1 "
AT2G41710
AT3G55770 AT1G35460
"anac048,
NAC048 " 
"IAA1, AXR5 "
"ATMYBL2,
MYBL2 " 
ARR15
"MYB51,
AtMYB51,
BW51A, BW51B, 
HIG1 " 
"AtTLP2, TLP2 "
AT4G17900
emb2746
"anac088,
NAC088 " 
"RAP2.10, DEAR4 
"HB-2, ATHB21, 
HB21 " 
"CBF4, DREB1D "
AT1G74840
AT3G25790
AT5G25190
AT5G06250
"ZAP1, ATWRKY1, 
WRKY1 " 
"COL1, ATCOL1 "
MYB77
"ATNAC2, ORE1, 
ANAC092,
ATNAC6, NAC2, 
NAC6 " 
"ARR17, RR17 "
"HMGB1, NFD1 " "APRR5, PRR5 "
"ATAF1, ANAC002 
AT2G19260
AT3G16160
"ATERF-4, ERF4, 
RAP2.5, ATERF4 " 
AT3G13040
AT1G20640
"ATMYB2, MYB2 "
AT3G06590
"FIE, FIS3, FIE1 "
"WRKY33,
ATWRKY33 " "ATMYBR1,
ATMYB44,
MYBR1, MYB44 " 
"TOC1, APRR1, 
PRR1, AtTOC1 " 
"HB53, HB-8, 
ATHB53 " 
"AT-HSFA6B,
HSFA6B " 
"anac032,
NAC032 " 
"ATHB-3, HAT7, 
ATHB3, HB-3 " TGA3
"HB-4, WOX13, 
ATWOX13 " 
AT2G20880
bHLH093
CPuORF2
"ATHB5, ATHB-5, 
HB5 " 
"ERF11, ATERF11 "
WRKY3
"WRKY60,
ATWRKY60 " 
AT2G36080 JKD
"ATBZIP61,
BZIP61 " 
"HLS1, COP3, 
UNS2 " 
AT3G17100
"CEJ1,
ATERF#011,
DEAR1 " 
AT2G25820
"MYB110,
AtMYB110 " 
AT2G42280
AT5G62260
"HD2A, ATHD2A, 
HDA3, HDT1 " 
"ATBZIP60,
BZIP60 " 
AT1G49560
AT3G09600
"LHY, LHY1 "
"ANAC041,
NAC041 " 
AT5G46915
AT2G46670
AT3G59580ZFP7
"ZFHD1, ATHB29, 
ZHD11 " 
AT5G54470
"NAP57,
AtNAP57, CBF5, 
AtCBF5 " 
MYBC1
AT1G20910
AT1G18960
"WRKY28,
ATWRKY28 " 
AT4G25400
AT1G71450
Figure 3.10: Causal transcription network of changes over time in cortex 
cells treated with S. meliloti. For simplicity, the network is visualized as a 
regulatory backbone with only nodes displayed that are predicted to regulate 
at least one target and with the size of nodes increasing with the number of 
outgoing edges. Nodes not connected to the main network with fewer than 2 
regulatory interactions are omitted. Edges with arrow heads denote positive 
regulation and edges with flat heads denote negative regulation. 
The PNR-associated HRS1 transcription factor is present in both CR and PR 
networks. In the pericycle HRS1 is inferred to be transcriptionally induced by 
CCA1 and has 44 predicted targets. In the cortex, HRS1 does not have any 
regulators and 4 targets. HRS1 homolog HHO1 is present in the CR network 
(2 regulators, 2 targets) meaning it is connected in all three cortical networks 
but absent in all pericycle ones. Both of these genes have previously been 
assumed to exhibit functional redundancy (Medici et al., 2015) but this 
suggests that their activities may be distinct on the basis of their expression in 
different cell types. 
Conclusions: FACS was used to isolate cells of the cortex and the pericycle 
at a range of timepoints up to 48 hours after treatment with replete nitrate or 
rhizobia, both of which are able to influence plant root architecture. 
Transcriptomics of these cells over time was used to identify changes in gene 
expression that allowed examination of molecular changes that might underpin 
root architecture reshaping. 
Based on the numbers of DE transcripts, both cell types have very 
strong cell type response identities as there is very little overlap between the 
two cell type responses. It was also seen that large differences exist in DE 
gene activity between treatments for each cell type. Together, this suggests 
that the identity of a cell type is flexible and is able to be modulated by the 
environment. This is reinforced by the findings from analysis of the expression 
of putative cell type specific enriched (CTSE) genes (Bargmann et al., 2013b) 
that they are cell-type enriched but also responsive to environmental change. 
Analysis of the data also suggest the possibility of signal transduction 
within the root during environmental responses which originates in outer layers 
of the root and travels inwards (cortex to pericycle in this case). The inclusion 
of analysis of responses of more cell types, particularly the epidermis (the 
outer most layer of the root) and the endodermis (which lies in between the 
cortex and the pericycle) would facilitate further study of this possible signal 
transduction. Key transcriptional regulatory hubs of pericycle and cortex cells 
were identified from the network analysis in untreated conditions and during 
the response to nitrate and rhizobia. Some genes assumed to be functionally 
redundant, such as HRS1/HHO1 seem to be preferentially expressed in one 
cell type. Therefore, these genes which might appear to be functionally 
redundant may actually be functionally separate on the basis of their patterns 
of expression. This could be resolved by cell type-specific analysis of mutants 
for genes of interest (for instance, hrs1/hho1 mutants) to see how gene 
regulatory networks are perturbed. 
This approach, using FACS to generate longitudinal and cell type 
specific gene expression data, has uncovered trends during root development 
which are obscured at the whole root level. This highlights the importance of 
analyzing the expression of genes through both time and space in order to 
fully understand how the timing and localization of this might moderate their 
activity as previous studies of root development (Birnbaum et al., 2003; Brady 
et al., 2007) and environmental responses have found (Geng et al., 2013; Iyer-
Pascuzzi et al., 2011).
Chapter 4: Molecular changes underpinning friend vs. foe recognition 
in legume roots 
Introduction: 
Complex interactions between the legume nodulation machinery and the 
plant immune system are required for establishment of root nodules: The 
rhizosphere is an extremely complex environment in which plant roots are 
continuously exposed to a diverse range of microorganisms (Berendsen et al., 
2012). Whilst the majority of these are harmless to a plant, pathogens may 
also be present amongst this population. Plants possess a basal innate 
immune system as their primary defence against pathogens.  This first layer 
of immunity, called MTI, consists of cell surface receptor kinases (PRRs) that 
recognize widely conserved chemical features associated with bacteria, fungi 
and other possible pathogens. Stimulation of these receptors activates their 
kinase activity and begins an intracellular signaling cascade that results in an 
immune response (Boller and Felix, 2009).  
As the molecular patterns recognized by these receptors are often 
conserved amongst pathogens and non-pathogens, innocuous or even 
symbiotic bacteria can also induce immune responses. In the case of plant-
microbe symbiotic interactions such as nodulation, this can potentially inhibit 
formation of mutualistic interactions. A wide range of immune elicitors and 
defence hormones have been shown to inhibit nodulation (Lopez-Gomez et 
al., 2012; Stacey et al., 2006; Sun et al., 2006). A sustained immune response 
to rhizobia, preventing rhizobial colonization, would result in the benefits of the 
interaction to both parties being lost. Consequentially, legumes have had to 
evolve a system allowing the selective lack of development of immune 
responses in response to bona fide symbionts without providing a potential 
route to be exploited by pathogens (Berrabah et al., 2015; Cao et al., 2017). 
There is evidence to suggest that rhizobia and signaling molecules 
associated with them actually do exert a short-lived activation of legume 
defences during the early stages of nodulation, although the density of 
inoculum in these studies is typically greater than would be encountered 
outside of laboratory conditions. Transient up-regulation of genes associated 
(based on ontology) with defence responses shortly after inoculation with 
rhizobia or Nod factors has been demonstrated across several model legume 
species including L. japonicus, soybean (Glycine max) and M. truncatula 
(Kouchi et al., 2004; Libault et al., 2010; Lohar et al., 2006). Additionally, 
increased phosphorylation of L. japonicus MAPK proteins has been observed 
following inoculation with M. loti (Lopez-Gomez et al., 2012) and brief induction 
of ROS has been reported after treating M. alfafa with S. meliloti (Santos et 
al., 2001), Phaseolus vulgaris with Nod factor purified from Rhizobium etli 
(Crdenas et al., 2008) and after treatment of peanut (Arachis hypogaea) with 
Bradyrhizobium sp (Munoz et al., 2015). The exact mechanism by which 
rhizobia activate host immunity is currently unknown, but it may not be simply 
related to activation of MTI by MAMPs; for instance L. japonicus has been 
demonstrated to be sensitive to flg22 but purified flagellin from its symbiont, 
M. loti does not induce immunity (Lopez-Gomez et al., 2012). Additionally, 
treatment with LPS of S. meliloti actually reduces ROS production and the 
expression of genes associated with defence responses in M. truncatula callus 
cell cultures (Tellstrom et al., 2007). 
The relatively brief nature, typically lasting only for a few hours, of 
activation of legume immunity by rhizobia is suggestive of active and long-
lasting suppression of defence responses. Both host and rhizobial factors 
have been implicated in moderating defence responses during this symbiosis. 
EPS of rhizobial cells have been implicated in negatively regulating defence 
responses and this is a common activity of EPS throughout the bacterial 
kingdom, either by binding receptors or masking antigens (Fraysse et al., 
2003). Previous work has demonstrated increased expression of M. truncatula 
defence genes in response to S. meliloti mutants deficient in succinoglycan 
(an EPS) relative to the wild type bacteria (Jones et al., 2008). LPS of 
Sinorhizobium meliloti and more specifically, the Lipid A epitope of this is able 
to suppress ROS production in M. truncatula. Curiously, this epitope actually 
stimulates oxidative burst in the non-legume N. tabacum (Scheidle et al., 2005; 
Tellstrom et al., 2007). There is evidence to suggest that the Nod factors 
secreted into the rhizosphere by nodule bacteria can suppress MTI; G. max 
demonstrates reduced ROS production in response to flg22 following pre-
treatment with Nod factor from B. japonicum (Liang et al., 2013). Host factors 
are also known to be important in moderating defence responses; P. sativum 
mutants in key symbiosis genes have been demonstrated to produce more 
robust defence responses after inoculation with Rhizboium leguminosarum, 
suggesting these genes may be important in suppression of immunity and that 
in their absence, rhizobia are seen as pathogens not symbionts (Ivanova et 
al., 2015). Taken together, there is a strong case that legume and rhizobial 
effectors have co-evolved such that they are able to selectively minimize the 
extent of defence responses harmful to symbiosis (Oldroyd, 2013). 
Ralstonia solanacearum is a broad-spectrum phytopathogen associated 
with characteristic wilting in a wide variety of plant species: Ralstonia 
solanacearum is a bacterial pathogen found in soil that is able to infect and 
cause disease in over 200 different plant species including commercially 
important crops such as potato and tomato (Salanoubat et al., 2002). The 
combination of its exceptionally large host range, persistence in the 
environment (R. solanacearum can survive in many soil types for months 
without invading a host plant (van Elsas et al., 2000)) and the lethality of the 
disease it is associated with (bacterial wilt) mean R. solanacearum is one of 
the most intensely studied plant pathogens. 
Molecular determinants contributing to R. solanacearum pathogenicity: 
R. solanacearum has been found to secrete a large number of proteins 
through type II and III secretion systems. Many of these proteins are important 
or essential for virulence, suggesting that the pathogen relies on using 
effectors to manipulate the host by either down-regulating defence pathways 
or enhancing access to nutrients (Poueymiro and Genin, 2009). 
The pathogenesis cycle of R. solanacearum begins when bacteria in 
the soil recognize the presence of a potential host plant nearby. This is thought 
to be mediated by PrhA on the bacterial membrane which is directed against 
some of cell wall pattern and activates expression of virulence genes upon its 
detection (Aldon et al., 2000). Determinants of motility (fliC and fliM) and 
chemotaxis (CheA and CheW) are also important virulence factors for the 
bacteria, suggesting they have roles in mediating contact between the 
pathogen and host (Tans-Kersten et al., 2001; Yao and Allen, 2006). 
The bacteria then gain entry to the plant through naturally occurring 
gaps in the roots or wounds. The bacteria has been observed to preferentially 
colonize the elongation zone of the primary root and the primordia or emerging 
lateral roots where the epidermis is weakest (Vasse et al., 1995). The bacteria 
is also known to possess several hydrolytic enzymes that are capable of 
degrading components of plant cell walls, which are thus contributors to 
virulence, although it is not known if these contribute to the capacity to invade 
the root directly (Huang and Allen, 1997; Schell, 1987; Tans-Kersten et al., 
1998). 
Once a bacterium has entered the root it then begins to divide and 
colonize the intracellular spaces of the underlying cortex. From here, there is 
penetration of the vasculature and ultimately invasion of the shoots via the 
xylem (Vasse et al., 1995). This would involve breaching the Casparian strip 
of the endodermis and the mechanism by which this is achieved is unclear. 
The bacterium possesses two putative drug efflux pumps, acrA and dinF, 
which likely protect the pathogen from host antimicrobials during the 
colonization process (Brown et al., 2007). 
The bulk of R. solanacearum EPS is comprised of the 
exopolysaccharide EPS I and this is thought to be only produced when 
bacterial densities in the xylem are sufficient via a quorum sensing mechanism 
(Lowe-Power et al., 2018). Excessive secretion of EPS by the bacteria is 
thought to facilitate the blockage of the vasculature and be responsible for the 
characteristic wilting and death of infected plants (Kao et al., 1992).  
R. solanacearum as a model for legume-pathogen interactions: Although 
legumes are not commonly used as a model to study pathogenesis in plants, 
the interaction with R. solanacearum represents the best characterized M 
truncatula pathosystem and best characterized pathosystem involving 
legumes. Some strains of R. solanacearum are able to induce disease 
symptoms in the susceptible M. truncatula A17 wild type, cumulating in 
characteristic wilting in a matter of days to weeks (Vailleau et al., 2007). Root 
pathogenesis in M. truncatula is dependent on the activity of Type III Secretion 
Systems possessed by the bacteria (Turner et al., 2009) and one particular 
effector, GALA7, is essential for infection (Angot et al., 2006). R. 
solanacearum has also been demonstrated to cause limited pathogenesis in 
the legume L. japonicus although this study used inoculated leaves rather than 
roots (Nagata et al., 2008). 
 Moreau et al. has addressed the transcriptional response of the M. 
truncatula to R. solanacearum and S. meliloti and identified the TF EFD to be 
strongly up-regulated in response to both. Furthermore, efd-1 null mutant 
plants mutants are resistant to infection by R. solanacearum, suggesting that 
this host gene contributes virulence. The positive effect of EFD pathogenesis 
was dependent on cytokinin signalling (Moreau et al., 2014). MtEFD is also 
known to be up-regulated during nodulation and promote nodule maturation at 
the expense of the formation of new nodules, an activity also mediated via 
moderation of cytokinin signalling (Vernie et al., 2008). Although miRNAs 
involved in legume symbiosis have been researched extensively, there has 
been very little published research on the role of miRNAs in defence response 
responses in legumes. Formey et al. have identified miRNAs responsive to R. 
solanacearum and predicted targets of these, but no functional analysis has 
taken place beyond this (Formey et al., 2014). QTL analysis has mapped the 
basis of resistance to R. solanacearum infection to the MtQRRS1 locus which 
is predicted to comprise 7 R genes (Ben et al., 2013), but little else is known 
about the locus besides this. 
In investigating pathogen-symbiosis intersections, a synthetic biology 
approach using a strain of R. solanacearum transformed with the symbiotic 
plasmid from Cupriavidus taiwanensis (the natural symbiont of the legume 
Mimosa pudica) was carried out. Interestingly, this work has shown that a 
small number of mutations is sufficient to allow a non-rhizobial strain of 
bacteria to induce some stages of nodulation. It should be noted that Ralstonia 
is not able to cause disease in M. pudica, but inactivation of the gene hrcV (a 
structural component of a type III secretion system) resulted in the formation 
of nodule-like structures and knockout of hrpG allowed colonization of nodule 
cells by the bacteria (Marchetti et al., 2010). The nodule-like structures formed 
by the bacteria resembled nodules in appearance and were invaded by 
infection threads. Subsequent experiments using the same system led to 
reduced immunogenicity of the bacteria (Marchetti et al., 2017; Marchetti et 
al., 2014). Although this cannot be considered a mutualism because the 
resulting nodules were unable to fix nitrogen, this demonstrates a pathway that 
a pathogen could transition into a commensal or at least non-pathogenic 
invader, in line with theory that nodulation evolved from parasitic interactions. 
Aims: immunity is important during symbiotic interactions between legumes 
and rhizobia with moderation of host immunity usually required for successful 
nodulation. The current hypothesis is that during the initial interaction between 
the bacteria and plant, rhizobial MAMPs initially activate MTI but this is quickly 
supressed and the symbiosis is able to proceed (Cao et al., 2017). The 
molecular determinants of this transition, especially from the host plant 
perspective, are poorly determined. Therefore, the response of the model 
legume M. truncatula to its symbiont Sinorhizobium medicae and the pathogen 
Ralstonia solanacearum was contrasted over time to identify genes that could 
be responsible for the transition from a state of defence to symbiosis. This was 
carried out by first using RT-qPCR to assay timings of response using genes 
that serve as markers for defence and symbiosis. Subsequently, RNAseq was 
used to identify novel transcripts involved in these processes. 
Results: 
To maximize physiological relevance plants used in these experiments (Figure 
4.1) was grown in pots containing perlite and vermiculite (Figure 4.1A), rather 
than on agar plates. Perlite and vermiculite mimic the physical properties of 
soil but can be autoclaved which permitted these experiments to be conducted 
in pseudosterile conditions. The system also allowed seedlings sufficient 
space for root growth over an extended period of time, enabling mature roots 
to be studied and sampled. 
 Plants were inoculated with either a symbiont or pathogen. 
Sinorhizobium medicae WSM419 (rhizobia, Figure 4.1D) was used to induce 
nodulation in plants instead of the model Sinorhizobium meliloti 1021 system 
as the former is a naturally occurring symbiont of M. truncatula and the 
resulting symbiosis is more efficient in terms or nitrogen fixation (Terpolilli et 
al., 2008). R. solanacearum (ralstonia, Figure 4.1E) was used as a pathogen 
(see below for rationale). Plants infected with ralstonia were grown with replete 
nitrogen (15 mM NH4NO3) to ensure they were sufficiently resourced to form 
defence responses whilst plants inoculated with rhizobia were grown in the 
complete absence of nitrogen to avoid inhibition of nodulation. Therefore, 
control plants were also grown in the presence (Figure 4.1C) or absence 
(Figure 4.1B) of nitrogen to serve as baselines for these experiments. At 
intervals (Figure 4.1F) chosen to encompass early interactions with the 
treatments up to late stage ralstonia pathogenesis and nodules being visible 
on rhizobia-treated roots (Figure 4.1G), the whole root system, including 
nodules were applicable, was harvested (Figure 4.1H-K, see methods), RNA 
extracted and gene expression analysis carried out using RT-qPCR and 
RNAseq. 
R. solanacearum is able to infect and induce wilting in M. truncatula: To 
compare defence and symbiosis responses in plants, a biotic treatment 
capable of inducing the former was required. For this purpose, the broad-
spectrum root pathogen R. solanacearum was tested. To clarify that ralstonia 
is able to infect and cause disease in M. truncatula within the conditions of 
these experiments, 3 day old seedlings were treated with ralstonia in the same 
perlite and vermiculite pot system used in subsequent experiments (see 
methods) and observed for symptoms of infection. Initially, infected plants do 
not show any signs of disease but then plants begin to wilt dramatically around 
2 weeks after infection with apparent death of the host plant occurring 3-4 
weeks after the initial inoculation (Figure 4.2). The characteristic wilting 
symptoms and timescale of this event is broadly consistent with ralstonia 
infection in other susceptible species (Mukhtar et al., 2008; Tans-Kersten et 
al., 2001). 
 To clarify the efficacy of S. medicae strain 419 in the perlite-vermiculite 
pot system, plants were also grown for 4 weeks following S. medicae 
inoculation. Plants inoculated with rhizobia (Figure 4.3C) had observably more 
above ground biomass than mock treated plants (Figure 4.3A) although by this 
stage, the total amount of nitrogen fixed was not sufficient to catch up with the 
size of plants grown with replete nitrogen (Figure 4.3B). 
Figure 4.1: Overview of experimental design. 2 day old M. truncatula 
seedlings were transplanted into pots (A) filled with perlite and vermiculite and 
watered from below with a nutrient solution containing 0 (B) or 15 mM 
ammonium nitrate (C). Within each nitrogen level, plants were either mock-
inoculated or inoculated with S. medicae (D) or R. solanacearum (E) 
respectively. At a range of timepoints (F) from immediately before to 12 days 
after inoculation, by which point nodules were visible on rhizobia treated roots 
(G), the whole root system of seedlings were harvested (H) and subject to 
RNA extraction (I). Samples were than assayed (J) for the expression of 
putative marker genes for symbiosis or defence by RT-qPCR whilst select 
samples were analysed using RNAseq, based on RT-qPCR results (K). 
Figure 4.2: Phenotype of M truncatula plants infected with R. 
solanacearum. Representative picture of plants either mock-inoculated (left) 
or inoculated with R. solanacearum (ralstonia, right) (B) photographed at 
immediately before (A/B) 12 (C/D), 21 (E/F) and 28 (G/H) days after 
inoculation (DAI). Scale bars represent 1 cm. n=6.  
0 DAI
12 DAI
21 DAI
28 DAI
Mock Ralstonia
Figure 4.3: Phenotypic effects of nitrogen treatment and S. medicae 
inoculation on growth in M. truncatula. Representative plants 
photographed after 4 weeks growth with no nitrogen (A), 15 mM ammonium 
nitrate (B) or no nitrogen and inoculated with S. medicae 419. Scale bars (to 
right of panel labels) represent 1 cm. n=6. 
Identifying marker genes for symbiosis and defence:  
To identify at which timepoints the response to rhizobia and ralstonia occurred 
and the timescale of the response, RT-qPCR was employed to assay the 
expression of marker genes that are associated with nodulation and defence 
responses in M. truncatula. Therefore, approaches were taken to identify 
candidate genes that may function as markers for these processes. 
ENOD11 (Early Nodulin 11, Medtr3g415670), is commonly used as a 
marker for symbiosis in M. truncatula as is up-regulated during interactions 
with both rhizobia and arbuscular mycorrhizae (Journet et al., 2001). NIN 
(Medtr5g099060) is responsible for regulating many events during nodulation 
and is also known to be strongly induced by rhizobia treatment (Vernie et al., 
2015). These two genes were chosen as symbiosis markers. 
Although marker genes for responses to rhizobial symbiosis in M. 
truncatula are well characterized, the pathways of defence and are not so well 
established in this model. Therefore, one approach to identify marker genes 
for these responses is to identify homologs from the corresponding and much 
better studied pathway in A. thaliana. To identify homologs of A. thaliana 
genes in M. truncatula, the protein homologs tool on Phytozome v12.1 
(Goodstein et al., 2012) was used to query each gene of interest using the 
sequence from the A. thaliana TAIR10 annotation version (Berardini et al., 
2015; Huala et al., 2001) against sequences from the M. truncatula Mt4.0 
annotation version (Tang et al., 2014), using protein similarity as a metric. 
Candidate homologs were determined on the basis of the extent of similarity 
between the protein sequences. In instances where multiple genes very 
closely matched the candidate (to be expected due to the genome duplication 
of M. truncatula (Young et al., 2011)) all hits were considered as potential 
homologs and were considered for further study. 
 Candidate marker genes for defence responses were selected from 
genes known to be involved in the A. thaliana innate immune pathway. FLS2 
(At5g46330) is a receptor-like kinase that is sensitive to the MAMP flagellin 
commonly found on many bacteria and to flg22, a 22 amino acid epitope within 
this (Chinchilla et al., 2006; Gomez-Gomez and Boller, 2000). CYP82C2 
(Cytochrome P450, family 82, subfamily C, polypetide 2, At4g31970), PHI1 
(Phosphate-induced 1, At1g35140) and FOX (FAD-linked oxidoreductase, 
At1g26380) are all strongly up-regulated by flg22 (Boudsocq et al., 2010). The 
enzyme-encoding gene ICS1 (Isochorismate synthase 1, At1g74710) is 
responsible for the synthesis of the defence hormone SA during plant defence 
responses and is also used as a defence marker (Wildermuth et al., 2001). 
 In addition, a literature review of the candidate homologs was used to 
provide further evidence in support of their use as markers for nodulation or 
defence. The top hit for FLS2 (Medtr4g094610) was found to have been 
studied previously in M. truncatula A17 and had been demonstrated to be 
strongly up-regulated in response to Pseudomonas syringae DC3000 (Chen 
et al., 2017). This supported the prediction that this gene has the same 
function as its A. thaliana counterpart and may therefore function as good a 
marker for defence responses triggered by flg22 or R. solanacearum 
inoculation. Researching one putative homolog of a gene ultimately not used 
in this study showed it had been used as a defence marker in M. truncatula in 
response to the pathogen Phytophthora palmivora (Rey et al., 2017). Another 
gene used as a defence marker in this same study, Medtr1g075340, was 
included. 
Once candidate genes were identified, transcript sequences were 
recovered from the M. truncatula genome annotation 4.0v2. Primers were 
designed against these sequences using Primer3 (Koressaar and Remm, 
2007; Untergasser et al., 2012). Once primers were designed they were 
aligned against the M. truncatula genome using BLAST (Altschul et al., 1990) 
to ensure they only bound within the sequence of the gene they were directed 
against. For full list of primers used, see Table 4.1. Primers were used for the 
genes MtUbiquitin, MtUBC9 and Mt-tubulin (Kakar et al., 2008) to determine 
housekeeping gene expression and the average of the expression of the three 
genes was used to normalize marker gene expression.   
Target 
Identifier Forward primer Reverse primer 
MtFLS2 Medtr4g094610 TGGAACGGAACAGCTTGTCA TCAGGATCAGAGAGGGTGCA 114 
MtNIN Medtr5g099060 TTCCAAGAAGCGTGCAGTGA GTTGGCATGGTGAGCAAGTG 141 
MtENOD11 Medtr3g415670 TGGTAACCAGCCTCCACCTA CCACATGCAAAGATGGGACG 210 
MtFOX Medtr2g031590 GGGAGCAACTGACACTAGCA CAGAAAGAGGCGATGCTGGA 212 
MtCYP82C Medtr6g008530 ACATGGTCGTTTCGTCTCGT ACAATCTTGCGAAGTTGGCG 115 
MtICS1 Medtr4g076520 TGTTGGTTCGGCTGTTTCCT ACCTCCATATGCGCGAATCA 112 
MtPHI1 Medtr5g464340 TCGCGTACATTTGGGTTGGA CCATTCCGTCAAGACCCACA 135 
Unknown Medtr1g075340 AGTTGGTTGGAGTGGAAGGAA TCCAAACCCAAACCCTGTCA 112 
MtUbiquitin Medtr3g091400 GCAGATAGACACGCTGGGA AACTCTTGGGCAGGCAATAA 100 
MtUBC9 Medtr7g116940 GGTTGATTGCTCTTCTCTCCCC AAGTGATTGCTCGTCCAACCC 100 
Mt-tubulin Medtr7g089120 TTTGCTCCTCTTACATCCCGTG GCAGCACACATCATGTTTTTGG 100 
Table 4.1: Primer sequences used for RT-qPCR analysis. Primers were 
diluted to a working concentration of 10 M and stored at -20 C prior to usage. 
AL = Amplicon length. 
To validate the success of the rhizobial inoculation and deduce which samples 
show the strongest response to rhizobia, indicative of nodulation 
establishment, the expression of ENOD11 (Figure 4.4A) and NIN (Figure 4.4B) 
in roots infected with rhizobia was tested by RT-qPCR. Both genes behave 
similarly with very low basal expression in uninfected roots. ENOD11 first has 
significant up-regulation at 4 DAI with rhizobia and is maintained at greatly 
elevated expression until the final 12 DAI timepoint. NIN expression is not 
significantly higher upon rhizobial inoculation until 2 DAI and then this level of 
expression is maintained until the end of the experiment. The timing and 
amplitude of these expression changes are broadly consistent with the 
behaviour of these genes upon inoculation with other strains of rhizobia 
(Journet et al., 2001; Vernie et al., 2015). 
Next, to test if ralstonia or rhizobia inoculation induced transcription of 
putative FLS2 homolog Medtr4g094610, expression of this gene was tested 
by RT-qPCR (Figure 4.5). In rhizobia-inoculated plants, MtFLS2 shows 
significantly increased expression at 2 DAI (Figure 4.5A) but not at other 
timepoints. MtFLS2 does not show significant DE at any point relative to mock 
inoculated plants after ralstonia inoculation (Figure 4.5B). 
Figure 4.4: Expression of symbiosis marker genes NIN and ENOD11 in 
M. truncatula roots. Expression of ENOD11 (A) and NIN (B) relative to 
average expression of housekeeping genes Medtr3g091400, Medtr7g116940 
and Medtr7g089120 in mock- and rhizobia-treated roots. Error bars represent 
standard error (n=3+ biological replicates each consisting of 5 seedlings) and 
asterisks denote significant differences compared to mock-inoculated plants 
as determined by the Students T-test at P < 0.05 (*), 0.01 (**) or 0.001 (***). 
0 hours 30 mins 1 hour 3 hours 6 hours 12 hours 1 day 2 days 4 days 6 days 9 days 12 days
Treatment
Rhizobia
Low nitrogen
0 hours 30 mins 1 hour 3 hours 6 hours 12 hours 1 day 2 days 4 days 6 days 9 days 12 days
Treatment
Rhizobia
Low nitrogen
ENOD11
Figure 4.5: Expression of putative FLS2 homolog Medtr4g094610 in M. 
truncatula roots. Expression of MtFLS2 in response to the pathogen R. 
solanacearum (A) and the symbiont S. medicae (B) relative to average 
expression of housekeeping genes Medtr3g091400, Medtr7g116940 and 
Medtr7g089120. Error bars represent standard error (n=2 biological replicates 
each consisting of 5 seedlings) and asterisks denote significant differences 
0 hours 30 mins 1 hour 3 hours 6 hours 12 hours 1 day 2 days 4 days 6 days 9 days 12 days
Treatment
Ralstonia
High nitrogen
0 hours 30 mins 1 hour 3 hours 6 hours 12 hours 1 day 2 days 4 days 6 days 9 days 12 days
Treatment
Rhizobia
Low nitrogen
compared to mock-inoculated plants as determined by the Students T-test at 
P < 0.05 (*). 
As shown above, FLS2 expression was not induced by ralstonia as would have 
been expected. To attempt to identify alternative defence marker genes but 
also to explore the response of MtFLS2, RT-qPCR was used to assay putative 
defence marker gene expression in plants treated with 100 nM of the 
immunogenic peptide flg22 (Figure 4.6). This concentration was chosen 
because it has been shown to elicit defence responses in the model plant A. 
thaliana (Boudsocq et al., 2010). Because transcriptional responses to flg22 
in A. thaliana are short-term, this assay was used only for samples from plants 
at 30 mins, 1 hour and 3 hours after flg22 treatment. The putative M. truncatula 
homologs of 6 genes associated with defence in A. thaliana; Medtr1g075340, 
FOX, CYP82C, ICS1, PHI-1 and FLS2 were tested. 
None of the genes tested were significantly induced by flg22 relative to 
the 0H (untreated) timepoint, including MtFLS2 (Figure 4.6F). Interestingly, the 
basal expression of some of these genes, as determined at this first timepoint. 
Defence markers would be expected to exhibit very low basal expression. 
MtFOX (Figure 4.6B), MtCYP82C (Figure 4.6C), MtICS1 (Figure 4.6D) is over 
tenfold higher than the average expression of the housekeeping genes used 
to calculate their relative expression. 
Figure 4.6: Expression of putative defence marker genes in response to 
flg22. Expression of Medtr1g075340 (A), MtFOX (B), MtCYP82C (C), MtICS1 
(D), MtPHI-1 (E) and MtFLS2 in response to the treatment with 100 nM flg22 
relative to average expression of housekeeping genes Medtr3g091400, 
Medtr7g116940 and Medtr7g089120. Error bars represent standard error (n=2 
biological replicates each consisting of 5 seedlings). No significant differences 
were found compared to plants 0 HAI as determined by the Students T-test. 
Using RNAseq to identify rhizobia- and ralstonia-responsive genes: 
Overall, the results from RT-qPCR were inconclusive, but longer-term effects 
of bacterial inoculation suggested that the RNA samples could be informative 
for further study. To identify genes responding to ralstonia, to be used as 
0 hours 30 min 1 hour 3 hours
Medtr1g075340
Time after inoculation
0 hours 30 min 1 hour 3 hours
Medtr2g031590 (FOX)
Time after inoculation
0 hours 30 min 1 hour 3 hours
Medtr6g008530 (CYP82C)
Time after inoculation
0 hours 30 min 1 hour 3 hours
Medtr4g076520 (ICS1)
Time after inoculation
0 hours 30 min 1 hour 3 hours
Medtr5g464340 (PHI-1)
Time after inoculation
0 hours 30 min 1 hour 3 hours
Medtr4g094610 (FLS2)
Time after inoculation
possible markers of M. truncatula defence responses in a comparison of, the 
regulation of defence and symbiotic responses in this model, select samples 
were used for whole transcriptome profiling using RNAseq. The samples 
chosen were rhizobia and ralstonia 3 and 12 hours after inoculation, in addition 
to samples taken immediately before inoculation (0H) in both replete and 
deplete nitrogen conditions to serve as a reference for the treated samples. 
The 3 and 12 hour timepoints were chosen to cover an early stage of the 
interaction between ralstonia and the plant, based on the hypothesis that these 
were more likely to at the point of MTI in the former case, and at a stage which 
ralstonia may be using effectors to reprogram host cells and likely induce ETI 
in the latter case.  
Libraries were prepared and sequenced with Illumina sequencing (see 
methods). Reads were trimmed and mapped to the M. truncatula genome 
annotation 4.0v2. Across all samples 84-88% of raw reads were uniquely 
mapped following processing representing between 16.5 and 30 million 
uniquely mapped reads. Principal component analysis was first used to ask if 
there were differences between treatments (Figure 4.7). The majority of 
treatments clustered tightly together although the first two principal 
components displayed on the plot only account for just over half of the total 
variance in the dataset. Both rhizobia and ralstonia 12 HAI samples are 
noticeably separated from the rest of the samples on the basis of the first two 
principal components. 
Figure 4.7: Principal component analysis of samples used in RNAseq 
experiments. PCA plot of normalized RNAseq aligned counts data from 
samples treated with R. solanacearum immediately before (red), 3 hours 
(cyan) and 12 hours (green) after inoculation or S. medicae immediately 
before (gold), 3 hours (magenta) or 12 hours (blue) after inoculation. 
Next, DE genes were calculated using DEseq2 (Table 4.2) in the 3 HAI 
and 12 HAI rhizobia and ralstonia samples relative to the 0 HAI (immediately 
before inoculation) samples (Figure 4.8A). The number of genes showing 
significant changes in regulation in the 3 HAI samples is small with 52 (44 up-
regulated, 8 down-regulated) and 42 (22 up-regulated, 20 down-regulated) 
15 16
1820
20 0 20 40
PC1: 31% variance
Ral 0H
Rhi 0H
Ral 12 H
Ral 3H
Rhi 12H
Rhi 3H
genes DE in the rhizobia and ralstonia samples respectively and increases to 
222 (158 up-regulated, 64 down-regulated) and 622 (413 up-regulated, 209 
down-regulated) in the corresponding 12 HAI samples. 
Experiment Rhizobia 
3 HAI 
Rhizobia 
12 HAI 
Ralstonia 
3 HAI 
Ralstonia 
12 HAI 
Total DEGs 52 222 42 622 
Induced 44 158 22 313 
Repressed 8  64 20 209 
Table 4.2: Differential gene expression induced by ralstonia or rhizobia 
inoculation. 
Although a proportion of DE genes are unique to a single experiment, over 
half of the genes DE in every treatment except ralstonia 12 HAI are also DE 
in other experiments (Figure 4.8B). This is most likely due to conservation of 
gene expression responses between timepoints of the same inoculant (i.e. 
rhizobia 3HAI and 12 HAI) and as a consequence of circadian effects (see 
discussion). 
There are three genes which are differentially expressed in every single 
experiment. Two of these genes, annotated to be a cation transport ATPase 
(Medtr8g013810) and a spermidine hydroxycinnamoyl transferase 
(Medtr3g049150) are amongst the most strongly up-regulated in response to 
both ralstonia and rhizobia, at both timepoints, indicating either strong early 
increase related to circadian regulation or an important role in both ralstonia 
and rhizobia responses. The third, Medtr2g024300 is very strongly down-
regulated in both rhizobia and ralstonia 3 HAI but up-regulated in response to 
both treatments 12 HAI. This pattern is more consistent with regulation 
according to a circadian pattern and thus it might not be directly related to 
ralstonia or rhizobia responses. Another likely indicator of circadian effects in 
the dataset is that all 5 genes that are DE in both treatments at 3 HAI and all 
but 2 of the 116 DE genes at 12 HAI show the same direction of change 
(induction or repression) in both treatments with similar fold changes. Although 
not present in the WL3 dataset, Medtr1g098160 is upregulated in the other 3 
datasets. This protein has high homology to the A. thaliana protein GIGANTEA 
which is a circadian regulated gene that peaks in expression around 10 hours 
after dawn (Fowler et al., 1999) suggesting that regulation of this protein is 
conserved in M. truncatula. 
Direct comparisons between ralstonia and rhizobia inoculated plants 
are difficult because ralstonia inoculation was carried out on plants grown in 
replete N whilst plants that were inoculated with rhizobia were grown in the 
absence of N. This issue can be partially addressed by identifying DE genes 
between the two sets of T=0 samples, which allows for some genes 
differentially expressed in response to N to be identified. This leads to the 
identification of 90 genes differentially expressed (70 up-regulated and 20 
down-regulated) as a result of the differing N levels. These include many 
genes with annotations suggestive of a role in nitrogen responses (see 
discussion). 
To explore the processes that change upon rhizobia or ralstonia 
inoculation, a GO term overrepresentation analysis was carried out. In both 
the 3 HAI samples for rhizobia and ralstonia, the number of DE genes is small 
and consequently, overrepresented GO terms are generic, although this is 
also a consequence of many M. truncatula genes being poorly functionally 
characterized. Despite this limitation there were some interesting results. The 
GO terms developmental process (P=1.8e-03) and phosphatase activity 
(P=3.5e-02) both appear in the rhizobia 3 HAI sample whilst genes from the 
ralstonia 3 HAI sample are enriched for regulation of cellular biosynthetic 
processes (P=1.20e-02). 
Figure 4.8: Differentially expressed genes in response to R. 
solanacearum and S. medicae inoculation 3 and 12 hours after 
inoculation. Total number of DE genes (A) during each experiment (n=3) with 
the proportion of these showing up-regulation shaded in orange and those 
down-regulated in grey. Select GO terms overrepresented amongst 
experiments (sets) are included. UpSet plot (B) showing overlap between 
different sets. Where points on the X-axis are connected with lines denotes 
conservation of DE genes between sets. Comparisons between sets for which 
there is not any intersection are omitted. 
Amongst the 413 genes up-regulated following 12 HAI with ralstonia are 31 
genes annotated with the GO term defence responses (P=7.2e-05). 30 of 
these are predicted to be LRR proteins. LRR proteins typically function as R 
proteins and therefore require additional proteins to signal through (McHale et 
al., 2006). This would suggest that there are likely additional genes involved 
in defence pathways but not annotated as such, including targets downstream 
of these receptors, present in the data which are also involved in defence 
responses but not annotated as such. The GO term phosphorylation was also 
overrepresented amongst these 413 genes (P=5.5e-05). Whilst this will likely 
encompass many generic cellular processes, proteins responsible for signal 
transduction downstream of LRRs are likely to have kinase activity (McHale et 
al., 2006) and therefore might also be involved in defence responses. 
 The 158 12 HAI rhizobia induced genes are overrepresented for the 
GO term lipid transport (P=7.2e-04). Of the 6 genes with this annotation, 4 
are repressed and 2 are induced, including the third top hit from the dataset. 
8 genes in this dataset also have the annotation defence responses although 
this is not statistically significant across the set as a whole. 4 of these are 
shared with the ralstonia 12 HAI set with an additional 2 each annotated as 
LRRs and defensins. 
 In conclusion, both rhizobia and ralstonia do induce small numbers of 
transcriptional changes even as early as 3 HAI and by 12 HAI hundreds of 
genes are induced or repressed. Many of these genes do not have functional 
annotations but it is clear from this which are annotated that there is specific 
responses associated with either bacteria occurring. 
Discussion: 
R. solanacearum is able to induce bacterial wilt in M. truncatula: Previous 
study by Vailleau et al. has demonstrated the susceptibility of M. truncatula 
A17 to R. solanacearum (Vailleau et al., 2007). Due to differences in 
experimental design employed in the work presented here, it was first 
necessary to observe the phenotypic effects of R. solanacearum inoculation 
on plants grown in these conditions. In particular, the age of the seedlings at 
the point of inoculation were different; seedlings were 3 days old in these 
experiments and 13 days old in the Vailleau et al. study. Seedlings were 
inoculated at younger age in the experiments in this chapter as germinating 
seedlings in the rhizosphere are likely to encounter pathogens and symbionts 
immediately. Therefore, it was necessary to ensure that not only did R. 
solanacearum still induce disease from this early stage but also that infected 
plants survived long enough to obtain sufficient root material for molecular 
analysis. 
 The symptoms of pathogenesis (Figure 4.2) observed here were 
identical to those observed in the Vailleau et al. study. However, the 
progression of pathogenesis was slower in these experiments with symptoms 
of wilt not apparent until 2 weeks after inoculation and wilting occurring 3-4 
weeks after inoculation. In the Vailleau et al. study, the onset of wilting was 
observed within a week and the majority of plants were severely wilted or dead 
within 2 weeks (Vailleau et al., 2007). This is likely explained by nutritional 
differences between the two experiments; plants inoculated with ralstonia in 
these experiments were watered with a replete nutrient solution and therefore 
were likely better able to resist the infection. 
 This clarifies that R. solanacearum is a suitable model for studying 
pathogenesis in M. truncatula ecotype A17. The use of ralstonia as a 
pathosystem allows for defence responses in M. truncatula, currently poorly 
understood, to be studied in greater detail. Understanding how M. truncatula 
responds to pathogens is important because this allows greater insight into 
the interplay between symbiotic interactions (i.e. nodulation) and pathogenic 
interactions in the rhizosphere. 
S. medicae strain WSM419 induces expression of ENOD11 and NIN in M. 
truncatula roots: S. meliloti 1021 is the most commonly used model to study 
nodulation in M. truncatula. However, whilst M. alfalfa is a natural host, 
symbiosis with M. truncatula is not a pairing that occurs in nature and its 
perpetuation as a model in this context is a legacy of it having its genome 
sequenced prior to other, more compatible symbionts. S. meliloti-M. truncatula 
symbiosis does result in nodule formation and some degree of nitrogen fixation 
but the symbiosis is not optimal (Terpolilli et al., 2008). Therefore, the 
experiments in this chapter were carried out using S. medicae 419 which is 
able to fix nitrogen with greater efficiency during symbiosis (Terpolilli et al., 
2008). 
 S. medicae inoculation results in the induction of the nodulation marker 
genes ENOD11 and NIN (Figure 4.4). Both genes are very strongly 
transcribed in response to rhizobial inoculation, beginning 2-4 days after initial 
rhizobial inoculation and continue to exhibit elevated expression at the final 12 
day timepoint at which point nodules are evident on rhizobia-treated roots. 
Expression of both of these genes within these timeframes is established in S. 
meliloti-M. truncatula symbiosis (Journet et al., 2001; Vernie et al., 2015). 
Given that these genes are known to be essential for nodulation, these 
expression patterns would be expected to be conserved between different 
compatible rhizobial species. 
Although these expression patterns of NIN and ENOD11 are broadly 
consistent with data from other rhizobia  M. truncatula interactions, there is 
evidence that both of these genes are actually expressed more rapidly within 
the context of the symbiosis. ENOD11 expression has been detected by GUS 
staining of pMtENOD11--glucuronidase and RT-qPCR as early as two hours 
after Nod factor treatment in epidermal root hair cells (Charron et al., 2004; 
Journet et al., 2001). Expression of GUS under the NIN promoter also 
suggests that NIN is expressed exclusively within the epidermis 24 hours after 
Nod factor treatment (Vernie et al., 2015). Because the expression data 
presented here is from whole roots, it is possible that expression is not initially 
detectable when averaged out across the breadth of the whole root and only 
becomes significantly different later in the symbiosis when NIN and ENOD11 
are expressed in other layers of the root. This is consistent with the knowledge 
that both of these markers do become expressed in the cortex following 
infection thread formation (Journet et al., 2001; Yoro et al., 2014). 
Putative defence markers do not respond to ralstonia, rhizobia or flg22: 
Surprisingly, expression of MtFLS2 was not found to be increased by ralstonia 
(Figure 4.5 B) inoculation and only 2 DAI following rhizobia inoculation (Figure 
4.5A). This increase seen 2 DAI could be an artefact of insufficient biological 
replication; although rhizobia have been demonstrated to induce defence 
responses during nodulation as reviewed previously, this normally occurs at a 
much earlier point in the interaction. 
It has been demonstrated that R. solanacearum does possess MAMPs 
that activate immune responses in A. thaliana. However, these responses are 
consistent between extracts from wild type R. solanacearum and fliC or flhDC 
mutants deficient in flagellin production. Furthermore, wild type bacteria are 
able to induce similar disease symptoms in both wild type and fls2-101 
mutants and a peptide based on the region of bacterial flagellin corresponding 
to flg22 does not elicit defence responses (Pfund et al., 2004). This suggests 
that R. solanacearum flagellin is not immunogenic and therefore if MtFLS2 has 
the same role as its counterpart in A. thaliana, its lack of response to ralstonia 
could be explained. 
From a review of the literature, it would be expected that rhizobia should 
also elicit defence responses, although it should be noted that MtFLS2 is not 
induced by S. meliloti in the Chen et al. study either (Chen et al., 2017). 
However, the strength of rhizobial inoculations used in many of these studies 
are likely far higher than the plants would encounter naturally and thus the 
defence responses may not be physiologically relevant. For instance some 
studies have used an OD600 of 0.8 (Libault et al., 2010) or 1.0 (Lohar et al., 
2006) when the OD600 of 0.05 used in these experiments is sufficient to result 
in nodule formation and nitrogen fixation (Figure 4.1G, Figure 4.3) and the 
reported induction of defence-related genes could be a consequence of 
overexposure to rhizobia. Expression of LjWRKY33 and LjMAPK3 have been 
reported following inoculation with OD600 0.02 M. loti although MAPK 
phosphorylation in the same study required inoculation with OD600 0.5 (Lopez-
Gomez et al., 2012). 
Although FLS2 is induced during immune responses in A. thaliana 
(Gomez-Gomez and Boller, 2000), this induction is not usually potent when 
compared to other defence markers and the activity of the receptor is thought 
to be regulated predominantly at the posttranscriptional level (Withers and 
Dong, 2017). Therefore, the inclusion of MtFLS2 in this study was based on 
the data suggesting that it was very strongly responsive to P. syringae in M. 
truncatula (Chen et al., 2017) rather than on the basis of the A. thaliana 
homolog being a robust marker of immune responses. Even if R. 
solanacearum and S. medicae lack the required MAMPs to activate its 
expression, MtFLS2 was not found to be induced by flg22 treatment either 
(Figure 4.6F). It may be possible that the response of MtFLS2 to P. syringae 
inoculation is an effect associated specifically with this pathogen, and this 
could be explored in future work. 
Experiments using flg22 also did not elicit any induction of the other 
putative defence markers tested (Figure 4.6). For example, a putative homolog 
of PER4, another flg22-responsive gene in A. thaliana (Boudsocq et al., 2010) 
had been identified for use here (but it was not ultimately tested due to 
unfavourable primer annealing properties). It had been used as a defence 
marker in a study (Rey et al., 2017) on the role of the GRAS protein RAD1 
(Required for arbuscule development 1) moderating infection by the pathogen 
Phytophthora palmivora. This study also described another gene, 
Medtr1g075340, as a defence marker which was found not to respond to flg22 
(figure 4.6A). Neither gene was shown to be up-regulated in response to P. 
palmivora however, and the basis on which the authors prescribe these genes 
as defence markers is unknown. 
It should also be noted that although flg22 is a very potent inducer of 
some genes associated with innate immunity in A. thaliana, it is not certain 
that it elicits the same response in M. truncatula. However, flg22 has been 
convincingly demonstrated to induce similar pathways in the legumes G. max 
and L. japonicus which belong to the same sub-family (Faboideae) as M. 
truncatula (Liang et al., 2013; Lopez-Gomez et al., 2012). More specifically, 
flg22 treatment has been shown to induce the expression of the DCL4 gene 
in M. truncatula. DCL4 belongs to the family of dicer-like proteins which are 
required for the generation of siRNAs and miRNAs (Tworak et al., 2016). DCL4 
was also shown to be induced in rhizobia-containing nodules although it is 
unclear if this is sufficient to suggest a link to innate immunity. Alternative 
approaches, such as measuring the production of ROS in the presence or 
absence of flg22 could be used to ask if the peptide is immunogenic in M. 
truncatula. 
Interplay between circadian rhythms and plant defence: The RNAseq 
expression levels (Figure 4.8) and flg22 RT-qPCR expression levels (Figure 
4.6) were calculated relative to 0 hour (immediately before treatment, see 
methods) samples instead of relative to mock treatments at the same 
timepoint. As treatment and sampling was synchronized such that the 0 hour 
timepoint occurred at dawn, this means that these samples are referenced 
against plants that are untreated but also collected at a different time of day. 
It is less likely that there will be significant developmental differences over such 
short periods of time but the possibility of circadian effects is certain. 
In addition to the confounding effects of expression of genes regulated 
by the circadian clock in some of the datasets, which can be difficult to 
uncouple from treatment-specific effects, there is a further layer of complexity 
when studying plant-microbe interactions since these may themselves also be 
influenced by circadian rhythms. The presence or absence of light influences 
the effectiveness of defence responses, particularly those associated with the 
SA pathway (Roden and Ingle, 2009) which would likely include those induced 
by R. solanacearum. This has been elegantly demonstrated by experiments 
inoculating A. thaliana with P. syringae at different times of the day with plants 
showing increased susceptibility at night and greater resistance during the day 
(Bhardwaj et al., 2011). Overexpression of key clock genes CCA1/LHY in A. 
thaliana also leads to increased susceptibility to both P. syringae and 
Hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis (Zhang et al., 2013). 
Whilst the 16 hour photoperiod used in these experiments ensures all 
samples were taken at either dawn or during the day, the possibility that the 
response to ralstonia or rhizobia inoculation seen in the RNAseq experiments 
includes effects related to the circadian rhythm of the plant is high. This could 
be addressed in future work for by carrying out gene expression profiling using 
the mock-inoculated samples at the 3 and 12 HAI timepoints. 
Insights into nitrogen metabolism in M. truncatula: Although these 
experiments were not designed to investigate N-responses, 90 genes that 
show altered expression following nitrogen provision can be identified by 
comparing the replete-/deplete-nitrogen T=0 samples which are essentially 
otherwise identical to mock-treated samples that have been grown on different 
N levels for 24 hours (see methods). 70 genes were found to be N-induced 
and 20 N-repressed. 
The most strongly induced of these is Medtr2g069273, which is an NCR 
peptide and thus suggests a role for this peptide beyond regulating the 
bacterial population of nodules (as discussed earlier). There are also some 
genes putatively involved in nitrate and amino acid metabolism present. These 
include nitrate-reductases (Medtr5g059820 and Medtr3g073180), a putative 
ferredoxin-nitrate reductase (Medtr4g086020), a serine-glyoxylate 
aminotransferase (Medtr5g090070), a class I glutamine amidotransferase 
(Medtr7g082570), putative components of NRT3.1 (Medtr4g104700 and 
Medtr4g104730) and an asparagine synthetase (Medtr3g464580). Amongst 
the down-regulated genes is an asparagine peptidase (Medtr1g018760) and 
a homolog of AtNRT2.5 (Medtr8g069775). Genes annotated with the GO 
terms iron ion binding, (P=0.019) heme binding (P=0.024) and tetrapyrrole 
binding (P=0.025) are significantly overrepresented amongst the nitrogen 
responsive genes. Although the most significant tetrapyrroles in plants are 
chlorophylls, these annotations are shared amongst the same group of 8 
genes, suggesting that the tetrapyrrole in question is more likely to be a 
seroheme, a co-factor of nitrite and sulphite reducing enzymes (Vavilin and 
Vermaas, 2002). 
 The young age of the seedlings (3 days at time of sampling) and 
absence of timepoints closer to nitrogen provision used for RNAseq limits the 
detail in which N-responses can be assayed. Sequencing of additional mock 
samples from later timepoints and the inclusion of shorter term timepoints 
would allow N-responses to be interrogated throughout development of M. 
truncatula seedlings. Given the relationship between nitrogen nutrition and 
nodulation, a better understanding of the primary nitrate response and later 
reprogramming of nitrogen metabolism in legumes may also provide insight 
into nodulation (Lagunas et al., 2019). 
Identification of defence-associated genes in M. truncatula: DE genes 
from the 12 HAI ralstonia samples would be expected to be enriched for 
defence-associated genes and this hypothesis is supported by the 
overrepresented GO term defence responses. However, this is assigned to 
genes on the basis of inference from homology to other proteins, rather than 
experimental evidence and may include genes not related to defence whilst 
omitting others, given the relatively poor understanding of defence signalling 
in M. truncatula. Therefore, in to attempt to identify novel defence-associated 
genes in this model, the DE genes from ralstonia 12 HAI sample were 
considered. To try to avoid the confounding effect from circadian changes in 
this dataset, DE genes intersecting with the 12 HAI rhizobia set were removed, 
leaving 505 genes (333 up-regulated, 172 down-regulated). Given that 
rhizobia treatment is associated with stimulation of immunity around this 
timescale (as discussed previously), removal of some defence-associated 
genes cannot be excluded by this approach. However, the GO term defence 
responses was still associated with 27 genes in this list, contrasted to 31 in 
the original dataset, suggesting that the majority of defence-associated genes 
are preserved. 
Two isoflavone synthases, MtIFS1 (Medtr7g027960) and MtIFS2 
(Medtr7g028020), are both strongly induced by ralstonia 12 HAI. Isoflavones 
are secondary metabolites conserved throughout Fabaceae. Although, little is 
known about isoflavones specifically in M. truncatula, these compounds have 
been widely associated with direct antimicrobial activity and can act as 
phytoalexin precursors across the Fabaceae family (Goyal et al., 2012). 
Several predicted wall-associated kinases (WAKs) were present amongst 
these genes (Medtr1g110180, Medtr2g031530, Medtr3g088760). WAK 
proteins recognize pectin, both present in cell walls and in fragments and thus 
have roles in regulating cell growth and recognition of pathogen attack (Kohorn 
and Kohorn, 2012) and therefore their induction by ralstonia is plausible. 
A calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (Medtr7g106710) with 
homology to the AtCPK1 is present in this list. In A. thaliana this protein is 
closely associated with defence pathways; its expression is induced during 
immunity and its overexpression leads to induction of genes associated with 
the SA pathway whilst loss of function leads to increased pathogen 
susceptibility (Coca and San Segundo, 2010). Furthermore, CPK1 is 
associated with ROS production and programmed-cell death during defence 
responses (Gao et al., 2013). Also present is a homolog of AtSD2-5 
(Medtr2g073250). This gene belongs to a family of proteins called S-domain 
receptor kinases that are associated with regulation of the self-incompatibility 
pathway in A. thaliana (Samuel et al., 2008). However, eFP browser data 
shows this gene is potently induced by bacterial MAMPs including flg22 and 
harpin (Brunner et al., 2007) and may therefore also be involved in defence 
pathways. 
In the 3 HAI ralstonia sample, one of the most up-regulated genes is a 
predicted pathogen-inducible alpha-dioxygenase (Medtr6g007770) which 
shares a high degree of conservation with the A. thaliana protein DOX1 
(dioxygenase 1). This protein is induced by various bacterial interactions and 
during the salicylic acid defence pathway (Blanco et al., 2005) and is 
understood to protect against oxidative stress during defence responses (De 
Leon et al., 2002). 
Testing the expression of these defence-associated genes in response 
to a generic inducer of innate immunity, such as flg22, would ascertain if these 
genes are likely to act as common components of the M. truncatula defence 
response or if they are induced specifically by ralstonia. It would also be 
worthwhile in future work to test the expression of these in all of the rhizobia-
inoculated plant samples by RT-qPCR to ask if they are associated with 
rhizobia-linked defence responses. The identification of defence markers in 
this species would be of broad benefit in understanding the role of immunity 
during nodulation and in studying M. truncatula-pathogen interactions. 
Interpreting early responses to rhizobia: Overall, neither the 3 HAI and 12 
HAI rhizobia datasets include many genes obviously associated with 
nodulation. By these timepoints, it is possible that a specific symbiotic 
response to rhizobia has not yet had a chance to form. However, expression 
of the marker ENOD11 has been demonstrated in the epidermis within hours 
of rhizobial inoculation as previously discussed. This lack of finding of strong 
gene expression changes could again be attributable to this dataset being 
generated from whole root samples because mixed patterns of induction and 
repression/low expression obscure cell type specific effects, such as found 
with early responses to rhizobia in the epidermis. The RNAseq data is in line 
with the finding of an absence of expression of symbiosis markers in earlier 
timepoints from the RT-qPCR data (Figure 4.4). 
 A predicted zinc transporter with high homology with the A. thaliana zinc 
transporter ZIP10 (ZRT/IRT-like protein 10) is activated 3 HAI with rhizobia. 
This gene (Medtr4g083570) has been characterized as zinc permease ZIP6 
in M. truncatula which is expressed exclusively in roots and nodules. Zinc is 
required as a co-factor for rhizobial nitrogenase and RNA interference of this 
gene results ineffective nitrogen fixation, suggesting it is involved in supplying 
zinc to fixing rhizobia (Abreu et al., 2017). However, this role is not consistent 
with expression at such an early timepoint. It is possible that this protein has 
additional roles in nodulation, possibly in root hair curling, given that A. thaliana 
ZIP10 is a regulator of root hair development (Di Cristina et al., 1996). It would 
be interesting to follow up on this finding. 
A higher than expected proportion of the genes in the 12 HAI rhizobia 
dataset were annotated with the GO term lipid transport due to the presence 
of 6 putative lipid transfer proteins.  Other lipid transfer proteins have been 
demonstrated to be involved in nodulation. For instance, the M. truncatula 
protein N5 has been demonstrated to be a positive regulator of nodulation; 
silencing of this gene leads to a significant (but not total) reduction in nodule 
number and its overexpression leads to hypernodulation. The gene is 
epidermis-specific and it is induced within days of S. meliloti inoculation (Pii et 
al., 2009; Pii et al., 2012). It is likely that other lipid transfer proteins have roles 
in nodulation during the early stages of the symbiosis, given that significant 
cellular reorganization is required for infection thread formation and 
preparation for division of cortical cells. 
Although the GO term lipid transport is not overrepresented amongst 
the 3 HAI rhizobia samples, some proteins related to this process are 
conserved between this and the 12 HAI dataset. These include a lipid transfer 
protein (Medtr1g012700) and a GDSL-like lipase (Medtr5g074270) which are 
the first and third most strongly induced genes in this dataset once circadian 
genes are excluded, reinforcing the importance of lipid remodelling during 
early nodulation. Genes likely to be associated with carbohydrate metabolism 
are also present at this timepoint; these include proteins with high homology 
to A. thaliana galactinol synthases GolS1 (Medtr2g084340) and GolS2 
(Medtr7g111850) and a predicted beta-amylase (Medtr5g013620). A. thaliana 
galactinol synthases are associated with heat shock responses 
(Panikulangara et al., 2004) and two predicted heat shock proteins 
(Medtr4g130540 and Medtr1g015165) are also up-regulated, however the 
functional significance of this is unclear. 
Interplay between defence and symbiosis in M. truncatula: Direct 
comparison between the rhizobia and ralstonia datasets is very difficult 
because the plants sampled for these were grown in vastly different N-
conditions and due to the confounding circadian effects, as discussed 
previously. Despite these caveats, DE genes were calculated between the 
rhizobia and ralstonia samples at the 3 HAI and 12 HAI timepoints. Genes 
associated with differences in N-level as calculated between the reference 
samples were removed from these datasets. The circadian-associated genes 
were not removed as comparisons were made at the same timepoint and any 
differences in their expression may be relevant to interpreting the data (and 
include inoculation/circadian interaction effects). However, none of the 5 
genes conserved between rhizobia and ralstonia 3 HAI were DE between the 
two treatments and only 7 of the 117 genes conserved between the two 12 
HAI datasets were DE between the treatments. This left 205 genes DE 
between rhizobia and ralstonia at 3 HAI and 325 at 12 HAI with an overlap of 
27 DE genes between the two sets. 
 GO term analysis of these genes did show the presence of some 
overrepresented processes amongst the 3 HAI comparison. This included 7 
genes associated with lipid transport (P=3.9e-03) which are all repressed by 
ralstonia relative to rhizobia. At 12 HAI, there were no processes significantly 
enriched amongst the DE genes but many of the most strongly induced or 
repressed genes are hypothetical proteins or poorly functionally annotated 
with no well characterized homologs in other plant species.  
One gene that in repressed by ralstonia relative to rhizobia is LYK2 
(Medtr5g086330) which is an ortholog of the Nod factor receptor LYK3 (De 
Mita et al., 2014) with which is possibly functionally redundant (Buendia et al., 
2018). Although this gene is DE between these two treatments but not 
between each treatment and its respective mock, it is possible that this effect 
may be much more pronounced at different timepoints or if cell type specific 
expression data was available. Nevertheless, the possibility of a receptor 
associated with symbiosis being repressed during pathogenesis is very 
interesting in the context of legume-microbe interactions. 
Although only being DE in the 12 HAI ralstonia dataset, PT4 
(Medtr1g028600) is particularly noteworthy. This gene encodes a phosphate 
transporter (Harrison et al., 2002) which is essential for phosphate uptake in 
M. truncatula plants during mycorrhizal symbiosis and is considered a marker 
gene for this interaction (Javot et al., 2007). Activation of this gene in response 
to ralstonia inoculation is unexpected, especially given that all plants were 
grown in replete phosphate and the possible P-N interplay could be explored. 
Conclusions: The response of M. truncatula seedlings to the pathogen R. 
solanacearum and symbiont S. medicae were compared over time. R. 
solanacearum induced stunting of plant growth within 2 weeks of inoculation 
and led to wilting and death of infected plants within 4 weeks (Figure 4.2). 
Nodules were formed on roots treated with rhizobia within 9 days of inoculation 
(Figure 4.1G). 
 RT-qPCR analysis showed the induction of nodulation marker genes 
NIN and ENOD11 at later timepoints in these experiments (Figure 4.4) in 
response to S. medicae, confirming these genes are induced in a similar 
fashion as with other rhizobial strains. However, the M. truncatula homolog of 
FLS2 was not induced by rhizobia, ralstonia or flg22 and other putative 
defence markers were also not flg22-responsive within the timescales of these 
experiments. 
 RNAseq was used to identify genes associated with inoculation with 
rhizobia and ralstonia 3 and 12 hours after inoculation. Functional analysis of 
DE genes was hindered by the lack of information available on the activity of 
many genes in the M. truncatula genome. However, genes were identified that 
may function as novel markers of defence responses in M. truncatula that merit 
further study (e.g. MtIFS1/MtIFS2, MtCPK1). Some genes associated with 
nitrogen availability and rhizobia inoculation were also identified. 
Comparisons between the rhizobia and ralstonia datasets were 
complicated by the influence of circadian effects in addition to the bacterial 
inoculations. Nevertheless, the possibility of genes that are differentially 
regulated during symbiosis and defence and may therefore be regulators of 
permitting symbiosis to occur in place of defence responses normally 
associated with plant-microbe interactions is worthwhile to study further.   
Chapter 5: General discussion: 
Insights into how the environment shapes plant root architecture: Plant 
root systems exhibit a remarkable level of plasticity as they adapt to their 
environment. Two specific examples of such alterations underpinning gene 
expression changes involved in their regulation were investigated in lateral 
root formation and nodule formation, both of which adaptations are subject to 
regulation from both abiotic and biotic inputs. 
To identify genes involved in the regulation of lateral root emergence in 
A. thaliana, FACS was employed over a timecourse experiment (Chapter 3: 
Regulation of gene expression by nitrogen and rhizobia underpinning lateral 
root emergence in Arabidopsis thaliana). The responses to treatments 
associated with lateral root formation in A. thaliana in nitrate provision and S. 
meliloti inoculation were examined in the pericycle and cortex. These 
responses were found to be highly cell type specific with little conservation 
between treatment-responsive genes in cells of the cortex and pericycle. 
Furthermore, trends in the regulation of these responses such as possible 
signal transduction of the nitrate response throughout the root and apparent 
repression of genes associated with the primary nitrate response in the 
pericycle were unearthed that are masked at the whole organ or organism 
level (Walker et al., 2017). 
Lateral root emergence is known to depend on the integration of 
multiple positive and negative stimuli (Benkova and Bielach, 2010) that induce 
distinct transcriptional reprogramming in different cell types (Gifford et al., 
2008). These experiments reinforce the importance of cell type specificity 
during complex developmental responses. Obtaining data for the cell types of 
the root absent from this dataset would enable the regulation of lateral root 
emergence to be examined at an even higher temporal and spatial resolution 
than has ever been achieved previously, possibly identifying further novel and 
biologically relevant mechanisms. 
Next, to obtain insight into how the competing demands of protecting 
against pathogen attack and forming beneficial interactions with symbionts are 
balanced in M. truncatula, gene expression was assayed following inoculation 
with the symbiont S. medicae or the pathogen R. solanacearum (Chapter 4: 
molecular changes underpinning friend vs. foe recognition in legume roots). 
Due to M. truncatula rarely being used as a model for plant-pathogen 
interactions and the consequential lack of knowledge of genes involved in the 
regulation of defence pathways, interactions between symbiosis and defence 
were difficult to confirm. An approach based on identifying homologs of 
defence-associated genes in the better studied A. thaliana model did not 
conclusively identify suitable defence markers, although some candidates 
were identified by RNAseq analysis of R. solanacearum inoculated roots. 
Despite progress in understanding defence responses in legumes, 
more work is needed in this area before the question of how defence is 
regulated during nodulation can be fully answered. Additionally, the approach 
used in these experiments to study regulation at the whole root level may not 
identify all biologically important changes in gene expression, especially if 
these changes are restricted to single cell types, as would be expected based 
on the results of Chapter 3. Nevertheless, the data obtained from these 
experiments contribute to understanding pathogen responses in M. truncatula. 
Future directions of this research: 
Characterizing rhizobia responsive genes in non-legumes: In this work, 
RNAseq analysis was used to identify rhizobia responsive genes during early 
interactions between S. medicae and M. truncatula. Very few of these genes 
are so far well characterized, but some of these would make interesting 
candidates for further study. In particular, the proteins annotated as being 
involved in lipid transport could plausibly have important roles in nodulation, 
given the importance of other lipid regulatory proteins in the symbiosis (Pii et 
al., 2012). 
 Additionally, having already characterized the response of the non-
legume A. thaliana to another rhizobial species, S. meliloti, it may also be 
interesting to compare these datasets. Although the A. thaliana dataset is cell 
type-specific it does feature samples taken at similar timepoints after 
inoculation compared to the M. truncatula RNAseq data. Although A. thaliana 
is not able to form nodules, the data presented in Chapter 3 demonstrate both 
transcriptional and developmental responses to rhizobia that would be 
interesting to examine. 
Additionally, other studies have demonstrated the suppression of 
defence responses in A. thaliana by rhizobial Nod factors, a response that is 
conserved in legumes. This is made especially interesting by the fact that this 
response has been demonstrated to depend on the function of the receptor 
gene LYK3 which shares high conservation with some legume Nod factor 
receptors (Liang et al., 2013). This raises the possibility that non-legumes are 
able to perceive and respond specifically to rhizobia to at least some extent. It 
would therefore be interesting to look at the expression patterns for homologs 
of genes associated with rhizobial inoculation in legumes in A. thaliana and 
other non-legumes. This would provide a deeper understanding of the extent 
to which non-legumes can interact with rhizobia which may contribute towards 
the goal of ultimately transferring nodulation to non-legume species. 
Towards identifying defence markers in M. truncatula: Attempts to 
investigate defence responses in M. truncatula have been made difficult by 
the lack of knowledge of genes that may act as defence markers in this 
organism. Despite poor functional annotation of many genes regulated in 
response to the pathogen R. solanacearum and therefore possibly related to 
defence, RNAseq analysis has identified some genes that show differential 
expression which, based on homology to A. thaliana proteins, may function in 
defence responses. These include possible isoflavone synthases 
MtIFS1/MtIFS2, wall-associated kinases and a calmodulin-dependent kinase 
MtCPK1. 
RT-qPCR could be used to test their expression to validate their 
differential expression in response to R. solanacearum. This could also be 
carried out in more samples to see how these genes behave in the more 
immediate and also long-term interactions with the pathogen. Furthermore, 
their expression in response to S. medicae and flg22 could also be 
investigated to gather data at the transcriptional level of the regulation of 
defence responses by rhizobia. This would also help clarify if the induction of 
these genes is related to a general defence response or is specific to the M. 
truncatula/R. solanacearum interaction. 
Another approach to identify M. truncatula defence markers could 
involve using meta analysis of published datasets characterizing the 
transcriptomic response of the plant to a range of different pathogens. 
Comparison to older datasets based on outdated annotations of the M. 
truncatula genome is difficult and studies employing microarrays may not use 
probes with complete coverage of the M. truncatula transcriptome. However, 
there are numerous suitable datasets, including the RNAseq dataset 
presented here, that could be used for such an analysis. For instance, 
transcriptome studies have been published detailing the response of M. 
truncatula to the necrotrophic fungal pathogens Macrophomina phaseolina 
(Mah et al., 2012), Fusarium oxysporum (Thatcher et al., 2016) and 
Rhizoctonia solani (Liu et al., 2017). In the latter two cases, the interaction with 
M. truncatula A17 is resistant thus meaning a robust, protective defence 
response is taking place. 
Application of fluorescence activated cell sorting to non-Arabidopsis 
species: No published studies utilizing FACS in plants outside of the model 
organism A. thaliana were known to exist at the time of writing. Other plant 
models, such as M. truncatula, are often less amenable to stable 
transformation and more commonly exhibit silencing of transgenes between 
generations (Rajeevkumar et al., 2015), thus making the generation of stable 
marker lines more difficult. Furthermore, most plant species produce fewer 
seeds, cannot be grown at such high density and may have cell wall 
compositions that are more resistant to enzymatic digestion relative to A. 
thaliana; all of these increase the difficulty in obtaining a sufficiently high 
protoplast yield for downstream analysis, particularly when rare target cell 
types are concerned. 
Although A. thaliana is an excellent model for study of many root 
developmental processes, it is not suitable for the study of root symbiotic 
interactions with microorganisms such as mycorrhizae and rhizobia as is it 
capable of neither mycorrhization or nodulation. Despite an innovative 
approach to studying nodulation in M. truncatula root hairs (Breakspear et al., 
2014), little is known about how individual root cell types behave during 
symbiosis. In order to gain maximum insight into how these processes operate 
at the cell type-specific level, it is therefore necessary to utilize cell type-
specific approaches in model plants aside from A. thaliana. 
Nodulation represents a process that requires different cell types to 
commit to vastly different but co-ordinated developmental programmes. 
Therefore, it would be ideal to understand transcriptional reprogramming for 
each cell type. Indeed, it is understood that many of the genes involved in the 
activation of nodulation do show different behaviours between the cortex and 
the epidermis (Hayashi et al., 2014). That such an approach would be useful 
is illustrated by the behaviour of nodulation marker genes in these experiments 
(Figure 4.4). As discussed previously, these genes are found to be activated 
days after rhizobial inoculation despite other studies demonstrating their 
expression, specifically in the epidermis, within hours. Therefore, it is likely 
that many other biologically relevant mechanisms are at play in a cell type-
specific manner early on during M. truncatula-microbe interactions, including 
at the timepoints used in the RNAseq experiments, that are not detected due 
to expression profile being measured from the entirety of the root. 
If the aforementioned difficulties could be overcome, a FACS-based 
approach to studying nodulation would provide much more detail and clarity 
on how nodule development or defence responses are co-ordinated or 
mitigated. Cell types of particular interest would be the epidermis (as the 
outermost layer which first encounters rhizobia in the soil), the cortex (the site 
of nodule emergence) and the pericycle (the site of lateral root emergence 
which is theorized the be evolutionarily related to nodulation (Bright et al., 
2005)). 
Broader impact of findings: 
Nitrogen is the most growth-limiting compound for plants and typically has to 
be provided to plants in the form of fertilizer in intensive agricultural systems 
(Vance, 2001). In Western countries, the majority of this fertilizer is produced 
industrially which is expensive and energy intensive. The production of 
ammonia for fertilizer for agricultural use via the Haber-Bosch process 
accounts for an estimated 1% of total global energy use. Further 
environmental damage is also associated with runoff of fertilizer into 
waterways during its application to crops (Conley et al., 2009). With the global 
population expected to exceed 9 billion people by 2050, providing sufficient 
food for this many people without allocating even greater amounts of land 
towards agriculture remains a significant challenge. 
For this reason, genetically modifying non-legumes to enable them to 
form symbiosis with nitrogen-fixing bacteria is an attractive option if GMO use 
is allowed in the future. In particular, transferring nodulation to cereal crops is 
a key objective of research into the symbiosis as fertilizer usage could be 
significantly reduced with self-nitrifying crops. Efforts are already underway to 
achieve this and these efforts tend to focus on the transfer of the legume 
nodulation machinery to other species (Charpentier and Oldroyd, 2010), but 
do not consider concomitant responses to pathogens in plants. Understanding 
how legumes are able to partition defence and symbiosis responses during 
nodulation may also be necessary step if the ability the form to nodules is to 
be transferred to non-legumes. 
References: 
Abreu, I., Saez, A., Castro-Rodriguez, R., Escudero, V., Rodriguez-Haas, B., Senovilla, 
M., Larue, C., Grolimund, D., Tejada-Jimenez, M., Imperial, J., et al. (2017). 
Medicago truncatula Zinc-Iron Permease6 provides zinc to rhizobia-infected nodule 
cells. Plant Cell Environ 40, 2706-2719. 
Acosta-Jurado, S., Rodriguez-Navarro, D.N., Kawaharada, Y., Perea, J.F., Gil-Serrano, 
A., Jin, H., An, Q., Rodriguez-Carvajal, M.A., Andersen, S.U., Sandal, N., et al. (2016). 
Sinorhizobium fredii HH103 Invades Lotus burttii by Crack Entry in a Nod Factor-and 
Surface Polysaccharide-Dependent Manner. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 29, 925-
Albrecht, C., Geurts, R., and Bisseling, T. (1999). Legume nodulation and 
mycorrhizae formation; two extremes in host specificity meet. EMBO J 18, 281-288. 
Aldon, D., Brito, B., Boucher, C., and Genin, S. (2000). A bacterial sensor of plant cell 
contact controls the transcriptional induction of Ralstonia solanacearum 
pathogenicity genes. EMBO J 19, 2304-2314. 
Almagro, A., Lin, S.H., and Tsay, Y.F. (2008). Characterization of the Arabidopsis 
nitrate transporter NRT1.6 reveals a role of nitrate in early embryo development. 
Plant Cell 20, 3289-3299. 
Altschul, S.F., Gish, W., Miller, W., Myers, E.W., and Lipman, D.J. (1990). Basic local 
alignment search tool. J Mol Biol 215, 403-410. 
Alvarez, J.M., Riveras, E., Vidal, E.A., Gras, D.E., Contreras-Lopez, O., Tamayo, K.P., 
Aceituno, F., Gomez, I., Ruffel, S., Lejay, L., et al. (2014). Systems approach 
identifies TGA1 and TGA4 transcription factors as important regulatory components 
of the nitrate response of Arabidopsis thaliana roots. Plant J 80, 1-13. 
Amor, B.B., Shaw, S.L., Oldroyd, G.E., Maillet, F., Penmetsa, R.V., Cook, D., Long, 
S.R., Denarie, J., and Gough, C. (2003). The NFP locus of Medicago truncatula 
controls an early step of Nod factor signal transduction upstream of a rapid calcium 
flux and root hair deformation. Plant J 34, 495-506. 
Andreasson, E., Jenkins, T., Brodersen, P., Thorgrimsen, S., Petersen, N.H., Zhu, S., 
Qiu, J.L., Micheelsen, P., Rocher, A., Petersen, M., et al. (2005). The MAP kinase 
substrate MKS1 is a regulator of plant defense responses. EMBO J 24, 2579-2589. 
Angelini, C., Cutillo, L., De Canditiis, D., Mutarelli, M., and Pensky, M. (2008). BATS: 
a Bayesian user-friendly software for analyzing time series microarray experiments. 
BMC Bioinformatics 9, 415. 
Angot, A., Peeters, N., Lechner, E., Vailleau, F., Baud, C., Gentzbittel, L., Sartorel, E., 
Genschik, P., Boucher, C., and Genin, S. (2006). Ralstonia solanacearum requires F-
box-like domain-containing type III effectors to promote disease on several host 
plants. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103, 14620-14625. 
Axtell, M.J., and Staskawicz, B.J. (2003). Initiation of RPS2-specified disease 
resistance in Arabidopsis is coupled to the AvrRpt2-directed elimination of RIN4. 
Cell 112, 369-377. 
Babe, A., Lavigne, T., Severin, J.P., Nagel, K.A., Walter, A., Chaumont, F., Batoko, H., 
Beeckman, T., and Draye, X. (2012). Repression of early lateral root initiation events 
by transient water deficit in barley and maize. Philos Trans R Soc Lond B Biol Sci 
367, 1534-1541. 
Banda, J., Bellande, K., von Wangenheim, D., Goh, T., Guyomarc'h, S., Laplaze, L., 
and Bennett, M.J. (2019). Lateral Root Formation in Arabidopsis: A Well-Ordered 
LRexit. Trends Plant Sci 24, 826-839. 
Bao, Y., Aggarwal, P., Robbins, N.E., 2nd, Sturrock, C.J., Thompson, M.C., Tan, H.Q., 
Tham, C., Duan, L., Rodriguez, P.L., Vernoux, T., et al. (2014). Plant roots use a 
patterning mechanism to position lateral root branches toward available water. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111, 9319-9324. 
Barbulova, A., Rogato, A., D'Apuzzo, E., Omrane, S., and Chiurazzi, M. (2007). 
Differential effects of combined N sources on early steps of the Nod factor-
dependent transduction pathway in Lotus japonicus. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 20, 
994-1003. 
Bargmann, B.O., Marshall-Colon, A., Efroni, I., Ruffel, S., Birnbaum, K.D., Coruzzi, 
G.M., and Krouk, G. (2013a). TARGET: a transient transformation system for 
genome-wide transcription factor target discovery. Mol Plant 6, 978-980. 
Bargmann, B.O., Vanneste, S., Krouk, G., Nawy, T., Efroni, I., Shani, E., Choe, G., 
Friml, J., Bergmann, D.C., Estelle, M., et al. (2013b). A map of cell type-specific auxin 
responses. Mol Syst Biol 9, 688. 
Bari, R., and Jones, J.D. (2009). Role of plant hormones in plant defence responses. 
Plant Mol Biol 69, 473-488. 
Bauer, W.D., and Caetano-Anolls, G. (1990). Chemotaxis, induced gene expression 
and competitiveness in the rhizosphere. Plant and Soil 129, 45-52. 
Bednarek, P., Pislewska-Bednarek, M., Ver Loren van Themaat, E., Maddula, R.K., 
Svatos, A., and Schulze-Lefert, P. (2011). Conservation and clade-specific 
diversification of pathogen-inducible tryptophan and indole glucosinolate 
metabolism in Arabidopsis thaliana relatives. New Phytol 192, 713-726. 
Bellini, C., Pacurar, D.I., and Perrone, I. (2014). Adventitious roots and lateral roots: 
similarities and differences. Annu Rev Plant Biol 65, 639-666. 
Ben, C., Debelle, F., Berges, H., Bellec, A., Jardinaud, M.F., Anson, P., Huguet, T., 
Gentzbittel, L., and Vailleau, F. (2013). MtQRRS1, an R-locus required for Medicago 
truncatula quantitative resistance to Ralstonia solanacearum. New Phytol 199, 758-
Benkova, E., and Bielach, A. (2010). Lateral root organogenesis - from cell to organ. 
Curr Opin Plant Biol 13, 677-683. 
Berardini, T.Z., Reiser, L., Li, D., Mezheritsky, Y., Muller, R., Strait, E., and Huala, E. 
(2015). The Arabidopsis information resource: Making and mining the "gold 
standard" annotated reference plant genome. Genesis 53, 474-485. 
Berendsen, R., L., Pieterse, C.M.J., and Bakker, P.A.H.M. (2012). The rhizosphere 
microbiome and plant health. Trends in Plant Science 17, 478. 
Berrabah, F., Ratet, P., and Gourion, B. (2015). Multiple steps control immunity 
during the intracellular accommodation of rhizobia. Journal of Experimental Botany 
66, 1977-1985. 
Bethke, G., Unthan, T., Uhrig, J.F., Poschl, Y., Gust, A.A., Scheel, D., and Lee, J. 
(2009). Flg22 regulates the release of an ethylene response factor substrate from 
MAP kinase 6 in Arabidopsis thaliana via ethylene signaling. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
106, 8067-8072. 
Bhardwaj, V., Meier, S., Petersen, L.N., Ingle, R.A., and Roden, L.C. (2011). Defence 
responses of Arabidopsis thaliana to infection by Pseudomonas syringae are 
regulated by the circadian clock. PLoS One 6, e26968. 
Birnbaum, K., Jung, J.W., Wang, J.Y., Lambert, G.M., Hirst, J.A., Galbraith, D.W., and 
Benfey, P.N. (2005). Cell type-specific expression profiling in plants via cell sorting 
of protoplasts from fluorescent reporter lines. Nat Methods 2, 615-619. 
Birnbaum, K., Shasha, D.E., Wang, J.Y., Jung, J.W., Lambert, G.M., Galbraith, D.W., 
and Benfey, P.N. (2003). A gene expression map of the Arabidopsis root. Science 
302, 1956-1960. 
Blanco, F., Garreton, V., Frey, N., Dominguez, C., Perez-Acle, T., Van der Straeten, 
D., Jordana, X., and Holuigue, L. (2005). Identification of NPR1-dependent and 
independent genes early induced by salicylic acid treatment in Arabidopsis. Plant 
Mol Biol 59, 927-944. 
Bolger, A.M., Lohse, M., and Usadel, B. (2014). Trimmomatic: a flexible trimmer for 
Illumina sequence data. Bioinformatics 30, 2114-2120. 
Boller, T., and Felix, G. (2009). A Renaissance of Elicitors: Perception of Microbe-
Associated Molecular Patterns and Danger Signals by Pattern-Recognition 
Receptors. The Annual Review of Plant Biology 60, 379-406. 
Bolwell, G.P. (1999). Role of active oxygen species and NO in plant defence 
responses. Curr Opin Plant Biol 2, 287-294. 
Boucher, C.A., Barberis, P.A., Trigalet, A., and Demery, D.A. (1985). Transposon 
Mutagenesis of Pseudomonas solanacearum: Isolation of Tn5-Induced Avirulent 
Mutants. Journal of General Microbiology 131, 2249-2457. 
Boudsocq, M., Willmann, M.R., McCormack, M., Lee, H., Shan, L., He, P., Bush, J., 
Cheng, S.H., and Sheen, J. (2010). Differential innate immune signalling via Ca(2+) 
sensor protein kinases. Nature 464, 418-422. 
Brady, S.M., Orlando, D.A., Lee, J.Y., Wang, J.Y., Koch, J., Dinneny, J.R., Mace, D., 
Ohler, U., and Benfey, P.N. (2007). A high-resolution root spatiotemporal map 
reveals dominant expression patterns. Science 318, 801-806. 
Breakspear, A., Liu, C., Roy, S., Stacey, N., Rogers, C., Trick, M., Morieri, G., Mysore, 
K.S., Wen, J., Oldroyd, G.E., et al. (2014). The root hair "infectome" of Medicago 
truncatula uncovers changes in cell cycle genes and reveals a requirement for Auxin 
signaling in rhizobial infection. Plant Cell 26, 4680-4701. 
Breeze, E., Harrison, E., McHattie, S., Hughes, L., Hickman, R., Hill, C., Kiddle, S., Kim, 
Y.S., Penfold, C.A., Jenkins, D., et al. (2011). High-resolution temporal profiling of 
transcripts during Arabidopsis leaf senescence reveals a distinct chronology of 
processes and regulation. Plant Cell 23, 873-894. 
Brewin, N.J. (2004). Plant Cell Wall Remodelling in the RhizobiumLegume 
Symbiosis. Critical Reviews in Plant Sciences 23, 293-316. 
Bright, L.J., Liang, Y., Mitchell, D.M., and Harris, J.M. (2005). The LATD gene of 
Medicago truncatula is required for both nodule and root development. Mol Plant 
Microbe Interact 18, 521-532. 
Brown, D.G., Swanson, J.K., and Allen, C. (2007). Two host-induced Ralstonia 
solanacearum genes, acrA and dinF, encode multidrug efflux pumps and contribute 
to bacterial wilt virulence. Appl Environ Microbiol 73, 2777-2786. 
Brunner, F., Nrnberger, T., Townsend, H., Emmerson, Z., and Schildknecht, B. 
(2007). AtGenExpress: Response to bacterial-(LPS, HrpZ, Flg22) and oomycete-
(NPP1) derived elicitors. 
Buendia, L., Girardin, A., Wang, T., Cottret, L., and Lefebvre, B. (2018). LysM 
Receptor-Like Kinase and LysM Receptor-Like Protein Families: An Update on 
Phylogeny and Functional Characterization. Front Plant Sci 9, 1531. 
Canales, J., Moyano, T.C., Villarroel, E., and Gutierrez, R.A. (2014). Systems analysis 
of transcriptome data provides new hypotheses about Arabidopsis root response to 
nitrate treatments. Front Plant Sci 5, 22. 
Cao, Y., Halane, M.K., Gassmann, W., and Stacey, G. (2017). The Role of Plant Innate 
Immunity in the Legume-Rhizobium Symbiosis. Annu Rev Plant Biol 68, 535-561. 
Cao, Y., Liang, Y., Tanaka, K., Nguyen, C.T., Jedrzejczak, R.P., Joachimiak, A., and 
Stacey, G. (2014). The kinase LYK5 is a major chitin receptor in Arabidopsis and 
forms a chitin-induced complex with related kinase CERK1. Elife 3. 
Crdenas, L., Martnez, A., Snchez, F., and Quinto, C. (2008). Fast, transient and 
specific intracellular ROS changes in living root hair cells responding to Nod factors 
(NFs). The Plant Journal 56, 802-813. 
Carter, A.D., Bonyadi, R., and Gifford, M.L. (2013). The use of fluorescence-activated 
cell sorting in studying plant development and environmental responses. Int J Dev 
Biol 57, 545-552. 
Carvalho, B.S., and Irizarry, R.A. (2010). A framework for oligonucleotide microarray 
preprocessing. Bioinformatics 26, 2363-2367. 
Casimiro, I., Beeckman, T., Graham, N., Bhalerao, R., Zhang, H., Casero, P., 
Sandberg, G., and Bennett, M.J. (2003). Dissecting Arabidopsis lateral root 
development. Trends Plant Sci 8, 165-171. 
Castaings, L., Camargo, A., Pocholle, D., Gaudon, V., Texier, Y., Boutet-Mercey, S., 
Taconnat, L., Renou, J.P., Daniel-Vedele, F., Fernandez, E., et al. (2009). The nodule 
inception-like protein 7 modulates nitrate sensing and metabolism in Arabidopsis. 
Plant J 57, 426-435. 
Cerri, M.R., Frances, L., Laloum, T., Auriac, M.C., Niebel, A., Oldroyd, G.E., Barker, 
D.G., Fournier, J., and de Carvalho-Niebel, F. (2012). Medicago truncatula ERN 
transcription factors: regulatory interplay with NSP1/NSP2 GRAS factors and 
expression dynamics throughout rhizobial infection. Plant Physiol 160, 2155-2172. 
Charpentier, M., Bredemeier, R., Wanner, G., Takeda, N., Schleiff, E., and Parniske, 
M. (2008). Lotus japonicus CASTOR and POLLUX are ion channels essential for 
perinuclear calcium spiking in legume root endosymbiosis. Plant Cell 20, 3467-3479. 
Charpentier, M., and Oldroyd, G. (2010). How close are we to nitrogen-fixing 
cereals? Curr Opin Plant Biol 13, 556-564. 
Charpentier, M., and Oldroyd, G.E. (2013). Nuclear calcium signaling in plants. Plant 
Physiol 163, 496-503. 
Charron, D., Pingret, J.L., Chabaud, M., Journet, E.P., and Barker, D.G. (2004). 
Pharmacological evidence that multiple phospholipid signaling pathways link 
Rhizobium nodulation factor perception in Medicago truncatula root hairs to 
intracellular responses, including Ca2+ spiking and specific ENOD gene expression. 
Plant Physiol 136, 3582-3593. 
Chen, C.Z., Lv, X.F., Li, J.Y., Yi, H.Y., and Gong, J.M. (2012). Arabidopsis NRT1.5 is 
another essential component in the regulation of nitrate reallocation and stress 
tolerance. Plant Physiol 159, 1582-1590. 
Chen, T., Duan, L., Zhou, B., Yu, H., Zhu, H., Cao, Y., and Zhang, Z. (2017). Interplay 
of Pathogen-Induced Defense Responses and Symbiotic Establishment in Medicago 
truncatula. Front Microbiol 8, 973. 
Cheng, H.P., and Walker, G.C. (1998). Succinoglycan is required for initiation and 
elongation of infection threads during nodulation of alfalfa by Rhizobium meliloti. J 
Bacteriol 180, 5183-5191. 
Chinchilla, D., Bauer, Z., Regenass, M., Boller, T., and Felix, G. (2006). The 
Arabidopsis receptor kinase FLS2 binds flg22 and determines the specificity of 
flagellin perception. Plant Cell 18, 465-476. 
Chinchilla, D., Zipfel, C., Robatzek, S., Kemmerling, B., Nurnberger, T., Jones, J.D., 
Felix, G., and Boller, T. (2007). A flagellin-induced complex of the receptor FLS2 and 
BAK1 initiates plant defence. Nature 448, 497-500. 
Cho, M.J., and Harper, J.E. (1991). Effect of inoculation and nitrogen on isoflavonoid 
concentration in wild-type and nodulation-mutant soybean roots. Plant Physiol 95, 
435-442. 
Clavijo, F., Diedhiou, I., Vaissayre, V., Brottier, L., Acolatse, J., Moukouanga, D., 
Crabos, A., Auguy, F., Franche, C., Gherbi, H., et al. (2015). The Casuarina NIN gene 
is transcriptionally activated throughout Frankia root infection as well as in 
response to bacterial diffusible signals. New Phytol 208, 887-903. 
Clua, J., Roda, C., Zanetti, M.E., and Blanco, F.A. (2018). Compatibility between 
Legumes and Rhizobia for the Establishment of a Successful Nitrogen-Fixing 
Symbiosis. Genes (Basel) 9. 
Cnops, G., Neyt, P., Raes, J., Petrarulo, M., Nelissen, H., Malenica, N., Luschnig, C., 
Tietz, O., Ditengou, F., Palme, K., et al. (2006). The TORNADO1 and TORNADO2 
genes function in several patterning processes during early leaf development in 
Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 18, 852-866. 
Coca, M., and San Segundo, B. (2010). AtCPK1 calcium-dependent protein kinase 
mediates pathogen resistance in Arabidopsis. Plant J 63, 526-540. 
Conley, D.J., Paerl, H.W., Howarth, R.W., Boesch, D.F., Seitzinger, S.P., Havens, K.E., 
Lancelot, C., and Likens, G.E. (2009). Ecology. Controlling eutrophication: nitrogen 
and phosphorus. Science 323, 1014-1015. 
Cooper, J.E. (2007). Early interactions between legumes and rhizobia: disclosing 
complexity in a molecular dialogue. J Appl Microbiol 103, 1355-1365. 
Corcilius, L., Hastwell, A.H., Zhang, M., Williams, J., Mackay, J.P., Gresshoff, P.M., 
Ferguson, B.J., and Payne, R.J. (2017). Arabinosylation Modulates the Growth-
Regulating Activity of the Peptide Hormone CLE40a from Soybean. Cell Chem Biol 
24, 1347-1355 e1347. 
Crawford, N.M. (1995). Nitrate: nutrient and signal for plant growth. Plant Cell 7, 
859-868. 
Cruz, C., Bio, A.F., Dominguez-Valdivia, M.D., Aparicio-Tejo, P.M., Lamsfus, C., and 
Martins-Loucao, M.A. (2006). How does glutamine synthetase activity determine 
plant tolerance to ammonium? Planta 223, 1068-1080. 
Cui, H., Tsuda, K., and Parker, J.E. (2015). Effector-triggered immunity: from 
pathogen perception to robust defense. Annu Rev Plant Biol 66, 487-511. 
De Leon, I.P., Sanz, A., Hamberg, M., and Castresana, C. (2002). Involvement of the 
Arabidopsis alpha-DOX1 fatty acid dioxygenase in protection against oxidative 
stress and cell death. Plant J 29, 61-62. 
De Mita, S., Streng, A., Bisseling, T., and Geurts, R. (2014). Evolution of a symbiotic 
receptor through gene duplications in the legume-rhizobium mutualism. New 
Phytol 201, 961-972. 
De Rybel, B., Vassileva, V., Parizot, B., Demeulenaere, M., Grunewald, W., 
Audenaert, D., Van Campenhout, J., Overvoorde, P., Jansen, L., Vanneste, S., et al. 
(2010). A novel aux/IAA28 signaling cascade activates GATA23-dependent 
specification of lateral root founder cell identity. Curr Biol 20, 1697-1706. 
De Smet, I., Signora, L., Beeckman, T., Inze, D., Foyer, C.H., and Zhang, H. (2003). An 
abscisic acid-sensitive checkpoint in lateral root development of Arabidopsis. Plant J 
33, 543-555. 
De Smet, I., Vanneste, S., Inze, D., and Beeckman, T. (2006). Lateral root initiation or 
the birth of a new meristem. Plant Mol Biol 60, 871-887. 
De Smet, I., Vassileva, V., De Rybel, B., Levesque, M.P., Grunewald, W., Van 
Damme, D., Van Noorden, G., Naudts, M., Van Isterdael, G., De Clercq, R., et al. 
(2008). Receptor-like kinase ACR4 restricts formative cell divisions in the 
Arabidopsis root. Science 322, 594-597. 
Deak, K.I., and Malamy, J. (2005). Osmotic regulation of root system architecture. 
Plant J 43, 17-28. 
Deakin, W.J., and Broughton, W.J. (2009). Symbiotic use of pathogenic strategies: 
rhizobial protein secretion systems. Nat Rev Microbiol 7, 312-320. 
Deal, R.B., and Henikoff, S. (2011). The INTACT method for cell type-specific gene 
expression and chromatin profiling in Arabidopsis thaliana. Nat Protoc 6, 56-68. 
Debelle, F., Maillet, F., Vasse, J., Rosenberg, C., de Billy, F., Truchet, G., Denarie, J., 
and Ausubel, F.M. (1988). Interference between Rhizobium meliloti and Rhizobium 
trifolii nodulation genes: genetic basis of R. meliloti dominance. J Bacteriol 170, 
5718-5727. 
Dechorgnat, J., Nguyen, C.T., Armengaud, P., Jossier, M., Diatloff, E., Filleur, S., and 
Daniel-Vedele, F. (2011). From the soil to the seeds: the long journey of nitrate in 
plants. J Exp Bot 62, 1349-1359. 
Denison, R.F., and Kiers, E.T. (2004). Lifestyle alternatives for rhizobia: mutualism, 
parasitism, and forgoing symbiosis. FEMS Microbiol Lett 237, 187-193. 
Desikan, R., Hancock, J.T., Ichimura, K., Shinozaki, K., and Neill, S.J. (2001). Harpin 
induces activation of the Arabidopsis mitogen-activated protein kinases AtMPK4 
and AtMPK6. Plant Physiol 126, 1579-1587. 
Di Cristina, M., Sessa, G., Dolan, L., Linstead, P., Baima, S., Ruberti, I., and Morelli, G. 
(1996). The Arabidopsis Athb-10 (GLABRA2) is an HD-Zip protein required for 
regulation of root hair development. Plant J 10, 393-402. 
Di Laurenzio, L., Wysocka-Diller, J., Malamy, J.E., Pysh, L., Helariutta, Y., Freshour, 
G., Hahn, M.G., Feldmann, K.A., and Benfey, P.N. (1996). The SCARECROW gene 
regulates an asymmetric cell division that is essential for generating the radial 
organization of the Arabidopsis root. Cell 86, 423-433. 
Dobin, A., Davis, C.A., Schlesinger, F., Drenkow, J., Zaleski, C., Jha, S., Batut, P., 
Chaisson, M., and Gingeras, T.R. (2013). STAR: ultrafast universal RNA-seq aligner. 
Bioinformatics 29, 15-21. 
Downie, J.A. (2014). Legume nodulation. Curr Biol 24, R184-190. 
Droillard, M.J., Boudsocq, M., Barbier-Brygoo, H., and Lauriere, C. (2004). 
Involvement of MPK4 in osmotic stress response pathways in cell suspensions and 
plantlets of Arabidopsis thaliana: activation by hypoosmolarity and negative role in 
hyperosmolarity tolerance. FEBS Lett 574, 42-48. 
Duan, L., Dietrich, D., Ng, C.H., Chan, P.M., Bhalerao, R., Bennett, M.J., and Dinneny, 
J.R. (2013). Endodermal ABA signaling promotes lateral root quiescence during salt 
stress in Arabidopsis seedlings. Plant Cell 25, 324-341. 
Dubrovsky, J.G., Sauer, M., Napsucialy-Mendivil, S., Ivanchenko, M.G., Friml, J., 
Shishkova, S., Celenza, J., and Benkova, E. (2008). Auxin acts as a local 
morphogenetic trigger to specify lateral root founder cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 
105, 8790-8794. 
Dyer, N.P., Shahrezaei, V., and Hebenstreit, D. (2019). LiBiNorm: an htseq-count 
analogue with improved normalisation of Smart-seq2 data and library preparation 
diagnostics. PeerJ 7. 
Eden, E., Navon, R., Steinfeld, I., Lipson, D., and Yakhini, Z. (2009). GOrilla: a tool for 
discovery and visualization of enriched GO terms in ranked gene lists. BMC 
Bioinformatics 10, 48. 
Emmert-Buck, M.R., Bonner, R.F., Smith, P.D., Chuaqui, R.F., Zhuang, Z., Goldstein, 
S.R., Weiss, R.A., and Liotta, L.A. (1996). Laser capture microdissection. Science 274, 
998-1001. 
Endre, G., Kereszt, A., Kevei, Z., Mihacea, S., Kalo, P., and Kiss, G.B. (2002). A 
receptor kinase gene regulating symbiotic nodule development. Nature 417, 962-
Esseling, J.J., Lhuissier, F.G., and Emons, A.M. (2003). Nod factor-induced root hair 
curling: continuous polar growth towards the point of nod factor application. Plant 
Physiol 132, 1982-1988. 
Eulgem, T., and Somssich, I.E. (2007). Networks of WRKY transcription factors in 
defense signaling. Curr Opin Plant Biol 10, 366-371. 
Fan, S.C., Lin, C.S., Hsu, P.K., Lin, S.H., and Tsay, Y.F. (2009). The Arabidopsis nitrate 
transporter NRT1.7, expressed in phloem, is responsible for source-to-sink 
remobilization of nitrate. Plant Cell 21, 2750-2761. 
Ferguson, B.J., Li, D., Hastwell, A.H., Reid, D.E., Li, Y., Jackson, S.A., and Gresshoff, 
P.M. (2014). The soybean (Glycine max) nodulation-suppressive CLE peptide, 
GmRIC1, functions interspecifically in common white bean (Phaseolus vulgaris), but 
not in a supernodulating line mutated in the receptor PvNARK. Plant Biotechnol J 
12, 1085-1097. 
Ferguson, B.J., Mens, C., Hastwell, A.H., Zhang, M., Su, H., Jones, C.H., Chu, X., and 
Gresshoff, P.M. (2019). Legume nodulation: The host controls the party. Plant Cell 
Environ 42, 41-51. 
Fisher, R.F., and Long, S.R. (1992). Rhizobium--plant signal exchange. Nature 357, 
655-660. 
Fliegmann, J., and Bono, J.J. (2015). Lipo-chitooligosaccharidic nodulation factors 
and their perception by plant receptors. Glycoconj J 32, 455-464. 
Formey, D., Sallet, E., Lelandais-Briere, C., Ben, C., Bustos-Sanmamed, P., Niebel, A., 
Frugier, F., Combier, J.P., Debelle, F., Hartmann, C., et al. (2014). The small RNA 
diversity from Medicago truncatula roots under biotic interactions evidences the 
environmental plasticity of the miRNAome. Genome Biol 15, 457. 
Fowler, S., Lee, K., Onouchi, H., Samach, A., Richardson, K., Morris, B., Coupland, G., 
and Putterill, J. (1999). GIGANTEA: a circadian clock-controlled gene that regulates 
photoperiodic flowering in Arabidopsis and encodes a protein with several possible 
membrane-spanning domains. EMBO J 18, 4679-4688. 
Fraysse, N., Couderc, F., and Poinsot, V. (2003). Surface polysaccharide involvement 
in establishing the rhizobium-legume symbiosis. Eur J Biochem 270, 1365-1380. 
Frerichs, A., Engelhorn, J., Altmuller, J., Gutierrez-Marcos, J., and Werr, W. (2019). 
Specific chromatin changes mark lateral organ founder cells in the Arabidopsis 
thaliana inflorescence meristem. J Exp Bot. 
Fujikake, H., Yamazaki, A., Ohtake, N., Sueyoshi, K., Matsuhashi, S., Ito, T., 
Mizuniwa, C., Kume, T., Hashimoto, S., Ishioka, N.S., et al. (2003). Quick and 
reversible inhibition of soybean root nodule growth by nitrate involves a decrease 
in sucrose supply to nodules. J Exp Bot 54, 1379-1388. 
Fukaki, H., Tameda, S., Masuda, H., and Tasaka, M. (2002). Lateral root formation is 
blocked by a gain-of-function mutation in the SOLITARY-ROOT/IAA14 gene of 
Arabidopsis. Plant J 29, 153-168. 
Gage, D.J. (2004). Infection and invasion of roots by symbiotic, nitrogen-fixing 
rhizobia during nodulation of temperate legumes. Microbiol Mol Biol Rev 68, 280-
Galvan-Ampudia, C.S., and Testerink, C. (2011). Salt stress signals shape the plant 
root. Curr Opin Plant Biol 14, 296-302. 
Gamas, P., Brault, M., Jardinaud, M.F., and Frugier, F. (2017). Cytokinins in 
Symbiotic Nodulation: When, Where, What For? Trends Plant Sci 22, 792-802. 
Gan, Y., Filleur, S., Rahman, A., Gotensparre, S., and Forde, B.G. (2005). Nutritional 
regulation of ANR1 and other root-expressed MADS-box genes in Arabidopsis 
thaliana. Planta 222, 730-742. 
Gao, M., Liu, J., Bi, D., Zhang, Z., Cheng, F., Chen, S., and Zhang, Y. (2008). MEKK1, 
MKK1/MKK2 and MPK4 function together in a mitogen-activated protein kinase 
cascade to regulate innate immunity in plants. Cell Res 18, 1190-1198. 
Gao, X., Chen, X., Lin, W., Chen, S., Lu, D., Niu, Y., Li, L., Cheng, C., McCormack, M., 
Sheen, J., et al. (2013). Bifurcation of Arabidopsis NLR immune signaling via Ca2+-
dependent protein kinases. PLoS Pathog 9, e1003127. 
Geng, Y., Wu, R., Wee, C.W., Xie, F., Wei, X., Chan, P.M., Tham, C., Duan, L., and 
Dinneny, J.R. (2013). A spatio-temporal understanding of growth regulation during 
the salt stress response in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 25, 2132-2154. 
Gibbs, D.J., and Coates, J.C. (2014). AtMYB93 is an endodermis-specific 
transcriptional regulator of lateral root development in Arabidopsis. Plant Signal 
Behav 9, e970406. 
Gibbs, D.J., Voss, U., Harding, S.A., Fannon, J., Moody, L.A., Yamada, E., Swarup, K., 
Nibau, C., Bassel, G.W., Choudhary, A., et al. (2014). AtMYB93 is a novel negative 
regulator of lateral root development in Arabidopsis. New Phytol 203, 1194-1207. 
Gibson, K.E., Kobayashi, H., and Walker, G.C. (2008). Molecular determinants of a 
symbiotic chronic infection. Annu Rev Genet 42, 413-441. 
Gifford, M.L., Dean, A., Gutierrez, R.A., Coruzzi, G.M., and Birnbaum, K.D. (2008). 
Cell-specific nitrogen responses mediate developmental plasticity. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 105, 803-808. 
Glawischnig, E. (2007). Camalexin. Phytochemistry 68, 401-406. 
Gleason, C., Chaudhuri, S., Yang, T., Munoz, A., Poovaiah, B.W., and Oldroyd, G.E. 
(2006). Nodulation independent of rhizobia induced by a calcium-activated kinase 
lacking autoinhibition. Nature 441, 1149-1152. 
Gomez-Gomez, L., and Boller, T. (2000). FLS2: an LRR receptor-like kinase involved 
in the perception of the bacterial elicitor flagellin in Arabidopsis. Mol Cell 5, 1003-
1011. 
Gomez-Gomez, L., Felix, G., and Boller, T. (1999). A single locus determines 
sensitivity to bacterial flagellin in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant J 18, 277-284. 
Gonzalez-Arzola, K., Diaz-Quintana, A., Rivero-Rodriguez, F., Velazquez-Campoy, A., 
De la Rosa, M.A., and Diaz-Moreno, I. (2017). Histone chaperone activity of 
Arabidopsis thaliana NRP1 is blocked by cytochrome c. Nucleic Acids Res 45, 2150-
2165. 
Goodstein, D.M., Shu, S., Howson, R., Neupane, R., Hayes, R.D., Fazo, J., Mitros, T., 
Dirks, W., Hellsten, U., Putnam, N., et al. (2012). Phytozome: a comparative 
platform for green plant genomics. Nucleic Acids Res 40, D1178-1186. 
Goyal, S., Lambert, C., Cluzet, S., Mrillon, J.M., and Ramawat, K.G. (2012). 
Secondary Metabolites and Plant Defence. In Plant Defence: Biological Control, pp. 
109-138. 
Gronlund, J.T., Eyres, A., Kumar, S., Buchanan-Wollaston, V., and Gifford, M.L. 
(2012). Cell specific analysis of Arabidopsis leaves using fluorescence activated cell 
sorting. J Vis Exp. 
Gutierrez, L., Mongelard, G., Flokova, K., Pacurar, D.I., Novak, O., Staswick, P., 
Kowalczyk, M., Pacurar, M., Demailly, H., Geiss, G., et al. (2012). Auxin controls 
Arabidopsis adventitious root initiation by regulating jasmonic acid homeostasis. 
Plant Cell 24, 2515-2527. 
Harrison, M.J., Dewbre, G.R., and Liu, J. (2002). A phosphate transporter from 
Medicago truncatula involved in the acquisition of phosphate released by 
arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi. Plant Cell 14, 2413-2429. 
Hastwell, A.H., Corcilius, L., Williams, J.T., Gresshoff, P.M., Payne, R.J., and 
Ferguson, B.J. (2019). Triarabinosylation is required for nodulation-suppressive CLE 
peptides to systemically inhibit nodulation in Pisum sativum. Plant Cell Environ 42, 
188-197. 
Hastwell, A.H., Gresshoff, P.M., and Ferguson, B.J. (2015). The structure and activity 
of nodulation-suppressing CLE peptide hormones of legumes. Functional Plant 
Biology 42. 
Hayashi, T., Shimoda, Y., Sato, S., Tabata, S., Imaizumi-Anraku, H., and Hayashi, M. 
(2014). Rhizobial infection does not require cortical expression of upstream 
common symbiosis genes responsible for the induction of Ca2+ spiking. Plant J 77, 
146-159. 
Heard, N.A., Holmes, C.C., Stephens, D.A., Hand, D.J., and Dimopoulos, G. (2005). 
Bayesian coclustering of Anopheles gene expression time series: study of immune 
defense response to multiple experimental challenges. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102, 
16939-16944. 
Heidstra, R., Welch, D., and Scheres, B. (2004). Mosaic analyses using marked 
activation and deletion clones dissect Arabidopsis SCARECROW action in 
asymmetric cell division. Genes Dev 18, 1964-1969. 
Heiman, M., Kulicke, R., Fenster, R.J., Greengard, P., and Heintz, N. (2014). Cell 
type-specific mRNA purification by translating ribosome affinity purification (TRAP). 
Nat Protoc 9, 1282-1291. 
Helariutta, Y., Fukaki, H., Wysocka-Diller, J., Nakajima, K., Jung, J., Sena, G., Hauser, 
M.T., and Benfey, P.N. (2000). The SHORT-ROOT gene controls radial patterning of 
the Arabidopsis root through radial signaling. Cell 101, 555-567. 
Hematy, K., Cherk, C., and Somerville, S. (2009). Host-pathogen warfare at the plant 
cell wall. Curr Opin Plant Biol 12, 406-413. 
Herrbach, V., Rembliere, C., Gough, C., and Bensmihen, S. (2014). Lateral root 
formation and patterning in Medicago truncatula. J Plant Physiol 171, 301-310. 
Hirsch, S., Kim, J., Munoz, A., Heckmann, A.B., Downie, J.A., and Oldroyd, G.E. 
(2009). GRAS proteins form a DNA binding complex to induce gene expression 
during nodulation signaling in Medicago truncatula. Plant Cell 21, 545-557. 
Horvath, B., Domonkos, A., Kereszt, A., Szucs, A., Abraham, E., Ayaydin, F., Boka, K., 
Chen, Y., Chen, R., Murray, J.D., et al. (2015). Loss of the nodule-specific cysteine 
rich peptide, NCR169, abolishes symbiotic nitrogen fixation in the Medicago 
truncatula dnf7 mutant. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112, 15232-15237. 
Hsu, P.Y., and Harmer, S.L. (2014). Wheels within wheels: the plant circadian 
system. Trends Plant Sci 19, 240-249. 
Huala, E., Dickerman, A.W., Garcia-Hernandez, M., Weems, D., Reiser, L., LaFond, F., 
Hanley, D., Kiphart, D., Zhuang, M., Huang, W., et al. (2001). The Arabidopsis 
Information Resource (TAIR): a comprehensive database and web-based 
information retrieval, analysis, and visualization system for a model plant. Nucleic 
Acids Res 29, 102-105. 
Huang, N.C., Liu, K.H., Lo, H.J., and Tsay, Y.F. (1999). Cloning and functional 
characterization of an Arabidopsis nitrate transporter gene that encodes a 
constitutive component of low-affinity uptake. Plant Cell 11, 1381-1392. 
Huang, Q., and Allen, C. (1997). An exo-poly-alpha-D-galacturonosidase, PehB, is 
required for wild-type virulence of Ralstonia solanacearum. J Bacteriol 179, 7369-
7378. 
Huffaker, A., Pearce, G., and Ryan, C.A. (2006). An endogenous peptide signal in 
Arabidopsis activates components of the innate immune response. Proc Natl Acad 
Sci U S A 103, 10098-10103. 
Hunt, S., and Layzell, D.B. (1993). Gas exchange of legume nodules and the 
regulation of nitrogenase actibvity. Annual Review of Plant Physiology and Plant 
Molecular Biology 44, 483-511. 
Ibanez, F., Wall, L., and Fabra, A. (2017). Starting points in plant-bacteria nitrogen-
fixing symbioses: intercellular invasion of the roots. J Exp Bot 68, 1905-1918. 
Ichimura, K., Casais, C., Peck, S.C., Shinozaki, K., and Shirasu, K. (2006). MEKK1 is 
required for MPK4 activation and regulates tissue-specific and temperature-
dependent cell death in Arabidopsis. J Biol Chem 281, 36969-36976. 
Ivanova, K.A., Tsyganova, A.V., Brewin, N.J., Tikhonovich, I.A., and Tsyganov, V.E. 
(2015). Induction of host defences by Rhizobium during ineffective nodulation of 
pea (Pisum sativum L.) carrying symbiotically defective mutations sym40 (PsEFD), 
sym33 (PsIPD3/PsCYCLOPS) and sym42. Protoplasma. 
Iyer-Pascuzzi, A.S., Jackson, T., Cui, H., Petricka, J.J., Busch, W., Tsukagoshi, H., and 
Benfey, P.N. (2011). Cell identity regulators link development and stress responses 
in the Arabidopsis root. Dev Cell 21, 770-782. 
Jacob, F., Vernaldi, S., and Maekawa, T. (2013). Evolution and Conservation of Plant 
NLR Functions. Front Immunol 4, 297. 
Javot, H., Penmetsa, R.V., Terzaghi, N., Cook, D.R., and Harrison, M.J. (2007). A 
Medicago truncatula phosphate transporter indispensable for the arbuscular 
mycorrhizal symbiosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104, 1720-1725. 
Jones, K.M., Sharopova, N., Lohar, D.P., Zhang, J.Q., VandenBosch, K.A., and Walker, 
G.C. (2008). Differential response of the plant Medicago truncatula to its symbiont 
Sinorhizobium meliloti or an exopolysaccharide-deficient mutant. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A 105, 704-709. 
Journet, E.P., El-Gachtouli, N., Vernoud, V., de Billy, F., Pichon, M., Dedieu, A., 
Arnould, C., Morandi, D., Barker, D.G., and Gianinazzi-Pearson, V. (2001). Medicago 
truncatula ENOD11: a novel RPRP-encoding early nodulin gene expressed during 
mycorrhization in arbuscule-containing cells. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 14, 737-
Kakar, K., Wandrey, M., Czechowski, T., Gaertner, T., Scheible, W.R., Stitt, M., 
Torres-Jerez, I., Xiao, Y., Redman, J.C., Wu, H.C., et al. (2008). A community 
resource for high-throughput quantitative RT-PCR analysis of transcription factor 
gene expression in Medicago truncatula. Plant Methods 4, 18. 
Kalo, P., Gleason, C., Edwards, A., Marsh, J., Mitra, R.M., Hirsch, S., Jakab, J., Sims, 
S., Long, S.R., Rogers, J., et al. (2005). Nodulation signaling in legumes requires 
NSP2, a member of the GRAS family of transcriptional regulators. Science 308, 
1786-1789. 
Kanamori, N., Madsen, L.H., Radutoiu, S., Frantescu, M., Quistgaard, E.M., Miwa, H., 
Downie, J.A., James, E.K., Felle, H.H., Haaning, L.L., et al. (2006). A nucleoporin is 
required for induction of Ca2+ spiking in legume nodule development and essential 
for rhizobial and fungal symbiosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103, 359-364. 
Kannan, P., Pandey, D., Gupta, A.K., Punetha, H., Taj, G., and Kumar, A. (2012). 
Expression analysis of MAP2K9 and MAPK6 during pathogenesis of Alternaria blight 
in Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Columbia. Mol Biol Rep 39, 4439-4444. 
Kao, C.C., Barlow, E., and Sequeira, L. (1992). Extracellular polysaccharide is 
required for wild-type virulence of Pseudomonas solanacearum. J Bacteriol 174, 
1068-1071. 
Kaschuk, G., Kuyper, T.W., Leffelaar, P.A., Hungria, M., and Giller, K.E. (2009). Are 
the rates of photosynthesis stimulated by the carbon sink strength of rhizobial and 
arbuscular mycorrhizal symbioses? Soil Biology and Biochemistry 41, 1233-1244. 
Kauffmann, A., Gentleman, R., and Huber, W. (2009). arrayQualityMetrics--a 
bioconductor package for quality assessment of microarray data. Bioinformatics 25, 
415-416. 
Kawaharada, Y., James, E.K., Kelly, S., Sandal, N., and Stougaard, J. (2017). The 
Ethylene Responsive Factor Required for Nodulation 1 (ERN1) Transcription Factor 
Is Required for Infection-Thread Formation in Lotus japonicus. Mol Plant Microbe 
Interact 30, 194-204. 
Kesarwani, M., Yoo, J., and Dong, X. (2007). Genetic interactions of TGA 
transcription factors in the regulation of pathogenesis-related genes and disease 
resistance in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 144, 336-346. 
Kiba, T., Feria-Bourrellier, A.B., Lafouge, F., Lezhneva, L., Boutet-Mercey, S., Orsel, 
M., Brehaut, V., Miller, A., Daniel-Vedele, F., Sakakibara, H., et al. (2012). The 
Arabidopsis nitrate transporter NRT2.4 plays a double role in roots and shoots of 
nitrogen-starved plants. Plant Cell 24, 245-258. 
Kiba, T., Inaba, J., Kudo, T., Ueda, N., Konishi, M., Mitsuda, N., Takiguchi, Y., Kondou, 
Y., Yoshizumi, T., Ohme-Takagi, M., et al. (2018). Repression of Nitrogen Starvation 
Responses by Members of the Arabidopsis GARP-Type Transcription Factor 
NIGT1/HRS1 Subfamily. Plant Cell 30, 925-945. 
Kiers, E.T., Rousseau, R.A., West, S.A., and Denison, R.F. (2003). Host sanctions and 
the legume-rhizobium mutualism. Nature 425, 78-81. 
Kim, H.S., Desveaux, D., Singer, A.U., Patel, P., Sondek, J., and Dangl, J.L. (2005a). 
The Pseudomonas syringae effector AvrRpt2 cleaves its C-terminally acylated 
target, RIN4, from Arabidopsis membranes to block RPM1 activation. Proc Natl 
Acad Sci U S A 102, 6496-6501. 
Kim, M.G., da Cunha, L., McFall, A.J., Belkhadir, Y., DebRoy, S., Dangl, J.L., and 
Mackey, D. (2005b). Two Pseudomonas syringae type III effectors inhibit RIN4-
regulated basal defense in Arabidopsis. Cell 121, 749-759. 
Kohorn, B.D., and Kohorn, S.L. (2012). The cell wall-associated kinases, WAKs, as 
pectin receptors. Front Plant Sci 3, 88. 
Konishi, M., and Yanagisawa, S. (2010). Identification of a nitrate-responsive cis-
element in the Arabidopsis NIR1 promoter defines the presence of multiple cis-
regulatory elements for nitrogen response. Plant J 63, 269-282. 
Konishi, M., and Yanagisawa, S. (2011). The regulatory region controlling the 
nitrate-responsive expression of a nitrate reductase gene, NIA1, in Arabidopsis. 
Plant Cell Physiol 52, 824-836. 
Konishi, M., and Yanagisawa, S. (2013). Arabidopsis NIN-like transcription factors 
have a central role in nitrate signalling. Nat Commun 4, 1617. 
Koressaar, T., and Remm, M. (2007). Enhancements and modifications of primer 
design program Primer3. Bioinformatics 23, 1289-1291. 
Kotur, Z., Mackenzie, N., Ramesh, S., Tyerman, S.D., Kaiser, B.N., and Glass, A.D. 
(2012). Nitrate transport capacity of the Arabidopsis thaliana NRT2 family members 
and their interactions with AtNAR2.1. New Phytol 194, 724-731. 
Kouchi, H., Shimomura, K., Hata, S., Hirota, A., Wu, G.J., Kumagai, H., Tajima, S., 
Suganuma, N., Suzuki, A., Aoki, T., et al. (2004). Large-scale analysis of gene 
expression profiles during early stages of root nodule formation in a model legume, 
Lotus japonicus. DNA Res 11, 263-274. 
Krapp, A., David, L.C., Chardin, C., Girin, T., Marmagne, A., Leprince, A.S., Chaillou, 
S., Ferrario-Mery, S., Meyer, C., and Daniel-Vedele, F. (2014). Nitrate transport and 
signalling in Arabidopsis. J Exp Bot 65, 789-798. 
Krasileva, K.V., Dahlbeck, D., and Staskawicz, B.J. (2010). Activation of an 
Arabidopsis resistance protein is specified by the in planta association of its leucine-
rich repeat domain with the cognate oomycete effector. Plant Cell 22, 2444-2458. 
Krol, E., Mentzel, T., Chinchilla, D., Boller, T., Felix, G., Kemmerling, B., Postel, S., 
Arents, M., Jeworutzki, E., Al-Rasheid, K.A., et al. (2010). Perception of the 
Arabidopsis danger signal peptide 1 involves the pattern recognition receptor 
AtPEPR1 and its close homologue AtPEPR2. J Biol Chem 285, 13471-13479. 
Krouk, G., Crawford, N.M., Coruzzi, G.M., and Tsay, Y.F. (2010a). Nitrate signaling: 
adaptation to fluctuating environments. Curr Opin Plant Biol 13, 266-273. 
Krouk, G., Lacombe, B., Bielach, A., Perrine-Walker, F., Malinska, K., Mounier, E., 
Hoyerova, K., Tillard, P., Leon, S., Ljung, K., et al. (2010b). Nitrate-regulated auxin 
transport by NRT1.1 defines a mechanism for nutrient sensing in plants. Dev Cell 
18, 927-937. 
Krouk, G., Mirowski, P., LeCun, Y., Shasha, D.E., and Coruzzi, G.M. (2010c). 
Predictive network modeling of the high-resolution dynamic plant transcriptome in 
response to nitrate. Genome Biol 11, R123. 
Krusell, L., Madsen, L.H., Sato, S., Aubert, G., Genua, A., Szczyglowski, K., Duc, G., 
Kaneko, T., Tabata, S., de Bruijn, F., et al. (2002). Shoot control of root development 
and nodulation is mediated by a receptor-like kinase. Nature 420, 422-426. 
Lagunas, B., Achom, M., Bonyadi-Pour, R., Pardal, A.J., Richmond, B.L., Sergaki, C., 
Vazquez, S., Schafer, P., Ott, S., Hammond, J., et al. (2019). Regulation of Resource 
Partitioning Coordinates Nitrogen and Rhizobia Responses and Autoregulation of 
Nodulation in Medicago truncatula. Mol Plant 12, 833-846. 
Lagunas, B., Schafer, P., and Gifford, M.L. (2015). Housing helpful invaders: the 
evolutionary and molecular architecture underlying plant root-mutualist microbe 
interactions. J Exp Bot 66, 2177-2186. 
Laplaze, L., Benkova, E., Casimiro, I., Maes, L., Vanneste, S., Swarup, R., Weijers, D., 
Calvo, V., Parizot, B., Herrera-Rodriguez, M.B., et al. (2007). Cytokinins act directly 
on lateral root founder cells to inhibit root initiation. Plant Cell 19, 3889-3900. 
Laskowski, M.J., Williams, M.E., Nusbaum, H.C., and Sussex, I.M. (1995). Formation 
of lateral root meristems is a two-stage process. Development 121, 3303-3310. 
Li, W., Wang, Y., Okamoto, M., Crawford, N.M., Siddiqi, M.Y., and Glass, A.D. (2007). 
Dissection of the AtNRT2.1:AtNRT2.2 inducible high-affinity nitrate transporter 
gene cluster. Plant Physiol 143, 425-433. 
Liang, J., Klingl, A., Lin, Y.Y., Boul, E., Thomas-Oates, J., and Marin, M. (2019). A 
subcompatible rhizobium strain reveals infection duality in Lotus. J Exp Bot 70, 
1903-1913. 
Liang, Y., Cao, Y., Tanaka, K., Thibivilliers, S., Wan, J., Choi, J., Kang, C., Qiu, J., and 
Stacey, G. (2013). Nonlegumes respond to rhizobial Nod factors by suppressing the 
innate immune response. Science 341, 1384-1387. 
Libault, M., Farmer, A., Brechenmacher, L., Drnevich, J., Langley, R.J., Bilgin, D.D., 
Radwan, O., Neece, D.J., Clough, S.J., May, G.D., et al. (2010). Complete 
transcriptome of the soybean root hair cell, a single-cell model, and its alteration in 
response to Bradyrhizobium japonicum infection. Plant Physiol 152, 541-552. 
Lin, M.H., Gresshoff, P.M., and Ferguson, B.J. (2012). Systemic regulation of 
soybean nodulation by acidic growth conditions. Plant Physiol 160, 2028-2039. 
Lin, S.H., Kuo, H.F., Canivenc, G., Lin, C.S., Lepetit, M., Hsu, P.K., Tillard, P., Lin, H.L., 
Wang, Y.Y., Tsai, C.B., et al. (2008). Mutation of the Arabidopsis NRT1.5 nitrate 
transporter causes defective root-to-shoot nitrate transport. Plant Cell 20, 2514-
2528. 
Linkohr, B.I., Williamson, L.C., Fitter, A.H., and Leyser, H.M. (2002). Nitrate and 
phosphate availability and distribution have different effects on root system 
architecture of Arabidopsis. Plant J 29, 751-760. 
Little, D.Y., Rao, H., Oliva, S., Daniel-Vedele, F., Krapp, A., and Malamy, J.E. (2005). 
The putative high-affinity nitrate transporter NRT2.1 represses lateral root initiation 
in response to nutritional cues. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 102, 13693-13698. 
Liu, C.W., and Murray, J.D. (2016). The Role of Flavonoids in Nodulation Host-Range 
Specificity: An Update. Plants (Basel) 5. 
Liu, J., Elmore, J.M., and Coaker, G. (2009a). Investigating the functions of the RIN4 
protein complex during plant innate immune responses. Plant Signal Behav 4, 1107-
1110. 
Liu, J., Elmore, J.M., Fuglsang, A.T., Palmgren, M.G., Staskawicz, B.J., and Coaker, G. 
(2009b). RIN4 functions with plasma membrane H+-ATPases to regulate stomatal 
apertures during pathogen attack. PLoS Biol 7, e1000139. 
Liu, K.H., and Tsay, Y.F. (2003). Switching between the two action modes of the 
dual-affinity nitrate transporter CHL1 by phosphorylation. EMBO J 22, 1005-1013. 
Liu, Y., Hassan, S., Kidd, B.N., Garg, G., Mathesius, U., Singh, K.B., and Anderson, J.P. 
(2017). Ethylene Signaling Is Important for Isoflavonoid-Mediated Resistance to 
Rhizoctonia solani in Roots of Medicago truncatula. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 30, 
691-700. 
Livak, K.J., and Schmittgen, T.D. (2001). Analysis of relative gene expression data 
using real-time quantitative PCR and the 2(-Delta Delta C(T)) Method. Methods 25, 
402-408. 
Lohar, D.P., Sharopova, N., Endre, G., Penuela, S., Samac, D., Town, C., Silverstein, 
K.A., and VandenBosch, K.A. (2006). Transcript analysis of early nodulation events in 
Medicago truncatula. Plant Physiol 140, 221-234. 
Long, S.R. (1996). Rhizobium symbiosis: nod factors in perspective. Plant Cell 8, 
1885-1898. 
Lopez-Gomez, M., Sandal, N., Stougaard, J., and Boller, T. (2012). Interplay of flg22-
induced defence responses and nodulation in Lotus japonicus. J Exp Bot 63, 393-
Loque, D., Yuan, L., Kojima, S., Gojon, A., Wirth, J., Gazzarrini, S., Ishiyama, K., 
Takahashi, H., and von Wiren, N. (2006). Additive contribution of AMT1;1 and 
AMT1;3 to high-affinity ammonium uptake across the plasma membrane of 
nitrogen-deficient Arabidopsis roots. Plant J 48, 522-534. 
Lorang, J.M., Sweat, T.A., and Wolpert, T.J. (2007). Plant disease susceptibility 
conferred by a "resistance" gene. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104, 14861-14866. 
Love, M.I., Huber, W., and Anders, S. (2014). Moderated estimation of fold change 
and dispersion for RNA-seq data with DESeq2. Genome Biology 15. 
Lowe-Power, T.M., Khokhani, D., and Allen, C. (2018). How Ralstonia solanacearum 
Exploits and Thrives in the Flowing Plant Xylem Environment. Trends Microbiol 26, 
929-942. 
Lucas, M., Swarup, R., Paponov, I.A., Swarup, K., Casimiro, I., Lake, D., Peret, B., 
Zappala, S., Mairhofer, S., Whitworth, M., et al. (2011). Short-Root regulates 
primary, lateral, and adventitious root development in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 
155, 384-398. 
Lynch, J. (1995). Root Architecture and Plant Productivity. Plant Physiol 109, 7-13. 
Mackey, D., Belkhadir, Y., Alonso, J.M., Ecker, J.R., and Dangl, J.L. (2003). 
Arabidopsis RIN4 is a target of the type III virulence effector AvrRpt2 and modulates 
RPS2-mediated resistance. Cell 112, 379-389. 
Mackey, D., Holt, B.F., 3rd, Wiig, A., and Dangl, J.L. (2002). RIN4 interacts with 
Pseudomonas syringae type III effector molecules and is required for RPM1-
mediated resistance in Arabidopsis. Cell 108, 743-754. 
Macosko, E.Z., Basu, A., Satija, R., Nemesh, J., Shekhar, K., Goldman, M., Tirosh, I., 
Bialas, A.R., Kamitaki, N., Martersteck, E.M., et al. (2015). Highly Parallel Genome-
wide Expression Profiling of Individual Cells Using Nanoliter Droplets. Cell 161, 
1202-1214. 
Madsen, E.B., Madsen, L.H., Radutoiu, S., Olbryt, M., Rakwalska, M., Szczyglowski, 
K., Sato, S., Kaneko, T., Tabata, S., Sandal, N., et al. (2003). A receptor kinase gene 
of the LysM type is involved in legume perception of rhizobial signals. Nature 425, 
637-640. 
Magori, S., and Kawaguchi, M. (2009). Long-distance control of nodulation: 
molecules and models. Mol Cells 27, 129-134. 
Magori, S., Oka-Kira, E., Shibata, S., Umehara, Y., Kouchi, H., Hase, Y., Tanaka, A., 
Sato, S., Tabata, S., and Kawaguchi, M. (2009). Too much love, a root regulator 
associated with the long-distance control of nodulation in Lotus japonicus. Mol 
Plant Microbe Interact 22, 259-268. 
Mah, K.M., Uppalapati, S.R., Tang, Y., Allen, S., and Shuai, B. (2012). Gene 
expression profiling of Macrophomina phaseolina infected Medicago truncatula 
roots reveals a role for auxin in plant tolerance against the charcoal rot pathogen. 
Physiological and Molecular Plant Pathology 79, 21-30. 
Malamy, J.E., and Ryan, K.S. (2001). Environmental regulation of lateral root 
initiation in Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 127, 899-909. 
Manchanda, G., and Garg, N. (2008). Salinity and its effects on the functional 
biology of legumes. Acta Physiologiae Plantarum 30, 595-618. 
Mao, G., Meng, X., Liu, Y., Zheng, Z., Chen, Z., and Zhang, S. (2011). Phosphorylation 
of a WRKY transcription factor by two pathogen-responsive MAPKs drives 
phytoalexin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 23, 1639-1653. 
Marchetti, M., Capela, D., Glew, M., Cruveiller, S., Chane-Woon-Ming, B., Gris, C., 
Timmers, T., Poinsot, V., Gilbert, L.B., Heeb, P., et al. (2010). Experimental evolution 
of a plant pathogen into a legume symbiont. PLoS Biol 8, e1000280. 
Marchetti, M., Clerissi, C., Yousfi, Y., Gris, C., Bouchez, O., Rocha, E., Cruveiller, S., 
Jauneau, A., Capela, D., and Masson-Boivin, C. (2017). Experimental evolution of 
rhizobia may lead to either extra- or intracellular symbiotic adaptation depending 
on the selection regime. Mol Ecol 26, 1818-1831. 
Marchetti, M., Jauneau, A., Capela, D., Remigi, P., Gris, C., Batut, J., and Masson-
Boivin, C. (2014). Shaping bacterial symbiosis with legumes by experimental 
evolution. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 27, 956-964. 
Marchive, C., Roudier, F., Castaings, L., Brehaut, V., Blondet, E., Colot, V., Meyer, C., 
and Krapp, A. (2013). Nuclear retention of the transcription factor NLP7 
orchestrates the early response to nitrate in plants. Nat Commun 4, 1713. 
Marsh, J.F., Rakocevic, A., Mitra, R.M., Brocard, L., Sun, J., Eschstruth, A., Long, S.R., 
Schultze, M., Ratet, P., and Oldroyd, G.E. (2007). Medicago truncatula NIN is 
essential for rhizobial-independent nodule organogenesis induced by autoactive 
calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase. Plant Physiol 144, 324-335. 
Mauch, F., Mauch-Mani, B., and Boller, T. (1988). Antifungal Hydrolases in Pea 
Tissue : II. Inhibition of Fungal Growth by Combinations of Chitinase and beta-1,3-
Glucanase. Plant Physiol 88, 936-942. 
Mbengue, M., Camut, S., de Carvalho-Niebel, F., Deslandes, L., Froidure, S., Klaus-
Heisen, D., Moreau, S., Rivas, S., Timmers, T., Herve, C., et al. (2010). The Medicago 
truncatula E3 ubiquitin ligase PUB1 interacts with the LYK3 symbiotic receptor and 
negatively regulates infection and nodulation. Plant Cell 22, 3474-3488. 
McHale, L., Tan, X., Koehl, P., and Michelmore, R.W. (2006). Plant NBS-LRR proteins: 
adaptable guards. Genome Biol 7, 212. 
Medici, A., and Krouk, G. (2014). The primary nitrate response: a multifaceted 
signalling pathway. J Exp Bot 65, 5567-5576. 
Medici, A., Marshall-Colon, A., Ronzier, E., Szponarski, W., Wang, R., Gojon, A., 
Crawford, N.M., Ruffel, S., Coruzzi, G.M., and Krouk, G. (2015). AtNIGT1/HRS1 
integrates nitrate and phosphate signals at the Arabidopsis root tip. Nat Commun 6, 
6274. 
Messinese, E., Mun, J.H., Yeun, L.H., Jayaraman, D., Rouge, P., Barre, A., Lougnon, 
G., Schornack, S., Bono, J.J., Cook, D.R., et al. (2007). A novel nuclear protein 
interacts with the symbiotic DMI3 calcium- and calmodulin-dependent protein 
kinase of Medicago truncatula. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 20, 912-921. 
Middleton, P.H., Jakab, J., Penmetsa, R.V., Starker, C.G., Doll, J., Kalo, P., Prabhu, R., 
Marsh, J.F., Mitra, R.M., Kereszt, A., et al. (2007). An ERF transcription factor in 
Medicago truncatula that is essential for Nod factor signal transduction. Plant Cell 
19, 1221-1234. 
Miya, A., Albert, P., Shinya, T., Desaki, Y., Ichimura, K., Shirasu, K., Narusaka, Y., 
Kawakami, N., Kaku, H., and Shibuya, N. (2007). CERK1, a LysM receptor kinase, is 
essential for chitin elicitor signaling in Arabidopsis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 104, 
19613-19618. 
Mizoguchi, T., Wheatley, K., Hanzawa, Y., Wright, L., Mizoguchi, M., Song, H.R., 
Carre, I.A., and Coupland, G. (2002). LHY and CCA1 are partially redundant genes 
required to maintain circadian rhythms in Arabidopsis. Dev Cell 2, 629-641. 
Moling, S., Pietraszewska-Bogiel, A., Postma, M., Fedorova, E., Hink, M.A., Limpens, 
E., Gadella, T.W., and Bisseling, T. (2014). Nod factor receptors form heteromeric 
complexes and are essential for intracellular infection in Medicago nodules. Plant 
Cell 26, 4188-4199. 
Moreau, S., Fromentin, J., Vailleau, F., Vernie, T., Huguet, S., Balzergue, S., Frugier, 
F., Gamas, P., and Jardinaud, M.F. (2014). The symbiotic transcription factor MtEFD 
and cytokinins are positively acting in the Medicago truncatula and Ralstonia 
solanacearum pathogenic interaction. New Phytol 201, 1343-1357. 
Mortier, V., Den Herder, G., Whitford, R., Van de Velde, W., Rombauts, S., 
D'Haeseleer, K., Holsters, M., and Goormachtig, S. (2010). CLE peptides control 
Medicago truncatula nodulation locally and systemically. Plant Physiol 153, 222-
Mortier, V., Holsters, M., and Goormachtig, S. (2012). Never too many? How 
legumes control nodule numbers. Plant Cell Environ 35, 245-258. 
Moussaieff, A., Rogachev, I., Brodsky, L., Malitsky, S., Toal, T.W., Belcher, H., Yativ, 
M., Brady, S.M., Benfey, P.N., and Aharoni, A. (2013). High-resolution metabolic 
mapping of cell types in plant roots. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 110, E1232-1241. 
Mukhtar, M.S., Deslandes, L., Auriac, M.C., Marco, Y., and Somssich, I.E. (2008). The 
Arabidopsis transcription factor WRKY27 influences wilt disease symptom 
development caused by Ralstonia solanacearum. Plant J 56, 935-947. 
Munoz, V., Ibanez, F., Tordable, M., Megias, M., and Fabra, A. (2015). Role of 
reactive oxygen species generation and Nod factors during the early symbiotic 
interaction between bradyrhizobia and peanut, a legume infected by crack entry. J 
Appl Microbiol 118, 182-192. 
Nagata, M., Murakami, E., Shimoda, Y., Shimoda-Sasakura, F., Kucho, K., Suzuki, A., 
Abe, M., Higashi, S., and Uchiumi, T. (2008). Expression of a class 1 hemoglobin 
gene and production of nitric oxide in response to symbiotic and pathogenic 
bacteria in Lotus japonicus. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 21, 1175-1183. 
Nakagawa, T., and Kawaguchi, M. (2006). Shoot-applied MeJA Suppresses Root 
Nodulation in Lotus japonicus. Plant and Cell Physiology 47, 176-180. 
Navarro, L., Zipfel, C., Rowland, O., Keller, I., Robatzek, S., Boller, T., and Jones, J.D. 
(2004). The transcriptional innate immune response to flg22. Interplay and overlap 
with Avr gene-dependent defense responses and bacterial pathogenesis. Plant 
Physiol 135, 1113-1128. 
Nawy, T., Lee, J.Y., Colinas, J., Wang, J.Y., Thongrod, S.C., Malamy, J.E., Birnbaum, 
K., and Benfey, P.N. (2005). Transcriptional profile of the Arabidopsis root quiescent 
center. Plant Cell 17, 1908-1925. 
Nishida, H., Handa, Y., Tanaka, S., Suzaki, T., and Kawaguchi, M. (2016). Expression 
of the CLE-RS3 gene suppresses root nodulation in Lotus japonicus. J Plant Res 129, 
909-919. 
Nishimura, R., Hayashi, M., Wu, G.J., Kouchi, H., Imaizumi-Anraku, H., Murakami, Y., 
Kawasaki, S., Akao, S., Ohmori, M., Nagasawa, M., et al. (2002). HAR1 mediates 
systemic regulation of symbiotic organ development. Nature 420, 426-429. 
O'Malley, R.C., Huang, S.C., Song, L., Lewsey, M.G., Bartlett, A., Nery, J.R., Galli, M., 
Gallavotti, A., and Ecker, J.R. (2016). Cistrome and Epicistrome Features Shape the 
Regulatory DNA Landscape. Cell 165, 1280-1292. 
Obertello, M., Krouk, G., Katari, M.S., Runko, S.J., and Coruzzi, G.M. (2010). 
Modeling the global effect of the basic-leucine zipper transcription factor 1 (bZIP1) 
on nitrogen and light regulation in Arabidopsis. BMC Syst Biol 4, 111. 
Okamoto, M., Kumar, A., Li, W., Wang, Y., Siddiqi, M.Y., Crawford, N.M., and Glass, 
A.D. (2006). High-affinity nitrate transport in roots of Arabidopsis depends on 
expression of the NAR2-like gene AtNRT3.1. Plant Physiol 140, 1036-1046. 
Okamoto, S., and Kawaguchi, M. (2015). Shoot HAR1 mediates nitrate inhibition of 
nodulation in Lotus japonicus. Plant Signal Behav 10, e1000138. 
Okamoto, S., Ohnishi, E., Sato, S., Takahashi, H., Nakazono, M., Tabata, S., and 
Kawaguchi, M. (2009). Nod factor/nitrate-induced CLE genes that drive HAR1-
mediated systemic regulation of nodulation. Plant Cell Physiol 50, 67-77. 
Okamoto, S., Shinohara, H., Mori, T., Matsubayashi, Y., and Kawaguchi, M. (2013). 
Root-derived CLE glycopeptides control nodulation by direct binding to HAR1 
receptor kinase. Nat Commun 4, 2191. 
Okazaki, S., Kaneko, T., Sato, S., and Saeki, K. (2013). Hijacking of leguminous 
nodulation signaling by the rhizobial type III secretion system. Proc Natl Acad Sci U 
S A 110, 17131-17136. 
Oke, V., and Long, S.R. (1999). Bacteroid formation in the Rhizobium-legume 
symbiosis. Curr Opin Microbiol 2, 641-646. 
Okushima, Y., Fukaki, H., Onoda, M., Theologis, A., and Tasaka, M. (2007). ARF7 and 
ARF19 regulate lateral root formation via direct activation of LBD/ASL genes in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19, 118-130. 
Oldroyd, G.E. (2013). Speak, friend, and enter: signalling systems that promote 
beneficial symbiotic associations in plants. Nat Rev Microbiol 11, 252-263. 
Omrane, S., and Chiurazzi, M. (2009). A variety of regulatory mechanisms are 
involved in the nitrogen-dependent modulation of the nodule organogenesis 
program in legume roots. Plant Signal Behav 4, 1066-1068. 
Omrane, S., Ferrarini, A., D'Apuzzo, E., Rogato, A., Delledonne, M., and Chiurazzi, M. 
(2009). Symbiotic competence in Lotus japonicus is affected by plant nitrogen 
status: transcriptomic identification of genes affected by a new signalling pathway. 
New Phytol 183, 380-394. 
Oono, R., Anderson, C.G., and Denison, R.F. (2011). Failure to fix nitrogen by non-
reproductive symbiotic rhizobia triggers host sanctions that reduce fitness of their 
reproductive clonemates. Proc Biol Sci 278, 2698-2703. 
Orman-Ligeza, B., Morris, E.C., Parizot, B., Lavigne, T., Babe, A., Ligeza, A., Klein, S., 
Sturrock, C., Xuan, W., Novak, O., et al. (2018). The Xerobranching Response 
Represses Lateral Root Formation When Roots Are Not in Contact with Water. Curr 
Biol 28, 3165-3173 e3165. 
Orosa-Puente, B., Leftley, N., von Wangenheim, D., Banda, J., Srivastava, A.K., Hill, 
K., Truskina, J., Bhosale, R., Morris, E., Srivastava, M., et al. (2018). Root branching 
toward water involves posttranslational modification of transcription factor ARF7. 
Science 362, 1407-1410. 
Orsel, M., Krapp, A., and Daniel-Vedele, F. (2002). Analysis of the NRT2 nitrate 
transporter family in Arabidopsis. Structure and gene expression. Plant Physiol 129, 
886-896. 
Pan, H., and Wang, D. (2017). Nodule cysteine-rich peptides maintain a working 
balance during nitrogen-fixing symbiosis. Nat Plants 3, 17048. 
Panikulangara, T.J., Eggers-Schumacher, G., Wunderlich, M., Stransky, H., and 
Schoffl, F. (2004). Galactinol synthase1. A novel heat shock factor target gene 
responsible for heat-induced synthesis of raffinose family oligosaccharides in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 136, 3148-3158. 
Para, A., Li, Y., Marshall-Colon, A., Varala, K., Francoeur, N.J., Moran, T.M., Edwards, 
M.B., Hackley, C., Bargmann, B.O., Birnbaum, K.D., et al. (2014). Hit-and-run 
transcriptional control by bZIP1 mediates rapid nutrient signaling in Arabidopsis. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111, 10371-10376. 
Patriarca, E.J., Tate, R., Ferraioli, S., and Iaccarino, M. (2004). Organogenesis of 
legume root nodules. Int Rev Cytol 234, 201-262. 
Peck, M.C., Fisher, R.F., and Long, S.R. (2006). Diverse flavonoids stimulate NodD1 
binding to nod gene promoters in Sinorhizobium meliloti. J Bacteriol 188, 5417-
5427. 
Peiter, E., Sun, J., Heckmann, A.B., Venkateshwaran, M., Riely, B.K., Otegui, M.S., 
Edwards, A., Freshour, G., Hahn, M.G., Cook, D.R., et al. (2007). The Medicago 
truncatula DMI1 protein modulates cytosolic calcium signaling. Plant Physiol 145, 
192-203. 
Peret, B., Larrieu, A., and Bennett, M.J. (2009). Lateral root emergence: a difficult 
birth. J Exp Bot 60, 3637-3643. 
Petersson, S.V., Johansson, A.I., Kowalczyk, M., Makoveychuk, A., Wang, J.Y., 
Moritz, T., Grebe, M., Benfey, P.N., Sandberg, G., and Ljung, K. (2009). An auxin 
gradient and maximum in the Arabidopsis root apex shown by high-resolution cell-
specific analysis of IAA distribution and synthesis. Plant Cell 21, 1659-1668. 
Petricka, J.J., Schauer, M.A., Megraw, M., Breakfield, N.W., Thompson, J.W., 
Georgiev, S., Soderblom, E.J., Ohler, U., Moseley, M.A., Grossniklaus, U., et al. 
(2012). The protein expression landscape of the Arabidopsis root. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A 109, 6811-6818. 
Petutschnig, E.K., Jones, A.M., Serazetdinova, L., Lipka, U., and Lipka, V. (2010). The 
lysin motif receptor-like kinase (LysM-RLK) CERK1 is a major chitin-binding protein 
in Arabidopsis thaliana and subject to chitin-induced phosphorylation. J Biol Chem 
285, 28902-28911. 
Pfund, C., Tans-Kersten, J., Dunning, F.M., Alonso, J.M., Ecker, J.R., Allen, C., and 
Bent, A.F. (2004). Flagellin is not a major defense elicitor in Ralstonia solanacearum 
cells or extracts applied to Arabidopsis thaliana. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 17, 
696-706. 
Pii, Y., Astegno, A., Peroni, E., Zaccardelli, M., Pandolfini, T., and Crimi, M. (2009). 
The Medicago truncatula N5 gene encoding a root-specific lipid transfer protein is 
required for the symbiotic interaction with Sinorhizobium meliloti. Mol Plant 
Microbe Interact 22, 1577-1587. 
Pii, Y., Molesini, B., Masiero, S., and Pandolfini, T. (2012). The non-specific lipid 
transfer protein N5 of Medicago truncatula is implicated in epidermal stages of 
rhizobium-host interaction. BMC Plant Biol 12, 233. 
Pitzschke, A., Schikora, A., and Hirt, H. (2009). MAPK cascade signalling networks in 
plant defence. Curr Opin Plant Biol 12, 421-426. 
Poueymiro, M., and Genin, S. (2009). Secreted proteins from Ralstonia 
solanacearum: a hundred tricks to kill a plant. Curr Opin Microbiol 12, 44-52. 
Price, P.A., Tanner, H.R., Dillon, B.A., Shabab, M., Walker, G.C., and Griffitts, J.S. 
(2015). Rhizobial peptidase HrrP cleaves host-encoded signaling peptides and 
mediates symbiotic compatibility. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 112, 15244-15249. 
Qiu, J.L., Fiil, B.K., Petersen, K., Nielsen, H.B., Botanga, C.J., Thorgrimsen, S., Palma, 
K., Suarez-Rodriguez, M.C., Sandbech-Clausen, S., Lichota, J., et al. (2008). 
Arabidopsis MAP kinase 4 regulates gene expression through transcription factor 
release in the nucleus. EMBO J 27, 2214-2221. 
Qutob, D., Kemmerling, B., Brunner, F., Kufner, I., Engelhardt, S., Gust, A.A., 
Luberacki, B., Seitz, H.U., Stahl, D., Rauhut, T., et al. (2006). Phytotoxicity and innate 
immune responses induced by Nep1-like proteins. Plant Cell 18, 3721-3744. 
Radutoiu, S., Madsen, L.H., Madsen, E.B., Felle, H.H., Umehara, Y., Gronlund, M., 
Sato, S., Nakamura, Y., Tabata, S., Sandal, N., et al. (2003). Plant recognition of 
symbiotic bacteria requires two LysM receptor-like kinases. Nature 425, 585-592. 
Radutoiu, S., Madsen, L.H., Madsen, E.B., Jurkiewicz, A., Fukai, E., Quistgaard, E.M., 
Albrektsen, A.S., James, E.K., Thirup, S., and Stougaard, J. (2007). LysM domains 
mediate lipochitin-oligosaccharide recognition and Nfr genes extend the symbiotic 
host range. EMBO J 26, 3923-3935. 
Rafiqi, M., Bernoux, M., Ellis, J.G., and Dodds, P.N. (2009). In the trenches of plant 
pathogen recognition: Role of NB-LRR proteins. Semin Cell Dev Biol 20, 1017-1024. 
Rajeevkumar, S., Anunanthini, P., and Sathishkumar, R. (2015). Epigenetic silencing 
in transgenic plants. Front Plant Sci 6, 693. 
Rasmussen, M.W., Roux, M., Petersen, M., and Mundy, J. (2012). MAP Kinase 
Cascades in Arabidopsis Innate Immunity. Front Plant Sci 3, 169. 
Reid, D.E., Ferguson, B.J., Hayashi, S., Lin, Y.H., and Gresshoff, P.M. (2011). 
Molecular mechanisms controlling legume autoregulation of nodulation. Ann Bot 
108, 789-795. 
Remans, T., Nacry, P., Pervent, M., Filleur, S., Diatloff, E., Mounier, E., Tillard, P., 
Forde, B.G., and Gojon, A. (2006). The Arabidopsis NRT1.1 transporter participates 
in the signaling pathway triggering root colonization of nitrate-rich patches. Proc 
Natl Acad Sci U S A 103, 19206-19211. 
Ren, D., Liu, Y., Yang, K.Y., Han, L., Mao, G., Glazebrook, J., and Zhang, S. (2008). A 
fungal-responsive MAPK cascade regulates phytoalexin biosynthesis in Arabidopsis. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105, 5638-5643. 
Rey, T., Bonhomme, M., Chatterjee, A., Gavrin, A., Toulotte, J., Yang, W., Andre, O., 
Jacquet, C., and Schornack, S. (2017). The Medicago truncatula GRAS protein RAD1 
supports arbuscular mycorrhiza symbiosis and Phytophthora palmivora 
susceptibility. J Exp Bot 68, 5871-5881. 
Rich, C., Reitz, M.U., Eichmann, R., Hermann, S., Jenkins, D.J., Kogel, K.-H., Esteban, 
E., Ott, S., and Schfer, P. (2019). Cell type identity determines transcriptomic 
immune responses in Arabidopsis thaliana 
roots. 
Roden, L.C., and Ingle, R.A. (2009). Lights, rhythms, infection: the role of light and 
the circadian clock in determining the outcome of plant-pathogen interactions. 
Plant Cell 21, 2546-2552. 
Rogg, L.E., Lasswell, J., and Bartel, B. (2001). A gain-of-function mutation in IAA28 
suppresses lateral root development. Plant Cell 13, 465-480. 
Ross, A., Yamada, K., Hiruma, K., Yamashita-Yamada, M., Lu, X., Takano, Y., Tsuda, 
K., and Saijo, Y. (2014). The Arabidopsis PEPR pathway couples local and systemic 
plant immunity. EMBO J 33, 62-75. 
Salanoubat, M., Genin, S., Artiguenave, F., Gouzy, J., Mangenot, S., Arlat, M., 
Billault, A., Brottier, P., Camus, J.C., Cattolico, L., et al. (2002). Genome sequence of 
the plant pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum. Nature 415, 497-502. 
Samuel, M.A., Mudgil, Y., Salt, J.N., Delmas, F., Ramachandran, S., Chilelli, A., and 
Goring, D.R. (2008). Interactions between the S-domain receptor kinases and 
AtPUB-ARM E3 ubiquitin ligases suggest a conserved signaling pathway in 
Arabidopsis. Plant Physiol 147, 2084-2095. 
Santos, R., Herouart, D., Sigaud, S., Touati, D., and Puppo, A. (2001). Oxidative burst 
in Alfalfa-Sinorhizobium meliloti symbiotic interaction. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 
14, 86-89. 
Scheidle, H., Gross, A., and Niehaus, K. (2005). The Lipid A substructure of the 
Sinorhizobium meliloti lipopolysaccharides is sufficient to suppress the oxidative 
burst in host plants. New Phytol 165, 559-565. 
Schell, M.A. (1987). Purification and Characterization of an Endoglucanase from 
Pseudomonas solanacearum. Appl Environ Microbiol 53, 2237-2241. 
Schlaman, H.R., Okker, R.J., and Lugtenberg, B.J. (1992). Regulation of nodulation 
gene expression by NodD in rhizobia. J Bacteriol 174, 5177-5182. 
Schnabel, E., Journet, E.P., de Carvalho-Niebel, F., Duc, G., and Frugoli, J. (2005). 
The Medicago truncatula SUNN gene encodes a CLV1-like leucine-rich repeat 
receptor kinase that regulates nodule number and root length. Plant Mol Biol 58, 
809-822. 
Searle, I.R., Men, A.E., Laniya, T.S., Buzas, D.M., Iturbe-Ormaetxe, I., Carroll, B.J., 
and Gresshoff, P.M. (2003). Long-distance signaling in nodulation directed by a 
CLAVATA1-like receptor kinase. Science 299, 109-112. 
Singh, V.K., Munro, K., and Jia, Z. (2012). A novel calmodulin-beta-PIX interaction 
and its implication in receptor tyrosine kinase regulation. Cell Signal 24, 1790-1796. 
Smit, P., Limpens, E., Geurts, R., Fedorova, E., Dolgikh, E., Gough, C., and Bisseling, 
T. (2007). Medicago LYK3, an entry receptor in rhizobial nodulation factor signaling. 
Plant Physiol 145, 183-191. 
Smit, P., Raedts, J., Portyanko, V., Debelle, F., Gough, C., Bisseling, T., and Geurts, R. 
(2005). NSP1 of the GRAS protein family is essential for rhizobial Nod factor-
induced transcription. Science 308, 1789-1791. 
Soyano, T., Hirakawa, H., Sato, S., Hayashi, M., and Kawaguchi, M. (2014). Nodule 
Inception creates a long-distance negative feedback loop involved in homeostatic 
regulation of nodule organ production. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 111, 14607-14612. 
Sprent, J.I. (2008). 60Ma of legume nodulation. What's new? What's changing? J 
Exp Bot 59, 1081-1084. 
Staal, J., and Dixelius, C. (2007). Tracing the ancient origins of plant innate 
immunity. Trends Plant Sci 12, 334-342. 
Stacey, G., McAlvin, C.B., Kim, S.-Y., Olivares, J., and Jos Soto, M. (2006). Effects of 
Endogenous Salicylic Acid on Nodulation in the Model Legumes Lotus japonicus and 
Medicago truncatula. Plant Physiology 141, 1471-1481. 
Stegle, O., Denby, K.J., Cooke, E.J., Wild, D.L., Ghahramani, Z., and Borgwardt, K.M. 
(2010). A robust Bayesian two-sample test for detecting intervals of differential 
gene expression in microarray time series. J Comput Biol 17, 355-367. 
Stougaard, J. (2000). Regulators and regulation of legume root nodule 
development. Plant Physiol 124, 531-540. 
Stracke, S., Kistner, C., Yoshida, S., Mulder, L., Sato, S., Kaneko, T., Tabata, S., 
Sandal, N., Stougaard, J., Szczyglowski, K., et al. (2002). A plant receptor-like kinase 
required for both bacterial and fungal symbiosis. Nature 417, 959-962. 
Streeter, J.G. (2003). Effects of drought on nitrogen fixation in soybean root 
nodules. Plant Cell and Environment 26, 1199-1204. 
Subramanian, S., Stacey, G., and Yu, O. (2007). Distinct, crucial roles of flavonoids 
during legume nodulation. Trends Plant Sci 12, 282-285. 
Sun, J., Cardoza, V., Mitchell, D.M., Bright, L., Oldroyd, G., and Harris, J.M. (2006). 
Crosstalk between jasmonic acid, ethylene and Nod factor signalling allows 
integration of diverse inputs for regulation of nodulation. The Plant Journal 46, 961-
Takahara, M., Magori, S., Soyano, T., Okamoto, S., Yoshida, C., Yano, K., Sato, S., 
Tabata, S., Yamaguchi, K., Shigenobu, S., et al. (2013). Too much love, a novel Kelch 
repeat-containing F-box protein, functions in the long-distance regulation of the 
legume-Rhizobium symbiosis. Plant Cell Physiol 54, 433-447. 
Tang, H., Krishnakumar, V., Bidwell, S., Rosen, B., Chan, A., Zhou, S., Gentzbittel, L., 
Childs, K.L., Yandell, M., Gundlach, H., et al. (2014). An improved genome release 
(version Mt4.0) for the model legume Medicago truncatula. BMC Genomics 15, 
Tans-Kersten, J., Guan, Y., and Allen, C. (1998). Ralstonia solanacearum pectin 
methylesterase is required for growth on methylated pectin but not for bacterial 
wilt virulence. Appl Environ Microbiol 64, 4918-4923. 
Tans-Kersten, J., Huang, H., and Allen, C. (2001). Ralstonia solanacearum needs 
motility for invasive virulence on tomato. J Bacteriol 183, 3597-3605. 
Tatematsu, K., Kumagai, S., Muto, H., Sato, A., Watahiki, M.K., Harper, R.M., Liscum, 
E., and Yamamoto, K.T. (2004). MASSUGU2 encodes Aux/IAA19, an auxin-regulated 
protein that functions together with the transcriptional activator NPH4/ARF7 to 
regulate differential growth responses of hypocotyl and formation of lateral roots 
in Arabidopsis thaliana. Plant Cell 16, 379-393. 
Tellstrom, V., Usadel, B., Thimm, O., Stitt, M., Kuster, H., and Niehaus, K. (2007). 
The lipopolysaccharide of Sinorhizobium meliloti suppresses defense-associated 
gene expression in cell cultures of the host plant Medicago truncatula. Plant Physiol 
143, 825-837. 
Terpolilli, J.J., O'Hara, G.W., Tiwari, R.P., Dilworth, M.J., and Howieson, J.G. (2008). 
The model legume Medicago truncatula A17 is poorly matched for N2 fixation with 
the sequenced microsymbiont Sinorhizobium meliloti 1021. New Phytol 179, 62-66. 
Thatcher, L.F., Williams, A.H., Garg, G., Buck, S.G., and Singh, K.B. (2016). 
Transcriptome analysis of the fungal pathogen Fusarium oxysporum f. sp. 
medicaginis during colonisation of resistant and susceptible Medicago truncatula 
hosts identifies differential pathogenicity profiles and novel candidate effectors. 
BMC Genomics 17, 860. 
Tian, Q., and Reed, J.W. (1999). Control of auxin-regulated root development by the 
Arabidopsis thaliana SHY2/IAA3 gene. Development 126, 711-721. 
Tian, T., Liu, Y., Yan, H., You, Q., Yi, X., Du, Z., Xu, W., and Su, Z. (2017). agriGO v2.0: 
a GO analysis toolkit for the agricultural community, 2017 update. Nucleic Acids 
Research 45, W122-W129. 
Timmers, A.C., Auriac, M.C., de Billy, F., and Truchet, G. (1998). Nod factor 
internalization and microtubular cytoskeleton changes occur concomitantly during 
nodule differentiation in Alfalfa. Development 125, 339-349. 
Timmers, A.C., Auriac, M.C., and Truchet, G. (1999). Refined analysis of early 
symbiotic steps of the Rhizobium-Medicago interaction in relationship with 
microtubular cytoskeleton rearrangements. Development 126, 3617-3628. 
Tirichine, L., Imaizumi-Anraku, H., Yoshida, S., Murakami, Y., Madsen, L.H., Miwa, 
H., Nakagawa, T., Sandal, N., Albrektsen, A.S., Kawaguchi, M., et al. (2006). 
Deregulation of a Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent kinase leads to spontaneous nodule 
development. Nature 441, 1153-1156. 
Turner, M., Jauneau, A., Genin, S., Tavella, M.J., Vailleau, F., Gentzbittel, L., and 
Jardinaud, M.F. (2009). Dissection of bacterial Wilt on Medicago truncatula 
revealed two type III secretion system effectors acting on root infection process 
and disease development. Plant Physiol 150, 1713-1722. 
Tworak, A., Urbanowicz, A., Podkowinski, J., Kurzynska-Kokorniak, A., Koralewska, 
N., and Figlerowicz, M. (2016). Six Medicago truncatula Dicer-like protein genes are 
expressed in plant cells and upregulated in nodules. Plant Cell Rep 35, 1043-1052. 
Untergasser, A., Cutcutache, I., Koressaar, T., Ye, J., Faircloth, B.C., Remm, M., and 
Rozen, S.G. (2012). Primer3--new capabilities and interfaces. Nucleic Acids Res 40, 
e115. 
Vailleau, F., Sartorel, E., Jardinaud, M.F., Chardon, F., Genin, S., Huguet, T., 
Gentzbittel, L., and Petitprez, M. (2007). Characterization of the interaction 
between the bacterial wilt pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum and the model 
legume plant Medicago truncatula. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 20, 159-167. 
van Elsas, J.D., Kastelein, P., van Bekkum, P., van der Wolf, J.M., de Vries, P.M., and 
van Overbeek, L.S. (2000). Survival of Ralstonia solanacearum Biovar 2, the 
Causative Agent of Potato Brown Rot, in Field and Microcosm Soils in Temperate 
Climates. Phytopathology 90, 1358-1366. 
van Noorden, G.E., Verbeek, R., Dinh, Q.D., Jin, J., Green, A., Ng, J.L., and Mathesius, 
U. (2016). Molecular Signals Controlling the Inhibition of Nodulation by Nitrate in 
Medicago truncatula. Int J Mol Sci 17. 
van Spronsen, P.C., Tak, T., Rood, A.M., van Brussel, A.A., Kijne, J.W., and Boot, K.J. 
(2003). Salicylic acid inhibits indeterminate-type nodulation but not determinate-
type nodulation. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 16, 83-91. 
van Velzen, R., Holmer, R., Bu, F., Rutten, L., van Zeijl, A., Liu, W., Santuari, L., Cao, 
Q., Sharma, T., Shen, D., et al. (2018). Comparative genomics of the nonlegume 
Parasponia reveals insights into evolution of nitrogen-fixing rhizobium symbioses. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 115, E4700-E4709. 
Vance, C.P. (2001). Symbiotic nitrogen fixation and phosphorus acquisition. Plant 
nutrition in a world of declining renewable resources. Plant Physiol 127, 390-397. 
Vasse, J., Frey, P., and Trigalet, A. (1995). Microscopic Studies of Intercellular 
Infection and Protoxylem Invasion of Tomato roots by 
Pseudomonas solanacearum. Molecular Plant-Microbe Interactions 8, 241-251. 
Vavilin, D.V., and Vermaas, W.F. (2002). Regulation of the tetrapyrrole biosynthetic 
pathway leading to heme and chlorophyll in plants and cyanobacteria. Physiol Plant 
115, 9-24. 
Vermeer, J.E., von Wangenheim, D., Barberon, M., Lee, Y., Stelzer, E.H., Maizel, A., 
and Geldner, N. (2014). A spatial accommodation by neighboring cells is required 
for organ initiation in Arabidopsis. Science 343, 178-183. 
Vernie, T., Kim, J., Frances, L., Ding, Y., Sun, J., Guan, D., Niebel, A., Gifford, M.L., de 
Carvalho-Niebel, F., and Oldroyd, G.E. (2015). The NIN Transcription Factor 
Coordinates Diverse Nodulation Programs in Different Tissues of the Medicago 
truncatula Root. Plant Cell 27, 3410-3424. 
Vernie, T., Moreau, S., de Billy, F., Plet, J., Combier, J.P., Rogers, C., Oldroyd, G., 
Frugier, F., Niebel, A., and Gamas, P. (2008). EFD Is an ERF transcription factor 
involved in the control of nodule number and differentiation in Medicago 
truncatula. Plant Cell 20, 2696-2713. 
Vidal, E.A., Alvarez, J.M., Moyano, T.C., and Gutierrez, R.A. (2015). Transcriptional 
networks in the nitrate response of Arabidopsis thaliana. Curr Opin Plant Biol 27, 
125-132. 
Walker, L., Boddington, C., Jenkins, D., Wang, Y., Gronlund, J.T., Hulsmans, J., 
Kumar, S., Patel, D., Moore, J.D., Carter, A., et al. (2017). Changes in Gene 
Expression in Space and Time Orchestrate Environmentally Mediated Shaping of 
Root Architecture. Plant Cell 29, 2393-2412. 
Wang, D., Yang, S., Tang, F., and Zhu, H. (2012). Symbiosis specificity in the legume: 
rhizobial mutualism. Cell Microbiol 14, 334-342. 
Wang, H., Ngwenyama, N., Liu, Y., Walker, J.C., and Zhang, S. (2007). Stomatal 
development and patterning are regulated by environmentally responsive mitogen-
activated protein kinases in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 19, 63-73. 
Wang, Q., Yang, S., Liu, J., Terecskei, K., Abraham, E., Gombar, A., Domonkos, A., 
Szucs, A., Kormoczi, P., Wang, T., et al. (2017). Host-secreted antimicrobial peptide 
enforces symbiotic selectivity in Medicago truncatula. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 114, 
6854-6859. 
Wang, Y., Penfold, C.A., Hodgson, D.A., Gifford, M.L., and Burroughs, N.J. (2014). 
Correcting for link loss in causal network inference caused by regulator 
interference. Bioinformatics 30, 2779-2786. 
Weidmann, S., Sanchez, L., Descombin, J., Chatagnier, O., Gianinazzi, S., and 
Gianinazzi-Pearson, V. (2004). Fungal elicitation of signal transduction-related plant 
genes precedes mycorrhiza establishment and requires the DMI3 gene in Medicago 
truncatula. Mol Plant Microbe Interact 17, 1385-1393. 
Wildermuth, M.C., Dewdney, J., Wu, G., and Ausubel, F.M. (2001). Isochorismate 
synthase is required to synthesize salicylic acid for plant defence. Nature 414, 562-
Withers, J., and Dong, X. (2017). Post-translational regulation of plant immunity. 
Curr Opin Plant Biol 38, 124-132. 
Wong, J., Nadzieja, M., Madsen, L.H., Bucherl, C.A., Dam, S., Sandal, N.N., Couto, D., 
Derbyshire, P., Uldum-Berentsen, M., Schroeder, S., et al. (2019). A Lotus japonicus 
cytoplasmic kinase connects Nod factor perception by the NFR5 LysM receptor to 
nodulation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 116, 14339-14348. 
Xie, F., Murray, J.D., Kim, J., Heckmann, A.B., Edwards, A., Oldroyd, G.E., and 
Downie, J.A. (2012). Legume pectate lyase required for root infection by rhizobia. 
Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 109, 633-638. 
Yamaguchi, Y., and Huffaker, A. (2011). Endogenous peptide elicitors in higher 
plants. Curr Opin Plant Biol 14, 351-357. 
Yamaguchi, Y., Huffaker, A., Bryan, A.C., Tax, F.E., and Ryan, C.A. (2010). PEPR2 is a 
second receptor for the Pep1 and Pep2 peptides and contributes to defense 
responses in Arabidopsis. Plant Cell 22, 508-522. 
Yamaguchi, Y., Pearce, G., and Ryan, C.A. (2006). The cell surface leucine-rich repeat 
receptor for AtPep1, an endogenous peptide elicitor in Arabidopsis, is functional in 
transgenic Tobacco cells. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 103, 10104-10109. 
Yan, D., Easwaran, V., Chau, V., Okamoto, M., Ierullo, M., Kimura, M., Endo, A., 
Yano, R., Pasha, A., Gong, Y., et al. (2016). NIN-like protein 8 is a master regulator of 
nitrate-promoted seed germination in Arabidopsis. Nat Commun 7, 13179. 
Yanagisawa, S. (2014). Transcription factors involved in controlling the expression 
of nitrate reductase genes in higher plants. Plant Sci 229, 167-171. 
Yang, S., Tang, F., Gao, M., Krishnan, H.B., and Zhu, H. (2010). R gene-controlled 
host specificity in the legume-rhizobia symbiosis. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 107, 
18735-18740. 
Yano, K., Yoshida, S., Muller, J., Singh, S., Banba, M., Vickers, K., Markmann, K., 
White, C., Schuller, B., Sato, S., et al. (2008). CYCLOPS, a mediator of symbiotic 
intracellular accommodation. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 105, 20540-20545. 
Yao, J., and Allen, C. (2006). Chemotaxis is required for virulence and competitive 
fitness of the bacterial wilt pathogen Ralstonia solanacearum. J Bacteriol 188, 3697-
3708. 
Yoro, E., Suzaki, T., Toyokura, K., Miyazawa, H., Fukaki, H., and Kawaguchi, M. 
(2014). A Positive Regulator of Nodule Organogenesis, NODULE INCEPTION, Acts as 
a Negative Regulator of Rhizobial Infection in Lotus japonicus. Plant Physiol 165, 
747-758. 
Young, N.D., Debelle, F., Oldroyd, G.E., Geurts, R., Cannon, S.B., Udvardi, M.K., 
Benedito, V.A., Mayer, K.F., Gouzy, J., Schoof, H., et al. (2011). The Medicago 
genome provides insight into the evolution of rhizobial symbioses. Nature 480, 520-
Yu, L.H., Wu, J., Tang, H., Yuan, Y., Wang, S.M., Wang, Y.P., Zhu, Q.S., Li, S.G., and 
Xiang, C.B. (2016). Overexpression of Arabidopsis NLP7 improves plant growth 
under both nitrogen-limiting and -sufficient conditions by enhancing nitrogen and 
carbon assimilation. Sci Rep 6, 27795. 
Zhang, C., Xie, Q., Anderson, R.G., Ng, G., Seitz, N.C., Peterson, T., McClung, C.R., 
McDowell, J.M., Kong, D., Kwak, J.M., et al. (2013). Crosstalk between the circadian 
clock and innate immunity in Arabidopsis. PLoS Pathog 9, e1003370. 
Zhang, H., and Forde, B.G. (1998). An Arabidopsis MADS box gene that controls 
nutrient-induced changes in root architecture. Science 279, 407-409. 
Zhao, Y., Wang, T., Zhang, W., and Li, X. (2011). SOS3 mediates lateral root 
development under low salt stress through regulation of auxin redistribution and 
maxima in Arabidopsis. New Phytol 189, 1122-1134. 
Zheng, Z., Qamar, S.A., Chen, Z., and Mengiste, T. (2006). Arabidopsis WRKY33 
transcription factor is required for resistance to necrotrophic fungal pathogens. 
Plant J 48, 592-605. 
Zhu, Y., Dong, A., Meyer, D., Pichon, O., Renou, J.P., Cao, K., and Shen, W.H. (2006). 
Arabidopsis NRP1 and NRP2 encode histone chaperones and are required for 
maintaining postembryonic root growth. Plant Cell 18, 2879-2892. 
Zipfel, C., Kunze, G., Chinchilla, D., Caniard, A., Jones, J.D., Boller, T., and Felix, G. 
(2006). Perception of the bacterial PAMP EF-Tu by the receptor EFR restricts 
Agrobacterium-mediated transformation. Cell 125, 749-760. 
Zolla, G., Heimer, Y.M., and Barak, S. (2010). Mild salinity stimulates a stress-
induced morphogenic response in Arabidopsis thaliana roots. J Exp Bot 61, 211-224. 
	Library declaration
	Liam Walker Revised Thesis
	Insert from: "WRAP_Coversheet_Theses_PhD.pdf"
	http://wrap.warwick.ac.uk/151131
