University of Warwick institutional repository: http://go
University of Warwick institutional repository: http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap  
A Thesis Submitted for the Degree of PhD at the University of Warwick 
http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap/55970 
This thesis is made available online and is protected by original copyright.  
Please scroll down to view the document itself.  
Please refer to the repository record for this item for information to help you to 
cite it. Our policy information is available from the repository home page.  
http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap
http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap/55970
The Assessment of Pre-morbid Levels of Intellectual Functioning in 
People with Dementia 
Emilie W Oakley 
This thesis is submitted in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of 
Doctorate in Clinical Psychology 
The Universities of Coventry and Warwick 
Department of Clinical Psychology 
May 2012 
Page ii 
Contents 
Chapter 1: Literature Review 
Page iii 
Chapter 2: Empirical Paper 
Page iv 
Chapter 3: Reflective Paper 
Page v 
Page vi 
List of Tables 
Chapter 1 
Figure 1:   Validity Criteria       Page 5 
Figure 2:   Inclusion Criteria       Page 9 
Table 1:    Summary of Literature Review Papers    Page 10 
Table 2:    Validity Criteria Assessed by each Study    Page 15 
Table 3:    Exclusion Criteria       Page 28 
Chapter 2 
Table 1:   Demographic Variables, Education and Mean Scores  Page 56 
Table 2:   Mean Cognitive Decline per Intelligence Classification  Page 58 
Table 3:   The Models Ability to Predict Group Allocation    Page 60 
Table 4:   Odds Ratios        Page 60 
Page vii 
List of Appendices 
Appendices 1-4: Ethical Approval 
Coventry University       Page  91 
Black Country Research and Ethics Committee   Page  92 
Research and Development Committee    Page  95 
National Information Governance Board     Page  97 
Appendices 5-6: Research Amendments Approval 
Black Country Research and Ethic Committee   Page  99 
Research and Development Committee    Page 101 
Appendix 7: Literature Search Strategy     Page 102 
Appendices 8-9: Measures 
Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR)    Page 103  
Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE)    Page 104 
Appendix 10:  Coding for Education      Page 105 
Appendices 11-12: Participant Information  
Cover Sheet        Page 106 
Participant Information Sheet & Consent Form   Page 107 
Appendix 13: Z-score Calculations      Page 108 
Appendices 14-16: Scatter plots  
Dementia Group Correlation      Page 109  
Mild Cognitive Impairment Group Correlation   Page 110  
No Cognitive Impairment Group Correlation    Page 111 
Appendices 17-18: Journal Submission Guidelines 
 British Journal of Clinical Psychology    Page 112 
 Journal of Aging and Mental Health     Page 116 
Page viii 
List of Abbreviations 
CAMDEX  Cambridge Mental Disorders of the Elderly Examination 
CCRT  Cambridge Contextual Reading Test 
DRS  Dementia Rating Scale 
DSM-III-R Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Version Three 
Revised 
DSM-IV  Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Version Four 
ICD-10  International Classification of Diseases Part 10 
IQ   Intelligence Quotidian 
GP   General Practitioner 
MCI  Mild Cognitive Impairment 
MMSE  Mini-Mental State Examination 
NART (-R) National Adult Reading Test (Revised) 
NHS  National Health Service 
NICE  National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence 
NIGB  National Information Governance Board for Health and Social Care 
NINDS/ADRDA National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and 
           Stroke and the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association 
NoCI  No Cognitive Impairment 
PASW   Predictive Analytics SoftWare 
PMIF  Pre-Morbid Intellectual Functioning 
R & D  Research and Development Office 
RBANS  Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status 
STW  Spot-the-Word Test 
TOPF  Test of Pre-morbid Functioning 
WAIS (-R)  Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (Revised) 
WTAR  Wechsler Test of Adult Reading 
UK  United Kingdom 
Page ix 
Acknowledgements 
Firstly I want to acknowledge the help and support I have received from both Tom 
Patterson and Jane Muers. I am very grateful to them for their enthusiasm, patience 
and commitment throughout the whole research process. This research may have 
taken a very different approach if it were not for their clinical knowledge and 
expertise. Thanks also go to Ian Hume for his statistical prowess, and constructive 
comments on my empirical paper. 
To my best friends, Aditi and James, I want to say thank you for keeping me 
grounded throughout the last three years and reminding me that there is more to life 
than work 
I want to thank my parents and family for their continued support in my chosen 
career. Their love, encouragement and unfaltering belief in my abilities, has helped 
me enormously.  
Finally to Simon, I want to thank him for being with me on every step of the journey. 
His constant love, support and reassurance have been invaluable and I could not have 
done this without him.  
Page x 
Declaration 
This thesis was carried out under the supervision of Dr Tom Patterson, Mrs Jane 
Muers and Dr Ian Hume. Authorship of published papers will be shared with the 
above. The ideas for this research were my own, and developed following discussions 
with Dr Tom Patterson and Mrs Jane Muers. With the exception of the 
aforementioned collaborations, the thesis is my own work. This thesis has not been 
submitted for a degree to any other university. 
Ethical approval (Appendices 1-6) was obtained from Coventry University Research 
Ethics Committee, the Black Country Research Ethics Committee and the NHS 
Trusts Research and Development Office
. Approval was also granted from the 
National Information Governance Board for support under section 251 of the NHS 
Act (2006) to process patient information without consent.  
It is intended that Chapter 1 will be submitted for publication to the British Journal of 
Clinical Psychology. Chapter 2 will be submitted for publication to the Journal of 
Aging and Mental Health (see Appendices 17-18 for instructions to authors). 
 In compliance with the guidelines stipulated by the NIGB, the locations of the memory clinics have been kept 
confidential. As such any references to location, including the name of the relevant NHS Research and 
Development Office, have been removed. This accounts for any blank spaces in the appendices.  
Page xi 
Summary 
This thesis consists of three papers: a literature review, an empirical paper and a 
reflective paper. The literature review considers the validity of measures of pre-
morbid intellectual functioning with people with varying levels of dementia severity. 
It aims to be of use to British clinicians by focussing specially on tests that were 
designed for use with a British English speaking population. No single measure of 
pre-morbid intellectual functioning is found to be valid for use with people of all 
levels of dementia severity. The use of multiple measures for estimating pre-morbid 
intellectual functioning are indicated. 
The empirical paper investigates the relationship between a persons pre-morbid level 
of intellectual functioning and the amount of cognitive decline that they experience 
prior to gaining a diagnosis of dementia. It uses a retrospective correlational design to 
analyse data from existing memory clinic files. A significant positive Pearsons 
correlation coefficient is found between pre-morbid intellectual functioning and 
amount of cognitive decline at the point of diagnosis, in all three of the diagnostic 
groups. This suggests that people with high pre-morbid functioning have to undergo 
greater cognitive decline before they are given a diagnosis of dementia. Changes to 
current clinical practice are indicated which take account of relative amounts of 
cognitive decline in the diagnostic process.  
Finally, a reflective account is presented which is based on the authors thoughts and 
experiences of carrying out research in the field of dementia. This focuses on the 
challenges in accessing retrospective clinical data. Suggestions are made regarding 
future research and clinical practice. 
Page 1 
Chapter 1: Literature Review 
The Validity of Pre-Morbid Measures of Cognitive Functioning in 
People with Varying Levels of Dementia: A Systematic Review of the 
Literature 
KEY WORDS 
Dementia; Cognitive Decline; Pre-morbid Intellectual Functioning; Validity. 
Word count: 5,287 (excluding abstract, reference list, tables and figures) 
Page 2 
ABSTRACT 
Purpose 
The present paper reviews existing evidence on the validity of pre-morbid measures 
of functioning with people with dementia. It aims to be of use to British clinicians, 
by specifically focussing on tests that were designed for use with a British English 
speaking population.  
Methods 
A search of databases (including PsycINFO, Web of Science, Cinahl and Medline), 
citation searches and reference lists was conducted to identify relevant studies. 
Twelve studies met the inclusion criteria.  
Results 
Performance on the National Adult Reading Test (NART) and the Wechsler Test of 
Adult Reading (WTAR) are shown to be affected by dementia, with people making 
significantly more errors as dementia severity increases. The Cambridge Contextual 
Reading Test (CCRT) may be a better estimate of pre-morbid functioning, as it 
produces a higher estimate of reading ability and has a higher correlation with 
current intellectual ability in the control group. However, performance on the 
CCRT also reduces with increased dementia severity. An area for further 
investigation is that of lexical-decision-making tasks such as the Spot-the-word 
(STW). This has had some promising results and may be valid for use with people 
with dyslexia.  Nonetheless the evidence base for this is small and more research is 
needed.    
Page 3 
Conclusions 
The use of objective, pre-morbid measures are vital in diagnosing dementia in order 
to avoid misdiagnosis. No single measure has been found to be valid for all stages 
of dementia, and the use of multiple measures may be needed in order to provide an 
accurate estimate of pre-morbid functioning. 
Practitioner Points 
Clinical implications 
 Performance on both the NART and WTAR is affected by dementia 
severity. 
 Placing NART words into the contextual sentences of the CCRT, produces a 
better estimate of pre-morbid intellectual functioning. However, CCRT 
performance is also affected by dementia severity.    
 Clinicians should use a number of different pre-morbid measures for more 
accurate estimates of pre-morbid intellectual functioning. 
Limitations 
 There is a lack of consistency in the studies reviewed both in the diagnostic 
criteria utilised and in the labelling of dementia severity. 
 Most pre-morbid measures of intellectual functioning have a ceiling effect, 
above which pre-morbid intellectual ability cannot be estimated.  
Page 4 
PURPOSE 
Background  
Dementia is defined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 
4th Edition (DSM-IV; American Psychiatric Association, 2000, page 157) as the 
development of a memory impairment accompanied by one of the following 
cognitive disturbances: aphasia, apraxia, agnosia and disturbance in executive 
functioning. The cognitive deficits identified should each cause significant 
impairment in social or occupational functioning and represent a significant decline 
from a previous level of functioning. 
Presently there is no gold standard for the process of determining levels of pre-
morbid intellectual functioning (PMIF). Ideally this would be determined using 
measures that were taken before any cognitive decline commenced, but in reality it 
is not possible to predict which individuals will go on to develop dementia, so 
PMIF is not routinely assessed. Thus pre-morbid levels have to be estimated 
retrospectively. The difficulty with this is that in order to accurately estimate PMIF, 
assessment tools need to measure abilities that are not affected by dementia. An 
overestimate of PMIF could lead to people being wrongly diagnosed with dementia 
(false positives), while an underestimate could result in people with dementia being 
missed (false negatives). 
Several methods have been proposed to estimate PMIF. These include the use of 
reading tests with words which do not follow the typical grapheme to phoneme 
translations, such as the National Adult Reading Test (NART, Nelson & Willison, 
1991) and the Wechsler Adult Reading Test (WTAR; Wechsler, 2001); contextual 
word reading tests such as the Cambridge Contextual Reading Test (CCRT; 
Beardsall & Huppert, 1994); demographic-based formulae (Wilson et al., 1978; 
Page 5 
Barona, Reynolds & Chastain, 1984; Crawford et al., 1989a) and lexical-decision-
making tasks such as the Spot-the-Word (STW; Baddeley, Emslie & Nimmo-Smith, 
1993).  
Validity Criteria 
Figure 1: Validity Criteria 
For a measure of PMIF to be valid for use with people with dementia there needs 
to be evidence that the measure does one or more of the following criteria:  
1. It correlates well with IQ scores that were measured prior to the onset 
of cognitive decline.  
2. It produces consistent scores regardless of changes to individuals 
dementia severity. 
3. It correlates well with measures of current intellectual ability in the 
control group.  
4. It overestimates the current abilities of people with dementia. 
Studies which assess the validity of a measure of PMIF for use with people with 
dementia should address at least one, if not more, of the above criteria. Ideally, 
for a gold standard level of validity assessment, there should be evidence that the 
measure addresses all of these criteria. Realistically, however, it is acknowledged 
that there are limitations to these criteria and that some measures will be unable 
to produce consistent scores beyond a particular level of dementia severity.  
These validity criteria have been developed as a quality framework for the 
purposes of this literature review, with individual criterion being drawn from the 
papers reviewed. 
Page 6 
Rationale  
There has been considerable debate as to how valid pre-morbid measures are. Some 
studies state that performance on measures derived from current abilities, such as 
the NART, are not affected by dementia (Nelson & McKenna, 1975; Nelson & 
OConnell, 1978; Sharpe & OCarroll, 1991), whilst others disagree (OCarroll et 
al., 1995; Stebbins, Wilson, Gilley, Bernard & Fox, 1990; Fromm, Holland, Nebes 
& Oakley 1991). Conversely demographic variables, which are not derived from 
current ability, are not affected by dementia. However, Crawford et al., (1989b) 
found that demographic variables can only account for 50% of variance in WAIS 
Full-Scale IQ (Wechsler, 1981), whereas the NART was able to account for 66% of 
variance. It is therefore unclear which method is the most valid. 
OCarroll (1995) critically reviewed studies which used demographic variables, 
reading ability or lexical-decision-making tasks to evaluate pre-morbid abilities. 
This included people with: Alzheimers disease, Huntingtons disease, 
Schizophrenia, Korsakoffs Syndrome, Depression and Glioma.  OCarroll (1995) 
suggested that there was too much error in the predictive scores of demographic 
variables, which could result in an underestimation of individuals abilities. He 
concluded that whilst the NART was popular, performance on the test may be 
compromised in Alzheimers disease. It was suggested that the NART words either 
needed to be placed into context to improve their validity, or else combined with 
demographic variables. Additionally lexical-decision-making tasks were suggested 
as a measure of pre-morbid ability in some individuals with dysphasic, dyslexic or 
articulatory problems, as people can point to the correct answer. However, the 
validity of these measures needs to be examined further in people with dementia.  
Page 7 
Similarly Franzen, Burgess & Smith-Seemiller (1997) explored some available 
methods of estimating PMIF. They noted a need to examine different disorders 
separately, as currently many studies group people in terms of brain-injury versus 
no brain-injury. They suggested pre-morbid measures can often be influenced by 
demographic factors such as age and ethnicity, which need to be controlled for. 
They also highlighted the need to focus on cognitive decline in areas other than IQ, 
such as memory and executive function. They found that none of the existing 
measures were optimal for use and that improvements were needed. However, they 
concluded that current objective measures were still considerably better than relying 
on subjective clinical judgement alone.  
Whilst both aforementioned reviews explored the use of pre-morbid measures with 
people with dementia, dementia was not the main focus and was often examined as 
part of a larger brain-injury group. Given that dementia affects cognitive 
functioning very differently from schizophrenia for example, there is a need to 
research the validity of measures of PMIF in the assessment of dementia separately. 
Furthermore, an updated critical review of the research in this area is needed, given 
that previous reviews only considered literature published prior to 1997. 
Not all pre-morbid tests are valid for use with people in Britain. The NART was 
originally developed using frequently used British words. However, doubts were 
raised about the transferability of the NART to American populations and American 
versions were developed, such as The American National Adult Reading Test 
(Schwartz & Saffran, 1987) and the North American Adult Reading Test (Blair & 
Spreen, 1989). Tests such as these should be excluded when considering a British 
population. 
Page 8 
The present literature review aims to critically appraise the validity of measures 
used to assess PMIF in people with dementia, mindful of the criteria presented in 
Figure 1. It aims to be of use to clinicians who work in dementia services in Britain; 
therefore it aims to evaluate only those measures which have been designed for use 
with a British-English speaking population. 
In order to provide continuity with the existing reviews this paper will explore the 
literature from 1996 onwards.  
Page 9 
METHODS 
Literature searches were carried out between October 2011 and January 2012, using 
the databases PsycINFO, Cinahl, Medline and Web of Science. Search terms 
included Premorbid OR Pre-morbid AND (IQ OR intell*
 OR funct*) AND 
Dementia NOT (Schizophrenia OR psychosis). Reference lists of included papers 
were searched and cited reference searches were made using the Web of Science. 
The British Journal of Clinical Psychology was also searched using the above 
criteria, but no additional papers were found.  
The search strategy (Appendix 7) yielded 544 papers overall. Abstracts of articles 
were read to check their suitability for inclusion.  Articles were only included if 
they met the inclusion criteria in Figure 2. Twelve papers met these criteria. The 
main aspects of these papers are summarised in Table 1. 
Figure 2: Inclusion Criteria 
 The * symbol is used to denote a truncation in order to search for any words beginning with those 
letters 
Papers were included if: 
 they were published in peer-reviewed journals 
 they were in the English language 
 they contained a distinct dementia population 
 the measures had been designed for use with a British-English speaking 
population 
 the research evaluated the use of a pre-morbid measure  
 the study was published from 1996 onwards 
Page 10 
Study Participants 
Mean age in 
years (range) 
Dementia 
severity 
Pre-morbid 
Measures* 
Main findings 
Bucks, Scott, 
Pearsall & 
Ashworth 
(1996) 
202 subjects: 
119 dementia 
(not specified)              
83 controls 
Overall mean: 
70.1  (44-88) 
Not included 
Short NART              
The short NART could not accurately 
predict scores for the full version of the 
NART, as it underestimated scores by up to 
one standard deviation. It was deemed to be 
unacceptable as a clinical measure in its 
current format.  
Beardsall & 
Huppert (1997) 
20 dementia                       
61 normal                   
Dementia  
Minimal 
mean: 83.6 
(78-95)                           
Mild/moderate 
mean: 86.6 
(79-95)          
Controls 
mean: 83.0 
(77-94) 
13 Minimal               
7 mild/ 
moderate         
as defined by 
CAMDEX 
Short NART 
Short CCRT                           
Short Spot-the-
Word (STW)    
The short CCRT produced a higher 
estimate of pre-morbid ability in both 
people with dementia and controls, than the 
short NART. Short STW performance was 
good for people with minimal dementia but 
grossly impaired in people with 
mild/moderate dementia. It was therefore 
suggested that each test is only appropriate 
for specific groups of people. 
Paolo, Trster, 
Ryan & Koller 
(1997) 
44 Alzheimer's  
44 Controls 
Alzheimer's 
Mild mean: 
74.04       
Alzheimer's 
Moderate 
mean:74.20            
Controls 
mean: 73.20   
24 mild mean 
Dementia 
Rating Scale 
(DRS) score: 
115.38 
20 moderate 
mean DRS 
score: 99.15             
Barona 
demographics                   
(WAIS-R) 
NART and Barona demographics both 
overestimated the IQs of people with 
Alzheimer's, when compared to WAIS-R 
IQ. People with moderate dementia scored 
lower than those with mild dementia on the 
NART, suggesting that the NART is 
sensitive to dementia severity. However, 
given that the scores were still higher than 
the WAIS-R, the NART may still provide 
relevant clinical information.  
Page 11 
Study Participants 
Mean age in 
years (range) 
Dementia 
severity 
Pre-morbid 
Measures* 
Main findings 
Conway & 
OCarroll (1997) 
30 Alzheimer's 
Group mean 
Two groups                  
MMSE < 17 
MMSE  17 
Overall mean 
MMSE:16.4  
(5-26) 
Placing NART words in the context of 
sentences (CCRT) reduced the number of 
pronunciation errors made. This effect was 
largest for the more severe dementia group. 
Moreover, the CCRT was not correlated to 
the MMSE whereas the NART was. This 
suggests that the CCRT is a better estimate 
of pre-morbid ability than the NART.  
Law & O'Carroll 
(1998) 
21 Alzheimer's          
114 controls (but 
reduced to 50 
controls when 
matched to 
Alzheimers 
subjects) 
Alzheimer's 
mean: 77.4   
Controls 
mean: 67.5  
Alzheimers 
MMSE mean: 
17.0 (10-21) 
Controls 
MMSE: no 
mean given 
(25-30) 
All three measures were relatively 
unaffected by Alzheimer's. Both the NART 
and the CCRT correlated well with current 
measures of verbal intelligence in the 
control group, but the STW had a low 
correlation. Placing the words in context 
resulted in 4.4 fewer errors for the 
Alzheimers group and 0.8 fewer errors for 
controls. Overall, CCRT is recommended 
as the fairest estimate of pre-morbid ability. 
Taylor (1999) 
43 Alzheimer's            
41 Multi-infarct 
dementia 
Alzheimer's 
mean 75.3 
(53-91)    
Multi-infarct 
dementia 
mean 69.5 
(37-92)   
Average 
duration of 
dementia was  
3 years 
Demographic 
variables 
(Crawford et al. 
1990) 
The NART correlated strongly with 
measures of current functioning, this 
suggests that it is influenced by dementia 
severity. To avoid an underestimation of 
ability, demographic variables should be 
used either as a substitute for, or in addition 
to, the NART. 
Page 12 
Study Participants 
Mean age in 
years (range) 
Dementia 
severity 
Pre-morbid 
Measures* 
Main findings 
Cockburn, 
Keene, Hope & 
Smith (2000) 
78 Alzheimers 
or mixed 
dementia 
Overall mean 
(at time of 
entry to the 
study): 78.63 
(60-95) 
MMSE scores   
mean: 14.32      
range: 0-26 
(MMSE) 
Four annual assessments were carried out 
with people with dementia. NART score 
was found to decline over time. The amount 
of decline in the NART scores was a 
function of previous MMSE scores, with 
greater decline being shown as MMSE 
scores decreased. This suggests that the 
NART is associated with current cognitive 
ability and its validity is compromised as 
severity increases. 
Bright, Jaldow 
& Kopelman 
(2002) 
32 Alzheimers             
51 controls                 
64 other 
conditions (e.g. 
Frontal lesions, 
Korsakoffs 
Syndrome and 
temporal lobe)        
Alzheimer's 
mean 67.16     
Controls 
mean: 55.39 
Mean duration 
of symptoms: 
2.9 years  
(6 months- 6 
years). 
NART-R          
Demographic 
variables  
(Crawford et 
al., 1989a; 
Crawford & 
Allen, 1997)     
(WAIS) 
(WAIS-R)   
NART/NART-R had higher correlations 
with current WAIS IQ in controls than 
demographics variables. An equation 
combining NART and demographics did 
not increase the amount of variance that 
could be explained. This suggests that the 
NART is a valid predictor of pre-morbid 
ability in early Alzheimer's. 
McGurn et al. 
(2004) 
45 Dementia      
(Alzheimer's,  
vascular and 
unspecified 
dementia)                       
464 Controls 
Dementia 
mean: 79.0             
Controls 
mean: 79.1 
Dementia 
MMSE mean: 
22.3. (Mild-
moderate).  
Controls 
MMSE mean: 
NART scores in both dementia and control 
groups were compared to an IQ test that 
was taken at age 11. After controlling for 
childhood ability, there were no differences 
between the groups on the NART. The 
NART is valid as an estimator of ability in 
mild to moderate dementia. 
Page 13 
Study Participants 
Mean age in 
years (range) 
Dementia 
severity 
Pre-morbid 
Measures* 
Main findings 
McFarlane, 
Welch & 
Rodgers (2006) 
66 Alzheimer's: 
(30 minimal 
36 mild)                
32 controls  
Minimal 
mean: 73.6 
(47-91)                      
Mild mean: 
75.6 (47-91)            
Controls  
mean: 70.0 
(48-84) 
Minimal: 
MMSE 24.6  
(24-28) 
Mild: MMSE                
18.6 (14-23)  
Controls: 
MMSE 29.5 
Demographics 
regression 
equation 
(Crawford & 
Allen, 1997) 
Irregular word reading is compromised in 
mild dementia. This group performed better 
on the CCRT than the NART, but still made 
significantly more errors than the minimum 
or control group. Demographic variables 
produced a significantly higher estimate of 
pre-morbid IQ than the NART in the mild 
group. There were no significant 
differences for the minimal or control 
groups, or when compared to the CCRT. 
No significant group differences were 
found on the STW test. This suggests that 
lexical decision tasks may provide a more 
accurate pre-morbid measure for people 
with mild dementia. 
Hilsabeck & 
Sutker (2009) 
Demographics 
from Study 2 
31 dementia:        
(18 Alzheimer's         
10 MCI                   
1 Vascular,        
1 Lewy bodies, 
and 1 
unspecified)                  
100  controls 
Dementia 
mean: 74.94   
Controls 
mean: 24.68 
Dementia 
MMSE mean: 
(19-30)   
Anagrams 
Solutions            
(RBANS) 
(WAIS-III)                                       
The anagrams solution, is not effective at 
predicting pre-morbid memory functioning. 
Whilst there were no significant differences 
between the groups on the anagrams 
solutions task, there was a low correlation 
between this task and other memory tests. 
Demographic variables and IQ combined, 
only accounted for between 24% and 31% 
of variance.  
Page 14 
Study Participants 
Mean age in 
years (range) 
Dementia 
severity 
Pre-morbid 
Measures* 
Main findings 
Duff, Chelune & 
Dennett (2011) 
1,059 referrals to 
dementia clinic 
Group mean: 
MMSE mean: 
MMSE scores:                           
18%  < 21                  
23% 21-24                     
29% 25-27                           
30% 28-30    
Test of         
Pre-morbid 
Functioning                   
Pre-morbid 
memory 
equations 
(Duff, 2010) 
Explored the validity of formulae (based on 
demographic variables and an estimate of 
pre-morbid intellect) to estimate pre-morbid 
memory functioning. Large and statistically 
significant differences were observed 
between pre-morbid and current memory 
function. The use of these formulae in 
future clinical work is supported but some 
cautions are noted. 
*Short National Adult Reading Test (Short NART; Beardsall & Brayne, 1990); National Adult Reading Test (NART; Nelson, 1982); 
National Adult Reading Test Revised (NART-R; Nelson & Willison, 1991); Barona Demographics Index (Barona et al., 1984); 
Cambridge Contextual Reading Test (CCRT; Beardsall & Huppert, 1994); Spot-the-Word (STW; Baddeley, Emslie & Nimmo-Smith, 
1993); Demographic variables (Crawford & Allen, 1997; Crawford et al. 1989a; Crawford et al., 1990); Anagrams Solutions (Hilsabeck 
& Sutker, 2009); Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR; Wechsler, 2001); Test of Pre-morbid Functioning (TOPF; Wechsler, 2011); 
Pre-morbid memory equations (Duff, 2010). 
Table 1: Summary of Included Papers   
Page 15 
RESULTS 
Assessment of Validity Criteria 
Study 
Criteria that the study assessed: 
Correlation 
with scores 
produced 
prior to 
dementia 
onset 
Use of 
different 
levels of 
dementia 
severity  
Correlation 
with current 
abilities in 
control 
group  
Correlation 
with current 
abilities in 
dementia 
group 
Paolo, Trster, 
Ryan & Koller 
(1997) 
Bright, Jaldow & 
Kopelman (2002) 
Hilsabeck & 
Sutker (2009) 
McGurn et al. 
(2004) 
Cockburn, 
Keene, Hope & 
Smith (2000) 
Beardsall & 
Huppert (1997) 
Conway & 
OCarroll (1997) 
McFarlane, 
Welch & Rodgers 
(2006) 
Law & O'Carroll 
(1998) 
Taylor (1999) 
Duff, Chelune & 
Dennett (2011) 
Bucks, Scott, 
Pearsall & 
Ashworth (1996) 
Table 2: Validity Criteria Assessed by each Study 
Page 16 
Each of the included papers was cross-checked against the validity criteria set out in 
Figure 1. The studies have been ordered on the basis of the number of criteria that 
they assessed for (Table Two). Studies which assessed a greater number of the 
criteria were deemed to be of a higher quality than those studies which assessed 
fewer aspects.  
The National Adult Reading Test (NART)  
 Validity with dementia. 
Ten of the papers reviewed explored the validity of the NART. Five papers 
suggested that performance on the NART is affected by dementia and five 
concluded that it is not. These papers are critically appraised below.  
Bright, Jaldow and Kopelman (2002), who assessed two of the validity criteria, 
found the NART to be a valid estimate of pre-morbid intelligence. They studied 
groups of people with various conditions including Alzheimers disease, 
Korsakoffs Syndrome, frontal or temporal lobe lesions and healthy controls. They 
examined participants scores on: the NART (both original and revised versions; 
NART-R), demographic variables and a combination of both. They compared these 
scores to participants current WAIS/WAIS-R scores and to the control group. In 
the control group both the NART and NART-R had higher correlations with current 
functioning (r=0.75 and r=0.73 respectively), than either of the demographic 
variables (r=0.50 and r=0.46). In the Alzheimers group the NART significantly 
overestimated peoples WAIS/WAIS-R scores. They concluded that the NART is 
valid as an estimate of pre-morbid intellectual functioning. 
Bright et al., (2002) used a relatively small Alzheimers population (n=32) who 
were in the early stages of dementia (average symptom duration of 2.9 years). The 
Page 17 
authors themselves note that it would be interesting to explore whether or not 
reading ability deteriorates with increased dementia severity, as they suspected it 
might. If ability does deteriorate then the NART, which has to be read, would not be 
valid with people with severe dementia. 
Further support for the NART is provided by Law and OCarroll (1998). They 
compared the performance of 21 people with dementia and 114 controls, on the 
NART, the CCRT and the STW. They found that performance on all three measures 
was relatively unaffected by Alzheimers disease, as there were no significant 
differences between the Alzheimers and control group. Moreover, they showed that 
scores on the NART correlated well with current verbal intelligence in the control 
group (r=0.72). As such they concluded that the NART is valid as a measure of pre-
morbid functioning. 
However, whilst the control groups correlation between NART and verbal 
intelligence was good, the correlation with WAIS full-scale IQ was low (r=0.55), 
leaving a lot of variance left unexplained. Given that the NART is used as a 
predictor of pre-morbid IQ and not just verbal intelligence, it would be expected 
that this correlation would be higher, raising questions about the validity of the 
NART.  
Furthermore, Law and OCarrolls control group had a Mini-Mental State 
Examination score (MMSE; Folstein et al., 1975) of over 24. The authors 
acknowledge that it is still possible to have significant cognitive impairment with an 
MMSE score of 25 or above. This potential confound may have contributed to a 
lack of difference between the dementia and control groups.  
Page 18 
McFarlane, Welch and Rodgers, (2006) used a cross-sectional design to study the 
effects of dementia severity on performance on a range of pre-morbid measures 
including: the NART, CCRT, WTAR, STW and demographic regression equations. 
They studied 66 people with Alzheimers and 32 controls, and separated the 
dementia group into two stages of dementia severity (minimal: MMSE 24-28 and 
mild: MMSE 14-23). Overall, they found that the mild dementia group made 
significantly more errors on the reading tests than either the controls or minimal 
group. These errors were reduced when the words were put into context, using the 
CCRT, but the mild group still made significantly more errors. They concluded that 
NART performance is affected by mild dementia and may not be valid for people 
with an MMSE score of between 14 and 23.  
A criticism of this study is the disparity in the MMSE range of the two dementia 
groups. The minimal group had a range of 5 MMSE values (24-28), whereas the 
mild group covered 10 MMSE values (14-23). It is possible that group differences 
emerged due to the values at the lower end of the range, and that these may not have 
been present if an MMSE range of 19-23 had been used. Further research is needed 
to clarify this. Secondly, it would be naive to assume that the NART is valid above 
a certain MMSE score, but invalid below this. Instead, it is likely that the NARTs 
validity reduces gradually as dementia severity increases, and clinicians should be 
aware of this. 
Paolo, Trster, Ryan and Koller (1997) explored the validity of the NART, in a 
sample of 44 people with Alzheimers disease and 44 controls. They found that 
NART performance was affected by dementia severity, with participants with more 
severe dementia (Dementia Rating Scale (DRS) < 110; Mattis, 1988) gaining lower 
scores. However, given that NART estimated pre-morbid IQs were higher than 
Page 19 
scores of current ability, they concluded that the NART may still be able to provide 
some relevant clinical information. Of all the included studies, Paolo et al. (1997) 
assessed the highest number of validity criteria (Table 2), consequently greater 
reliance should be placed on the findings of this study. 
Longitudinal NART Studies.  
Two studies employed a longitudinal approach to assessing the validity of the 
NART. A longitudinal approach provides an insight into how an individuals score 
changes over time, and removes any between-subject differences.  
McGurn et al., (2004) compared NART predicted pre-morbid IQ scores with actual 
pre-morbid IQ scores (taken from age 11 school tests), in both a dementia and 
control group. This was the only included study which assessed this validity 
criterion and as such provides a rare assessment of the NARTs validity. The 
dementia group was classed as having mild to moderate dementia with a mean 
MMSE score of 22.3. McGurn et al., found that the correlations between NART and 
age 11 IQ were similar for both the dementia (r=0.63) and control groups (r=0.60). 
These authors concluded that the NART is a valid measure in people with mild to 
moderate dementia. However, they did not explore the scores of people with more 
severe dementia. 
Cockburn, Keene, Hope and Smith (2000) explored whether NART scores change 
with dementia progression. Unlike other studies, they assessed this validity criterion 
using the same group of individuals. They conducted annual assessments of 78 
people with Alzheimers disease and followed them up until they died, up to nine 
years later. NART scores were found to decline as dementia severity increased. The 
amount of NART decline was found to be a function of a persons previous MMSE 
Page 20 
score, with lower MMSE scores predicting larger amounts of subsequent NART 
decline. This suggests that the NART may be sensitive to current cognitive 
functioning, and is not solely measuring pre-morbid abilities.  
Interestingly there was an exception to these findings with one participant 
producing stable NART scores throughout, despite a decline in MMSE. Cockburn 
et al., (2000) concluded that relying on group data may be misleading and suggested 
there is more to learn about how dementia affects reading ability. 
Overall, while the NART appears to overestimate the current abilities of people 
with dementia, performance has been shown to be affected by dementia severity, 
with lower scores being produced for people with more severe dementia.  
Short NART  
Following criticism that the full NART may be distressing to people who performed 
badly, it was suggested that the NART could be estimated on the basis of the first 
half of the test alone (Beardsall & Brayne, 1990; Crawford, Parker, Allan, Jack & 
Morrison, 1991). Bucks et al., (1996) aimed to validate this with a group of 119 
people with dementia and 83 controls. The authors stated that there were 
unacceptably large discrepancies between the scores of the two versions of the 
NART and subsequently the short NART was deemed not to be valid as a 
replacement for the full NART. A criticism of Bucks at al., (1996) is that it was the 
only study which did not assess any of the suggested validity criteria. More research 
is needed to assess the validity of the short NART in terms of its correlation with 
current measures of ability. 
Beardsall and Huppert (1997) which assessed only one the validity criteria, found 
no significant differences between the dementia group (n=20) and the control group 
Page 21 
of average reading ability (n=30), on the short NART, CCRT and STW. However, 
the short NART led to a lower estimate of reading ability than the short CCRT, 
mean of 2.3 fewer words for the controls, and 3.8 for the dementia group. This 
suggests that the CCRT is superior to the NART, but further work is needed to see 
if a higher score on the CCRT equates to a better prediction of pre-morbid IQ.  
From the papers reviewed, there is little to support the validity of the short NART, 
as other measures can provide a fairer estimate of PMIF. 
Demographic Variables 
Whilst demographic variables are completely independent of current functioning, 
Crawford et al. (1989b) have shown that they are not able to explain as much of the 
variance in WAIS Full-Scale IQ as the NART. It is therefore not clear how valid 
demographic variables are. 
McFarlane et al. (2006) found demographic variables (based on Crawford and 
Allans (1997) regression equation) to be a better estimate of pre-morbid 
functioning than the NART, in people with mild dementia (MMSE score 14-23). 
Likewise Taylor (1999) supported the use of demographic variables. In a study of 
84 people with dementia Taylor found that NART performance is affected by 
dementia severity as it correlated significantly with tests of current cognitive ability. 
He concluded that the NART was not valid as a measure and instead he advocated 
the use of demographics which are not affected by dementia severity.  
As previously reported, Bright et al., (2002) found that demographics variables 
demonstrated lower correlations with current WAIS ability in the control group than 
the NART. As such they found that the NART was a better predictor of pre-morbid 
functioning. However, the authors noted that performance on the NART may 
Page 22 
deteriorate if a more advanced dementia population was used; whereas estimates 
from demographic variables would not be affected.  
Paolo et al., (1997) which assessed three of the validity criterion, found that Barona 
demographics accurately predicted short WAIS-R IQs in the control group (n=44), 
and overestimated short WAIS-R IQs in the dementia group (n=44). The Barona 
demographics could detect deterioration in more people diagnosed with mild 
impairment (DRS  110) than the NART. They concluded that demographic 
variables may be more powerful in detecting decline. 
Uncertainty remains about the validity of demographic variables. Despite lower 
correlations with current abilities, demographic variables may be preferable in 
situations where other measures are compromised, such as with people with severe 
dementia; although, by this stage the dementia would probably be evident without 
the need for neuropsychological assessments. 
The NART assumes that words which are not pronounced correctly are not in a 
persons reading vocabulary. However, Beardsall and Huppert (1994) suspected 
that some people mispronounced words which they read accurately in everyday life. 
They suggested that words needed to be placed into context in order to facilitate 
recognition, so they developed the CCRT. Franzen et al.s (1997) concluded that 
whilst people produced fewer pronunciation errors on the CCRT than the NART, 
work was needed to see whether or not this made the CCRT a better predictor of 
pre-morbid IQ. 
The present review identified four studies that have investigated the validity of the 
CCRT. As already stated Beardsall and Huppert (1997) found that the short CCRT 
Page 23 
provided a higher estimate of pre-morbid functioning than the short NART, in 
people with both minimal and mild/moderate dementia. Conway and OCarroll 
(1997) supported this by comparing the scores of 30 people with Alzheimers 
disease on both the NART and the CCRT. They found that people made 
significantly fewer errors on the CCRT than the NART (t=3.08, p<0.01), with the 
more severe dementia group (MMSE < 17) showing a greater increase in scores (2.6 
fewer errors), than the group with an MMSE  17 (0.9 fewer errors). Moreover, the 
authors found that whilst the NART was correlated to MMSE scores, the CCRT 
was not. This suggests that performance on the CCRT is affected less by dementia 
severity than the NART. 
Law and OCarroll (1998) compared the scores of 21 people with Alzheimers to 
114 controls on the NART, CCRT and STW. They found performance on all three 
measures were relatively unaffected by Alzheimers disease. People in the dementia 
group scored 4.4 words higher on average on the CCRT than the NART. Moreover, 
in the control group, the CCRT was shown to have a higher correlation (r=0.63) 
with measures of current intellectual abilities than either the NART (r=0.55) or the 
STW (r=0.36). From this they concluded that the CCRT was the fairest estimate of 
pre-morbid ability.  
McFarlane et al. (2006) showed that performance on the CCRT was affected by 
dementia severity. They found that despite scoring higher on the CCRT than the 
NART, people with mild dementia (MMSE: 14-23) made significantly more errors 
than either the minimal dementia (MMSE: 24-28) or the control group.  
A criticism of these studies is the size of the dementia groups. The largest study, 
McFarlane et al. (2006), used a sample of 66 people, however, this sample was 
Page 24 
reported to be underpowered. If any of the other studies were also underpowered 
then this could have a significant impact on the conclusions made, and replications 
with larger populations are needed.  
The finding that the CCRT correlates more highly with current ability in the control 
group, suggests that the CCRT is a better estimate of pre-morbid IQ than the 
NART. However, none of these studies assessed the correlation between the CCRT 
and either: scores taken prior to the onset of dementia, or current abilities in the 
dementia group. These criteria need to be assessed in order to determine the full 
validity of the CCRT.  
Despite its popularity among clinicians, only McFarlane et al., (2006) evaluated the 
validity of the WTAR. No differences between the controls and combined minimal 
and mild dementia group were found on the WTAR, t(95)=1.71, p>0.05, although 
there were significant differences between the minimal (MMSE: 24-28) and mild 
(MMSE: 14-23) dementia groups t(65)=2.21, p<0.05. This suggests that people 
make significantly more errors on the WTAR as dementia severity increases. As 
such the WTAR may only be valid with people with minimal dementia; however, 
further research is needed to confirm this. Moreover, there is a need to assess the 
validity of the WTAR in terms of its correlation with current intellectual ability, 
something that McFarlane et al. did not assess. 
Beardsall and Huppert (1997) found no significant differences between the 
dementia and control groups on the short STW, a test of lexical-decision-making. 
However, the authors noted that the probability was of borderline significance 
Page 25 
(F=3.0, p<0.06), with people with more severe dementia: mild/moderate, (as 
defined by the Cambridge Mental Disorders of the Elderly Examination, 
CAMDEX; Roth et al., 1986), performing significantly worse than controls. They 
therefore suggested that the short STW is not valid as a predictor of pre-morbid IQ 
in people with mild/moderate dementia. Given that Baddeley et al. (1993) found the 
correlation between the short and full STW was 0.94, Beardsall and Hupperts 
(1997) findings can be generalised to the full STW. A limitation of this study is that 
the probability level is set at 0.06, which increases the chances of making a type 1 
error. Moreover, as only 7 people had mild/moderate dementia, this study may be 
underpowered and replications are needed.  
McFarlane et al. (2006) found that there were no significant differences between the 
controls and the combined minimal and mild dementia group on the STW, 
t(95)=0.61, p>0.05. They also found no significant differences between the mild 
(MMSE: 14-23) and minimal dementia (MMSE: 24-28) groups t(65)=1.11, p>0.05. 
They concluded that the STW is valid with all levels of dementia severity and may 
provide the best estimate of PMIF in people with mild dementia. However, they 
note the need to further investigate the correlation between the STW and current 
intellectual ability, something which Law and OCarroll (1998) found to be low 
(r=0.36).  
The evidence suggests that the STW may be useful as an estimate of pre-morbid IQ 
but further studies are needed to support this. It is noted, however, that McFarlane 
used a later version of the STW and further research is needed to explore whether 
this makes a difference to the findings stated. 
Page 26 
Pre-Morbid Memory 
Most of the methods of estimating PMIF, described above, focus on measuring a 
persons pre-morbid IQ. However, cognitive decline encompasses impairment in a 
persons memory abilities too. Given that pre-morbid IQ is often predicted on the 
basis of verbal IQ alone, memory abilities are being ignored. Currently, pre-morbid 
memory is measured by clinical judgement on the basis of demographics alone, but 
this is liable to considerable error. A need to develop objective measures of pre-
morbid memory is indicated. 
Hilsabeck & Sutker (2009) suggested the use of an implicit memory task, the 
Anagrams Solutions, as an objective way of measuring pre-morbid memory. 
However, they found that it was not valid as a measure of memory function, as it 
did not correlate significantly with explicit memory measures in the control group.  
Duff, Chelune and Dennett (2011) evaluated the use of formulae (based on 
demographic variables and an estimate of pre-morbid intellect; Duff, 2010), to 
estimate pre-morbid memory in 1,059 Dementia clinic referrals. The pre-morbid 
memory equations significantly overestimated current abilities on four different 
measures. However, the memory formulae were found to correlate to MMSE 
scores, suggesting that they are affected by dementia severity. As such their validity 
is uncertain.  
A critique of this study is that formal dementia diagnoses were not stated, with 
cognitive impairment seemingly implied from either MMSE or DRS. Thirty percent 
of participants scored 28 or higher on the MMSE, and consequently may not have 
had any cognitive decline. Replications of these findings using a confirmed 
dementia population are needed. Moreover, there is a need to explore the formulaes 
Page 27 
validity across different levels of dementia severity, and when compared to a 
control group. These criteria need to be assessed before making conclusions as to 
the validity of this measure. 
Limitations 
Classification of Severity 
There is little consistency in the way that dementia severity is defined: seven studies 
used the MMSE, one used the DRS, one the CAMDEX and three did not comment. 
The same is true for severity terminology. McFarlane et al. (2006) classed people as 
having minimal dementia if they had an MMSE score between 24 and 28, and 
mild between 14 and 23. Duff et al., (2011) classed people as milder with an 
average MMSE of 24.5, whereas, Law and OCarroll (1998), accepted people in the 
control group with an MMSE score of 25. Standardisation of severity terms are 
needed in order to fully integrate the research into clinical practice. Without this it 
will be difficult to determine how valid these measures of PMIF are with people 
with varying levels of dementia. 
MMSE scores are affected by variables such as age and education (Anthony, 
LeResche, Niaz, Von Korff & Folstein, 1982; Crum, Anthony, Bassett, & Folstein, 
1993) so need to be adjusted accordingly. However, of the seven studies that used 
the MMSE, only McGurn et al., (2004) and Hilsabeck & Sutker (2009) explicitly 
noted the use of adjusted MMSE scores (the former for age 11 IQ and the latter for 
age and gender). This suggests that the other studies may be flawed if they classed 
severity on unadjusted MMSE scores.  
Page 28 
Study Exclusion criteria 
Bucks, Scott, Pearsall & 
Ashworth (1996) 
Not specified 
Beardsall & Huppert (1997) Depression 
Paolo, Trster, Ryan & Koller 
(1997) 
Stroke, psychiatric disorder, significant head trauma, illicit drug or alcohol abuse, medication that impairs 
cognition and other signs/symptoms of neurological disorders that may compromise cognition 
Conway & OCarroll (1997) 
Infective, metabolic, nutritional and hormonal causes of organic disorder were excluded as well as 
functional psychiatric disorders 
Law & O'Carroll (1998) Not specified 
Taylor (1999) 
History of alcohol abuse, uncorrected sight/hearing, physical disability affecting testing, recent infection 
or other illness, head injury, major psychiatric problems or ECT 
Cockburn, Keene, Hope & 
Smith (2000) 
Alcohol abuse, any suggestion of causes of disease other than dementia i.e. previous head injury or 
hypothyroidism 
Page 29 
Table Three: Exclusion Criteria 
Bright, Jaldow & Kopelman 
(2002) 
Hypertensive or cerebrovascular disease 
McGurn et al. (2004) Not specified 
McFarlane, Welch & Rodgers 
(2006) 
Alcohol abuse, depression, stroke, head injury and any uncorrected eyesight problems 
Hilsabeck & Sutker (2009) 
Current or past neurological or psychiatric illness, history of significant head trauma, active substance 
abuse or dependence or cognitive impairment so severe as to prohibit participation in the study 
Duff, Chelune &  Dennett 
(2011) 
Not specified 
Page 30 
Causes of Cognitive Decline 
Several factors can cause cognitive decline other than dementia. These include: age 
(Morris, Craik & Gick, 1990), psychosis (Bilder et al., 2000; Addington et al., 
2003); substance misuse (Block & Ghoneim, 1993); excessive alcohol (Evert & 
Oscar-Berman, 1995); prescribed medications (Fox et al., 2011); acquired brain 
injury (Whyte, Skidmore, Aizenstein, Ricker & Butters, 2011) and stroke (Mok et 
al., 2004). However, very few studies screened for these factors (see Table Three). 
There may be potential confounds in any research, which assumes cognitive decline 
to be produced by dementia alone.  
Dyslexia  
Several measures require a person to read irregular words. However, this may result 
in an underestimation of pre-morbid functioning in some people with dyslexia, if 
they rely on phonetics to help them to read. Indeed the NART states that it is not 
valid with people with dyslexia. The STW, however, is cited as being valid for use 
with dyslexia (Baddeley at al., 1993) although its validity with a dementia 
population still needs to be proven. Newer non-reading estimates, such as Spot-the-
book and Spot-the-country (Scott, Wit & Deary, 2006), have also shown promise in 
healthy participants, but further assessment with participants with both dyslexia and 
dementia is needed.   
Demographic Equations 
Throughout this paper demographic variables have been explored as one group. 
However, demographic estimates are derived from several different regression 
equations (Crawford et al., 1989a; Barona et al., 1984; Crawford & Allan, 1997). It 
http://bjp.rcpsych.org/content/191/51/s52.full#ref-6
http://bjp.rcpsych.org/content/191/51/s52.full#ref-1
http://bjp.rcpsych.org/content/191/51/s52.full#ref-1
Page 31 
would be interesting to know if there are significant differences between these 
equations, and if so, which is the most valid with dementia.  
Diagnostic Criteria  
There is considerable variation in how dementia is classified. The NINDS-ADRDA 
(McKhann et al., 1984) referring specifically to Alzheimers disease, was referred 
to in six studies; the CAMDEX and DSM-IV were both used in two studies, while 
ICD-10 (World Health Organisation, 1992), the Hachinski Index (Hachinski et al., 
1975) and DSM-III-R (American Psychiatric Association, 1987) were all referred to 
once (one study used two criteria). Choice of diagnostic criteria seems varied. A 
study by Wetterling, Kanitz & Borgis (1996) on vascular dementia found a 
concordance rate of only 53% between the diagnostic criteria used. Research is 
needed to clarify whether diagnostic variations in the literature reviewed in this 
present paper have any impact on the findings stated. 
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS  
The present review evaluated the validity of measures of pre-morbid intellectual 
functioning with dementia. No evidence was found supporting the validity of one 
single measure for use with dementia at all stages of severity. Moreover, a number 
of measures should not be used in particular situations. Both the NART and the 
WTAR are shown to underestimate the ability of people with an MMSE less than 
24. Whilst the CCRT produced higher estimates of pre-morbid reading ability, it 
too is affected by dementia, and may be unreliable with people with an MMSE less 
than 24. There was no evidence to support the use of the short NART as a valid 
estimator, and this should be avoided where possible. This is also true for the 
Anagram Solutions, whose use was not validated. 
Page 32 
In terms of tests that should be used by clinicians, the current evidence suggests that 
the CCRT is the most valid measure in people with minimal dementia (MMSE  
24). It correlates well with current abilities in the control group, and produced an 
estimate of reading ability up to 4.4 words higher than the NART. In the dementia 
group, it was also shown not to correlate with current measures of ability. 
There is more debate, however, as to which measure to use with people with more 
severe dementia (MMSE<24). Given that several measures are affected by 
dementia severity, underestimation of ability may occur if these measures are used 
with people with more severe dementia. At present it is advised that demographic 
variables, which are not affected by dementia severity, are the best predictors of 
pre-morbid ability at this level of severity.  
The Spot-the-Word test has some promising results across all levels of dementia 
severity but the evidence base for this is limited. However, one study questioned its 
correlation to current measures of ability in controls. Given that this could 
potentially be valid for both people with mild dementia and people with dyslexia, 
there is a need to investigate this further.  
Furthermore, ceiling effects in measures must always be acknowledged. The 
highest possible pre-morbid IQ estimated on the WTAR is 119. Therefore estimated 
IQs should be considered as a lower estimate of ability, and not an absolute value.  
Clinicians are advised to make use of multiple measures in order to estimate pre-
morbid ability. Scores gained from at least two distinct measures should be cross-
checked against each other. Large discrepancies will highlight potential limitations 
in the measures, and alert clinicians to a possible underestimation of ability. 
Consequently this should help to reduce the number of clinical errors made. 
Page 33 
Conclusions 
Currently available objective measures of pre-morbid ability, used in addition to 
clinical judgement, should reduce the chance of clinical misdiagnosis. The CCRT is 
suggested as the best available measure of PMIF for people with MMSE scores of 
24 or more, while demographic variables are recommended for scores below 24. It 
is suggested that a combination of measures may be best to ensure an accurate 
estimate of PMIF. Finally, a consistent definition of dementia severity is needed, 
against which to compare the validity of different measures of pre-morbid 
intellectual functioning.  
Page 34 
References 
Review papers 
Beardsall, L., & Huppert, F. (1997). Short NART, CCRT and Spot-the-Word: 
Comparisons in older and demented persons. British Journal of Clinical 
Psychology, 36 (4 ), 619-622.  
Bright, P., Jaldow, E., & Kopelman, M. D. (2002). The National Adult Reading 
Test as a measure of pre-morbid intelligence: A comparison with estimates 
derived from demographic variables. Journal of the International 
Neuropsychological Society, 8 (6) , 847-854. 
Bucks, R.S., Scott, M.I., Pearsall, T. & Ashworth, D.L. (1996). The Short NART: 
Utility in a memory disorders clinic. British Journal of Clinical 
Psychology, 35 (1), 133-141. 
Cockburn, J., Keene, J., Hope, T., & Smith, P. (2000). Progressive decline in 
NART score with increasing dementia severity. Journal of Clinical and 
Experimental Neuropsychology, 22 (4) , 508-517.  
Conway, S.C., & OCarroll, R.E. (1997). An evaluation of the Cambridge 
Contextual Reading Test (CCRT) in Alzheimer's disease. British Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 36 (4), 623-625. 
Duff, K., Chelune, G.J., & Dennett, K. (2011). Predicting estimates of premorbid 
memory functioning: Validation in a dementia sample. Archives of Clinical 
Neuropsychology, 26, 701-705. 
http://0-search.proquest.com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/psycinfo/docview/619472105/132E8959E0C4EC08D71/5?accountid=14888
http://0-search.proquest.com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/psycinfo/docview/619472105/132E8959E0C4EC08D71/5?accountid=14888
Page 35 
Hilsabeck, R. C., & Sutker, P. B. (2009). Using an Implicit Memory Task to 
Estimate Premorbid Memory. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 24 
(2), 179-191.  
Law, R., & O'Carroll, R. E. (1998). A comparison of three measures of estimating 
premorbid intellectual level in dementia of the Alzheimer type. 
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 13, 727-730. 
McFarlane, J., Welch, J., & Rodgers, J. (2006). Severity of Alzheimer's disease and 
effect on premorbid measures of intelligence.  British Journal of Clinical 
Psychology, 45, 453-463.    
McGurn, B., Starr, J. M., Topfer, J. A., Pattie, A., Whiteman, M. C., Lemmon, H.A. 
... & Deary, I.J. (2004). Pronunciation of irregular words is preserved in 
dementia, validating premorbid IQ estimation. Neurology, 62 (7), 1184-
1186.  
Paolo, A. M., Trster, A. I., Ryan, J. J., & Koller, W.C. (1997). Comparison of 
NART and Barona demographic equation premorbid IQ estimates in 
Alzheimer's disease. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 53 (7) , 713-722.  
Taylor, R. (1999). National Adult Reading Test performance in established 
dementia. Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics,  29 (3) , 291-296.  
http://apps.webofknowledge.com/full_record.do?product=WOS&search_mode=MarkedList&qid=32&SID=P1BnjB2N5OBNK7ejFn7&page=1&doc=18&colName=WOS
http://apps.webofknowledge.com/full_record.do?product=WOS&search_mode=MarkedList&qid=32&SID=P1BnjB2N5OBNK7ejFn7&page=1&doc=18&colName=WOS
http://0-search.proquest.com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/psycinfo/docview/619363542/132E8959E0C4EC08D71/7?accountid=14888
http://0-search.proquest.com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/psycinfo/docview/619363542/132E8959E0C4EC08D71/7?accountid=14888
http://apps.webofknowledge.com/full_record.do?product=WOS&search_mode=MarkedList&qid=32&SID=P1BnjB2N5OBNK7ejFn7&page=1&doc=24&colName=WOS
http://apps.webofknowledge.com/full_record.do?product=WOS&search_mode=MarkedList&qid=32&SID=P1BnjB2N5OBNK7ejFn7&page=1&doc=24&colName=WOS
http://0-search.proquest.com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/psycinfo/docview/620378526/132E8959E0C4EC08D71/2?accountid=14888
http://0-search.proquest.com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/psycinfo/docview/620378526/132E8959E0C4EC08D71/2?accountid=14888
http://0-search.proquest.com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/psycinfo/docview/619217081/132E8959E0C4EC08D71/11?accountid=14888
http://0-search.proquest.com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/psycinfo/docview/619217081/132E8959E0C4EC08D71/11?accountid=14888
http://0-search.proquest.com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/psycinfo/docview/619217081/132E8959E0C4EC08D71/11?accountid=14888
http://0-search.proquest.com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/psycinfo/docview/619436725/132E8959E0C4EC08D71/6?accountid=14888
http://0-search.proquest.com.pugwash.lib.warwick.ac.uk/psycinfo/docview/619436725/132E8959E0C4EC08D71/6?accountid=14888
Page 36 
Other references 
Addington, J., Brooks, D. J. & Addington, D. (2003). Cognitive functioning in first 
episode psychosis: initial presentation. Schizophrenia Research, 62, 59-64. 
American Psychiatric Association. (1987). Diagnostic and statistical manual of 
mental health disorders (3rd ed. revised). Washington, DC: Author. 
American Psychiatric Association. (2000). Diagnostic and statistical manual of 
mental health disorders (4th ed.). Washington, DC: Author. 
Anthony, J.C., LeResche, L., Niaz, U., Von Korff, M.R., & Folstein, M.F. (1982). 
Limits of the Mini-Mental State as a screening test for dementia and 
delirium among hospital patients. Psychological Medicine, 12, 397-408. 
Baddeley, A., Emslie, H. & Nimmo-Smith, I. (1993). The Spot-the-Word Test: A 
robust estimate of verbal intelligence based on lexical decision. British 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 32, 55-65. 
Barona, A., Reynolds, C.R., & Chastain, R. (1984). A demographically based index 
of premorbid intelligence for the WAIS-R. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 52 (5), 885-887. 
Beardsall, L. & Brayne, C. (1990). Estimation of verbal intelligence in an elderly 
community: A prediction analysis using the shortened NART. British 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 29, 83-90.  
Beardsall, L. & Huppert, F.A. (1994). Improvement in NART word reading in 
demented and normal older persons using the Cambridge Contextual 
Page 37 
Reading Test. Journal of Clinical and Experimental Neuropsychology, 16, 
232-242.                                                                                                                                       
Bilder, R. M., Goldman, R. S., Robinson, D.E., Reiter, G., Bell, L., Bates, J.A., et 
al. (2000). Neuropsychology of first-episode schizophrenia: Initial 
characterization and clinical correlates. American Journal of Psychiatry, 
157, 549 559. 
Blair, J., & Spreen, O. (1989). Predicting premorbid  IQ:  A Revision  of  the 
National Adult Reading Test. The Clinical Neuropsychologist, 25, 119-124. 
Block, R.I., & Ghoneim, M.M. (1993). Effects of chronic marijuana use on human 
cognition. Psychopharmacology, 110, 219-228. 
Crawford, J.R. & Allan, K.M. (1997). Estimating premorbid IQ with demographic 
variables: Regression equations derived from a UK sample. Clinical 
Neuropsychologist, 11, 192-197. 
Crawford, J.R., Allan, K.M., Cochrane, R.H.B., & Parker, D.M. (1990). Assessing 
the validity of the NART-estimated premorbid IQs in the individual case. 
British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 29, 435-436. 
Crawford, J.R., Parker, D.M., Allan, K.M., Jack, A.M. & Morrison, F.M. (1991). 
The Short NART: Cross-validation, relationship to IQ and some practical 
considerations. British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 30, 223-229. 
Crawford, J.R., Stewart, L.E., Cochrane, R.H.B., Foulds, J.A., Besson, J.A.O., & 
Parker, D.M. (1989a). Estimating premorbid IQ from demographic 
variables: Regression equations derived from a UK sample. British Journal 
of Clinical Psychology, 28, 275-278. 
Page 38 
Crawford, J.R., Stewart, L.E., Cochrane, R., Foulds, J., Besson, J.A.O., & Parker, 
D.M. (1989b). Estimation of premorbid intelligence in organic conditions. 
British Journal of Psychiatry, 153, 178-181. 
Crum, R.M., Anthony, J.C., Bassett, S.S. & Folstein, M.F. (1993). Population-
based norms for the Mini-Mental State Examination by age and educational 
level. Journal of the American Medical Association, 269 (18), 2386-91. 
Duff, K. (2010). Predicting premorbid memory functioning in older adults. Applied 
Neuropsychology, 17 (4), 278-282. 
Evert, D.L., & Oscar-Berman, M. (1995). Alcohol-related cognitive impairments: 
An overview of how alcoholism may affect the workings of the brain. 
Alcohol Health and Research World, 19 (2), 89-96. 
Folstein,  M.F.,  Folstein,  S.E.,  &  McHugh,  P.R. (1975).  Mini-Mental State. A 
practical method for grading the cognitive state of patients for the clinician.  
Journal of Psychiatric Research, 12, 189-198. 
Fox, C., Richardson, K., Maidment, I.D., Savva. G.M., Matthews, F.E., Smithard, 
D., ... Brayne, C. (2011). Anticholinergic Medication Use and Cognitive 
Impairment in the Older Population: The Medical Research Council 
Cognitive Function and Ageing Study. Journal of the American Geriatric 
Society, 59 (8), 1477-1483. 
Franzen, M. D., Burgess, E. J., & Smith-Seemiller, L. (1997). Methods of 
estimating premorbid functioning. Archives of Clinical Neuropsychology, 
12, 711-738. 
Page 39 
Fromm, D., Holland, A. l., Nebes, R.D., & Oakley, M. A. (1991). A longitudinal 
study of word-reading ability in Alzheimers disease: Evidence from the 
National Adult Reading Test. Cortex, 27, 367-376. 
Hachinski, V.C., Iliff, C.D., Zilhka, E., Du Boulay, G.H., McAllister, V.L., 
Marshall, J., ... Symon, I. (1975). Cerebral blood flow in dementia. Archives 
of Neurology, 32, 632-637. 
Mattis, S. (1988). Dementia Rating Scale: Professional manual. Odessa, FL: 
Psychological Assessment Resources.  
McKhann, G., Drachman, D., Folstein, M., Katzman, R., Price, D. & Stadlan, E.M. 
(1984). Clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease: report of the NINCDS-
ADRDA Work Group under the auspices of Department of Health and 
Human Services Task Force on Alzheimer's Disease. Neurology, 34 (7), 
939-944.  
Mok, V. C. T., Wong, A., Lam, W.W.M., Fan, Y.H., Tang, W.K., Kwok, T., ... 
Wong, K.S. (2004). Cognitive impairment and functional outcome after 
stroke associated with small vessel disease. Journal of Neurology, 
Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, 75, 560-566. 
Morris, R.G., Craik, F.I.M. & Gick, M.L. (1990). Age differences in working 
memory tasks. The role of secondary memory and the central executive 
system. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 42, 67-86. 
Nelson, H. E. (1982). National Adult Reading Test (NART): Test manual. Windsor, 
UK: NFER-Nelson.  
http://jnnp.bmj.com/search?author1=V+C+T+Mok&sortspec=date&submit=Submit
Page 40 
Nelson, H.E., & McKenna, P. (1975). The use of current reading ability in the 
assessment of dementia. British Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 
14, 259-267.            
Nelson, H.E., & OConnell, A. (1978). Dementia: The estimation of premorbid 
intelligence levels  using the New Adult Reading Test. Cortex, 14, 234-244. 
Nelson, H.E. & Willison, J.R. (1991). The Revised National Adult Reading Test- 
Test manual. Windsor, UK; NFER-Nelson. 
OCarroll, R.E. (1995). The assessment of premorbid ability: A critical review. 
Neurocase, 1, 83-89.  
O'Carroll, R.E., Prentice, N., Murray, C., van Beck, M., Ebmeier, K.P. & Goodwin, 
G.M. (1995). Further evidence that reading ability is not preserved in 
Alzheimer's disease. British Journal of Psychiatry, 167 (5), 659-62. 
Roth, M, Tym, E., Mountjoy, C.Q., Huppert, F.A., Hendrie, H., Verma, S., & 
Goddard, R. (1986). CAMDEX. A standardised instrument for the diagnosis 
of mental disorder in the elderly with special reference to the early detection 
of dementia. The British Journal of Psychiatry, 149, 698-709. 
Schwartz, M., & Saffran, E. (1987). The American-Nart: Replication and extension 
of the British findings on the persistence of word pronunciation skills in 
patients with dementia, unpublished manuscript. Philadelphia.  
Scott, K.M., Wit, I., & Deary, I.J. (2006). Spotting books and countries: New 
approaches to estimating and conceptualizing prior intelligence. 
Intelligence, 34, 429-436. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=%22O'Carroll%20RE%22%5BAuthor%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=%22Prentice%20N%22%5BAuthor%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=%22Murray%20C%22%5BAuthor%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=%22van%20Beck%20M%22%5BAuthor%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=%22Ebmeier%20KP%22%5BAuthor%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=%22Goodwin%20GM%22%5BAuthor%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=%22Goodwin%20GM%22%5BAuthor%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8564324
Page 41 
Sharpe, K., & OCarroll, R. (1991). Estimating premorbid intellectual level in 
dementia using the National Adult Reading Test: A Canadian study. British 
Journal of Clinical Psychology, 30, 381-384. 
Stebbins, G.T., Wilson, R.S., Gilley, D.W., Bernard, B.A., & Fox, J.H. (1990). Use 
of the National Adult Reading Test to estimate premorbid IQ in dementia. 
Clinical Neuropsychologist, 4, 18-24. 
Wechsler, D. (1981). Manual for the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale - Revised.  
New York:  The Psychological Corporation. 
Wechsler, D. (2001). Manual for the Wechsler Test of Adult Reading. San Antonio, 
TX: The Psychological Corporation. 
Wechsler, D. (2011). Manual for the Test of Premorbid Functioning. New York:  
The Psychological Corporation.  
Wetterling, T., Kanitz, R-D., & Borgis, K-J. (1996). Comparison of different 
diagnostic criteria for Vascular Dementia (ADDTC, DSM-IV, ICD-10, 
NINDS-AIREN). Stroke, 27, 30-36. 
Whyte, E., Skidmore, E., Aizenstein, H., Ricker, J., & Butters, M. (2011). 
Cognitive Impairment in Acquired Brain Injury: A Predictor of 
Rehabilitation Outcomes and an Opportunity for Novel Interventions. The 
Journal of Injury, Function, and Rehabilitation, 3 (6), S45-51. 
Wilson, R. S., Rosenbaum, G., Brown, G., Rourke, D., Whitman, D. & Grisell, J. 
(1978). An index of premorbid intelligence. Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 46, 1554-1555.  
Page 42 
World Health Organization. (1992). Tenth Revision of the International 
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems (ICD10). 
Geneva: Author. 
Page 43 
Chapter 2: Empirical Paper 
Diagnosis of Dementia and Relative Cognitive Decline 
Emilie W Oakley 
Clinical Psychology Department, Coventry University, Coventry, UK 
WORD COUNT: 4,989 words (excluding references and tables) 
Page 44 
Diagnosis of Dementia and Relative Cognitive Decline 
Journal of Aging & Mental Health 
ABSTRACT 
Objectives 
The present study explores whether there is a relationship between estimated pre-
morbid intellectual functioning and the amount of cognitive decline shown prior to 
receiving a diagnosis of dementia. 
Methods 
A retrospective design was adopted which collected data including estimated pre-
morbid IQ and RBANS scores from memory clinic patients files. This was used to 
calculate the amount of cognitive decline that people undergo prior to having an 
assessment for dementia. Correlational analyses were carried out comparing the 
amount of cognitive decline and pre-morbid intellectual functioning. 
Results 
Of the population sampled, 135 patients had been diagnosed with dementia; 59 with 
mild cognitive impairment and 51 showed no cognitive impairment. A positive 
relationship was found for all groups between pre-morbid intellectual functioning 
and amount of cognitive decline. As a persons estimated pre-morbid functioning 
increased so too did the amount of cognitive decline that they experienced. A 
multinomial logistic regression highlighted age and RBANS score as being the 
most predictive of diagnostic classification. This model accounted for up to 53.8% 
of the variance.  
Page 45 
Conclusions 
Pre-morbidly high functioning people experience greater amounts of cognitive 
decline prior to being given a diagnosis of dementia than other people. This 
provides support for an ascertainment bias in the dementia assessment. Changes to 
the current dementia assessment process are indicated, which take into account the 
amount of cognitive decline experienced.  
KEY WORDS: Dementia; Education; Pre-morbid Intellectual Functioning; 
Ascertainment Bias. 
Page 46 
Diagnosis of Dementia and Relative Cognitive Decline 
INTRODUCTION 
Currently, there are over 800,000 people with dementia in the United Kingdom 
(Alzheimers Society, 2012) and this figure is set to double in the next thirty years 
as the population ages (Knapp et al., 2007). However, it is estimated that only 40% 
of people with dementia receive a diagnosis (Alzheimers Society, 2011). 
Living Well with Dementia: The National Dementia Strategy for England 
(Department of Health, 2009) states that significant improvements need to be made 
to dementia services in terms of improved access to services, earlier diagnosis and 
intervention, and higher quality of care. An earlier diagnosis may improve the 
quality of peoples lives by allowing people additional time to make legal and 
financial decisions about their future. People with Alzheimers disease may receive 
medication at an earlier stage, which can help to slow the progression of the 
disease. They may also be taught psychological strategies to help them to maximise 
the cognitive skills that they do have. It is therefore important to determine how 
people with dementia can be identified as early as possible. 
There is much debate as to the influence that education, and by association pre-
morbid intellectual functioning has on dementia. Many studies show that education 
is inversely related to dementia such that people with less education are more likely 
to be diagnosed (the Canadian Study of Health and Aging, 1994; Dartigues et al., 
1991; De Ronchi et al., 1998; Fratiglioni and Wang, 2007; Gatz et al., 2007; Hill et 
al., 1993; Ngandu et al., 2007; Ott et al., 1995; Prencipe et al., 1996; Schmand, et 
al., 1997 and Zhang et al., 1990). Paradoxically, however, people who were pre-
morbidly high functioning have been shown to deteriorate at a much faster rate after 
Page 47 
being diagnosed with dementia, than those who were pre-morbidly low functioning 
(Hall et al., 2007 and Stern, 2006). 
Conversely, there are studies which found no evidence that less education is a risk 
factor for diagnosis of dementia (Beard, Kokmen, Offord & Kurland, 1992; 
Bonaiuto et al., 1995; Bowler, Munos, Merskey & Hachinski, 1998 & OConnor, 
Pollitt & Treasure, 1991). Yet others that suggest that once diagnosed, pre-morbidly 
high functioning people decline at the same rate as everybody else (Del Ser, 
Hachinski, Merskey & Munoz, 1999).  
One explanation that has been put forward to account for why dementia is 
diagnosed less frequently in people with higher levels of education attributes this to 
the presence of greater cognitive reserve in individuals with a higher level of 
estimated pre-morbid intellectual functioning. Cognitive reserve describes the 
minds resilience to neurological brain damage (Stern, 2002). Autopsy studies have 
shown that some people experience considerable amounts of brain damage, but 
exhibit little clinical manifestation of dementia itself (Katzman, 1988). This 
phenomenon was found to apply mainly to people whose brains contained a greater 
number of neurons than average and weighed more. Therefore when disease 
processes began to cause damage to the brain, high-functioning individuals did not 
exhibit any signs of the condition, as they effectively had a reserve of neurons. As 
several studies have shown that individuals with higher IQs and/or greater 
cognitive stimulation have larger brain volumes (Kesler, Adams, Blasey & Bigler, 
2003 and Willerman, Schultz, Rutledge & Bigler, 1991), it is suggested that these 
people also have a higher reserve. Ince (2001) provided support for cognitive 
reserve. He found that 25% of people who met the pathological criteria for 
Page 48 
Alzheimers at autopsy, had previously unimpaired neuropsychological 
assessments, on average 1.2 years before they died. Additional findings for brain 
reserve have been provided by: Fratiglioni & Wang (2007); Roselli et al., (2009); 
Stern, (2009) and Valenzuela (2008). 
An alternative explanation of why people who are high-functioning are diagnosed 
with dementia less frequently, is that there is an ascertainment bias in the way that 
dementia is diagnosed. This explanation is supported by Tuokko, Garrett, 
McDowell, Silverberg & Kristjansson, (2003).  These authors criticise the use of 
criteria for assessing dementia which are based on an absolute threshold approach 
(e.g. such as the MMSE cut-off score of 24, suggested in the National Institute for 
Health and Clinical Excellence guidelines; NICE, 2006), and instead advocate the 
need to establish relative cognitive decline within each individual (Bain, 2006). The 
ascertainment bias model assumes that pre-morbidly high functioning individuals 
must experience greater amounts of cognitive decline in order to reach that absolute 
threshold and receive a diagnosis.  
Support for the ascertainment bias is provided by findings that tests of cognitive 
functioning are influenced by a persons education and intelligence (Christensen 
and Jorm, 1992). As a result higher cut-off points on tests of cognitive functioning 
should be used when assessing pre-morbidly high-functioning people with 
dementia (Starr and Lonie, 2007). Moreover, when test scores are adjusted on the 
basis of pre-morbid intellectual functioning, studies show that more people can be 
detected as having dementia at an earlier stage (Lindeboon, Launer, Schmand, 
Hooyer & Jonker, 1996; Rentz et al., 2004). 
Page 49 
Autopsy studies, which are able to confirm previously probable diagnosis of 
Alzheimers disease, have provided further support to the ascertainment bias 
theory. Munoz, Ganapathy, Eliasziw and Hachinski (2000) found that there were no 
significant differences in terms of educational attainment between a group of people 
who had autopsy-confirmed Alzheimers disease and a control group who did not. 
This suggests that high education may not be as much of a protective factor for the 
development of dementia as originally believed.   
The presence of an ascertainment bias may account for the discrepancies in the 
literature as to whether or not educational attainment is inversely proportional to 
dementia. If people are diagnosed on the basis of absolute amounts of cognitive 
decline, rather than relative amounts, this may prevent people with a high level of 
education from gaining a diagnosis of dementia. Consequently, people with high 
education will appear to be less susceptible to dementia, as they have not gained a 
diagnosis. This study aims to move the literature forward by exploring this further. 
Main Aim: To explore whether there is a relationship between peoples estimated 
pre-morbid levels of intellectual functioning, and the amount of cognitive decline 
shown before being diagnosed with dementia. 
Hypothesis: It is hypothesised that in those individuals diagnosed with dementia, a 
greater amount of cognitive decline will be shown at the point of diagnosis in 
individuals with higher pre-morbid intellectual functioning, compared to 
individuals with lower pre-morbid levels of intellectual functioning. 
Page 50 
Subsidiary Aim: To explore which variables, including clinical (cognitive) and 
demographic variables, are the most predictive of variance within the diagnostic 
process.  
METHODS 
Design  
The present study uses a quantitative retrospective design. Patients were divided 
into three groups on the basis of their diagnosis: Dementia, Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (MCI) and No Cognitive Impairment (NoCI).  
A correlational design was used to explore the relationship between estimated pre-
morbid IQ and the amount of cognitive decline shown before receiving a diagnosis 
of dementia. A multinomial logistic regression was used to explore which variables 
contributed significantly to a model predicting diagnostic group allocation. 
Participants 
The sample for the present study was obtained from people who had previously 
attended an NHS memory clinic and had been assessed for dementia. People who 
met the relevant criteria (see below) were included in the study.  
Measures 
 Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR). 
The Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR; Wechsler, 2001) (Appendix 8) is 
used to estimate a persons pre-morbid IQ. It consists of 50 phonetically irregular 
words that require prior knowledge of them in order to pronounce them correctly. 
The test was standardised on a sample of 331 British people and 1134 Americans, 
aged between 16-80 years old. The WTAR shows good internal consistency, with 
coefficients ranging from 0.87 to 0.95, and good test-retest reliability (r=0.90) 
Page 51 
(Wechsler, 2001). The test shows good convergent validity with other reading tests, 
such as the American National Adult Reading Test (AMNART; r=0.90) and 
correlates highly with measures of intelligence, specifically the Wechsler Adult 
Intelligence Scale (WAIS-III) Full-Scale IQ, (r=0.73) (Wechsler, 2001). 
 Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status 
(RBANS). 
The Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS; 
Randolph, 1998) contains 12 subtests which measure a persons attention, language, 
visuospatial/constructional abilities, immediate and delayed memory. It was 
designed for use with English-speaking adults aged between 20 and 89 years and 
has normative scores derived from a sample of 540 healthy adults (Randolph, 
1998).  
The RBANS indices have been shown to have high correlation coefficients when 
measured against other neuropsychological measures. The language index, for 
example, correlated highly with the Boston Naming Task, (r=0.75) and the 
Visuospatial/Constructional index correlated highly with the Rey-Osterrieth 
Complex Figure Test (r=0.79; Randolph, 1998).  The RBANS has been shown to 
have good test-retest reliability across the two versions of the test, with a 
correlation coefficient of 0.84 (Wilk et al., 2004). 
 Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). 
The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE; Folstein, Folstein & McHugh, 1975) 
(Appendix 9) is a basic measure of a persons cognitive abilities. The test has been 
shown to have good test-retest reliability over both 24 hours (r=0.89) and 28 day 
intervals (r=0.98), and good inter-rater reliability (r=0.83) (Folstein et al., 1975). It 
Page 52 
was able to distinguish between people with and without cognitive impairment, 
when tested on a group of 137 people (Folstein et al., 1975). It also correlated 
strongly with the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) verbal (r=0.78) and 
performance scales (r=0.66).  
Procedure 
Following ethical approval data was collected from patients memory clinic files. 
All data was taken from the point of initial contact with the memory clinic, 
regardless of whether subsequent assessments were carried out. Data consisted of 
demographic details (age, gender and ethnicity); level of education (see Appendix 
10 for coding); estimated pre-morbid IQ (measured by the WTAR); total RBANS 
score; MMSE score and diagnostic outcome (as stated by the Psychiatrist involved 
in the memory clinic). Data pertaining to the exclusion criteria (see below) were 
also extracted, including the presence of a severe and enduring mental health 
problem and excessive alcohol use.  
 Closed patient files. 
Permission to access the files of patients who have been discharged from the 
service, closed files, was obtained from the National Information Governance 
Board for Health and Social Care (NIGB), for support under section 251 of the 
National Health Service Act (2006) to process patient information without consent.  
Permission was also sought from the Black Country Research and Ethics 
Page 53 
Committee, the Research and Development Committee for the relevant NHS Trust
and from the lead clinicians involved in each of the memory clinics. 
 Open patient files. 
In addition, information was collected from the files of patients who were still 
accessing the memory clinic service. Written consent was obtained from these 
individuals prior to accessing their files (Appendices 11-12). 
Inclusion Criteria 
For patient data to be included in the study, each patient file needed to have: 
 A valid estimate of pre-morbid IQ as measured by the WTAR 
 An RBANS total score 
 A diagnostic outcome 
Exclusion Criteria 
Patient data was excluded from the study if patients had subtypes of dementia other 
than Alzheimers disease, Vascular or Mixed Dementia. Patients data was also 
excluded if patients had severe and enduring mental health problems, such as 
schizophrenia, psychosis or bipolar disorder, as these conditions have been shown 
to affect a persons cognitive abilities (Schouws et al., 2009; Wood et al., 2007; 
OCarroll, 2000). If alcohol use was considered to be a factor in a patients 
presentation, then their data was also excluded.  
 To protect patient confidentiality, the location of the memory clinics will remain anonymous. This 
includes the name of the NHS Trust where the memory clinics were based. 
Page 54 
In order to access the minimum amount of information necessary, the data of 
patients who had previously accessed secondary or tertiary mental health services at 
the memory clinic location were excluded. 
Data Analysis 
Data was analysed using the Predictive Analytics SoftWare (PASW) version 17. 
For the purposes of analysis, the raw scores were converted into z-scores in order to 
make them comparable (see appendix 13 for z-score calculation). Cognitive decline 
was calculated by subtracting a persons total RBANS z-score, from their estimated 
pre-morbid IQ z-score.  
A correlational analysis was carried out in order to compare estimated pre-morbid 
IQ and the amount of cognitive decline shown prior to diagnosis. This was done for 
each of the three diagnostic levels.  
A multinomial logistic regression was conducted in order to explore which 
variables had a significant impact on the way that patients were assigned to a 
diagnostic category.  
RESULTS 
The data from 245 memory clinic patients were included in the analysis. The data 
was collected from four memory clinic sites and pertained to memory clinic 
assessments carried out between 2006 and the time of the study. The dementia 
group consisted of 135 patients comprising: 77 people with Alzheimers disease, 28 
with vascular dementia and 30 with mixed dementia. There were 59 patients in the 
Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) group and 51 in the No Cognitive Impairment 
(NoCI) group. Table 1 shows demographic details; the highest level of education 
achieved and the average scores for each of the groups.  
Page 55 
An Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) showed no significant differences between the 
groups in terms of gender, ethnicity, or estimated pre-morbid IQ (F<1). There was a 
significant difference between the groups in terms of the age of the patients 
F(2,242)= 42.48, p<0.001, with the dementia patients being significantly older than 
the other two groups. There was also a significant difference in education, 
F(2,240)= 4.16, p=0.02, with patients in the dementia group receiving fewer years 
of education overall. 
Page 56 
Dementia  
(N=135) 
(N=59) 
No CI 
(N=51) 
sd = 8.06 
(55-98)* 
71.69     
sd = 9.20 
(45-92) 
63.35     
sd = 12.15 
(42-88) 
Gender (%) 
Female:  48 Female:   39 Female:  45 
Male:      52 Male:       61 Male:      55 
Ethnicity (%) 
White:  97.8 White:  96.6 White:  92.2 
Asian:    0.7 Asian:    3.4 Asian:    5.9 
Black:    0.7 
Black:    1.9 
Arabic:   0.7   
School 
Education 
103 (76.3) 39   (66.1) 31   (60.8) 
Further 
Education 
18   (13.3) 11   (18.6) 12   (23.5) 
Higher 
Education 
12   (8.9) 6     (10.2) 6     (11.8) 
Masters 1     (0.7) 1     (1.7) 2     (3.9) 
unavailable 
1     (0.7) 
1     (1.7) 
24.44    
sd = 3.83  
(10-30) 
27.88    
sd = 1.58 
(24-30) 
27.70    
sd = 3.25 
(14-30) 
Pre-morbid IQ 
101.49    
sd = 10.51 
(70-122) 
100.97    
sd = 10.47 
(71-118) 
104.10    
sd = 9.07  
(82-123) 
RBANS Score 
65.93    
sd = 12.27   
(47-107) 
81.37    
sd = 14.02 
(53-113) 
93.43    
sd = 15.34 
(49-122) 
Cognitive Decline 
(Z-score) 
sd = 1.01 
(-3.05  2.64) 
-0.44    
sd = 1.19 
(-2.97  1.49) 
-0.82    
sd = 0.71 
(-2.09  0.95) 
*The Range is provided in brackets, unless otherwise stated.  
Table 1: Demographic Variables, Education and Mean Scores. 
Page 57 
Correlations  
A significant positive Pearsons correlation coefficient was found between 
estimated pre-morbid IQ and amount of cognitive decline, in all three of the 
diagnostic groups: Dementia group, r(134)=0.761, p<0.001; MCI group, 
r(58)=0.745, p<0.001 and NoCI group, r(50)=0.409, p=0.003. The correlation was 
strongest in the dementia group and weakest, but still significant, in the no 
cognitive impairment group. Therefore the higher a persons estimated pre-morbid 
IQ, the greater the amount of cognitive decline they experienced prior to receiving a 
diagnosis of dementia.  
Correlation coefficients were contrasted to determine whether the magnitude of the 
relationships found for the three groups were significantly different. The strength of 
the correlation coefficient did not alter significantly between the Dementia and MCI 
groups, z=0.23, p=0.82. However, the NoCI group correlation was significantly 
lower than either of the other groups: Dementia and NoCI, z=3.35, p=0.001 and the 
MCI and NoCI groups, z=2.68, p=0.007.  
According to the guidelines suggested by Cohen (1988), both the Dementia and the 
MCI group had a large effect size and the NoCI group had a medium effect size. 
Scatter plots for the three groups are shown in Appendices 14 to 16. 
Power calculations were carried out in order to ascertain how many patient datasets 
would be needed to replicate the findings from the present study. For an 80% 
chance of the relationship being significant at the 0.05 level, 15 people would be 
needed for the dementia group; 16 people for the MCI group and 48 people for the 
NoCI group. This suggests that the sample sizes used in the present study were 
sufficient to detect an effect occurring. 
Page 58 
A post-hoc analysis was conducted to further explore the mean cognitive decline 
for people with different levels of estimated pre-morbid IQ (Table 2).  
Diagnosis 
Intelligence* 
Classification N 
Pre-morbid 
IQ RBANS 
Cognitive Decline  
(z-score) 
Dementia 
Low Average/ 
Borderline 
83.76  
sd = 6.17 
57.18  
sd = 7.70 
-0.73  
sd = 0.90 
Average 83 
99.64  
sd = 5.33 
65.11  
sd = 11.05  
sd = 0.74 
High Average/ 
Superior 
114.49  
sd = 3.16 
72.11  
sd = 13.84 
sd = 0.80 
Low Average/ 
Borderline 
78.67  
sd = 6.35 
71.33  
sd = 7.69 
-2.04  
sd = 0.72 
Average 42 
100.74  
sd = 5.46 
83.02  
sd = 15.27 
-0.55  
sd = 1.01 
High Average/ 
Superior 
114.00  
sd = 2.68 
80.55  
sd = 9.00 
sd = 0.48 
Low Average/ 
Borderline 
84.50  
sd = 3.54 
63.50  
sd = 12.02 
- 1.02  
sd = 0.34 
Average 33 
100.39  
sd = 5.51 
90.49  
sd = 14.15 
- 1.01 
 sd = 0.70 
High Average/ 
Superior 
114.19 
 sd = 4.29 
103.25  
sd = 10.32 
- 0.40  
sd = 0.60 
* People were grouped into three levels of estimated pre-morbid IQ, this was based 
on Wechslers intelligence classifications (Wechsler, 1997). Low 
Average/Borderline = Estimated Pre-morbid IQ of 70-89; Average = 90-109; High 
Average/Superior = 110-119 (highest score possible on WTAR). 
Table 2: Mean Cognitive Decline Experienced by Different 
Intelligence Classifications. 
Page 59 
Prediction of Diagnostic Category 
A multinomial logistic regression was conducted to predict diagnostic group 
allocation. Demographic variables (age, gender, ethnicity and education); scores 
from the RBANS and MMSE; estimated pre-morbid IQ and amount of cognitive 
decline were used as the predictor variables. 
An alpha level of 0.05 was set for inclusion of variables remaining in the model. 
Age, MMSE score and RBANS total were all found to be significant predictor 
variables. However, it was clear that multicollinearity was an issue between MMSE 
and RBANS score; they had a highly significant correlation, r=0.603, p<0.001. 
Given that RBANS score was found to have a higher correlation (r=0.643) with 
diagnostic group than the MMSE (r=0.402), this variable was chosen to remain in 
the model and MMSE score was removed. Gender, ethnicity, education, estimated 
pre-morbid IQ and amount of cognitive decline did not contribute significantly to 
the diagnostic outcome and were removed from the model.  
A test of the full model (age and RBANS score) against a constant only model was 
statistically significant, indicating that the predictor variables as a set reliably 
distinguished between the diagnostic classifications (
(4)=153.204, p<0.001). The 
model accounted for between 46.5% and 53.8% of the variance (Cox and Snells 
and Nagelkerkes Pseudo R respectively). The model was able to predict 
diagnostic group allocation with a 69.0% success rate overall, with the dementia 
group being predicted the best (see Table 3). The classification accuracy surpassed 
the by chance accuracy criteria, supporting the utility of the model.  
Page 60 
Actual Classification 
Predicted Classification 
Dementia MCI NoCI Correct (%) 
Dementia 121 9 5 89.6 
MCI 33 15 11 25.4 
NoCI 6 12 33 64.7 
Overall Percentage (%) 65.3 14.7 20.0 69.0 
Table 3: Models Ability to Predict Diagnostic Group Allocation 
In the dementia group both Age,  =0.129, Wald (1)=25.773, p<0.001 and 
RBANS,  = -0.128, Wald (1)= 48.867, p<0.001 significantly predicted diagnostic 
group allocation between the dementia and NoCI groups.  
Age and RBANS score also significantly predicted diagnostic group allocation 
between the MCI and NoCI groups: Age,  =0.062, Wald (1)=8.992, p=0.003, and 
RBANS score,  = -0.049, Wald (1)=10.512, p=0.001. 
 95% Confidence Interval 
for Odds Ratio 
 Odds  Ratio Lower Upper 
Dementia vs. Age 1.14 1.08 1.20 
NoCI RBANS .88 .85 .91 
MCI vs. NoCI 
Age 1.06 1.02 1.11 
RBANS .95 .92 .98 
Table 4: Odds Ratios 
Table 4 shows the Odds Ratios (OR) for the variables. The Odds Ratios show the 
strength of association between a predictor and a response variable. For example, in 
the Dementia group, when a persons age increases by 1 year, the chances of a 
person being diagnosed with dementia increases by a factor of 1.14. Furthermore, 
as RBANS score increases by 1 point, the chances of a person being diagnosed with 
dementia increases by a factor of 0.88 (which equates to a 12% decrease in risk).  
Page 61 
DISCUSSION 
Correlational Analyses 
The results show that the higher a persons estimated pre-morbid IQ is, the greater 
the amount of cognitive decline that they will show prior to being diagnosed with 
dementia.  
These findings provide support for the presence of an ascertainment bias in the 
diagnostic process. The positive correlation between estimated pre-morbid 
intellectual functioning and the amount of cognitive decline, suggests that an 
absolute threshold level of impairment is currently being used to diagnose people. 
This would explain why people with high pre-morbid intellectual functioning show 
more cognitive decline prior to receiving a diagnosis, as their cognitive abilities 
must decrease by a larger amount before they reach the absolute threshold level. 
Conversely, people with lower pre-morbid intellectual functioning experience less 
cognitive decline prior to reaching the diagnostic threshold. 
These findings cannot be explained by the presence of cognitive reserve. The 
Cognitive Reserve theory would suggest that cognitive reserve compensates for the 
presence of brain damage and prevents a person with high pre-morbid intellectual 
functioning from exhibiting signs of clinical or functional impairment. The finding 
of large amounts of cognitive decline prior to diagnosis in pre-morbidly high 
functioning people contradicts this theory. 
Of particular note was the large amount of cognitive decline observed in patients 
who did not receive a diagnosis of dementia. In the MCI group, 16 people showed 
cognitive decline that was greater than the mean amount experienced by the 
dementia group, but were still classed as having mild cognitive impairment. Of 
Page 62 
these 16 people, nine had an estimated pre-morbid IQ of 110 or over (the threshold 
used to denote high average intelligence in the WTAR). Two people experienced 
cognitive decline of almost three times the average of the dementia group. In the 
NoCI group a further three people experienced cognitive decline greater that the 
average amount of the dementia group; two of these people had an estimated pre-
morbid IQ of 110 or over. The presence of an ascertainment bias in the assessment 
process is able to explain these observations. This theory suggests that some people 
with high estimated pre-morbid intellectual functioning are being incorrectly 
categorised as not having dementia. Despite showing large amounts of cognitive 
decline, their intellectual ability at the time of the assessment may still have been 
above the threshold needed for dementia diagnosis.  
If people with high estimated pre-morbid abilities are being incorrectly diagnosed, 
then this would also account for the presence of a smaller, but still significant, 
correlation in both the Mild Cognitive Impairment and No Cognitive Impairment 
groups.  
Prediction of Diagnostic Category 
The results of the multinomial logistic regression show that out of all of the 
variables investigated in the present research, only three variables: Age, RBANS 
and MMSE score were able to predict diagnostic group allocation. Relative 
cognitive decline was not predictive of diagnostic category. Given that RBANS and 
MMSE scores were shown to be highly correlated, MMSE score was excluded from 
the model. From the use of only a persons age and their RBANS score, 89.6% of 
allocations into the dementia group could be correctly predicted.  
Page 63 
The finding that relative amounts of cognitive decline were not predictive of 
diagnostic outcome provides further support for the presence of an ascertainment 
bias, especially since measures that were significant (RBANS and MMSE) were 
based on absolute threshold measures of cognitive decline. If diagnosis took into 
account peoples previous levels of cognitive ability, then it would be expected that 
relative amounts of cognitive decline would have an impact on the diagnostic 
outcome that people receive. Instead, relative amounts of cognitive decline were not 
significant. 
Clinical Implications 
These findings have significant clinical implications for the way that people with 
high pre-morbid intellectual functioning are diagnosed with dementia. Based on the 
findings of the present study, it is suggested that high-functioning people who go on 
to develop dementia, must show a greater amount of cognitive decline before they 
receive a diagnosis of dementia. This will have consequences for such individuals 
in terms of accessing relevant healthcare provision. 
The correlation between estimated pre-morbid IQ and amount of cognitive decline 
also has implications for pre-morbidly low functioning people. The lowest recorded 
estimated pre-morbid IQ in the no cognitive impairment group was 82 in 
comparison to 71 in the mild cognitive impairment group and 70 in the dementia 
group. It is possible that more people with lower estimated pre-morbid IQs are 
being diagnosed with dementia or mild cognitive impairment and fewer people are 
being labelled as having no cognitive impairment. Future research which segregates 
people into distinct groups on the basis of their estimated pre-morbid IQs may be 
needed to clarify this. 
Page 64 
These findings bring a new perspective to studies such as Ince (2001) which found 
that 25% of people who met the criteria for Alzheimers disease at autopsy had 
previously unimpaired neuropsychological assessments. Originally this was 
believed to provide further support for the cognitive reserve model, but it may also 
highlight the shortcomings of current neuropsychological assessments, which do 
not account for relative amounts of cognitive decline. If neuropsychological 
assessments cannot detect cognitive impairment in people with high pre-morbid 
functioning, this could explain the inverse relationship between education and 
dementia, as pre-morbidly high functioning people may fail to be diagnosed with 
dementia. 
The presence of an ascertainment bias could also explain why some studies (such as 
Hall et al., 2007 and Stern, 2006) have suggested that people with high pre-morbid 
functioning decline at a faster rate when they are diagnosed with dementia. One 
explanation may be that because these individuals are being diagnosed at a much 
later stage, this may result in a much more rapid progression of the disease. As such 
their prognosis would be expected to be poorer.  
Clinically, one area of concern is the recent changes to the way in which people are 
being assessed for dementia within the NHS. Since 2010 dementia nurses have been 
given more responsibility in assessing people for cognitive decline. However, they 
do not utilise any neuropsychological tests to evaluate a persons estimated pre-
morbid IQ. The findings of this study highlight the importance of assessments 
taking account of relative cognitive decline. This is not possible unless a persons 
pre-morbid IQ is estimated.  
Page 65 
Limitations 
The WTAR was used to estimate pre-morbid functioning. However, there is debate 
as to how valid the WTAR is as a measure. It has a significant ceiling effect with 
the maximum possible estimated pre-morbid IQ being 119. It is therefore likely that 
the amount of cognitive decline reported here is an underestimate of the true 
amount, as some people may have started with scores significantly higher than 119. 
If there is a move to use relative decline in dementia diagnosis, this ceiling effect 
needs to be taken into account when interpreting neuropsychological assessments of 
pre-morbidly high functioning individuals. 
As the present study was making use of the assessment processes currently used in 
memory clinics in the NHS, it was not possible to estimate pre-morbid IQ on the 
basis of demographic variables (Crawford et al. 1989). It had been intended that the 
WTAR estimated pre-morbid IQ would be cross-checked against an estimate 
produced from demographic variables. However, there was a lack of detail in some 
of the patients medical files as to what occupation people had, so this was not 
possible. In future it may be an advantage to estimate pre-morbid intellectual 
functioning through a range of measures and not rely solely on pre-morbid 
estimation made by the WTAR. 
The present study did not exclude people with depression. It is possible that this 
may have confounded some of the results, as cognitive abilities have been shown to 
be affected by depression (Austin, Mitchell & Goodwin, 2001; Goodwin, 1997). 
However, as depression may have been present in all groups, it should not have had 
a significant impact on overall findings. Future research should control for this.  
Page 66 
A further limitation of the present study is the inclusion criteria for the No 
Cognitive Impairment group. This group was included in the study as it was 
thought that some people with dementia, who had high estimated pre-morbid 
intellectual functioning, may have been falsely classified as not having any 
cognitive impairment. In addition, this group was used as a control group in the 
regression model to which the other groups were compared. However, the fact that 
this group may have contained people with cognitive decline, even if they had not 
received a formal diagnosis, may affect its use as a reference group for the 
regression model. This could explain why the model was unable to account for 
more than 53.8% of variance. Replications of the regression analysis using people 
who have not experienced any cognitive decline are needed in order to confirm 
these results. 
Future Research 
There were a number of people whose cognitive abilities were re-assessed after 
twelve months in order to confirm their diagnosis. It is possible that a number of 
diagnoses were altered at this later time. This information was outside the remit of 
this study. However, it would be interesting to explore this further to see how much 
cognitive decline was shown prior to people gaining their final diagnosis.  
While the present study indicates that people with high estimated pre-morbid 
functioning undergo greater cognitive decline prior to receiving a diagnosis of 
dementia, it does not explain why these people have already undergone greater 
amounts of decline at the point of accessing the memory clinic. Anecdotally, 
members of a dementia support group commented that they found it very difficult 
to access secondary services. Some people commented that they had to visit their 
Page 67 
GP on several different occasions before their memory complaints were taken 
seriously. Therefore, some GPs may be acting as a barrier to diagnosis and may 
prevent people from accessing secondary services. Further research needs to be 
done to explore what protocols are used by GPs when seeing patients with 
subjective memory complaints. 
The present study found a significant difference between the groups in terms of 
educational attainment, whereby the people in the dementia group had significantly 
fewer years of education than those in the other two groups. Now that an 
ascertainment bias has been highlighted, further research is awaited to explore 
whether an educational difference remains if people are diagnosed on the basis of 
relative amounts of cognitive decline and not absolute values. The findings of such 
research could have significant implications for the Cognitive Reserve theory.  
Conclusion 
The present study has shown that people with high estimated pre-morbid IQ show 
greater amounts of cognitive decline prior to receiving a diagnosis of dementia, 
than people with lower estimated pre-morbid IQ. The findings of the present study 
challenge the argument that cognitive reserve can adequately account for the 
inverse relationship between education and dementia diagnosis and instead suggest 
that there is an ascertainment bias at work. Further research with larger sample 
sizes is indicated to develop the evidence base for this finding. The idea that pre-
morbidly high functioning people experience greater amounts of cognitive decline 
prior to diagnosis, highlights the need for changes in the dementia assessment 
process which takes into account relative amounts of cognitive decline.  
Page 68 
References 
Alzheimers Society. (2011). Mapping the Dementia Gap. London: Author. 
Alzheimers Society. (2012). Dementia 2012: A National Challenge. London: 
Author. 
Austin, M-P., Mitchell, P. & Goodwin, G.M. (2001). Cognitive deficits in 
depression.  The British Journal of Psychiatry, 178, 200-206. 
Bain, L.J. (2006). A review of the State of the Art on Mild Cognitive Impairment: 
The Fourth Annual Symposium. Alzheimers & Dementia 2, 246-256. 
Beard, C.M., Kokmen, E., Offord, K.P., & Kurland, L.T. (1992). Lack of 
association between Alzheimers disease and education, occupation, marital 
status, or living arrangement. Neurology, 42, 2063-2068. 
Bonaiuto, S., Rocca, W.A., Lippi, A., Giannandrea, E., Mele, M., Cavarzeran, F., & 
Amaducci, L. (1995). Education and occupation as risk factors for dementia: 
a population-based case-control study. Neuroepidemiology, 14, 101-109. 
Bowler, J.V., Munos, D.G., Merskey, H., Hachinski, V. (1998). Factors affecting 
the age of onset and rate of progression of Alzheimers disease. Journal of 
Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 65, 184-190. 
Christensen, H. & Jorm, F.A. (1992). Effect of premorbid intelligence on the mini-
mental state and IQCODE. International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 7, 
159-160. 
Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences (2nd ed.). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.  
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lawrence_Erlbaum_Associates
Page 69 
Crawford, J.R., Stewart, L.E., Cochrane, R.H.B., Foulds, J.A., Besson, J.A.O., & 
Parker, D.M. (1989). Estimating premorbid IQ from demographic variables: 
Regression equations derived from a UK sample. British Journal of Clinical 
Psychology, 28, 275-278. 
Dartigues, J.F., Gagnon, M., Michel, P., Letenneur, L., Commenges, D., Barberger-
Gateau, P., ... Alprovitch, A. (1991). The Paquid research program on the 
epidemiology of dementia. Methods and initial results. Revue Neurologique. 
147 (3), 225-230.  
De Ronchi, D.,  Fratiglioni, L.,  Rucci, P., Paternico, A., Graziani, S., Dalmonte, E. 
(1998). The effect of education on dementia occurrence in an Italian 
population with middle to high socioeconomic status. Neurology, 50, 1231-
1238. 
Del Ser, T., Hachinski, V., Merskey, H., & Munoz, D.G. (1999). An autopsy-
verified study of the effect of education on degenerative dementia. Brain, 
122, 2309-2319. 
Department of Health. (2009). Living Well with Dementia: The National Dementia 
Strategy for England. London, Stationery Office. 
Folstein, M.F., Folstein, S., & McHugh, P.R. (1975). Mini Mental State: A practical 
method for grading the cognitive states of patients for the clinician. Journal 
of Psychiatric Research, 12, 189-198. 
Fratiglioni, L., & Wang, H. (2007). Brain reserve hypothesis in dementia. Journal 
of Alzheimer's Disease, 12 (1), 11-22.  
Page 70 
Gatz, M., Mortimer, J.A., Fratiglioni, L., Johansson, B., Berg, S., Andel, R., ... 
Pedersen N.L. (2007). Accounting for the relationship between low 
education and dementia: A twin study. Physiology and Behavior, 92, 232
Goodwin, G.M. (1997). Neuropsychological and neuroimaging evidence for the 
involvement of frontal lobes in depression. Journal of 
Psychopharmacology, 11, 115-122.  
Hall, C.B., Derby, C., LeValley, M.S., Katz, M.J., Verghese, M.D. & Lipton, R.B. 
(2007).  Education delays accelerated decline on a memory test in persons 
who develop dementia.  Neurology, 69, 1657-1664. 
Hill, L.R., Klauber, M.R., Salmon, D.P., Yu, E.S., Liu, W.T., Zang, M., & 
Katzman, R. (1993). Functional status, education, and the diagnosis of 
dementia in the Shanghai survey. Neurology, 43, 138-145. 
Ince, P.G. (2001).  Pathological correlates of late-onset dementia in a multicenter 
community-based population in England and Wales. Lancet, 357, 169-175.   
Katzman, R., Terry, R., DeTeresa, R., Brown, T., Davies, P., Fuld, P., ...  Peck, A. 
(1988). Clinical, pathological, and neurochemical changes in dementia: a 
subgroup with preserved mental status and numerous neocortical plaques. 
Annals of Neurology, 23 (2), 138-144.   
Kesler, S.R., Adams, H.F., Blasey, C.M., & Bigler, E.D. (2003). Premorbid 
intellectual functioning, education, and brain size in traumatic brain injury. 
An investigation of the cognitive reserve hypothesis. Applied 
Neuropsychology, 10, 153-162.  
Page 71 
Knapp, M., Prince, M., Albanese, E.., Banerjee, S., Dhanasiri, S., Fernandez, J-L., 
... Stewart, R. (2007). Dementia UK: The full report. London: Alzheimers 
Society. 
Lindeboon, J., Launer, L.J., Schmand, B.A., Hooyer, C., Jonker, C. (1996). Effects 
of adjustment on the case-finding potential of cognitive tests. Journal of 
Clinical Epidemiology, 49, 691-695.  
Munoz, D., Ganapthy, G.R., Eliasziw, M., & Hachinski, V. (2000). Educational 
attainment and socioeconomic status of patients with autopsy-confirmed 
Alzheimer Disease. Archives of Neurology, 57, 85-89. 
National Health Service Act. (2006). Section 251. London: Stationary Office. 
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence/Social Care Institute for 
Excellence. (2006). Dementia: Clinical guideline. London: NICE/SCIE. 
Ngandu, T., von Strauss, E., Helkala, E.L., Winbald, B., Nissinen, A., Tuomiletho, 
J., ... Kivipelto, M.  (2007). Education and dementia: What lies behind the 
association. Neurology, 69  (14), 1142-1450. 
OCarroll, R. (2000). Cognitive impairment in schizophrenia. Advances in 
Psychiatric Treatment, 6, 161-168. 
O'Connor, D.W., Pollitt, P.A. & Treasure, F.P. (1991). The influence of education 
and social class on the diagnosis of dementia in a community population. 
Psychological Medicine, 21, 219-224.  
Ott, A., Breteler, M.M.,  van Harskamp, F., Claus, J.J., van der Cammen, T.J.M., 
Grobbee, D.E. & Hofman., A. (1995). Prevalence of Alzheimers Disease 
Page 72 
and vascular dementia: association with education. The Rotterdam Study. 
British Medical Journal, 310, 970-973. 
Prencipe, M., Casini, A.R., Ferretti, C., Lattanzio, M.T., Fiorelli, M., Culasso, F. 
(1996).  Prevalence of dementia in an elderly rural population: effects of 
age, sex, and education. Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery & Psychiatry, 
60, 628-633. 
Randolph, C., Tierney, M. C., Mohr, E., & Chase, T. N. (1998). The Repeatable 
Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological Status (RBANS): 
Preliminary clinical validity. The Journal of Clinical and Experimental 
Neuropsychology, 20, 310-319. 
Rentz, D.M., Huh, T.J., Faust, R.R., Budson, A.E., Scinto, L.F.M., Sperling, R.A., 
& Daffner, K.R. (2004). Use of IQ-adjusted norms to predict progressive 
cognitive decline in highly intelligent older individuals. Neuropsychology, 
18 (1), 38-49. 
Roselli, F., Tartaglione, B., Federico, F., Lepore, V., Defazio, G., Livrea, P. (2009). 
Clinical Neurology and Neurosurgery, 111, 321-330.  
Schmand, B., Smit, J., Lindeboon, J., Smits C, Hooijer C, Jonker C, Deelman B. 
(1997). Low education is a genuine risk factor for accelerated memory 
decline and dementia. Journal of Clinical Epidemiology, 50 (9), 1025-1033. 
Schouws, S.N.T.M., Comijs, H.C., Stek, M.L., Dekker, J., Oostervink, F., 
Naarding, P., ... Beekman, A.T.F. (2009). Cognitive Impairment in Early 
and Late Bipolar Disorder. American Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 17 
(6), 508-515. 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=%22Smits%20C%22%5BAuthor%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=%22Hooijer%20C%22%5BAuthor%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=%22Jonker%20C%22%5BAuthor%5D
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed?term=%22Deelman%20B%22%5BAuthor%5D
Page 73 
Starr, J.M. & Lonie, J. (2007). The influence of premorbid IQ on Mini- Mental 
State Examination score at time of dementia presentation. International 
Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, 22, 382-384. 
Stern, Y. (2002). What is cognitive reserve? Theory and research application of the 
reserve concept. Journal of the International Neuropsychological Society, 8, 
447-460. 
Stern, Y. (2006). Cognitive reserve and Alzheimers disease. Alzheimer Disease & 
Associates Disorders, 20, 112-117. 
Stern, Y. (2009). Cognitive reserve. Neuropsychologia, 47, 2015-2028. 
The Canadian Study of Health and Aging. (1994). The Canadian Study of Health 
and Aging: risk factors for Alzheimers disease in Canada. Neurology, 44, 
2073-2080.  
Tuokko, H., Garrett, D. D., McDowell, I., Silverberg, N., & Kristjansson, B. 
(2003). Cognitive decline in high-functioning older adults: Reserve or 
ascertainment bias? Aging & Mental Health, 7 (4), 259-270. 
Valenzuela, J. (2008). Brain reserve and the prevention of dementia. Current 
Opinion in Psychiatry, 21 (3), 296-302.  
Wechsler, D. (1997).  Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale- Third edition. 
San Antonio, TX: Psychological Corporation. 
Wechsler, D. (2001). Wechsler Test of Adult Reading. San Antonio, TX: 
Psychological Corporation. 
Page 74 
Wilk, C.M., Gold, J.M., Humber, K., Dickerson, F., Fenton, W.S., & Buchanan, 
R.W. (2004). Brief cognitive assessment in schizophrenia: normative data 
for the Repeatable Battery for the Assessment of Neuropsychological status. 
Schizophrenia Research, 70, 175-186. 
Willerman, L., Schultz, R., Rutledge, J.N., & Bigler, E.D. (1991). In vivo brain size 
and intelligence. Intelligence, 15, 223-228.  
Wood, G.J., Brewer, W.J., Koutsouradis, P., Philips, L.J., Francey, S.M., Proffitt, 
T.M., ... Pantelis, C. (2007). Cognitive decline following psychosis onset: 
data from the PACE clinic. British Journal of Psychiatry, 51: s52-57. 
Zhang, M.Y., Katzman, R., Salmon, D., Jin, H., Cai, G.J., Wang, Z.Y., ... Levy, P. 
(1990). The prevalence of dementia and Alzheimers disease in Shanghai, 
China: impact of age, gender and education. Annuals of Neurology, 27, 428-
Page 75 
Chapter 3: Reflective Paper 
Challenges in Accessing Retrospective Clinical Data for Research in 
the Field of Dementia: A Reflective Account 
Word Count: 3,987 (excluding references) 
Page 76 
Overview 
In this paper I will reflect on the process of carrying out research in the field of 
dementia. The material for this paper is taken from my own experiences of the 
research process; observations that I have made along the way and my reflections 
on factors that influenced me to carry out research into dementia. 
I will reflect on elements of the research that were difficult to overcome, notably 
that of accessing retrospective clinical data, and think of suggestions as to how to 
make this process easier for future researchers. Finally I will discuss areas for 
further research within the field of dementia.  
Background and Interest in Dementia Research 
Whilst on placement in an Older Adult Psychology service, I co-facilitated a 
memory group for both people with dementia and their carers. I learned a great deal 
about the experiences that people affected by dementia go through. Some 
individuals with dementia were much more aware about their symptoms than 
others, and despite being a group for people who were only just diagnosed, there 
were noticeable differences in the levels of severity of dementia witnessed. This 
made me curious to know why this was. 
I was very moved by some of the stories shared in the group, both by the person 
with dementia and by his or her carer. There was a vivid sense of sadness and loss 
that surrounded dementia and it was difficult not to become immersed in these 
feelings. I remember discussing this group with my supervisor, and we talked about 
how, as Mental Health professionals, dementia is one condition that we work with 
which remains a potential threat to all of us. Other conditions such as Schizophrenia 
and Personality Disorders have an earlier peak onset age, after which the older we 
Page 77 
get the less likely it is that we will develop these disorders. However with dementia, 
the reverse is true, with risk increasing with older age (Jorm & Jolley, 1998).  
Moreover, from a psychological perspective, there is very little that can be done to 
reduce the symptoms of cognitive decline. As a professional, these thoughts left me 
with feelings of both hopelessness and helplessness regarding the people with 
whom I was working. As an individual, I started to dread the prospect of myself or 
someone close to me developing dementia. It was partly in response to these 
difficult feelings that I decided to channel my attention into dementia research. I 
may not be able to alter the course of dementia, but through my research I can help 
to ensure that it is understood as well as it possibly can be.  
Interest in Dementia Diagnosis 
A personal experience of dementia affected me particularly. My grandfather was a 
very capable and intellectual person. He worked as a mechanical engineer and his 
accolades included being part of the design team which put the bubbles into Aero 
bars. However, in later life he changed a great deal. His memory declined and he 
became very confused. My clearest memory of this was when he drank some 
barbecue sauce, convinced that it was in fact a glass of red wine. In addition, his 
gait deteriorated, and he started to shuffle. His personality changed and he become 
much more irate at things, when he had been a very passive and quiet man. With 
hindsight, I am convinced that he had dementia, but this was never formally 
diagnosed.  
The reasons for his lack of diagnosis are not clear and having limited evidence, I 
have to recognise the possibility that an underlying dementia process may not have 
been present. It did however make me think about reasons why some people who 
Page 78 
have dementia may not get a diagnosis. In my grandfathers case, it is possible that 
he was a victim of the ascertainment bias in the assessment process (Tuokko, 
Garrett, McDowell, Silverberg & Kristjansson, 2003), whereby despite 
experiencing cognitive decline he failed to reach the absolute threshold level 
required for dementia diagnosis. As such it is appropriate that my research looks at 
how dementia is diagnosed in pre-morbidly high functioning people. However, I 
cant help but wonder whether my grandfather ever actually went to his GP about 
his memory concerns. If not, what were his reasons for this? Was he unaware that 
he may have had dementia, or was he in denial about his symptoms? 
I also thought about the influence my Grandmother had. Carers perceptions of 
dementia play a large role in the decisions of whether or not people seek help, as 
often it is carers who are first to notice the presence of cognitive decline. It is 
possible that she did not encourage him to seek help as she did not want to admit 
that anything was wrong. Alternatively, she may not have perceived any benefits in 
seeking help. Lots of people that I have talked to during my research, were unaware 
that medications exist to slow the progression of dementia. If people are unaware of 
such benefits, then they will be less likely to seek help, especially given the stigma 
that surrounds conditions such as dementia. Further research is needed to explore 
the potential barriers which prevent people from accessing memory services.  
Accessing Patient Information 
One of the biggest challenges of this research was accessing clients medical files. 
When I first talked about my research idea with my supervisors, we were very 
excited at the thought of using existing information that had already been collected 
from memory clinics. We anticipated that it would be quicker to access this 
Page 79 
information and consequently I would be able to collect more data, making the 
findings more representative of the general public. Moreover, the fact that the 
information was taken from existing memory services meant that it added richness 
to the research in the respect that this is what is actually happening in NHS memory 
clinics.  
Having carried out small scale research projects as part of the clinical doctorate, I 
naively expected that I would be able to access this information without too many 
difficulties. Given that patients had already consented for the memory assessment 
to happen, I did not anticipate needing to gain consent again. Section 33 of the Data 
Protection Act (1998) cites research as an exception to some of the eight data 
protection principles, provided that set criteria are met. It states that identifiable 
information may be accessed for the purposes of anonymising data for research. 
This is provided that the research is in accordance with the original purpose that the 
data was collected, and that the research will not cause any substantial damage or 
distress to the participants involved. However, this research may only be carried out 
by a member of the direct clinical care team. It does not apply to researchers from 
outside the service. Given that I was not a member of the direct care team, approval 
was required to use this data. 
NIGB Application 
There are two ways to gain approval to access existing clinical information, either 
by speaking to each individual directly and getting their written consent to do so, or 
by approval from the National Information Governance Board for Health and Social 
Care (NIGB). The NIGB is an independent body that was set up in order to 
promote, improve and monitor information governance in health and adult social 
Page 80 
care (NIGB, 2012). Under section 251 of the National Health Service Act (2006), 
the NIGB is able to recommend that the common law duty of confidentiality is set 
aside so as to access identifiable information without individual consent. This can 
occur in situations where there is insufficient anonymous data and it would not be 
practicable to gain individual consent. 
Initially it was felt that it was not practicable to gain individual consent on a person-
by-person basis for the present study. I did not have any contact with any of the 
dementia clinic
 patients. To avoid breaking confidentiality, contact would have 
had to be initiated by a current member of care staff. In cases where patients were 
still open to the dementia clinic, this contact could potentially have been made by 
members of the Psychiatry team. He or she could have asked patients whether they 
would be happy to be contacted by a researcher, in order to ask permission to 
access his or her memory clinic file. However, in cases where the files were closed 
to the dementia clinic, the initial contact would have had to be made by a clinician 
that is known to them, such as their General Practitioner (GP). Unlike the dementia 
clinic, where the client is seen on a regular basis, the GP would not have been 
scheduled to see clients routinely, so specific contact would be needed. This would 
have required the GP to take on additional tasks. Given the large number of 
patients datasets required for this study, this approach did not seem like a viable 
option. Therefore an application was submitted to the NIGB requesting that the 
common law duty of confidentiality be set aside.  
 A person is assessed for dementia at the memory clinic, and then attends the dementia clinic for 
ongoing medication and support once they have been given a diagnosis of dementia. 
Page 81 
The NIGB is a valuable body as it helps to safeguard the use of personal data and 
ensure that the eight principles of the Data Protection Act (1998) are upheld. It not 
only advises on the use of section 251 of the National Health Service Act (2006), 
but it supports improvements in national information governance practice by citing 
good practice guidelines, and monitors relevant information governance trends 
within the health and social care field. These strategies help to minimise the misuse 
of data and reduce breaches of confidentiality. 
Unfortunately, my initial application to the NIGB was refused. The committee had 
concerns about the following areas:  
 The level of access required to highly sensitive data 
 Compliance with the third principle of the Data Protection Act 
(1998)  
 The identification of a practicable alternative to carrying this 
research out without consent by undertaking it on a prospective, 
consented basis.  
These concerns were very frustrating and for a while put me off research altogether. 
I felt that all my hard work in developing the research project to this point had been 
in vain; especially given that I felt that the findings might potentially be very 
exciting and that the aims of the research were in the best interests of the public. 
Moreover, I was told by the NIGB that with more time and resources I could gain 
individual consent from each and every person. This gave me a sense that only 
large research organisations, with better resources, would be able to carry out 
research projects like this. With only seven months left before my thesis submission 
deadline I was faced with the prospect of having to start all over again. 
Page 82 
I was surprised by the NIGBs first concern that I would be accessing too much 
sensitive information. Given my role as a Trainee Clinical Psychologist I am in no 
doubt about my own abilities to maintain confidentiality, as I do so routinely. I 
appreciate that identifiable information should only be accessed as a last resort, but 
in the absence of an existing anonymous database, I felt that creating one was 
justified. All of the information that I wanted to access was within a Psychologists 
remit, as it pertained only to Mental Health services. It therefore felt that tasks 
which I carry out regularly in my clinical practice were being scrutinised. As such I 
felt that the NIGBs concern was unjustified and I struggled to think of ways in 
which I could overcome this. Fortunately, with the help of my supervisors, we were 
able to come up with a solution. It was possible to check the database to see 
whether people had been referred to the service for reasons other than the memory 
clinic; if they were, it was proposed that these patients files were excluded from 
the research. As such the minimum possible amount of information was accessed. 
On appeal, the NIGB accepted the proposed solution.  
After gaining some distance, I now have a better appreciation of the NIGBs 
concerns. I understand that not all researchers are practiced at dealing with 
confidential information on a routine basis. Therefore limiting access to data helps 
reduce the risk of confidential information being mistreated. Moreover, access to 
the minimal amount of sensitive data helps to protect the welfare of the researcher. 
Highly sensitive mental health details may be distressing to people who are 
unaccustomed to them. Therefore it is in everyones best interests, that the 
minimum amount of data is accessed. 
Page 83 
The NIGBs third concern was resolved when the NIGB were informed that a 
prospective study was not possible due to changes in the way that dementia 
assessments are currently carried out in the local memory services, meaning that 
sufficient data for the research would not be present. 
One obstacle remained though, regarding the NIGBs second concern that only the 
minimum amount of data necessary should be accessed. In order to give me 
permission to carry out the research, the NIGB required me to access only the 
minimum sample size needed to answer my research question. To me this remains a 
conundrum as it seems as if the principles of the Data Protection Act (1998) are at 
odds with the purposes of research. The present research study was novel and 
therefore it did not have an existing effect size from which to derive sample size. 
Effect sizes could only be calculated retrospectively, once the study was underway. 
To overcome this obstacle I provided the NIGB with broad and general sample size 
estimates (Coaley, 2010, p 61), until specific sample sizes could be determined. In 
future, the NIGB may need to consider being a bit more flexible with this principle 
in order to facilitate research. However, it is still potentially worrying that research 
can be carried out using a minimum sample size alone. This leaves research 
vulnerable to being underpowered, if any subsequent data has to be excluded on the 
basis of anomalies. More thought may be needed to constructively align these 
contradictory perspectives. 
Potential Improvements to the NIGB Process 
Having acknowledged the importance of the NIGBs role, there are a few things 
that could be done to help facilitate the undertaking of research in future. Firstly I 
felt frustrated by how long it took for my application to be processed. As a trainee, 
Page 84 
carrying out this research as part of my doctorate, I had strict deadlines that I 
needed to meet. However, the NIBG did not appear to be sympathetic to these 
constraints. From the time of my initial inquiry to the final approval, the application 
process took six months to complete. This is a third of the allotted time that I had 
available to complete the whole project. This might prevent future research studies 
from happening if they have a limited amount of time available. 
My second concern relates to the lack of communication. In the initial stages, I 
found it very difficult to get answers to queries that I had regarding my NIGB 
application. Given that this process was new to me, and I did not know anyone else 
who had previously applied to the NIGB, I inevitably had lots of questions. I found 
it difficult to understand exactly what answers were required on the application 
form. For example, the application requested both Corporate and System Level 
Security Policies, and I was unsure if these policies applied to my research, and if 
so, where to obtain them. Perhaps there is a need for some further online guidance 
or sample applications to help people who are less familiar with this type of 
research.   
Finally the process may have been easier had I been given the opportunity to 
discuss the committees concerns with them face to face. Some of their initial 
queries could have been resolved straight away if I had been allowed to expand on 
particular details from my application. As it was, my application was refused and I 
had to wait a further two months while it went to appeal. Consequently I came very 
close to not carrying out this project at all. In future, where concerns are raised 
perhaps the NIGB could provide additional suggestions as to how the research may 
be facilitated in a manner in keeping with the Data Protection Act (1998). 
Page 85 
Future Research 
There is certainly scope to carry out more research into how people are diagnosed 
with dementia. For my empirical study, a quantitative methodology was adopted. 
However, I would be interested to explore peoples experiences from a qualitative 
perspective. The findings from my empirical paper show that people with high pre-
morbid intellectual abilities suffer greater cognitive decline at the point of being 
assessed for dementia. However, it fails to determine why this may be. Qualitative 
accounts of peoples journey through the process of dementia diagnosis may help to 
illuminate this further. This could include when and by whom, the first signs of 
cognitive decline were noticed, and at what point people decide to seek help from 
healthcare professionals as a result. It would also be important to take into account 
the viewpoints of people who have never accessed any dementia services, although 
these people may be difficult to find. Such research may help to highlight potential 
barriers to accessing services, which can consequently be addressed. An increased 
understanding of these barriers may enable people to access the support that they 
need. 
Dementia: A National Challenge 
On a positive note, the need for greater dementia research has recently been 
acknowledged at a national level. The Alzheimers Society has recently released its 
report Dementia 2012: A National Challenge. The report describes the escalating 
number of people with dementia, and the subsequent costs of dementia services. As 
a result David Cameron has labelled dementia a national crisis. Speaking at an 
Alzheimers Society conference in March, 2012 he described how the levels of 
dementia diagnosis, understanding and awareness are shockingly low and that 
much more research is needed to increase our understanding of the condition 
Page 86 
(Cameron, 2012). Consequently, Cameron has pledged to double the national 
dementia research budget and he aims for the UK to become a world leader in 
dementia research. This is fantastic news for the field of dementia, as it may be 
finally getting the national recognition that it deserves. Hopefully this extra 
research will help to demystify dementia and allow for the development of better 
treatments to help improve the quality of the lives of those individuals that are 
affected by it. 
Maximising Future Research  
There is potential for further dementia research to be conducted using retrospective 
research designs. There is a wealth of existing data which is routinely collected by 
dementia services, which could be used to answer a variety of research hypotheses. 
However, thought is needed as to how to gain individual consent to use this data, in 
a way that is practicable. Perhaps patients could be asked from their initial contact 
with services, whether they consent to their clinical files being accessed for the 
purposes of research or not. That is not to say that this would give researchers 
permission to access any information that they wish, as they would still be 
governed by ethical procedures and the principles of the Data Protection Act 
(1998). Effectively, it would mean extending section 33 of the Data Protection Act 
(1998) to include researchers outside of the direct care team. This would allow 
researchers access to a greater amount of data.  
Alternatively, if there was concern about accessing patient-identifiable information, 
then more work could be done to produce an anonymous database from the existing 
clinical information. As electronic medical files become more and more 
commonplace, it should be relatively easy to effectively anonymise patient data. 
Page 87 
This would help to maximise the research that can be carried and increase our 
understanding of both dementia and current clinical practice. Again ethical 
procedures would help to safeguard access to this data and to ensure that 
information was not misused. If this was done sensitively, it would allow for data to 
be combined from multiple sites, so as to help collate evidence and notice national 
trends. This may be particularly useful with less common dementia subtypes which 
do not present as often to memory clinic services. By increasing the amount of 
research possible, this helps to ensure that clinical practice is kept up-to-date and 
consequently the best possible care can be given to people with dementia.  
My Hopes and Fears about My Research 
It is my hope that the findings from my present research study will be used to alter 
the way that people with high pre-morbid intellectual functioning are diagnosed 
with dementia. My research has highlighted the importance of using relative 
amounts of cognitive decline within the assessment process, rather than relying on 
absolute values. In future I would expect clinicians to routinely estimate a persons 
pre-morbid levels of intellectual functioning, in order to determine the amount of 
cognitive decline that they have undergone. My greatest fear would be that these 
findings are not recognised in any way, and that pre-morbidly high functioning 
people with dementia continue not to be diagnosed promptly.  
Clinically, I have gained a much better understanding of the research process. It has 
become clear to me how important it is for clinical practice to be constantly 
evaluated. This requires an up-to-date understanding of both mental health 
disorders and therapeutic approaches, so that the best possible clinical intervention 
can be implemented. As scientist-practitioners, Clinical Psychologists are uniquely 
Page 88 
positioned to be able to carry out this work. Our dual training in both research skills 
and therapeutic interventions means that not only can we research gaps in clinical 
knowledge, but we can then use those findings to improve our clinical practice in a 
meaningful way. This is a real strength of our profession, and one which needs to 
be nurtured.  
In future I sincerely hope to be able to continue to work as a Clinical Psychologist 
who carries out research, although I know that this may be difficult to achieve. All 
too often clinicians have to deal with increasingly large caseloads which occupy 
their time, leaving little space for research. As a result this area can get overlooked, 
or can be left to be done by people who are solely researchers. I believe that to be 
the best possible clinician it is important to keep challenging the way that clinical 
work is carried out and not to take things for granted. This will help to ensure that 
services remain effective, and deliver the best possible care. I will therefore need to 
think carefully about how to ensure that I continue to carry out research when I 
become a qualified Clinical Psychologist.   
Conclusions     
Despite setbacks along the way I have thoroughly enjoyed the research process. At 
times it has been difficult to keep myself motivated, but overall I feel that I have 
gained a lot from carrying out this study. It is encouraging to hear that the 
Government has started to recognise the importance of dementia research, and I 
hope that the additional funding will help to increase both public and professional 
knowledge about dementia. Consideration is needed of how to make the most 
effective use of existing data, in order to maximise the lessons that can be learnt 
from clinical practice. However difficult it is to access existing data, it does not 
Page 89 
mean that it should not be used, and with a little extra thought this can be achieved. 
This thesis is testimony to that fact.  
I still feel anxious about one day being diagnosed with dementia. However, through 
this research I have increased peoples awareness of some key aspects in the 
assessment and diagnosis of dementia. Hopefully through awareness of the 
importance of considering relative amounts of cognitive decline, a greater number 
of people with high pre-morbid intellectual functioning will be diagnosed as 
promptly as people with other levels of pre-morbid intellectual functioning. 
Page 90 
References 
Alzheimers Society. (2012). Dementia 2012: A National Challenge. London: 
Author. 
Cameron, D. (2012, March). National Crisis. Speech presented at the Alzheimers 
Society Dementia 2012 Conference, London. Retrieved from 
http://www.alzheimers.org.uk/dementia2012  
Coaley, K. (2010). An introduction to psychological assessment and psychometrics. 
London: Sage. 
Data Protection Act. (1998). London: Stationery Office. 
Jorm, A.F., & Jolley, D. (1998). The incidence of dementia: a meta-analysis. 
Neurology, 51, 728-733. 
National Health Service Act. (2006). Section 251. London: Stationary Office. 
National Information Governance Board for Health and Social Care. (2012). NIGB 
homepage. Retrieved from http://www.nigb.nhs.uk. 
Tuokko, H., Garrett, D. D., McDowell, I., Silverberg, N., & Kristjansson, B. 
(2003). Cognitive decline in high-functioning older adults: Reserve or 
ascertainment bias? Aging & Mental Health, 7 (4), 259-270. 
Page 91 
Appendices 1-4: Ethical Approval 
Appendix 1: Coventry University  
Page 92 
Appendix 2: Black Country Research and Ethics Committee 
Page 93 
Page 94 
Page 95 
Appendix 3: Research and Development Committee    
Page 96 
Page 97 
Appendix 4: National Information Governance Board 
Page 98 
Page 99 
Appendices 5-6 Research Amendments Approval 
Appendix 5: Black Country Research and Ethics Committee  
Page 100 
Page 101 
 Appendix 6: Research and Development Committee  
Steele Rebecca (RKB) R&D Facilitator                                                                  29/11/11 
Re: Diagnosis of Dementia and Relative Cognitive Decline in People with 
High Levels of Premorbid Intellectual Functioning. 
REC Ref: 11/WM/0110 
Dear Emilie, 
Following review of substantial amendment number 01 for the above study,                                     
NHS Partnership Trust confirms they can accommodate this amendment. The 
amendment may therefore be immediately implemented at this site under the 
existing NHS Permission.  Please note that you may only implement changes 
that were described in the amendment notice. 
The following documents were reviewed: 
 Notice of Substantial Amendment form September 24
 REC favourable opinion letter October 25
 Protocol Version 4, September 23
 Participant Consent Form, Version 1, September 23
 2011. 
Thank you for keeping R&D informed. 
Best wishes 
Rebecca Steele 
CLRN R&D Facilitator 
The Clinical Research Network 
Supporting research to make patients, and the NHS, better 
Page 102 
Appendix 7: Literature Search Strategy 
PsycINFO, Cinahl, Medline and Web of 
Science searched using the terms: 
(Premorbid OR Pre-morbid) AND (IQ 
OR intell* OR funct*) AND Dementia 
NOT (Schizophrenia OR psychosis)'.  
Excluded papers prior to 1996. 
Papers examined for relevance, 
exclusions included tests which 
involved measures of pre-morbid 
functioning, but  which did not evaluate 
their use  
Excluded studies which did not use a 
distinct dementia population 
Excluded studies with measures that 
were not designed for use with a British 
English speaking population 
Replications removed 
Citation and reference searches  
conducted 
544 papers 
found 
50 papers 
27 papers 
20 papers 
11 papers 
12 papers 
included 
Page 103 
Appendices 8-9 Measures 
Appendix 8: Wechsler Test of Adult Reading (WTAR) 
Page 104 
Appendix 9: Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE)  
PATIENTS NAME:  ______________________________________ 
Date: _____________________   Clients Highest Level of Education: __________ 
Maximum Score      Score               ORIENTATION  
 5               (     ) What is the (year) (season) (date) (day) (month)? 
 5       (     ) where are we: (state) (county) (town) (hospital (floor)? 
REGISTRATION 
 3       (     ) Name 3 unrelated objects (i.e.: apple, table, penny) 
Then ask the patient all 3 after you have said them. 
    Give 1 point for each correct answer.  Then repeat them 
    until the patient learns all 3. 
    Count trials and record.    Trials ______________ 
    ATTENTION AND CALCULATION  
 5       (     ) Serial 7s.  1 point for each correct.  Stop after 5  
    answers.  Alternatively spell world backwards. 
    100  93  86  79  72  65  58 
    RECALL 
 3       (     ) Ask for 3 objects repeated above.  Give 1 point for each. 
    LANGUAGE 
 9       (     ) Name a pencil, and watch (2 points) 
        (     ) Repeat the following:  No ifs, and or buts. (1 point) 
        (     )  Follow a 3-stage command: 
       Take this paper in your right hand, fold it in half, 
       and put it on the floor.  (3 points) 
        (     ) Read and obey the following:  Close your eyes (1 point) 
        (     )  Write a sentence.  (1 point) 
        (     ) Copy design. (1 point) 
  __________  Total Score  (Out of 30)   
23 OR LESS:  HIGH LIKELIHOOD OF DEMENTIA  
25-30:  NORMAL AGING OR BORDERLINE DEMENTIA  
Page 105 
Appendix 10: Coding for Education 
1= Finished school  
2= Further Education 
3= Higher Education 
4= Masters 
5= Doctorate 
Page 106 
Appendices 11-12: Participant Information 
Appendix 11: Cover Sheet  
Page 107 
Appendix 12: Participant Information and Consent Form 
Page 108 
Appendix 13: Z-score Calculation 
Z-scores can be calculated as: 
z-score             
where: 
  is a raw score to be standardized 
  is the mean of the sample scores 
  is the standard deviation of the sample scores 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mean
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Standard_deviation
Page 109 
Appendix 14: Relationship between the Amount of Cognitive Decline 
Shown and Estimated Pre-morbid IQ in the Dementia Group 
Page 110 
Appendix 15: Relationship between the Amount of Cognitive Decline 
Shown and Estimated Pre-morbid IQ in the Mild Cognitive Impairment 
Group 
Page 111 
Appendix 16: Relationship between the Amount of Cognitive Decline 
Experienced and Estimated Pre-morbid IQ in the No Cognitive Impairment 
Group 
 R2 Linear = 0.168 
Page 112 
Appendices 17-18: Journal Submission Guidelines 
Appendix 17: British Journal of Clinical Psychology  
The British Journal of Clinical Psychology publishes original contributions to 
scientific knowledge in clinical psychology. This includes descriptive comparisons, 
as well as studies of the assessment, aetiology and treatment of people with a wide 
range of psychological problems in all age groups and settings. The level of 
analysis of studies ranges from biological influences on individual behaviour 
through to studies of psychological interventions and treatments on individuals, 
dyads, families and groups, to investigations of the relationships between explicitly 
social and psychological levels of analysis. 
The following types of paper are invited: 
  Papers reporting original empirical investigations 
 Theoretical papers, provided that these are sufficiently related to the empirical 
 Review articles which need not be exhaustive but which should give an 
interpretation of the state of the research in a given field and, where appropriate, 
identify its clinical implications 
 Brief reports and comments 
1. Circulation 
The circulation of the Journal is worldwide. Papers are invited and encouraged from 
authors throughout the world. 
2. Length 
Papers should normally be no more than 5000 words (excluding abstract, reference 
list, tables and figures), although the Editor retains discretion to publish papers 
beyond this length in cases where the clear and concise expression of the scientific 
content requires greater length. 
3. Submission and reviewing 
All manuscripts must be submitted via http://www.editorialmanager.com/bjcp/. The 
Journal operates a policy of anonymous peer review. Before submitting, please read 
the terms and conditions of submission and the declaration of competing interests. 
4. Manuscript requirements 
 Contributions must be typed in double spacing with wide margins. All sheets must 
be numbered. 
 Manuscripts should be preceded by a title page which includes a full list of 
authors and their affiliations, as well as the corresponding author's contact details. 
A template can be downloaded from the website. 
http://www.editorialmanager.com/bjcp/
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1111/(ISSN)2044-8260/homepage/BPS_Journals_Declaration_of_Competing_Interests.doc
http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/journal/10.1111/(ISSN)2044-8260/homepage/Sample_Manuscript_Title_Page.doc
Page 113 
 Tables should be typed in double spacing, each on a separate page with a self-
explanatory title. Tables should be comprehensible without reference to the text. 
They should be placed at the end of the manuscript with their approximate locations 
indicated in the text. 
 Figures can be included at the end of the document or attached as separate files, 
carefully labelled in initial capital/lower case lettering with symbols in a form 
consistent with text use. Unnecessary background patterns, lines and shading 
should be avoided. Captions should be listed on a separate sheet. The resolution of 
digital images must be at least 300 dpi. 
 For articles containing original scientific research, a structured abstract of up to 
250 words should be included with the headings: Objectives, Design, Methods, 
Results, and Conclusions. Review articles should use these headings: Purpose, 
Methods, Results, and Conclusions. 
 All Articles must include Practitioner Points  these are 24 bullet points to detail 
the positive clinical implications of the work, with a further 24 bullet points 
outlining cautions or limitations of the study. They should be placed below the 
abstract, with the heading Practitioner Points. 
 For reference citations, please use APA style. Particular care should be taken to 
ensure that references are accurate and complete. Give all journal titles in full. 
 SI units must be used for all measurements, rounded off to practical values if 
appropriate, with the imperial equivalent in parentheses. 
 In normal circumstances, effect size should be incorporated. 
 Authors are requested to avoid the use of sexist language. 
 Authors are responsible for acquiring written permission to publish lengthy 
quotations, illustrations, etc. for which they do not own copyright. For guidelines 
on editorial style, please consult the APA Publication Manual published by the 
American Psychological Association. 
5. Brief reports and comments 
These allow publication of research studies and theoretical, critical or review 
comments with an essential contribution to make. They should be limited to 2000 
words, including references. The abstract should not exceed 120 words and should 
be structured under these headings: Objective, Method, Results, Conclusions. There 
should be no more than one table or figure, which should only be included if it 
conveys information more efficiently than the text. Title, author name and address 
are not included in the word limit. 
6. Supporting Information 
BJC is happy to accept articles with supporting information supplied for online only 
publication. This may include appendices, supplementary figures, sound files, video 
clips etc. These will be posted on Wiley Online Library with the article. The print 
version will have a note indicating that extra material is available online. Please 
indicate clearly on submission which material is for online only publication. Please 
http://www.amazon.co.uk/gp/product/1433805618?ie=UTF8&tag=thebritishpsy-21&linkCode=xm2&camp=1634&creativeASIN=1433805618
Page 114 
note that extra online only material is published as supplied by the author in the 
same file format and is not copyedited or typeset. Further information about this 
service can be found at  
http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/suppmat.asp 
7. Copyright 
Authors will be required to assign copyright to The British Psychological Society. 
Copyright assignment is a condition of publication and papers will not be passed to 
the publisher for production unless copyright has been assigned. To assist authors 
an appropriate copyright assignment form will be supplied by the editorial office 
and is also available on the journals website at 
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/pdf/CTA_BPS.pdf. Government employees in 
both the US and the UK need to complete the Author Warranty sections, although 
copyright in such cases does not need to be assigned. 
8. Colour illustrations 
Colour illustrations can be accepted for publication online. These would be 
reproduced in greyscale in the print version. If authors would like these figures to 
be reproduced in colour in print at their expense they should request this by 
completing a Colour Work Agreement form upon acceptance of the paper. A copy 
of the Colour Work Agreement form can be downloaded here. 
9. Pre-submission English-language editing 
Authors for whom English is a second language may choose to have their 
manuscript professionally edited before submission to improve the English. A list 
of independent suppliers of editing services can be found at  
http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/english_language.asp. All services are 
paid for and arranged by the author, and use of one of these services does not 
guarantee acceptance or preference for publication. 
10. OnlineOpen 
OnlineOpen is available to authors of primary research articles who wish to make 
their article available to non-subscribers on publication, or whose funding agency 
requires grantees to archive the final version of their article. With OnlineOpen, the 
author, the author's funding agency, or the author's institution pays a fee to ensure 
that the article is made available to non-subscribers upon publication via Wiley 
Online Library, as well as deposited in the funding agency's preferred archive. For 
the full list of terms and conditions, see 
http://wileyonlinelibrary.com/onlineopen#OnlineOpen_Terms 
Any authors wishing to send their paper OnlineOpen will be required to complete 
the payment form available from our website at: 
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/onlineOpenOrder 
http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/suppmat.asp
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/pdf/CTA_BPS.pdf
http://www.blackwellpublishing.com/pdf/SN_Sub2000_F_CoW.pdf
http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/english_language.asp
http://wileyonlinelibrary.com/onlineopen#OnlineOpen_Terms
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/onlineOpenOrder
Page 115 
Prior to acceptance there is no requirement to inform an Editorial Office that you 
intend to publish your paper OnlineOpen if you do not wish to. All OnlineOpen 
articles are treated in the same way as any other article. They go through the 
journal's standard peer-review process and will be accepted or rejected based on 
their own merit. 
11. Author Services 
Author Services enables authors to track their article  once it has been accepted  
through the production process to publication online and in print. Authors can 
check the status of their articles online and choose to receive automated e-mails at 
key stages of production. The author will receive an e-mail with a unique link that 
enables them to register and have their article automatically added to the system. 
Please ensure that a complete e-mail address is provided when submitting the 
manuscript. Visit http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/ for more details on 
online production tracking and for a wealth of resources including FAQs and tips 
on article preparation, submission and more. 
12. The Later Stages 
The corresponding author will receive an email alert containing a link to a web site. 
A working e-mail address must therefore be provided for the corresponding author. 
The proof can be downloaded as a PDF (portable document format) file from this 
site. Acrobat Reader will be required in order to read this file. This software can be 
downloaded (free of charge) from the following web site: 
http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep2.html. 
This will enable the file to be opened, read on screen and annotated direct in the 
PDF. Corrections can also be supplied by hard copy if preferred. Further 
instructions will be sent with the proof. Hard copy proofs will be posted if no e-
mail address is available. Excessive changes made by the author in the proofs, 
excluding typesetting errors, will be charged separately. 
13. Early View 
British Journal of Clinical Psychology is covered by the Early View service on 
Wiley Online Library. Early View articles are complete full-text articles published 
online in advance of their publication in a printed issue. Articles are therefore 
available as soon as they are ready, rather than having to wait for the next 
scheduled print issue. Early View articles are complete and final. They have been 
fully reviewed, revised and edited for publication, and the authors final corrections 
have been incorporated. Because they are in final form, no changes can be made 
after online publication. The nature of Early View articles means that they do not 
yet have volume, issue or page numbers, so they cannot be cited in the traditional 
way. They are cited using their Digital Object Identifier (DOI) with no volume and 
issue or pagination information. E.g., Jones, A.B. (2010). Human rights 
Issues. Human Rights Journal. Advance online publication. doi:10.1111/j.1467-
9299.2010.00300.x 
http://authorservices.wiley.com/bauthor/
http://www.adobe.com/products/acrobat/readstep2.html
Page 116 
Appendix 18: Journal of Aging and Mental Health    
Instructions for Authors 
This journal uses ScholarOne Manuscripts (previously Manuscript Central) to peer 
review manuscript submissions. Please read the guide for ScholarOne 
authors before making a submission. Complete guidelines for preparing and 
submitting your manuscript to this journal are provided below. 
Aging & Mental Health welcomes original contributions from all parts of the 
world on the understanding that their contents have not previously been published 
nor submitted elsewhere for publication. We encourage the submission of timely 
review articles that summarize emerging trends in an area of mental health and 
aging, or which address issues which have been overlooked in the field. Reviews 
should be conceptual and address theory and methodology as appropriate. All 
submissions will be sent anonymously to independent referees. It is a condition of 
acceptance that papers become the copyright of the publisher. 
Manuscripts 
Manuscripts may be in the form of: (i) regular articles not usually exceeding 5,000 
words (under special circumstances, the Editors will consider articles up to 10,000 
words); or (ii) short reports not exceeding 2,000 words. These word 
limits exclude references and tables. 
All submissions should be made online at Aging & Mental Health's ScholarOne 
Manuscripts site. New users should first create an account. Once a user is logged 
onto the site submissions should be made via the Author Centre. 
Authors should prepare and upload two versions of their manuscript. One should be 
a complete text, while in the second all document information identifying the author 
should be removed from files to allow them to be sent anonymously to referees. 
When uploading files authors will then be able to define the non-anonymous 
version as "File not for review". 
All submissions should be in the style of the Publication Manual of the American 
Psychological Association (6th edition, 2009). Papers should be double spaced 
throughout (including the references), with margins of at least 2.5 cm (1 inch). All 
pages must be numbered. 
The first page should include the title of the paper, first name, middle initial(s) and 
last name of the author(s), and for each author a short institutional address, and an 
abbreviated title (for running headlines within the article). At the bottom of the 
page give the full name and address (including telephone and fax numbers and e-
mail address if possible) of the author to whom all correspondence (including 
proofs) should be sent. The second page should repeat the title and contain an 
abstract of not more than 250 words. The third page should repeat the title as a 
heading to the main body of the text. 
http://journalauthors.tandf.co.uk/submission/ScholarOne.asp
http://journalauthors.tandf.co.uk/submission/ScholarOne.asp
http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/camh
http://mc.manuscriptcentral.com/camh
Page 117 
Structured abstracts: The main text should be preceded by a short structured 
abstract, accompanied by a list of keywords. The abstract should be arranged as 
follows: Title of manuscript; name of journal; abstract text containing the following 
headings: Objectives, Method, Results, and Conclusion. 
Key words: A list of 3-5 keywords should be provided. Words already used in the 
title should be avoided if possible. 
The text should normally be divided into sections with the headings Introduction, 
Methods, Results, and Discussion. Long articles may need subheadings within 
some sections to clarify their content. Within the text section headings and 
subheadings should be typed on a separate line without numbering, indentation or 
bold or italic typeface. 
Style guidelines 
Description of the Journal's article style. 
Description of the Journal's reference style, Quick guide. 
Any consistent spelling style is acceptable. Use single quotation marks with double 
within if needed. 
If you have any questions about references or formatting your article, please 
contact authorqueries@tandf.co.uk (please mention the journal title in your email). 
Word Templates 
Word templates are available for this journal. 
 If you are not able to use the template via the links or if you have any other 
queries, please contact authortemplate@tandf.co.uk 
Units of measurement 
All measurements must be cited in SI units. 
Illustrations  
All illustrations (including photographs, graphs and diagrams) should be referred to 
as Figures and their position indicated in the text (e.g. Fig. 3). Each should be 
submitted numbered on the back with Figure number (Arabic numerals) and the 
title of the paper. The captions of all figures should be submitted on a separate 
page, should include keys to symbols, and should make interpretation possible 
without reference to the text. 
Figures should ideally be professionally drawn and designed with the format of the 
journal (A4 portrait, 297 x 210 mm) in mind and should be capable of reduction. 
Tables  
Tables should be submitted on separate pages, numbered in Arabic numerals, and 
their position indicated in the text (e.g. Table 1). Each table should have a short, 
self-explanatory title. Vertical rules should not be used to separate columns. Units 
should appear in parentheses in the column heading but not in the body of the table. 
Any explanatory notes should be given as a footnote at the bottom of the table. 
Page 118 
Proofs  
Proofs will be sent to the author nominated for correspondence. Proofs are supplied 
for checking and making essential typographical corrections, not for general 
revision or alteration. Proofs must be returned within 72 hours of receipt. 
Free article access 
Corresponding authors will receive free online access to their article through our 
website, Taylor & Francis Online, and a complimentary copy of the issue 
containing their article. Reprints of articles published in this journal can be 
purchased through Rightslink when proofs are received. If you have any queries, 
please contact our reprints department at reprints@tandf.co.uk 
Copyright 
It is a condition of publication that authors assign copyright or licence the 
publication rights in their articles, including abstracts, to Taylor & Francis. This 
enables us to ensure full copyright protection and to disseminate the article, and the 
journal, to the widest possible readership in print and electronic formats as 
appropriate. Authors retain many rights under the Taylor & Francis rights policies, 
which can be found at http://journalauthors.tandf.co.uk/preparation/copyright.asp. 
Authors are themselves responsible for obtaining permission to reproduce copyright 
material from other sources. 
Exceptions are made for certain Governments' employees whose policies require 
that copyright cannot be transferred to other parties. We ask that a signed statement 
to this effect is submitted when returning proofs for accepted papers. 
Aging & Mental Health has a new editorial e-mail address: amh@ucl.ac.uk. 
General enquires can be sent to m.orrell@ucl.ac.uk. 
	coveroakley.pdf
	University of Warwick institutional repository: http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap
