University of Warwick institutional repository: http://go
University of Warwick institutional repository: http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap  
A Thesis Submitted for the Degree of PhD at the University of Warwick 
http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap/57929 
This thesis is made available online and is protected by original copyright.  
Please scroll down to view the document itself.  
Please refer to the repository record for this item for information to help you to 
cite it. Our policy information is available from the repository home page.  
http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap
http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap/57929
Library Declaration and Deposit Agreement  
1. STUDENT DETAILS  
Please complete the following:  
Full name: .  
University ID number:   
2. THESIS DEPOSIT  
2.1  I understand that under my registration at the University, I am required to deposit my thesis with 
the University in BOTH hard copy and in digital format. The digital version should normally be saved 
as a single pdf file.  
2.2  The hard copy will be housed in the University Library. The digital version will be deposited in 
the Universitys Institutional Repository (WRAP). Unless otherwise indicated (see 2.3 below) this 
will be made openly accessible on the Internet and will be supplied to the British Library to be made 
available online via its Electronic Theses Online Service (EThOS) service.  
[At present, theses submitted for a Masters degree by Research (MA, MSc, LLM, MS or MMedSci) 
are not being deposited in WRAP and not being made available via EthOS. This may change in 
future.]  
2.3  In exceptional circumstances, the Chair of the Board of Graduate Studies may grant permission 
for an embargo to be placed on public access to the hard copy thesis for a limited period. It is also 
possible to apply separately for an embargo on the digital version. (Further information is available in 
the Guide to Examinations for Higher Degrees by Research.)  
2.4  If you are depositing a thesis for a Masters degree by Research, please complete section (a) 
below. For all other research degrees, please complete both sections (a) and (b) below:  
(a) Hard Copy  
I hereby deposit a hard copy of my thesis in the University Library to be made publicly available to 
readers (please delete as appropriate) EITHER immediately OR after an embargo period of 
I agree that my thesis may be photocopied.        YES / NO (Please delete as appropriate)  
(b) Digital Copy  
I hereby deposit a digital copy of my thesis to be held in WRAP and made available via EThOS.   
Please choose one of the following options:  
EITHER   My thesis can be made publicly available online.      YES / NO (Please delete as appropriate)  
OR   My thesis can be made publicly available only after..[date]  (Please give date)  
                YES / NO (Please delete as appropriate)  
OR   My full thesis cannot be made publicly available online but I am submitting a   separately 
identified   additional, abridged version that can be made available online.  
          YES / NO (Please delete as appropriate)  
OR   My thesis cannot be made publicly available online.          YES / NO (Please delete as appropriate)  
3. GRANTING OF NON-EXCLUSIVE RIGHTS  
Whether I deposit my Work personally or through an assistant or other agent, I agree to the following:  
Rights granted to the University of Warwick and the British Library and the user of the thesis through 
this agreement are non-exclusive. I retain all rights in the thesis in its present version or future 
versions. I agree that the institutional repository administrators and the British Library or their agents 
may, without changing content, digitise and migrate the thesis to any medium or format for the 
purpose of future preservation and accessibility.  
4. DECLARATIONS  
(a) I DECLARE THAT:  
and owners of the copyright in the thesis to make this agreement. Reproduction of any part of this 
thesis for teaching or in academic or other forms of publication is subject to the normal limitations on 
the use of copyrighted materials and to the proper and full acknowledgement of its source.  
-bound copy 
submitted in completion of my degree, once any minor corrections have been completed.  
knowledge break any UK law or other Intellectual Property Right, or contain any confidential 
material.  
and may be searched and copied by, for example, text mining and plagiarism detection software.  
(b) IF I HAVE AGREED (in Section 2 above) TO MAKE MY THESIS PUBLICLY AVAILABLE 
DIGITALLY, I ALSO DECLARE THAT:  
Internet the thesis in digitised format through the Institutional Repository and through the British 
Library via the EThOS service.  
-party copyright 
holders, I have sought and obtained permission to include it in any version of my thesis available in 
digital format and that this permission encompasses the rights that I have granted to the University of 
Warwick and to the British Library.  
5. LEGAL INFRINGEMENTS  
I understand that neither the University of Warwick nor the British Library have any obligation to 
take legal action on behalf of myself, or other rights holders, in the event of infringement of 
intellectual property rights, breach of contract or of any other right, in the thesis.  
Please sign this agreement and return it to the Graduate School Office when you submit your thesis.  
Assessing and understanding young peoples 
attitudes toward religious diversity in the United 
Kingdom 
Alice Pyke 
Warwick University 
A dissertation submitted in partial fulfilment for 
Institute of Education 
University of Warwick 
April 2013 
DECLARATIONS 
Declaration 
This work has not been previously accepted in substance for any degree and is not 
being concurrently submitted in candidature for any degree. 
Statement 1 
This thesis is the result of my own investigations, except where otherwise stated.  
Other sources are acknowledged giving explicit references.  A bibliography is 
appended. 
Statement 2 
I hereby give consent for my thesis, if accepted, to be available for photocopying and 
for inter-library loan, and for the title and summary to be made available to outside 
organisations. 
Contents 
Introducing the dissertation..1 
1. The face of religious diversity across the four nations of the United Kingdom . 11 
Acknowledgements 
This dissertation marks the end of three challenging but rewarding years.  I am 
grateful to so many people who have supported and encouraged me throughout this 
time. 
 I am grateful to my Warwick colleagues for the opportunity to work alongside 
them as part of this research project and thank those who supervised me to shape this 
dissertation. I am also greatly indebted to Gary Fisher and to Trevor Robinson for 
their unwavering support. 
 I would also like to thank the members of RSB for encouraging me throughout. I 
feel both immensely proud and privileged to be part of an organisation which places 
such an emphasis on affirming others. You are a wonderful group of people. 
Particular thanks go to Shane for his care and support during one of the most 
challenging periods of my study. I hope I can teach someone else how to pick 
themselves up and keep going in the way that you taught me. 
 To my flatmates from the past three years, thank you for putting up with a scatty 
PhD student. I am immensely grateful. To Andrew, thank you for helping me with 
the final formatting, setting me up with that dropbox account, and for your help 
during a very fraught build up to the viva. 
 To my family; you are my world. Never underestimate just how much I love you 
and how grateful I am to all of you for being there for me while I did this. 
Finally I am grateful to anyone who gave me a hug, a cup of tea, and told me that I 
could do this and that I was strong enough to finish. Thank you from the bottom of 
my heart for believing in my ability to do this during the times when I struggled to 
believe it for myself. 
Abstract 
The increased presence of religious diversity among the population of the United 
Kingdom, particularly over the past century, is particularly noticeable through 
population studies such as the national census, and tangible signs including the increase 
in public celebrations of religious festivals, the increase in the presence of religious 
dress and food, and the increase in construction of religious architecture for faiths other 
than the historic religion of Christianity. This change in the United Kingdom signifies 
the need to assess and understand attitudes toward this evident religious diversity among 
young people living in the United Kingdom. 
 This dissertation is contextualised and conducted through a studentship role on the 
Young Peoples Attitudes Toward Religious Diversity Project, funded by the 
AHRC/ESRC as part of the Religion and Society Programme, conducted by the 
Warwick Religions and Education Research Unit. This mixed methods project employed 
quantitative methods to profile students aged 13- to 15-years in the different nations and 
school types of the United Kingdom, alongside findings from qualitative focus group 
interviews among 13- to 16 year-old students. The findings draw two conclusions; first, 
that attitudes toward religious diversity vary according to nation, with students in 
London and Northern Ireland exhibiting signs of particular difference in attitudes from 
the students in the other nations of the United Kingdom; and second, that attitudes 
toward religious diversity vary according to school type.   
       The mixed methodology of the research in the setting of the United Kingdom, the 
comparison of nations and school types, and the large scale on which the research was 
conducted all offer an innovative contribution to scholarship within the field of the 
social scientific study of religion. The conclusions also contribute to a better 
understanding of the national contexts of the United Kingdom and the different values 
which the different methods of educating young people in the United Kingdom can 
promote.
Introducing the dissertation 
Introduction 
Despite the increasingly diverse population of the United Kingdom, which has 
become increasingly visible during the past decades, evidence regarding the attitudes 
of young people toward this growing diversity seems to be lacking. This dissertation 
is contextualised in the AHRC/ESRC project concerning young peoples attitudes to 
religious diversity in the United Kingdom. Both the research project and the 
dissertation set out to address the lack of empirical research which can give an 
accurate profile of the attitudes of young people toward religious diversity in the 
United Kingdom. The dissertation will address this problem in part one by 
discussing how religious diversity is visible in the population of the United 
Kingdom; by examining the literature which indicates examples of areas in which 
religious diversity has become apparent through challenges and contentions; by 
reviewing the theories and past empirical studies which are of relevance to 
addressing the research question; and by discussing the methodology and research 
strategy employed to gather the data. Part two of the dissertation will report the 
findings of the qualitative and quantitative data sets concerning how examination of 
the influence of nation and the influence of school type can deepen understanding 
regarding attitudes toward religious diversity. This presentation of the analysis and 
findings of the two datasets will address the research question by providing empirical 
evidence as to how attitudes toward religious diversity can be assessed and 
understood. 
Part one: examining the context 
The dissertation forms one of the outputs of the Young Peoples Attitudes toward 
Religious Diversity project funded by the Arts and Humanities Research Council and 
Economic and Social Research Council (AHRC/ESRC) as part of the Religion and 
Society Programme, and conducted by the Warwick Religions and Education 
Research Unit (WRERU). This project seeks to profile the attitudes of young people 
toward religious diversity by using a mixed methods approach of both qualitative 
and quantitative research methods among 13- to 15-year-old students residing in the 
different nations of the United Kingdom and attending different types of schools 
across each nation of the United Kingdom. 
Examining religious affiliation of the population of the United Kingdom 
Chapter one will begin to contextualise the question of what the attitudes toward 
religious diversity are among young people in the United Kingdom. The chapter will 
introduce the rationale which each nation used for including a religion question in 
the 2001 census, in Northern Ireland, Scotland, and England and Wales. The chapter 
will then discuss the different religion questions included in each national census 
paper across the United Kingdom for the 2001 census. The chapter will also examine 
the data from the answers to these religion questions to discuss the religious 
landscape of the United Kingdom. The discussion of this census data will include 
comment on the general population, and young people in the population at the most 
detailed level possible provided by the census output (the 10- to 15-year-old age 
group).  
The visible signs of religious diversity in the United Kingdom  
Chapters two, three and four will use literature to complement the discussion of the 
representation of religious affiliation in the 2001 national census by discussing 
examples where the increase of religious diversity in the United Kingdom has 
become more apparent in society.  
 Chapter two will discuss the prominence of different holy days and religious 
festivals which are celebrated across the different nations both privately and 
publically. Chapter three will address a second example of the increasingly 
religiously diverse landscape of the United Kingdom by discussing the literature 
concerning the visibility of religious dress and food in society. Chapter four will 
address the third example of the increased visibility of different religious buildings 
and architecture. These three examples will indicate how the religious landscape of 
the population has changed from a Christian mono-religious nation into a more 
religiously diverse nation, thus establishing a need and a context in which research 
which examines attitudes toward issues such as these can be conducted.  
The hidden face of religious diversity within the United Kingdom 
Chapter five will develop the examples of the visibility of religious diversity across 
the United Kingdom (as demonstrated by holy days and festivals, religious dress and 
food, and religious buildings and architecture) by moving on to discuss the hidden 
face of religious diversity in the United Kingdom. This chapter will discuss 
examples of areas of life which historically have been rooted in a religious tradition, 
but have been adapted or modified to respond to the increase in religious diversity 
among the population over the last century. These areas of life will include 
education, healthcare, and death and dying. Their religious roots will be discussed 
and signs which remain regarding their religious heritage will be identified. By 
discussing these religious roots, the religious values which lay at the heart of these 
areas of life will be highlighted, thus acting as preparation for a study which assesses 
and understands attitudes toward religious diversity. This review of literature in 
chapter five will add to the review already contributed to indicate the change in the 
United Kingdom from a traditionally Christian mono-cultural society into a multi-
religious and multi-cultural society, particularly within the last century, thus 
justifying the need to assess and understand attitudes toward religious diversity. 
Applying relevant theory to assess and understand attitudes toward religious 
diversity 
Chapter six will develop the literature further by discussing the public significance of 
religious affiliation and what information religious affiliation can provide about an 
individual, the religion they self-assign themselves to, and their beliefs and values. 
Different theories of self-assigned religious affiliation will be discussed, such as the 
contributions of Bibby, Bouma, Fane and Francis. The chapter will select the Francis 
argument for understanding self-assigned religious affiliation as the most appropriate 
means of understanding beliefs and values within the field of the social-scientific 
study of religion and for understanding attitudes toward religious diversity. The 
support for this understanding will be based on previous research projects conducted 
among young people without religious affiliation, with world faith affiliation, and 
with denominational affiliation to understand values concerning personal wellbeing, 
sexual morality, and substance use. This chapter acts as a vital link between the 
findings of census data concerning self-assigned religious affiliation among young 
people, how self-assigned religious affiliation can be applied to understand attitudes 
toward religious diversity among young people, and the wider literature concerning 
the modern religious landscape of the United Kingdom. 
Previous empirical research concerning young people and religious diversity 
Having identified the context and environment of the United Kingdom and supported 
this through relevant literature, chapter seven will justify the case for conducting the 
young peoples attitudes toward religious diversity project which could complement 
the findings of previous WRERU projects concerning young people. Chapter seven 
will therefore offer a detailed study of the project Religion in Education: a 
Contribution to Dialogue or a Factor of Conflict in Transforming Societies of 
European Countries (REDCO) conducted by WRERU prior to the attitudes toward 
religious diversity project as an example of an earlier study concerning young people 
and attitudes toward religion and other religions, on which the present study built.  
Choosing appropriate methodology  
Chapter eight will discuss the mixed methodology of the project by discussing both 
the qualitative and quantitative methods of the AHRC Young Peoples Attitudes 
toward Religious Diversity Project. The chapter will discuss how the two phases of 
the project were conducted. The qualitative study which formed the first phase of the 
project will be discussed with reference to the design of the interview schedule, the 
sampling strategy, and a brief overview of the findings which informed the 
quantitative study. Chapter eight will then discuss the quantitative phase of the 
project, including the questionnaire design, the sampling strategy, and the pilot 
study, before concluding that both of the methods used were appropriate for 
collecting the data which was analysed and will be discussed in the latter part of this 
dissertation.  This methodology chapter also demonstrates the reasoning behind the 
layout of the data chapters. 
Generating the research questions which underpin the research 
Therefore the overriding research questions which this dissertation seeks to address 
are as follows. The overall research question which this dissertation will address is to 
understand what the attitudes of young people aged 13-to 15-years old toward 
religious diversity in the United Kingdom are. This research question is derived from 
addressing the religious affiliation of young people from the 2001 census is and 
looks to develop these results into understanding attitudes toward religious diversity. 
 The first sub research question which will assist in addressing this overall 
research question is whether the nation of the United Kingdom in which a young 
person lives affects their attitudes toward religious diversity. This also develops from 
the discussion of the different national patterns within the 2001 census data and the 
review of the literature which illustrates the religious diversity which is now evident 
across the United Kingdom.  
The second sub research question will address whether the type of school 
which a student attends can affect their attitudes toward religious diversity. This 
research question arises from the discussion of the religious heritage of the education 
system and the discussion of its influence on beliefs and values within the literature. 
Part two: examining the new data 
The data generated by the project (both qualitative and quantitative) will be 
discussed in five chapters, with each of these chapters developing a specific theme. 
Attitudes toward religious diversity and social context 
Chapter nine will discuss the social context of the young people and their comments 
concerning their lives in the United Kingdom in order to profile their different 
backgrounds. Social context will be assessed by the investigation of four broad 
themes which were raised by the students: family life, friendships and peer groups, 
environment, religious practice, and school life. The chapter will cite examples of 
qualitative material which addressed the students comments about their social 
contexts and demonstrates how this shaped the quantitative questions. The 
quantitative data will be crosstabulated with both nation and school type for 
discussion to be made and conclusions to be drawn about what nation and school 
type can say about student views of their social context. This will answer the 
research question by indicating the different backgrounds which the students come 
from and how these different social contexts combined with the influence of living in 
different nations and attending different school types can inform the attitudes toward 
religious diversity among young people.   
Attitudes toward religious diversity and religious beliefs 
Chapter ten will discuss the religious beliefs of the young people. Religious beliefs 
will be assessed by the investigation of four broad themes which were raised by the 
students: belief in God, concepts of God, the relationship between religious and 
scientific belief, and belief in life after death. The chapter will cite examples of 
qualitative material which addressed the students comments about their religious 
beliefs and demonstrate how this shaped the quantitative questions. The quantitative 
data will be crosstabulated with both nation and school type for discussion to be 
made and conclusions to be drawn about what nation and school type can say about 
the religious beliefs of students. An understanding of the religious beliefs of young 
people will answer the research question as the differences between traditional or 
more modern religious beliefs, or conservative and liberal beliefs could give an 
indication of how open-minded or closed-minded students might be when asked 
about their attitudes toward religious diversity later on in the dissertation. The 
differences in nations and school types may also be able to give more detail 
concerning how open-minded or closed-minded the students may be concerning 
attitudes. 
Attitudes toward religious diversity and awareness of influences on and of 
religion 
Chapter eleven will discuss the influences on and of religion and what factors young 
people consider influential about both religion and other religious groups. These 
influences on and of religion will be assessed by the investigation of five broad 
themes: parents, influence of peers and friends, influence of school, and influence of 
media. The fifth theme is the influence of religion on the lives of young people. 
These themes were all raised by the students. The chapter will cite examples of 
qualitative material which addressed the students comments about factors which had 
influenced their views and demonstrate how this shaped the quantitative questions. 
The quantitative data will be crosstabulated with both nation and school type for 
discussion to take place and conclusions to be drawn about what nation and school 
type can say about the influences on and of religion on students. This will answer the 
research question as an understanding of where the attitudes concerning religion and 
other religious groups come from could provide an indication of what the attitudes 
toward religious diversity might be, how and whether these might be influenced by 
the nation in which the students live or the school type which they attend. 
Broad attitudes concerning religious diversity 
Chapter twelve will discuss broader attitudes which young people have toward 
religious diversity as a means of understanding the generalisations which are made 
about religious diversity and attitudes toward religious diversity within the wider 
world. These broad attitudes toward religious diversity will be assessed by the 
investigation of four broad themes: the negative impact which the students believe 
that religious diversity has on the world, the positive impact which religious 
diversity has on the world, the desire of the students to broaden their understanding 
of religious diversity, and concerns, attitudes and stereotypes which the students 
have about religious diversity.  The chapter will cite examples of qualitative material 
which addressed the students comments about their broader attitudes toward 
religious diversity and demonstrate how this shaped the quantitative questions. The 
quantitative data will be crosstabulated with both nation and school type for 
discussion to be made and conclusions to be drawn about what nation and school 
type can say about the broader attitudes which students have concerning religious 
diversity. This will answer the research question of what the attitudes toward 
religious diversity among young people are by informing about the more general 
attitudes which students have concerning religious diversity, thus alerting to any 
positive or negative generalisations or stereotypes which are endorsed by the 
students. 
Immediate attitudes toward religious diversity 
Chapter thirteen will discuss the immediate attitudes which young people have 
toward religious diversity to develop the previous discussion of the broad attitudes 
toward religious diversity. These immediate attitudes toward religious diversity will 
be assessed by the investigation of three broad themes: religious diversity and 
school, religious diversity and the local environment, and religious diversity and 
personal relationships.  The chapter will cite examples of qualitative material which 
addressed the students comments about their immediate attitudes toward religious 
diversity and demonstrate how this shaped the quantitative questions. The 
quantitative data will be crosstabulated with both nation and school type for 
discussion to be made and conclusions to be drawn about what nation and school 
type can say about the immediate attitudes which students have concerning religious 
diversity. This will answer the research question of what are the attitudes of young 
people toward religious diversity by seeing how attitudes toward religious diversity 
are endorsed within their everyday lives and whether or not this is influenced by 
nation or school type. This allows for the findings of the previous chapter concerning 
the broader attitudes toward religious diversity to be complemented as the attitudes 
will assess how the students relate to religious diversity in a way that is of relevance 
to their social contexts. 
Conclusion for approaching the problem 
This introduction to the dissertation has identified that the subject of young peoples 
attitudes toward religious diversity requires further empirical investigation, 
particularly with regard to the nation which they come from and the type of school 
which they attend. As a consequence, a rationale for responding to this research 
question has been set out and a research strategy for answering the question as to 
what the attitudes toward religious diversity among young people are in the United 
Kingdom has been discussed. This rationale and research strategy are deemed to be 
the most effective ways of answering the research questions of what young peoples 
attitudes toward religious diversity in the United Kingdom are. Chapter one will 
begin to implement this research strategy by discussing the visibility of religious 
diversity in the United Kingdom through the findings of the 2001 national census.   
Part One: research context 
1. The face of religious diversity across the four nations 
of the United Kingdom 
Introduction 
One way in which to discover the general state of religious diversity in the United 
Kingdom is to examine the statistics on religion collected from the national census. 
A national census takes place every ten years to gather demographic information 
about individuals and households across the nation and the completion of it is 
compulsory (Boyle & Dorling, 2004).  
 The census paper for each nation now includes a question which is voluntary 
concerning religion, with the exception of Northern Ireland where the question is not 
voluntary, although the layout and style of each religion question differs from nation 
to nation. For Scotland and for England and Wales, the inclusion of a religion 
question was new to the census in 2001 (Aspinall, 2000). However, Northern Ireland 
has a history of including questions concerning religion in the census paper, having 
included a question since 1926 when the partition of Ireland took place (Hennesy, 
2000). This means that data collected from the national census can provide an 
accurate contextualisation of each nation concerning its religious background or 
current religious trends where the entire population is represented (Boyle & Dorling, 
2004).  This chapter uses the data from the 2001 census in the nations of Northern 
Ireland, Scotland, and England and Wales to examine how the different religions are 
represented in the United Kingdom, which are represented most highly and whether 
there are any patterns which can be seen in the data to show trends which are 
occurring in terms of religion across the United Kingdom.   
 The chapter will first briefly introduce the historical background of religion in 
each nation, thus explaining the contexts from which the questions arise, then 
examine the varying layouts and designs of each nations religion question or 
questions, before looking at the way the data which arises from these questions 
makes the information available to the researcher. The findings of each nation will 
be discussed, with Northern Ireland being discussed first because Northern Ireland is 
the nation with the earliest record of a census question on religion (Doherty & Poole, 
2002), then Scotland because of its well constructed and well defined question, 
before finally discussing England and Wales, and breaking their results down into 
individual nations. Where there has been a breakdown to look at the results of 
teenage religion and religious diversity these will be presented and discussed for 
each nation. Finally the chapter will bring the findings together and draw 
conclusions from the findings. 
Contextualising differences in nations 
The difference in religion questions across each nation is a result of the need that 
historical events and social contexts have prompted. For example, Northern Irelands 
history of what have become known as the troubles up to and since the partition of 
Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland have demanded that a religion question 
and a question concerning religious and community backgrounds be included.  
Northern Ireland is said to possess a long-standing history of being a country which 
is divided by its two largest religious communities, the Protestants and the Catholics. 
This history of the struggle for religions to live peacefully side-by-side dates back 
hundreds of years (Mitchell, 2005). The troubles in Northern Ireland centre around 
a conflict based on political ideologies and social/ethnic identities that happen to be 
divided along religious lines (Cairns & Darby, 1998). Whilst the Protestant political 
groups (Unionists) desire to remain part of the United Kingdom, the Catholic 
political groups (Nationalists) desire to disestablish and become part of the Republic 
of Ireland (Ganiel & Jones, 2012).   
 It is argued that, whilst religion in the doctrinal sense is not the cause of tension 
in Northern Ireland in the twenty-first century, it is the use of religion as an indicator 
of an individuals communal membership and or political ideology which has 
contributed to the history of the troubles in Northern Ireland (Mitchell, 2005). 
Whilst the Good Friday Agreement of April 10 1998 has not completely ceased 
tension and extremist behaviour in Northern Ireland, it has ushered in a more 
peaceful cohesive attitude where politics, religion and ethnicity are concerned in 
twenty-first century Northern Ireland. 
 Like Northern Ireland, Scotlands background is that it has been a Christian 
country since approximately 400AD. The established church is the Presbyterian 
Church of Scotland. This means that in Scotland there is a constitutional link 
between Church and state (Church of Scotland, 2013). The inclusion of the religion 
questions in the 2001 census were justified as a way of monitoring anti-
discrimination policies, and also to look at the differences in Scottish society 
regarding the two denominations of Roman Catholicism and the Church of Scotland 
(Scottish Executive, 2005). The reason for this may be due to issues of sectarianism 
which, in the past, have been a problem in areas of Scotland, one particular example 
being Glasgow. Problems in this city lead to an investigation into sectarianism in 
Glasgow (NFO Social Research, 2003).  The religion question was also included to 
collect more detailed information about particular ethnic minority groups (Scottish 
Executive National Statistics, 2005; Weller, 2004). Recent immigration to the United 
Kingdom prompted a need for Scottish officials to discover the rate of immigration 
of other religions and cultures into Scotland separately rather than immigration to the 
UK as a whole. 
 England and Wales are also defined as Christian nations. In England the 
established church is the Church of England, meaning that there is a constitutional 
link between church and state (Guest, Olson, & Wolffe, 2012). The monarch is both 
the head of state and supreme governor of the Church of England (Archbishops 
Council, 2013). The Church in Wales remains part of the Anglican Communion, but 
since 1924 it has not been an established Church in Wales (Morgan, 2011). Whilst 
the religious history of England and Wales has been turbulent in the past, with the 
decision of Henry VIII to create the Church of England independent from the 
Catholic Church in Rome and the changeable years following, there have not been 
religious or sectarian problems at the same level or in recent times on a scale that 
would require the census to investigate the issues that it has been required to in the 
case of Northern Ireland and Scotland.  
The question in the census paper 
There are three parts to the religion question in the Northern Ireland census paper. 
The first religion question (shown in figure 1.1) asks about affiliation to a religion 
but only requires an answer of yes or no. 
Figure 1.1 Religion question in the Northern Ireland census paper 2001.  
(Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency) 
8. Do you regard yourself as belonging to any particular religion? 
The second religion question in the Northern Ireland census paper of 2001 only 
requires an answer if the answer to the first religion question was yes and is shown 
in figure 1.2. 
Figure 1.2 Religious affiliation question. Northern Ireland census 2001. 
(Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency) 
The final question, shown in figure 1.3 is known as the community background 
question and is answered if individuals did not regard themselves as belonging to 
any particular religion. 
Figure 1.3 Community Background Question. Northern Ireland census paper 2001. 
(Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency) 
The Scotland census paper includes two questions modelled on that of the Northern 
Ireland census paper. The first of these questions (shown in figure 1.4) concerns the 
current religious affiliation of the individual and is a condensed version of the first 
two questions in the Northern Ireland census paper. Therefore, through these 
questions, the data which is made available shows whether or not people in Northern 
If yes 
What religion, religious denomination or body do you belong to? 
Roman Catholic    Presbyterian Church in Ireland 
Church of Ireland    Methodist Church in Ireland 
Other please write in 
If no 
What religion, religious denomination or body were you brought up in? 
Roman Catholic    Presbyterian Church in Ireland 
Church of Ireland    Methodist Church in Ireland 
Other, please write in. 
Ireland regard themselves as belonging to a particular religion, and if so which one. 
It also gives an insight into the numbers of how many people have been brought up 
in religious communities, and if so, in which communities they were brought up. 
Figure 1.4 Current religious affiliation. From the 2001 census paper. 
(General Register Office for Scotland) 
The second religion question in the Scotland census paper concerns religion of 
upbringing and is shown in figure 1.5 
Figure 1.5 Religion of upbringing. From the 2001 census paper. 
(General Register Office for Scotland) 
Q13. What religion, religious denomination or body do you belong to? 
Church of Scotland      Roman Catholic 
Other Christian (please write in)    Buddhist 
Hindu        Muslim 
Jewish        Sikh 
Another religion (please write in) 
Q14. What religion, religious denomination or body were you brought up in? 
None      Church of Scotland 
Roman Catholic    Other Christian (please write in) 
Buddhist     Hindu 
Muslim     Jewish 
Sikh      Another religion (please write in) 
For the nations of England and Wales, the census paper was exactly the same. Only 
one question was asked. This is shown in figure 1.6 
Figure 1.6 Religion question from the 2001 census. England and Wales. 
(Office for National Statistics) 
Northern Ireland 
1,685,267 people answered the religion and community background questions in 
Northern Ireland. To present the data concerning religion in Northern Ireland, the 
results for the general population, males and females within the general population, 
and 13- to 15-year-olds (both collectively males and females separately) are 
discussed using table 1.1 as a reference. Table 1.2 presents the data concerning 
community background in Northern Ireland for the same groups. 
What is your religion? 
None    Buddhist 
Christian     Hindu 
(Including Church of England,     Muslim 
Catholic, Protestant, and all other      Jewish 
Christian denominations).      Sikh 
Any other religion (please write in) 
Table 1.1 Current religion. Northern Ireland 2001 Census. 
Religious groups 
Total population  
13- to 15-year-old population 
Catholic 40.26 47.98 
   Presbyterian church in Ireland 20.69 17.81 
   Church of Ireland 15.30 13.27 
   Methodist Church in Ireland 3.51 3.15 
   Other Christian including 
Christian related 6.07 5.39 
   Other religions and 
philosophies 0.30 0.21 
   No religion or religion not 
stated 13.88 12.18 
(Northern Ireland Statistics and Research agency) 
Religious affiliation of the general population 
Table 1.1 demonstrates the religious affiliation of the general population. In terms of 
the whole population of Northern Ireland, the three denominations of Christianity 
with the highest levels of affiliation are Catholic (40.26%), Presbyterian Church in 
Ireland (20.69%) and Church of Ireland (15.30%). After these three, the next most 
popular response to the religion question was that an individual had no religion or 
had not stated their religion (13.88%). This group came higher than the total 
percentage of those who were affiliated with Other Christian denominations in 
Northern Ireland (6.07%), the Methodist Church in Ireland (3.51%), and other 
religions and philosophies (0.30%). 
Religious affiliation of the 13- to 15-year-old population 
The proportion of 13- to 15-year-olds in Northern Ireland makes up 4.81% of the 
total population. An estimated 87.81% of these 13- to 15-year-olds are religious and 
an estimated 12.18% are not religious. On looking at the data for the 13- to 15-year-
old group it becomes clear that there are both parallels and differences in both the 
patterns which emerge and the conclusions which can be drawn about the profile of 
religion in Northern Ireland. Table 1.1 demonstrates religious affiliation among this 
group. 
 The group with the highest levels of affiliation among the 13- to 15-year-old 
group is, once again, Catholic (47.98%) followed this time by the Presbyterian 
Church in Ireland (17.81%), then the Church of Ireland (13.27%) which mirrors the 
pattern for the general population of Northern Ireland. Once again the fourth group is 
the group which does not claim to have a religion or does not state its religion 
(12.18%). The next group after this are those who consider themselves to be Other 
Christian or from other Christian denominations (5.39%). Again, in parallel to the 
percentages of the whole population, the Methodist Church in Ireland was the 
Christian denomination with the lowest level of affiliation (3.15%). 
 The groups No religion, or Religion not stated, Presbyterian Church in Ireland, 
Church of Ireland, Methodist Church in Ireland, and other Christian have higher 
percentages of affiliation amongst the whole population than the 13- to 15-year-old 
group within the population. The only exception to this is the Catholic groups where 
the total group of 13- to 15-year-olds who are Catholic (47.98%) is higher than the 
total group of Catholics in the whole population (40.26%). 
The community background of the general population 
The community background of the general population is demonstrated in table 1.2. 
In terms of community background the census discovered that 53.13% of the 
population say that they have come from or been brought up in the Protestant 
denomination or community. This was the highest group followed by 43.76% of the 
population who were Catholic. These were the two groups with the highest levels of 
affiliation, which is unsurprising as religious and political history of Northern 
Ireland has always recorded these two groups as the two main religious groups in 
Northern Ireland. 
 Following the Protestant and Catholic groups the third highest group were those 
who stated that they did not have a community background or did not wish to state 
their community background: 2.72% expressed this option. Those who expressed 
that they came from a community background of other religions and philosophies 
only accounted for 0.39% of the population of Northern Ireland. This confirms the 
Catholic and Protestant community as the two largest in Northern Ireland but does 
not explain why the Protestant community is more highly affiliated here than in the 
previous census question about current religion. A suggested explanation for this 
might be that the identity of Protestantism may be considered of more importance to 
this group than their affiliation to the denomination. However this would require 
further investigation. 
Table 1.2 Community background: Religion or religion brought up in. Northern 
Ireland 2001 Census 
 Religious groups 
Total population 
13- to 15-year-old population 
Catholic 43.76 50.97 
   Protestant and other Christian 
related 53.13 45.15 
   Other religions and philosophies 0.39 0.26 
   None 2.72 3.62 
(Northern Ireland Statistics and research Agency) 
Community background of the 13- to 15-year-old population  
The community background of the 13- to 15-year-old population is demonstrated in 
table 1.2. Among the 13- to 15-year-old sample, the highest community background 
differed from that of the whole population with 50.97% saying that they had been 
raised in a Catholic community background and 45.15% saying that they had been 
raised in a Protestant background. The Catholic group thus mirrors the results of the 
first religion question which found it to be the denomination with the highest level of 
affiliation in Northern Ireland. Again the patterns for other religious and 
philosophical backgrounds and no religious background or none stated mirrored the 
rest of the population of Northern Ireland with the option of no religious background 
or no religious background stated (3.62%) being higher than those from other 
religious and philosophical backgrounds (0.26%). 
Summary of findings in Northern Ireland 
The data for Northern Ireland portrays a country which is predominantly Christian, 
with minimal inhabitants from other major world religions. While there is evidence 
of diversity in Northern Ireland for both the current religion question and the 
community background question, this is restricted to denominational diversity within 
the religion of Christianity rather than religious diversity. In general the 13-to 15-
year-old group tend to be slightly lower in affiliation to different religious groups 
and community groups than the total population. 
Scotland 
Current religious affiliation of the general population 
In Scotland, 5,062,011 residents answered the question concerning religion. The 
results can be found in tables 1.3 and 1.4. The summary of the analysis of religion in 
the 2001 census report (2005) demonstrated that 67% of the overall population of 
Scotland self-assigned to a religious denomination, whereas 28% claimed no 
religious affiliation. The results of the current religion question show that there are 
high levels of Christian affiliation in Scotland, and also high levels of people who 
have no religion. 
 The religious group with the highest level of affiliation among the population of 
Scotland is Christianity. As Christianity is more historically established in Scotland 
it can be argued that this is the reason that there are more who are affiliated with it. 
Within the group who consider themselves affiliated with Christianity, the 
denomination with the highest level of self-assigned religious affiliation is the 
Church of Scotland (42.40%) which accounts for just under half of the population of 
Scotland. This is unsurprising as the Church of Scotland is the established church in 
Scotland, despite not being controlled by the state as in England (Weller, 2001). 
Those who said they were not affiliated with a religion accounted for 27.55% of the 
population. However, 5.49% provided no response to the question. The total sum of 
those who did not answer the religion question or said that they had no religion was 
therefore 33.04%. Roman Catholicism was found to be the second highest Christian 
denomination in Scotland with 15.88% of the population claiming Catholicism as 
their current religion. The population has a history of affiliation to the Roman 
Catholic faith, which although being affected by the events of the Reformation, was 
strengthened during the nineteenth century when immigration from Ireland brought 
more Roman Catholics intent on finding work and settling in Scotland (Weller, 
2001). 
 Aside from Christianity, those with no religious affiliation, and those unwilling 
to disclose their religion, Islam is the second largest religion represented in Scotland 
(0.84%), although the report points out that this is still less than 1% of the whole 
population of Scotland. All of the major religions aside from Christianity 
individually accounted for less than 1% of the population. The Analysis of Religion 
in the 2001 Census Summary Report found that these minority religious groups 
tended to be concentrated in large urban areas such as Glasgow and Edinburgh 
(Scottish Executive National Statistics, 2005). 
Table 1.3 Current Religion. Scotland 2001 Census. 
 Religious groups 
Total Scotland 
population 
13- to 15-year-old population  
   None 27.55 31.85 
   Church of Scotland 42.40 36.78 
   Roman Catholic 15.88 17.09 
   Other Christian 6.81 5.25 
   Buddhist 0.13 0.08 
   Hindu 0.11 0.09 
   Jewish 0.13 0.09 
   Muslim 0.84 1.19 
   Sikh 0.13 0.20 
   Another Religion 0.53 0.38 
   Not Answered 5.49 6.99 
(General Register Office for Scotland) 
Current religious affiliation of the 13- to 15- year-old population 
The percentages of the 13- to 15- year-old adolescents in Scotland mirror those of 
the population. The highest percentage of affiliation among 13- to 15-year-old 
adolescents is the Church of Scotland (36.78%). Again, those with no current 
religion formed the second highest group (31.85%). The third highest group was 
Roman Catholicism (17.09%). The percentage of 13- to 15-year-old adolescents who 
did not answer the current religion question was higher than that of the whole 
population of Scotland (6.99% compared with 5.49%). Similarly, the world 
religions, aside from Christianity count for less than 1% of the 13- to 15-year-old 
population with the exception of the Muslim population (1.19%). 
Religion of upbringing of the general population  
The results of the religion of upbringing question are displayed in table 1.4 census 
found that the highest percentage of people in Scotland had been brought up in the 
Church of Scotland (47.27%). The second highest group were those who were not 
brought up with a religious affiliation (17.53%). This was followed by Roman 
Catholicism (16.98%).  The next highest group were those who belong to other 
Christian denominations (8.38%). These data demonstrate that Scotland is a 
predominantly Christian country with a high level of people who have not been 
brought up with a religion. The major world religions are not as well represented but 
this is perhaps because these religions have been introduced to Scotland more 
recently than Christianity which is historically more established. Each of the major 
world religions of upbringing account for less than 1% of the population. 
Table 1.4 Religion of upbringing. Scotland 2001 Census. 
(General Register Office for Scotland) 
Religion of upbringing of the 13- to 15-year-old population 
The highest religion of upbringing among 13- to 15-year-old adolescents within the 
Scottish population was the Church of Scotland (37.40%). The 13- to 15-year-old 
adolescents who had not been brought up with a religion numbered 27.64% and the 
13- to 15-year-old adolescents whose upbringing was Roman Catholic numbered 
16.52%. The percentage of 13- to 15-year-olds who did not answer the question 
about religion of upbringing numbered 11.30% which was a much higher number 
than that of the whole population. Again, the world religions aside from Christianity 
accounted for less than 1% of the group with the exception of Islam which 
accounted 1.18% of the 13- to 15-year-old group. With regard to the whole 
 Religious groups 
Total population 
13- to 15-year-old population  
   None 17.53 27.64 
   Church of Scotland 47.27 37.40 
   Roman Catholic 16.98 16.52 
   Other Christian 8.38 5.35 
   Buddhist 0.09 0.08 
   Hindu 0.12 0.09 
   Jewish 0.15 0.10 
   Muslim 0.83 1.18 
   Sikh 0.13 0.19 
   Another Religion 0.17 0.15 
   Not Answered 8.35 11.30 
population it would seem that a smaller proportion are being raised in a religious 
environment currently than was the case previously. 
Summary of findings in Scotland 
The data demonstrate that the 13- to 15-year-old group in Scotland are less religious 
than that of the whole population. This may be due to their parents being less 
affiliated with a religion and so less likely to bring their children up within a 
religious community. This is supported by Voas and Crockett (2005), who have 
argued the case that decline in both belief as well as belonging is generational and 
the direct result of the rate at which religion is transmitted from the parent to the 
child. The patterns also show that there are more Christians and non-religious people 
than other religious groups in Scotland. There is a low representation of major world 
religions aside from Christianity in Scotland. 
England and Wales 
Religion of the general population 
A total of 49,138,838 people answered the religion question in England. 2,903,085 
people answered the religion question in Wales. The total answers to the religion 
question in England and Wales collectively was 52,041, 916. The percentages from 
the religion question for the 2001 census in England and Wales for the general 
population and the 13- to 15-year-old population are shown in table 1.5.  
 The religion that the highest percentage of the population say they are affiliated 
with is Christianity (71.75%). The second highest group are those who say that they 
have no religion (14.81%) after this was the group who chose not to state or disclose 
their religion (7.71%). Following Christianity, the religion with the second highest 
percentage of the population who say it is their religion is Islam, with 2.97% of 
residents in England and Wales stating it as their religion. Those who stated that they 
were Hindu accounted for 1.06% of the population of England and Wales. The other 
religions from the six world religions accounted for less than one percent of the 
population, but were still present in England and Wales. Those who were Sikh 
formed 0.63% of the population; Jews accounted for 0.50% of the population. Those 
who said that they came from any other religion were grouped together and formed 
0.29% of the population, and Buddhists formed 0.28% of the population.  
 These figures demonstrate that the majority of the population of England and 
Wales still affiliate themselves with the Christian tradition, whatever denomination 
this may be. However there is also a significant proportion of the population who 
claim that they are not religious or do not wish to state what their religion is. There is 
an Islamic presence in England and Wales but less than 5% state Islam as their 
religion. Whilst there is a presence of the other four major world religions, their 
presence is not as visible as Christianity and Islam. 
Religion and the 13- to 15- year-old population 
The results of the young people in England and Wales mirror that of the whole 
population in terms of the patterns which emerge concerning the answer to the 
religion question. Once again, the highest percentage of the population stated that 
their religion was Christian (68.96%). The other groups with high percentages were 
those with no religion (15.57%) and those who chose not to state their religion 
(7.93%). These figures reflect the trends of the general population of England and 
Wales. Additionally Islam emerged as the second highest religious group in England 
and Wales with 4.62% of 13- to 15-year-old young people in England and Wales 
stating this as their religion. Despite being less than 5% of the 13- to 15 year-old 
population this is still a significant population of Muslims in England and Wales. 
The other four major world religions were not as clearly represented as Christianity 
and Islam but there were 13- to 15-year-olds who stated that their religion was Hindu 
(1.26%), Sikh (0.87%), Jewish (0.41%), Buddhist (0.19%) and any other religion 
(0.16%) meaning that the other religions are visible in England and Wales. 
Table 1.5 Religious affiliation. England and Wales 2001 Census 
(Office for National Statistics) 
Summary of England and Wales 
The census data demonstrates that Christianity seems to be the primary religion in 
England and Wales which the majority of people still claim to have as their religion. 
This is unsurprising as England and Wales have long been acknowledged as 
Christian countries and there is a well-established history of Christianity in England 
and Wales. The Queen is head of the Church of England, a denomination within 
Religious groups 
Total population 
13- to 15-year-old population  
Christian 71.75 68.96 
   Buddhist 0.28 0.19 
   Hindu 1.06 1.26 
   Muslim 2.97 4.62 
   Sikh 0.63 0.87 
   Jewish 0.50 0.41 
   Other 0.29 0.18 
   Not Stated 7.71 7.93 
   No Religion 14.81 15.57 
Christianity but there is also a history of Catholicism in England. There is a culture 
of church and chapel attendance in both England and Wales which, while it may be 
that religious practice is not as high as it once was, affiliation to Christianity may 
still be seen by many as the norm. 
 There are also a great number of the population who are not religious or did not 
wish to disclose their religion on the census paper. The results of the data for young 
people find that the patterns of young peoples religions follow closely with that of 
the general population. 
 England and Wales have very similar religious demographics. England is 
perhaps slightly more multicultural than Wales but it is larger than Wales and 
includes more urban areas than Wales. Urban areas have a tendency to be more 
multicultural than rural areas because industry brought more migrant workers from 
other cultures which resulted in the introduction of multiculturalism to the United 
Kingdom. 
Wales 
Religion of the general population 
The results of the religion of the general population in Wales can be found in table 
1.6. The religious group which the majority of the population claimed to belong to 
was Christianity with 71.90% of the Welsh population stating that this was their 
religion. The group with the second highest percentage were the group who said that 
they did not have a religion (18.53%), followed by those who chose not to state their 
religion (8.07%). Wales differs from England in that all of the major world religions 
aside from Christianity account for less than 1% of the population. Islam still 
remains the largest religion aside from Christianity even though 0.75% of the 
population stated that they were Muslim. Those who said that they were from any 
other religion formed the next highest with 0.24%. Those who claimed that their 
religion was Buddhist or Hindu in the 2001 census accounted for 0.19% each. Those 
who said that Judaism was their religion formed 0.08% of the population whilst 
those who said that Sikhism was their religion accounted for 0.07% of the 
population. Therefore religion in Wales remains slightly more mono-religious than 
multi-religious. 
Table 1.6 Religion Question Wales. From the 2001 census. 
Religious groups 
Total population 
13-to 15-year-old population 
Christian 71.90 68.99 
Buddhist 0.19 0.09 
Hindu 0.19 0.18 
Muslim 0.75 1.19 
Sikh 0.07 0.13 
Jewish 0.08 0.05 
Other 0.24 0.12 
Not Stated 8.07 8.86 
No Religion 18.53 20.39 
(Office for National Statistics) 
Religion of the 13- to 15-year-old population 
The results of the religion of the 13- to 15-year-old population in Wales can be found 
in table 1.6. The data demonstrated that Christianity was the religion that most 13- to 
15 year-old year old stated they were with 68.99% of the young people stating that 
their religion was Christian. This was followed by the group which stated that they 
did not have a religion (20.39%) this yet again matches the population patterns and 
trends. Those who chose not to state their religion accounted for 8.86% of the 10- to 
15 year-old population. The percentage of 13- to 15-year-olds in the population who 
stated their religion as Muslim was 1.19 thus the order of the top four groups among 
13- to 15-year-old population in Wales matches the pattern which is found in the 
population of Wales as a whole and across the whole population of England. The 
other four world religions are present in Wales but are a small minority in 
comparison to the higher four. There were 0.17% of the 13- to 15- year old 
population who described themselves as Hindu, 0.18% who stated their religion as 
Sikh, 0.13% who stated their religion as Buddhist, and 0.05% who stated their 
religion as Jewish. 
Summary of findings in Wales 
The data from the census demonstrate that religious affiliation in Wales is in many 
ways similar to religious affiliation in England. Affiliation to Christianity remains 
the highest religious affiliation followed by those who claim no affiliation to any 
religious group. The difference in religious diversity across the two populations is 
demonstrated by the lower representation of affiliation to the world religions in 
Wales than in England.  
England 
Religion of the general population 
Table 1.7 shows the data which demonstrates religious affiliation amongst the 
population of England. The highest percentage of people in England who answered 
the religion question stated that Christianity was their religion (71.74%). The second 
and third highest percentage of people were those who stated that they had no 
religion (14.59%) and those who chose not to state their religion (7.68%). 
 The religious group with the highest percentage after Christianity was Islam 
with 3.10% of the English population stating that they were Muslim. All of the major 
world religions aside from Christianity account for less than five percent of the 
population but there is still a presence of Hindus (1.11%), Sikhs (0.67%), Jews 
(0.52%), Buddhists (0.28%), and other religions (0.29%). 
Religion of the 13-to 15-year-old population 
The religious affiliation of the 13-to 15-year-old population is demonstrated in table 
1.7 and generally mirrors that of the religious affiliation of the total population 
within England. Christianity still remains the religion which most people are 
affiliated with (68.96). This is followed by those who are not affiliated with a 
religion (15.27%) and those who did not state their religious affiliation (7.88%). 
There is evidence of religious diversity among the 13-to 15-year-old population with 
Islam being the most highly affiliated of the major world religions aside from 
Christianity (4.83%), and Hinduism (1.33%), Sikhism (0.91%), Buddhism (0.20%) 
and Judaism (0.43%) finding representation among the 13-to 15-year-old population.  
Table 1.7 Religious affiliation. England 2001 Census. 
Religious groups 
Total population  
13- to 15-year-old population  
   Christian 71.74 68.96 
   Buddhist 0.28 0.20 
   Hindu 1.11 1.33 
   Muslim 3.10 4.83 
   Sikh 0.67 0.91 
   Jewish 0.52 0.43 
   Other 0.29 0.19 
   Not Stated 7.69 7.88 
   No Religion 14.59 15.27 
(Office for National Statistics) 
Summary of England 
For both the total population and the 13- to 15-year old population in England, 
Christianity is the religion with the highest level of religious affiliation. The groups 
which follow Christianity in both cases are no religion and religion not stated. 
 There is evidence of affiliation to the six major world religions within the 
population of England both among the total population and among the 13- to 15-
year-old population. However there are no clear patterns concerning whether 
religious affiliation among 13-to 15-year-olds is higher or lower than the total 
population. 
Considerations when analysing census data 
When interpreting data from a national census, and when presenting statistics from 
it, it is important to note that the results do not tell the full story of the religious 
situation in the United Kingdom, nor should it be completely relied upon. The layout 
of each census paper has its strengths and weaknesses. 
 Unlike the Northern Ireland census question concerning religion, the England and 
Wales census only contains one religion question. Since there are many aspects to religion 
including belief, practice and affiliation, to use just one question and expect a completed 
explanation of the state of religion in England is optimistic. The census in Scotland is clear 
that it investigates religious affiliation by asking about religious belonging. The difficulty 
therefore with the England and Wales religion question is that it is not clear whether it 
refers to religious belief or practice and is therefore open to interpretation by the individual 
who completes the question.  
  In the case of Scotland, to get a complete number of adherents to a religious 
denomination, group or faith, it is sometimes necessary to collapse several codes because 
adherents do not always label themselves identically, some may have abbreviated their 
response using a general term which could apply to several religious groups. (General 
Register Office for Scotland, 2003). Therefore the census may not always reflect the 
intention of the original respondent. As an example of situations where this would have 
occurred there are several denominations within the Pentecostal tradition and these could 
be collapsed together and entered into the Other Christian category when the participant 
had wished to be recorded within the dataset as that particular branch of the Pentecostal 
tradition. 
 Another difference in the England and Wales census paper is the grouping 
together of denominations into the one category of Christianity. This is not the case 
in Northern Ireland or Scotland. Whilst it is acknowledged that in England and 
Wales there is not such a recent history of struggles between different denominations 
of Christianity which might require demographic data to show how Christianity is 
represented in England and Wales.  Such a study would benefit to those using the 
census data to make accurate claims about religion in the United Kingdom, with a 
particular focus on the different denominations of Christianity to be able to show a 
cross comparison of the diversity in Christian denominations across the United 
Kingdom. This would also be particularly beneficial for a study which addresses the 
difference in attitudes among pupils attending schools with a religious character such 
as Anglican schools and Roman Catholic schools across the United Kingdom. 
 Additionally when bearing in mind the percentages of teenage responses to the 
census it is important to remember that a census is set up to be completed by each 
household, rather than each individual. It is therefore most likely to be the head of 
the household who fills in the form meaning that the teenager may not have the 
chance to answer for themselves in the way that they might personally choose to. 
 Another problem with making claims about this data is how religion should be 
defined or how it has been interpreted by those who have completed the census form. 
The question arises as to whether someone who considers themselves to be religious 
is someone who has a religious belief, or someone who practices a religion, or both. 
Until there is an understanding of the meaning of the questions or how the individual 
who completed the form interpreted the question, which may be difficult, it makes 
any claims that are made about religion in Scotland hard to justify. 
General conclusions for the population of the United Kingdom as a whole 
The main conclusions which can be drawn are that the United Kingdom still remains 
predominantly Christian as demonstrated by the data. However the results of the 
census also demonstrate that the number of people who are not religious is rising in 
the United Kingdom as demonstrated by the increase in those reporting to have no 
religion in the 2011 census compared to the 2001 census (Office for National 
Statistics, 2012). 
 The differing religious and sectarian dynamics in each country have an effect on 
the religious figures and statistics for that country, with some nations such as 
Northern Ireland, and Wales having fewer visible indications of religious diversity in 
the population in comparison with Scotland, or even more visibly England. 
 Concerning the results of the teenage population within the census have in most 
cases mirrored the results of the general population. Despite these figures being 
useful and collected from a trustworthy source they could be argued as not being 
completely reliable, especially for understanding young people in the United 
Kingdom and religious diversity. Therefore an investigation which asks the young 
people directly about religion and religious diversity is required. 
2. Religious diversity reflected in holy days and 
festivals 
Introduction  
This chapter will study the celebration of religious festivals and holy days, which act 
as a tangible reflection of the religious diversity which exists in the United Kingdom. 
The Macmillan Dictionary of Religion (1994) claims a festival to be a wide term 
which implies a joyous occasion for the community which frequently has a religious 
focus attached. Additionally the Oxford Dictionary of World Religions (Bowker, 
1997) states that festivals are celebrations which are characterised by an ordered and 
ritualised nature.   
 Festivals often arise from a social need to acknowledge events in a religious 
calendar and mark occasions in the history of that particular religious community, 
thus looking back to the past and emphasising tradition while providing a relevance 
and significance of the religious tradition to the present day. Festivals and holy days 
often follow designated periods of prayer and fasting.  A holy day often gives rise to 
a festival because it is a day marked to be set apart as different from everyday life.   
 The chapter will first pinpoint some of the most well known festivals in the 
major world religions of Buddhism, Christianity Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, and 
Sikhism which are present in the United Kingdom and discuss the meaning which 
lies at the heart of them and some of the rituals which accompany them, before 
examining how they are celebrated in the United Kingdom. The chapter will then 
investigate the responses made by educators, councils and local business which help 
to make the celebration of these festivals easier and help to raise their public profile 
by making them more accessible to the general public. By examining how these 
festivals are celebrated in the United Kingdom, the physical presence of other 
religions and cultures, as tangible evidence of religious diversity in the United 
Kingdom, becomes apparent. This provides a platform for understanding attitudes 
toward religious diversity in the United Kingdom among the young people who have 
grown up in this society and have some sense of the beliefs and values which they 
see being practised by others.  
 The chapter concludes that the diverse religious beliefs of people within the 
United Kingdom become visible through the public celebration of festivals. This 
sign of religious diversity therefore informs the research questions and dissertation 
because, by examining one of the visible signs of religious diversity such as 
festivals, and the way in which they are reflected publically in society, the beliefs 
and values of the religion or faith celebrating that festival becomes apparent. 
What religious festivals say about each religious tradition 
Christianity 
There is a close connection between the Christian Church and the state in the United 
Kingdom, especially in England and Scotland where there remain Established 
Churches recognised by the state (Weller, 2001). Therefore, the principle festivals 
follow the Christian calendar and are also celebrated as public holidays. Rankin 
(1998) describes how the festivals of the Christian year allow the theology of the 
faith to be celebrated in life. Christian festivals follow an annual cycle which begins 
with Advent marking the beginning of the Christian year in preparation for the 
festival of Christmas which marks the birth of Christ (Gwynne, 2009; McGrath, 
1997). Then following the birth of Christ the calendar follows his life on earth, 
through crucifixion, resurrection and ascension, and ends with Pentecost and the 
continuing presence of Christ within the Trinity (Bowker, 1997). The two principal 
feasts in the church calendar are Christmas and Easter (Gwynne, 2009). 
 Christmas is celebrated with congregations gathering in churches to celebrate 
with special liturgies and music (Rankin, 1998), and is also celebrated in the home 
with the exchanging of gifts as a reminder of the gifts given to Jesus by the wise 
men, eating special foods and decorating homes (McGrath, 1997; Smith, 1996).  
 Easter, in contrast to Christmas, is known as a moveable feast and does not fall 
on a fixed date because it is dictated by the lunar Jewish calendar to coincide with 
the festival of Passover. Easter, the festival which celebrates the crucifixion and 
resurrection of Christ, is celebrated in the spring and celebrates the saving power of 
Christ and the eternal love of God (McGrath, 1997). As the festival is a celebration 
of new life, this was traditionally a time when baptisms took place. This is still the 
case and candidates are often presented for confirmation at this time. As with the 
festival of Christmas, there are also specific liturgies for the Easter Celebrations 
including a vigil, the entry of the new Pascal candle into the Church, and the renewal 
of baptism vows (Rankin, 1998). Many of the traditions which take place at this 
festival are pre-Christian but have been adapted for Christian symbolism, for 
example the giving of eggs and floral decorations (Smith, 1996). Like other festivals 
special food is eaten such as lamb and Easter Simnel cake. 
 While there are other feasts in the Christian Church calendar which are 
celebrated, the public significance of Easter and Christmas  lies in the fact that they 
are nationally celebrated with public holidays which allow the whole country to 
celebrate and participate in the festivals (Miller, 1995). 
Judaism 
Festivals in Judaism include the observance of the Jewish New Year or Rosh 
Hashanah (Gwynne, 2009). Jewish festivals also arise from agricultural traditions 
such as Purim, and commemorations of the events in which God has interacted with 
and looked after the Jewish people such as the Jewish festival of lights which is 
known as Hanukkah (Bowker, 1997). The three main festivals in the Jewish calendar 
are the three pilgrim festivals of Passover, Shavuot, and Sukkot (Pilkington, 1995). 
Like the Christian festivals mentioned previously, many Jewish festivals are 
celebrated with special meals in the home, holiday from work, and special liturgy at 
the synagogue (Pilkington, 1995).  
 Jewish New Year or Rosh Hashanah follows the Day of Atonement. It is marked 
by attendance at the synagogue and the wearing of new clothes. Sweet foods are also 
eaten in the family home as a way of encouraging a good year ahead (Gwynne, 
2009). 
 Passover or Pesach is the festival of unleavened bread and lasts for a week 
(Woodward, 2009). It commemorates the exodus of the Jews from slavery in Egypt 
(Bluck, Gilliat-Ray, Graham, Singh & Zavos, 2012). This festival takes place in the 
home and only bread which is unleavened is eaten as a reminder of the lack of time 
to let bread rise before the Jews left Egypt (Neusner, 1997). As well as looking to the 
tradition of the past and the history of the Jewish people, the festival looks forward 
to the rebuilding of Israel and the coming of Elijah (Bowker, 1997).  
 Shavuot or the festival of weeks has agricultural origins and is a late spring or 
early summer festival (Macmillan, 1994) which falls fifty days after the first day of 
Passover. The festival commemorated the giving of the Torah to Moses on Mount 
Sinai (Smith, 2006). As the theme within the festival is the revelation of the law, 
Jewish schools in the synagogues also hold graduation ceremonies at this time 
(Neusner, 1997). It is celebrated by gathering together in the synagogue where the 
book of Ruth and the Ten Commandments are read. The synagogue is also decorated 
with green plants which commemorate the agricultural origins of the festival 
(Pilkington, 1995). 
 The festival of Purim commemorates the deliverance of Jews from a plot to 
massacre them as recorded in the Esther. The scroll of Esther is read out in the 
synagogue (Gwynne, 2009). Dressing up and a carnival atmosphere are common and 
gifts of food are often sent to family and to the poor. The festival of Sukkot or the 
Jewish festival of booths is another festival which commemorates the Jewish people 
being delivered by the saving power of God. It is also a festival with agricultural 
origins and it recalls the story Leviticus 23:42 which records the time that the Jewish 
people lived in the wilderness. As a reminder of this, a booth is built in the home that 
resembles a shelter in the wilderness. The liturgy follows the theme of harvest and a 
study of Deuteronomy (Pilkington, 1995). 
  The festival of lights in Judaism is the festival of Hannukah which lasts for a 
period of eight days in December (Gwynne, 2009). It commemorates the purification 
and re-dedication of the temple after its destruction and the miracle of the oil lamp 
lasting eight days when there was only enough oil to burn for one day (Pilkington, 
1995). In Jewish homes lights are placed in windows or outside a house. One candle 
is lit per day on the menorah and special prayers are recited, presents are given and 
games are played, including the spinning of the dradel (Smith, 1996). 
Hinduism 
The Hindu spring festival is known as Holi, the festival of colours. Like some other 
religious festivals it has its roots in agriculture and celebrates life and fertility. Holi 
has been described as a carnival of reversals and riot where roles and ranks are 
reversed and merrymaking takes place (Bowker, 1997). Coloured water is thrown at 
people and practical jokes take place (Gwynne, 2009). There are also games similar 
to the games which Krishna would have played, such as reaching sweetened milk 
which is hung from a tree. Bonfires are lit and coconuts and popcorn are cooked on 
the fire to act as a symbol of offering harvested grains to God (Jackson, 1998). 
 The winter festival of Diwali or festival of lights is a reminder of light 
triumphing over darkness and lasts for five days. It is celebrated by both Hindus and 
Sikhs. Its importance for Hindus lies in the story of Rama rescuing his wife Sita 
from captivity, and while bringing her home in darkness being illuminated on the 
journey by people placing lamps in the window to light their way (Gwynne, 2009). 
Its importance for Sikhs lies in the commemoration of the release of Guru Hargobind 
and his followers which was originally celebrated by lighting up the temple. For this 
reason fireworks and bonfires are lit and homes and public places are decorated with 
dramatic displays of electric light. The festival is also marked by exchanging gifts 
and new clothes being worn. Jackson (1998) highlights that in some areas of the 
United Kingdom, the Hindu Diwali celebrations also mark an opportunity to 
participate in ceremonies where Hindu businesses can make and renew vows of 
honesty and hard work in the trading of the coming year (Gwynne, 2009). 
Sikhism 
Festivals in Sikhism can be divided into two categories, melas and gurpurbs. Melas 
are festivals where meetings and a carnival atmosphere occur. One example of a 
Sikh mela is the festival of Diwali mentioned previously.  
 Gurpurb festivals are holidays of the Gurus and commemorate the births and 
deaths of the Gurus or major events in their lives such as accessions. One example of 
a Gurpurb is the festival of Baisakhi. This festival marks the beginning of the Sikh 
religious calendar and is when the Gurdwara committee are elected. This festival 
also commemorates the founding of the Khalsa by Guru Gobi Singh and the 
initiation of the first Khalsa Sikhs. On this festival Sikhs are initiated to become 
Khalsa Sikhs and adopt the five Ks and new names (Nesbitt, 2005). Other major 
Gurpurb festivals include the birthdays of Guru Nanak and Guru Gobind Singh as 
well as the martyrdom of Guru Arjan and Guru Tegh Bahadur. In the United 
Kingdom the birthdays of Guru Nanak and Guru Gobind Singh are marked with 
street processions where the area has a Sikh community. The processions are led by 
five people who represent the first five men to join the Kalsah (Nesbitt, 2005). They 
are followed by a float carrying the Guru Granth Sahib which is decorated. The 
procession is accompanied by hymns in honour of the guru and martial arts displays. 
Langar offerings of sweets are also distributed to eat (Kaur-Singh, 1998).  
Islam 
Like the religion of Judaism, the religion of Islam calculates its festivals according to 
a lunar calendar and the reasons behind the Festivals are dictated by the directions of 
the Quran and follow the events in the life of the prophet Muhammed.  
 The two principal festivals in Islam are Id al-Adha which commemorates the 
willingness of Ibrahim to sacrifice his son Ismail. On this occasion Muslims gather 
to pray together in the Mosque and an animal is sacrificed for the community by the 
Imam, and families then sacrifice an animal. The family will eat a portion of what 
has been sacrificed but a third must be given to the poor (Cole & Morgan, 2000). 
This is also the culmination of the Hajj in Mecca (Ruthven, 1997).  
 The second principal festival in Islam is Id al Fitr which is the feast which marks 
the month-long fast of Ramadan and the beginning of the month of Shawwal 
(Gwynne, 2009). The festival lasts for two to three days and begins once the new 
moon is sighted which marks the end of Ramadan. The festival begins with special 
congregational prayers in the mosque which last from dawn until noon. After the 
prayers in the mosque, families gather together in their homes wearing new clothes 
and exchanging gifts and sweets (Cole & Morgan, 2000). Special food is also eaten 
in the home for Eid-ul -Fitr and alms (Zakat) are given to help the poor (Macmillan, 
1994). Both of these festivals are times when holidays from school and work occur 
to celebrate the festival. Riadh El Droubie (1998) highlights how Islamic festivals 
are times for reducing community tensions, building on positive relationship and 
fulfilling the obligation to care for the poor (Gwynne, 2009). It must also be noted 
that, while Islam is a religion which encourages prayer to take place anywhere at the 
allotted time for which Muhammed called, the Islamic festivals are times when 
prayer in the mosque is encouraged as part of the celebrations. 
Buddhism  
Buddhism is another faith which follows the lunar calendar rather than the Gregorian 
(Bowker, 1997). Therefore many Buddhist festivals fall on the occasion of a full 
moon (Gombrich, 1998). The festival of primary importance in Buddhism is Wesak 
in April. This is a festival which marks several important events in the life of the 
Buddha, notably the occasion of his birth, enlightenment, and his passing into 
Nirvana (Erriker, 2001). It is marked by attending the temple in simple white clothes 
to give food as an offering, to pray, to hear a Dharma talk, and to meditate. 
 The second most important festival which reminds Buddhists of the importance 
of the Buddhist community is the festival of Sangha. It is when the Buddha began 
his teaching and is a time when the commitment of Buddhist monks and nuns is 
celebrated. It is marked with a celebration of the sangha, a rededication and 
reinforced commitment to the teachings of the Buddha, and gifts are also exchanged 
on this day. Worship on this day includes chanting, meditation, the lighting of lamps, 
and focus on the teachings of the Buddha. 
 Additionally, Dharma day is a date in the Buddhist calendar which marks the 
beginning of not only the Buddhas teaching but consequently the beginning of the 
religion of Buddhism (Erriker, 2001). Having originally had a cultural association 
with the start of the monsoon season and the entry into the monastery for deeper 
reflection until the weather permitted travelling and teaching again, Dharma day is 
now marked in the United Kingdom by the study of the Buddhas teachings 
(Gwynne, 2009). Buddhist festivals are often marked by attendance at the Vihara or 
temple wearing white simple clothes as a symbol of purity to give offerings to the 
Buddha or the Buddhist monks and to reflect on Buddhist teachings (Erriker, 2001).  
 Buddhist festivals are celebrated in the United Kingdom but many have been 
adapted from the culture in which they originated to assimilate with the western 
culture of the United Kingdom (Gwynne, 2009), particularly with regard to the date 
on which they are celebrated, which is often moved to the Sunday closest to the date 
of the festival which allows more people to participate in the celebrations without 
having to make special allowances to avoid attendance at work or school in order to 
attend the Vihara. It must also be noted that many of the festivals in Buddhism were 
centred around events which primarily concerned those living a monastic Buddhist 
life (Gombrich, 1998). This perhaps explains why many Buddhist festivals which 
take place in the United Kingdom are more private rather than public. 
Collective elements in festivals 
The festivals mentioned have both collective themes of celebrations and 
commemorations of important events in the calendars of the faith and collective 
elements as to how they are celebrated, especially when the celebrations are made 
public. The occurring practices of celebration are the collective gathering for 
worship in religious buildings with seasonal liturgy, the emphasis of the gathering of 
the family in the home, the eating of symbolic foods, the giving of gifts, and the 
symbols and decorations to indicate the arrival of the festival. But the public displays 
of fireworks at Diwalli, the retail of chocolate Easter eggs in shops and public 
displays of nativity scenes, or the sight of Menoras in the windows of Jewish homes 
is a tangible demonstration of the religious diversity which exists in the United 
Kingdom, thus placing the research both into an appropriate and relevant context and 
providing a justification for the research to take place (Gwynne, 2009). 
How religious festivals are celebrated publically in the United Kingdom 
The religious festivals which have been discussed in this section and which have 
been found to contain similar elements of celebration have become increasingly 
more visible in the twenty-first century in the terms of the way that they are 
celebrated in the public sphere. During the 1980s Gillespie (1989) conducted 
research which highlighted that Asian families were showing video footage of public 
celebrations of religious festivals to their children to demonstrate how festivals such 
as Holi were celebrated publically in India because these festivals were not being 
celebrated publically in the United Kingdom. There are now many places where 
festivals are now celebrated in the public sphere, for example the Eid celebrations in 
Southwark, (Southwark Council, 2012) and city councils funding interactive 
exhibitions which demonstrate the celebration of Holi through art activities, Indian 
food and story telling (South Asian arts, 2013). Multicultural areas of cities and 
towns have responded to the religious and cultural needs of the residents around 
them and have begun to hold public celebrations both for the benefit of those who 
assign to that religion, but also for the purposes of introducing those of other faiths 
to the beliefs and practices of that religion and to foster positive community 
relations. An example of this is the celebrations of Diwalli in Leicester which is 
organised by Leicester City Council. This festival draws thousands each year to see 
the lights, fireworks, hear contemporary Asian music artists, try traditional Asian 
foods, and be part of the celebrations (Virdee, 2009).  
 Similarly, Hindu temples and Mandirs for example at the BAPS Shri 
Swaminarayan Mandir in Neasden, London hold Holi celebrations where 
congregations from other faith groups are invited. Another example of the increased 
visibility of religious celebrations is demonstrated where areas such as the London 
Borough of Richmond upon Thames have begun to provide public spaces for the 
celebrations where people can still carry out the traditional celebratory activities 
such as throwing paint and have parties as a way of continuing to observe their 
festivals in the traditional way whilst allowing others to participate who are new to 
the beliefs, practices and celebrations. Public celebrations and the extended 
invitation to all allow these religions to foster an environment of understanding 
concerning their beliefs and values through the festivals which they celebrate 
(Levinson, 1996). This can extend as far as those who know little about the festivals 
and the religions from which they arise, whether this be because they come from an 
alternative religious or non-religious background. 
 Within the field of education, a recognition of religious festivals as a tool for 
teaching Religious Education and Citizenship has begun to be embraced positively. 
Schools have begun to take note of the importance of understanding the alternative 
religions and cultures through teaching about and experience of religious festivals. 
Many schools have begun to encourage their teachers and pupils of different faiths to 
plan parties for Eid. By using festivals as an educational tool cultures and heritage 
can be taught to pupils and help them to understand the importance of building 
communities (Levinson, 1996). 
 Additionally, schools have begun to work together with faith leaders to arrange 
religious education weeks which focus on festivals in practical ways to aid the 
understanding of their pupils. The Wrexham Tapestry of Life and Faith festival is 
one such example of this in which local education authorities and SACRE groups 
have provided pupils with opportunities to attend events and workshops over the 
period of a school week which have included Islam, music and art workshops, 
interactive Judaism, which has allowed pupils to participate in Seder meals and hear 
stories about the Ashkenazi Jewish community and Buddhism, in which pupils 
attended workshops and meditation exercises, cultural food demonstrations, visits to 
places of worship, and talks from religious leaders. Events such as these provide 
pupils with both knowledge and tangible experiences of how religious beliefs are 
demonstrated through practice, and how festivals in different religions and cultures 
are celebrated (Logan, 2006). The willingness of educators and faith leaders to 
conduct events like these, results in a tangible display and clear knowledge of the 
religiously diverse society that the United Kingdom has now become. 
 Commercial retailers are also supporting the diversity of cultures and religions 
in the United Kingdom and making the public more aware of them by creating the 
relevant seasonal displays of products for sale in their stores. Many supermarkets 
have been recently seen to celebrate religious festivals by displaying and selling 
foods and decorations for religious festivals and one store in the town of Luton has 
created banners and signs which wish shoppers a happy Id al Fitwr following the 
month of Ramadan.  
 Therefore festivals of the world religions are increasingly being celebrated in the 
public eye and to a certain extent this has been aided through the support of local 
county and city councils; school education schemes, Local Educational Authorities 
and SACRES; and the support provided by commerce and local businesses. 
However, it could be argued that the most important feature of these public 
celebrations is the invitation which is extended to the general public (who may have 
little or no understanding of how the festivals are celebrated and the religions which 
celebrate them) and the support which is being provided for the general public to 
appreciate the festivals which are fundamental to the key beliefs of different 
religious groups. 
Issues 
Thus far this chapter has demonstrated that, while there is an increasing public 
awareness of religious diversity through the festivals which are celebrated in the 
United Kingdom, this is still not a widely shared knowledge where the majority of 
the public are aware of the traditions of the festivals and the religious beliefs which 
accompany them. For example despite grand celebrations in multicultural areas of 
large towns and cities such as Leicester and London, these festivals often pass 
unnoticed in other areas where there is less religious diversity.  
 One of the main issues with celebrations and festivals is that they are often 
celebrated by the members of that religious community but pass unnoticed or with 
minimal acknowledgment by the majority of the public in the United Kingdom 
which has prompted multi-faith groups to run events and projects which show those 
not from the faith about the traditions of the festivals and the beliefs which lie at the 
heart of them, for example the Council of Christians and Jews hosting events which 
teach about Passover (Council of Christians and Jews, 2013). One of the primary 
reasons for this lack of attention is because of the calendar which is used in the 
United Kingdom. The United Kingdom operates on the Gregorian calendar which 
centres around the major Christian festivals (Bowker, 1997). This is the case for the 
majority of the western world and means that many of the national holidays of the 
whole country are focused around Christmas and Easter but not for festivals from 
other religions which operate on alternative calendars (Parrinder, 1998). Therefore, 
there is no special dispensation for festivals such as Id al Fitwr, Rosh Hashanna, or 
Diwali which can go unnoticed by the general public because the calendar does not 
set aside the time to celebrate them. 
 The western calendar also structures its working week around the two day 
weekend of Saturday and Sunday. Sunday was originally the one day of rest to allow 
attendance at church. It marked the first day of the week and the weekly 
commemoration of the resurrection of Christ and was adopted to be a day of rest as a 
Christian equivalent of the Jewish Sabbath. As the working week in the west 
therefore provides Saturday and Sunday as days of rest, the challenge of many 
religious groups has been to adapt their religious festivals, often moving the date in 
order to ensure that the majority can celebrate in the free time that they have rather 
than celebrating on days in which the western working week might prevent 
celebrations (Parrinder, 1998).  
 Another issue concerning the practices which lie at the heart of the religious 
festivals which are increasingly celebrated in the United Kingdom is whether these 
practices and the means or ritual in which they must be carried out are supported. 
One example of this is the difficulty of sacrificial animal slaughter for the festival of 
Eid- ul-Adha.  This has become problematic with the European laws concerning the 
slaughter in registered abattoirs. This required the festival to be adapted in its nature 
with the Imam attending the slaughter to observe that it is conducted in the way 
which ritual demands. This has become problematic if the slaughter needs to take 
place over the course of a weekend when opening hours stop this activity from 
taking place (Ball, 2009). In cases such as these, the festival has been adapted and 
money is sent to the home Islamic country for an animal to be slaughtered there in 
place of a sacrificial animal in the United Kingdom. 
Conclusion and implications for the research 
This chapter has explored the prominence of festivals as a tangible sign of the 
religiously diverse society that the United Kingdom has become. Through exploring 
the meaning in the festivals within Buddhism, Christianity, Hinduism, Islam 
Judaism, and Sikhism which are celebrated both privately in the home and with 
varying degrees of public display in the United Kingdom it becomes evident that 
there are clear elements which are common to each festival, regardless of the faith to 
which they belong. This chapter has built on the findings of chapter one which 
mapped out the presence of religious diversity in the United Kingdom through the 
self-assigned religious affiliation statistics in the 2001 census. With this presence in 
mind, this chapter has introduced how religious affiliations can be seen in practice 
throughout the United Kingdom by means of the way in which these religions 
celebrate their religious festivals and holy days. It has highlighted that these religious 
festivals and holy days are not simply confined to the religions from which they 
come and are no longer primarily celebrated through low key events as they might 
have been when these religious presences first arrived in the United Kingdom. 
Rather, through being celebrated publically they serve as a tangible sign of religious 
practice in the United Kingdom. 
 Examining how festivals and holy days are celebrated in public and the 
encouragement with which this is met from educators, businesses and local councils 
shows that the state of religious diversity is becoming ever more obvious and the 
increased understanding of it encouraged. However, having briefly introduced the 
negative issues which can emerge when planning and celebrating alternative festivals 
in a western culture it is also clear that attitudes toward other religions and 
unfamiliar practices are not yet as positive as they have the potential to be. This 
therefore links to the dissertation because through understanding the attitudes toward 
religious diversity, gaps in understanding can be identified which can lead to a better 
education for tolerance of the beliefs and practices of others.  
 The implications of this chapter and the way in which it informs the current 
research question and shapes the dissertation is that it has presented a picture of the 
religious diversity of the United Kingdom, where the young people who will form 
the sample live. For some, these experiences of religious diversity will be stronger 
than others and these encounters or lack thereof with the religious diversity which 
exists in the United Kingdom will have shaped and formed their attitudes to a certain 
extent. 
3. Religious diversity reflected in dress and food 
Introduction 
In addition to the presence of religious festivals and holy days, another reflection of 
religious diversity in the United Kingdom is through religiously motivated dress and 
the observance of religious food laws. Religious traditions involve aspects of 
encouragement or direction concerning an individuals choice of dress and diet. 
Religious dress and food can act as inward reminders of the beliefs and values of the 
religion to which the individual belongs, but additionally, religious dress and food 
often act as an outward acknowledgment of the beliefs and values embodied by the 
religion and a display of these values to those who may not be so familiar with that 
particular religion or culture. This chapter will explore and define the significance 
first of religious dress and second of religious food to those who choose to adopt it 
and the sources of instruction from which the guidelines come. The issues which this 
can present will then be discussed briefly with examples of cases when religious 
dress or food have acted as a reflection of the diversity of the United Kingdom, yet 
have contrasted with western culture.   
 The chapter will conclude that religious dress and food provide a reflection of 
the diverse beliefs, values and religious practices which exist in the United Kingdom. 
The chapters discussion of the implications and issues which arise from this justify 
an investigation which unites the tangible signs of religious diversity in the United 
Kingdom with the attitudes of the young people who live and have grown up in this 
diverse environment. 
Dress 
The following examples of the directions and obligations for religious dress within 
different religions are by no means exhaustive but highlight that religious dress often 
serves as a reminder to the individual of the core values of the faith, the promises 
which have been made by the individual on being initiated into the faith, and to 
remember the need for humility both before God and others. More importantly for 
this dissertation though is the fact that each of these religious symbols and forms of 
dress have become more visible within the United Kingdom over the recent decades. 
Christianity 
As Christianity is the historic religion of the United Kingdom, Christian dress is less 
overt or tangible than other religions but many Christians choose to wear a cross or 
crucifix around their neck as a reminder of the belief that through the death of Christ 
on the cross and his subsequent resurrection from the dead humankind is granted 
salvation (Gwynne, 2009). Christians also find direction concerning religious dress 
in the guidance which Saint Paul in his letter to the Corinthians 11. 2-6 to the early 
Christians concerning what is appropriate attire when attending church. While this 
was adhered to quite strictly through part of the twentieth century, during the twenty-
first century dress within church has changed considerably and become much more 
relaxed (Gwynne, 2009). 
Sikhism 
Sikh dress was encouraged in the first instance by the tenth Guru of the Sikhs, Guru 
Gobind Singh who instructed that the Five Ks be worn (Nesbitt, 2005). These were 
given their name because the Punjabi names for each symbol each began with the 
letter K. They included the Kesh uncut hair, Kanga comb, Kirpan sword, Kachh 
cotton breeches, and Kara steel or iron bangle (Singh, 2010). Although the turban is 
not one of the five Ks, it is still an element of Sikh religious dress which has been 
encouraged by one of the Gurus and is important because it could be argued that the 
turban is perhaps the symbol in Sikhism which is most externally visible and is 
increasingly becoming worn by women. The Sikh who wears the 5 Ks is recognised 
as a Khalsa Sikh who has taken part in the initiation ceremony to become a full adult 
member of the Sikh faith.  
Judaism 
Jewish expectations of religious dress are clearly stated in the Torah, in books which 
present the law such as Numbers and Deuteronomy. The level at which religious 
dress is adhered to often depends on the level of orthodoxy of the individual for both 
males and females. The yarmulke or kippah which is worn on a daily basis or at least 
to the synagogue by male Jews acts as a reminder of humility before God 
(Pilkington, 1995). Additionally the Zitzit, which are tassels attached to clothing, act 
as a reminder of the duty and identity of a male Jew. For female Jews, the hair, arms 
and legs are often covered as to ensure both humility and modesty. Some Orthodox 
women will also cover their heads and wear clothing which covers the knees, elbows 
and the collar bone (Pilkington, 1995). 
Islam 
Within Islam, the most visible forms of religious dress are those which are worn by 
women, notably the hijab. The word hijab means partition (Pye, 1994) and 
developed as a result of the guidance in the Quran that women should be modest in 
their dress. The hijab therefore protects women from displaying features which may 
imply sexual invitation or promote inappropriate thoughts about women from others 
(Ruthven, 1997). The hijab in the western world covers the hair and neck but other 
garments such as the niqab veil the face, and the burkah covers the whole body with 
the exception of the eyes (Gwynne, 2009). These garments are designed to promote 
the respect and protection of women. 
Buddhism 
In Buddhism the robe worn by Buddhist monks and nuns is designed as a reminder 
of simplicity of living (Gwynne, 2009). While not all Buddhists are monks, the 
symbols which they wear are designed as a similar reminder of balance and 
simplicity in life and when attending the temple, simple plain white clothes are often 
worn. 
Hinduism 
The sari, commonly worn by Hindu women, is a four foot wide piece of cloth of 
varying length which is wrapped around the body, but leaves the midriff bare which 
acts as a symbol of the origin of life (Gwynne, 2009). 
Religious dress in society 
While religious dress reminds the individual of the values of their religion, religious 
dress also acts as a visual and external sign to those who do not belong to that 
particular religion of the individuals religious beliefs and practices (Gwynne, 2009). 
Therefore religious dress acts as one of the tangible signs of religious diversity or 
difference and one of the most obvious means of distinguishing between individuals 
(Parsons, 1994).  
 For this reason religious dress can often cause issues to arise. This in turn can 
influence attitudes toward those of different faiths or cause difficult relations 
concerning how religious dress, which often originates from different cultures, can 
assimilate or be included in a western culture. 
Arising issues concerning religious dress 
Issues concerning religious dress have often become prominent in places where 
uniforms or particular dress codes are required such as in the workplace or in 
schools. Legal battles concerning the right to wear religious dress have become 
commonplace in the twenty-first century despite the absence of a legal ban on 
religious symbols or dress in public places as is the case in other countries within the 
European Union. 
 One of the most prominent legal controversies occurred over the issue of 
employment law, where many Sikhs were denied work because wearing turbans and 
carrying Kirpans was said to be contrary to the demands of employment law 
resulting in employment tribunals for Sikhs who wished to remain in employment 
while also retaining their status as Kalsah Sikhs (Nesbitt, 2005). It has been noted 
that this was not always the case, and that where employment tribunals did not take 
place, many Sikhs broke the law of Khalsa vows to assimilate to the British lifestyle 
and to gain employment (Nesbitt, 2005). While some first generation immigrants 
were willing to adopt these changes and make these compromises, many second 
generation immigrants found this more challenging and began to contest the laws 
which did not support them in the way they would prefer. 
 The 1971 law concerning the compulsory use of the crash helmet when riding a 
motor cycle created controversy concerning whether or not the law should apply to 
Sikh men wearing turbans. Following protests from the Sikh community, the law 
was relaxed, and an exception made for Sikhs in 1976. This is one example of the 
issue of religious dress being becoming visible in society. Other cases in the past 
have included the admission of Sikhs to nightclubs where hats are forbidden as part 
of the dress code and the refusal to wear hard hats on building sites where this is a 
health and safety obligation (Parsons, 1994). 
 Parsons highlights that often when these issues are raised, many have reverted to 
wearing the symbols as a gesture of solidarity, or because the prominence of the 
issue prompts them to think about their own display of religious dress. However, 
Parsons has also attributed the increased numbers who wear religious symbols to the 
fact that employment agreements for Sikhs have improved and to the arrival of holy 
men from the Punjab who have encouraged a renewed commitment to Sikhism 
through outward signs such as the 5 Ks (Parsons, 1994). 
 Singh (2010) has also discussed religious dress, particularly amongst young 
Sikhs in the United Kingdom. In work concerning the visible presence of the turban, 
one of the highest concerns which emerged were increasingly negative attitudes 
toward the turban following the attacks in America on 11 September 2000 (Gohil & 
Sidhu, 2008). As a result of increased media coverage of members of Al-Quaeda 
wearing turbans, many Sikhs became concerned that the association with Al-Quaeda 
would result in negative attitudes towards Sikhs wearing turbans.  
 Additionally, religious dress has sometimes been raised as a problematic issue 
when worn in school and at times has been said to conflict with regulations 
concerning school uniform. Liederman (2000) describes how the issue of religious 
dress has often been more prominent in state schools and is one of the most widely 
debated concerns on a national scale. The earliest example of problems with 
religious dress date to 1990 when two Islamic girls in headscarves were refused 
entry to their classroom in a Manchester school. The matter was resolved by the 
Local Educational Authority but became widely circulated by the media. Coverage 
of this incident, and similar ones which have occurred since, proves that the issue of 
religious dress in public is a reflection of the diverse nature of the United Kingdom 
and can provide an indication of the attitudes concerning religious diversity. It has 
also been argued by Haw (2010) that the wearing of the Hijab has increased for 
political reasons following the war in Afghanistan as a means of Muslims displaying 
to their communities their desire to detach Islam from terrorist activities which are 
portrayed as Islamic. 
 The tangible presence of religious dress in the United Kingdom also generates 
the issue of conflict between eastern and western thought concerning womens 
rights. The most classic examples being when Hijabs, Burkas, and Niqabs are worn 
by women in the United Kingdom. Wide debate takes place about eastern values of 
women being obliged to cover themselves not fitting with the freedom of expression 
through dress, to which women have become entitled over the past century (Kilic, 
Saharso, & Sauer, 2008). 
 Therefore, these issues highlight that religious dress provides a tangible witness 
of an individuals beliefs.  However religious dress can also generate attitudes 
toward that particular faith from others who see religious dress displayed and worn 
in public. These attitudes can stem from underlying beliefs and attitudes about issues 
such as rights, religious freedom, and the perception and expectations of women. 
Conclusion 
This section has identified that religious dress reflects the level of religious diversity 
which exists in the United Kingdom. Dress acts as both a symbolic reminder to the 
individual of their beliefs and values, but also acts as a public testimony to show 
others something of the beliefs and values of the individual and the religious 
tradition from which the individual comes. However, religious dress can cause 
conflict and create division over the simple matter of one group looking different 
from the other. This division or barrier can often inhibit understanding, leading to 
negative attitudes thus prompting the need for research which discovers both the 
negative and the positive attitudes toward religious diversity and points to where a 
lack of understanding prompts a need for better education about religious diversity.  
Another reflection of the religiously diverse society in which young people live is 
through the food which is visible in the United Kingdom. Food can act 
 as an indication of both religious and cultural diversity. This section will examine 
the food laws which exist for the different religions and the way these food laws are 
reflected in society through observances in the family home. The section will then 
examine provisions which are made in public eating places and food shops, and the 
provision of catered food which complies with religious and ethnic food laws in 
institutions such as schools. Through the reflection of religious diversity in food the 
section will conclude that, as food is an element which encompasses the beliefs and 
values of a faith tradition, this feeds into the environment in which young people 
live, thus potentially influencing their attitudes. This provides a grounding to 
investigate the attitudes toward religious diversity in the environment in which 
young people live. 
 The following food laws which the major world religions demand show that 
religious beliefs are intrinsically linked to everyday life. With the ever increasing 
presence of these religions in the United Kingdom the food of the religious and 
cultural beliefs and values of the people who live in the United Kingdom are 
reflected in three ways. First, through the family meals in the home, second through 
public eating places and food shops, and third through catering in institutions such as 
schools.  
Christianity 
Christian food laws are more liberal than the other religions which will be discussed 
later in this section. Traditional beliefs concerning food were encouraged among 
those who were living a monastic life rather than the laity. The exceptions to this 
include the traditional Christian practice of abstaining from meat on a Friday and 
eating fish instead. Some committed Christians still follow this example, although it 
is not as commonplace. Additionally, depending on the level of conservative 
Christian belief, some Christian believers are also encouraged to consume alcohol in 
moderation or abstain from alcohol. 
Judaism 
Jewish food laws are distinctive concerning food which can and cannot be eaten. 
These foods are divided into the categories of Kosher and non-kosher (Lawton, 
2009). The guidance for this originates in the torah and is elaborated in post-torah 
Jewish law which dictates the animals which are clean and those which are unclean 
(Smith, 2005). Additionally clear guidance exists concerning the way in which 
animals are slaughtered and to ensure that all blood is removed from meat before it is 
cooked (Bowker, 1997). These laws and guidelines also include food preparation 
laws such as the prohibition of mixing meat with milk which come from Leviticus in 
the Torah (Pilkington, 1995). These serve as a reminder that God is to be revered 
even through simple acts such as eating and preparing food as well as a reminder of 
how holiness is interlinked with cleanliness (Smith, 2006).   
Islam 
Islamic food laws are rooted in Quranic commands. There are two distinct 
categories of foods which are dictated as lawful and unlawful. Those which are 
lawful are Halal. This refers to the preparation of the food and in the case of meat, 
the way in which the animal was slaughtered. Some more traditional and orthodox 
Islamic food laws also state that food may not be prepared by a menstruating woman 
or by someone who is considered to be an infidel. Foods which are Haram or 
unlawful are foods which are contaminated with blood, the meat from a pig, and 
animals which were discovered to be dead already. The consumption of alcohol is 
also forbidden in Islamic law (Bowker, 1997).  
Hinduism 
Hindu dietary laws are both religious and cultural and influenced by the caste system 
where pure food is sought out and polluted food avoided. As Hinduism focuses on 
the sanctity of all life, many Hindus follow a vegetarian diet which is considered to 
be superior, although it is only Brahmans who are obliged by rule to adopt this 
practice (Bowker, 1997). Whilst some Hindus may choose to eat meat, all Hindus 
avoid eating beef because of the sacred status of the cow. Food also forms an 
important part of Hindu worship and is used as an offering to God. Hinduism also 
prohibits the consumption of intoxicants, although debate continues as to whether 
this extends to alcohol (Bowker, 1997). 
Sikhism 
Sikhism discourages the consumption of meat from an animal which has been killed 
ritually such as halal or kosher meat as directed by Guru Gobind Singh. Many Sikhs 
choose to abstain from meat and eggs (Bowker, 1997). As Sikhism is a religion 
which originates where a vegetarian Punjabi diet was traditional, many Sikhs adopt 
this (Nesbitt, 2005). Hindu influence discouraged Sikhs from eating beef because of 
the sacred symbolism of the cow and Sikhs are also discouraged from consuming 
alcohol especially Kalsah Sikhs (Bowker, 1997). The Sikh langar which forms part 
of the collective worship is a vegetarian meal to cater for all without causing offence 
(Nesbitt, 2005). 
Buddhism 
In Buddhism, the philosophy of compassion for all living things, and the first precept 
of never taking a life has resulted in vegetarianism becoming common amongst most 
Buddhists as a demonstration of higher and purer commitment to the faith (Erricker, 
2001). Buddhism states that if an animal is killed for consumption it must die in a 
way where no pain is caused (Erricker, 2001). Abstaining from consuming alcohol is 
one of the five principles of moral conduct in Buddhism. The laws are followed by 
many Buddhists despite being originally intended for those living the monastic life. 
Religious food laws in the home 
The religious food laws mentioned in the previous section are rooted in the home and 
have their primary impact there. As some religions have more detailed food laws 
than others, this section will focus on those food laws with more meticulous 
guidelines of how this impacts on home life will be discussed. 
 The food laws of Judaism and the festivals which are celebrated in the home 
mean that there is a strong observance of Jewish food laws within the home through 
the eating of the Sabbath meal on a Friday night which is observed with prayers, 
Challah bread and Kiddush wine. Passover is also a festival which is observed in the 
home where the Seder meal, which adheres strictly to kosher laws, is eaten among 
family and friends (Cole & Morgan, 2000). 
 In a study of Hindu children, Nesbitt (1993) uncovers the experiences of 
children when reflecting on the differences in food in the home and at school. The 
participants discuss the issues of hygiene, purity and how these are observed in 
contrast to how pupils perceive them in public or at school. There is also a 
discussion of the awareness of the religiously acceptable methods for food 
preparation and serving meals, as well as foods which are considered to be purer 
than others. When asked about the difference between food in a Hindu home and 
food in a non-Hindu home, many responses included the distinction between the 
consumption of meat including beef in the non-Hindu home. 
 The food laws found in Islam also have an impact on the home. One instance 
where this is highlighted is during the fast of Ramadan where food can be consumed 
both after sunset and before sunrise.  
Religious food laws in schools 
When embarking on a study of young peoples attitudes towards religious diversity 
and assessing the visibility of religious diversity by looking at food in todays 
society, it is important to examine religious dietary issues which surround young 
people in their everyday lives. For this reason, this section will examine how schools 
cater for the religious dietary needs of pupils. 
 The literature observed discovers that government guidelines concerning diet, 
nutrition, and school meal requirements are detailed and meticulous to ensure that 
pupils receive the appropriate nutrients from the meals which are eaten during school 
hours. However, this guidance does not always extend to ensuring that school meals 
adhere to the food laws which some religions dictate. 
 Twiner, Cook, and Gillen (2011) highlight the scarce academic debate 
concerning the provision of both Kosher and Halal foods for pupils in school meals. 
They raise concern for the lack of clearly stated guidelines concerning religious 
needs of students for every school in the country.  
 Thus when it is requested that religious diets such as Kosher and Halal are 
catered for, it is found to be the case that these needs are grouped together within the 
category of catering for special diets such as allergies and intolerances. With the 
provision of religious diets having been declared a new issue, the authors imply that 
the need for food which adheres to religious guidelines is then left to the decision of 
the school to follow based on the religious needs of the school community. In cases 
where need is not voiced, the study finds that an assumption would remain that 
special diets were not required. This points towards a suggestion that religious 
diversity is respected, catered and provided for in the places and areas of the United 
Kingdom where it is required but not given instruction on a national level. Areas of 
exemplary practice, care and attention to the needs of religious diets do exist, but 
provision for religious diets in school has a tendency to exist as an exception rather 
than as a rule. The study also discovers that there is a circular problem of lack of 
trust towards those who make decisions concerning school menus resulting in 
packed lunches and an assumption that school meals with options for religious diets 
are not required.  
 The authors conclude that rather than national policy which will never manage 
to cater to the needs of everyone,  there is a need for a more general understanding of 
diversity and a need for dialogue between those with religious dietary needs and 
those who are responsible for responding to and providing for these religious needs. 
The food which is served in schools is perhaps a time where religious diversity is 
most visible to young people and subject to the scrutiny of their peers it may be that 
it is in school that attitudes are formed and shaped towards religious diversity 
through this tangible example.  
 The issue of Halal food remains a contentious issue within local communities 
where quite often a lack of support arises when Halal food is provided in school. 
This has been raised as a concern in several local authorities where parents have 
expressed concern over pupils whose religious dietary needs do not require them to 
eat Halal or kosher food but who have been provided with this food nonetheless. 
 Schools across the country have also begun to respond to the presence of 
multiculturalism and religious diversity which is present in the United Kingdom, by 
introducing after-school cooking clubs which aim to teach multicultural awareness 
and enhance community cohesion through food. Gatenby, Donnelly, and Connelly 
(2011) discuss the success of such schemes among secondary school pupils. The 
study found that cultural awareness and understanding of cultural festivals increased 
significantly among the pupils after participating, as well as enthusiasm to know 
more about other religions, cultures and ethnicities. Therefore positive attitudes 
toward religious diversity can be encouraged through increased awareness of the 
religious food laws of the pupils who are eating in school. Although this has been 
found to be lacking, it is at least the case that when the demand is sought out, that it 
is met. The following sections discuss how the presence of ethnicity and 
multiculturalism in public eating places and the provision of foods in shops is more 
culturally driven than driven by religious food laws. 
Multicultural food in public 
Multiculturalism has become increasingly visible in the United Kingdom through the 
increased presence of restaurants providing food from different religious and ethnic 
backgrounds. Restaurants such as these are now well established in the United 
Kingdom and form a key role in the restaurant and catering business. The growth of 
restaurants in the United Kingdom, most notably Indian and Chinese restaurants, was 
most apparent during the 1950s and 1960s. However, in an article which traces the 
development of Indian food in Britain, Hussain (2009) states that restaurants existed 
prior to this as early as 1808. Restaurants which existed this early would have 
existed to cater for the needs of those who had spent time as expatriates living 
abroad in India, doctors and students from India who were living in London at the 
time would also have eaten in these early restaurants. These places provided a 
meeting place for those living in a new country, where a reminder of home could be 
accessed through familiar food and surroundings. 
 The development and adaption of these restaurants occurred mainly in the 1950s 
and 1960s when the target market began to change and attract local residents in 
towns and cities to try new foods and experience a taste of a different culture and 
ethnicity (Buettner, 2008).        
 Therefore, as the visibility of ethnic food in public through outlets such as 
restaurants and takeaways has increased, it becomes apparent that this will be one of 
the most tangible signs of the diverse culture which young people live in. While this 
does not give an indication of the religious food laws which are associated with the 
cultures, it does show that there are tangible signs of other cultures in the United 
Kingdom and an opportunity to be introduced to the values of other cultures through 
food. 
Ethnic food shops 
Ethnic food shops have also become a more common feature of the commercial 
landscape across the United Kingdom. These shops serve as a tangible sign of 
cultural diversity rather than a provision for religious food laws as they provide 
familiar food for those who live in the United Kingdom but are not originally of that 
nationality (Virdee, 2009). However they also serve as a provider of foods which 
introduce the multicultural foods of those who have settled in the United Kingdom to 
that of the British public.  
 Hamlett, Bailey, Alexander, and Shaw (2008) document the experiences of 
South Asians and consumer patterns. They examine the development and origin of 
the ethnic food shops in the United Kingdom.  The first ethnic food shops were 
established as early as 1928 in London and 1949 in Birmingham. In a similar way to 
the increase of restaurants providing ethnic food, the number of shops selling ethnic 
food and ingredients also grew in the 1950s and 1960s. Areas of towns and cities 
quickly became hubs for ethnic shops particularly in areas where they were needed 
to provide for the ethnic and religious dietary needs of the local population (Hamlett 
Bailey, Alexander, & Shaw, 2008). In less urban areas ethnic food was more scarce 
but was easier to locate than it had been at the beginning of the twentieth century. 
 What is important to note concerning the presence of ethnic food shops, 
however, was their purpose and how this purpose adapted gradually over time. The 
original purpose was to provide a means of accessing food which was familiar to the 
newly established communities in the ethnic areas of the United Kingdom and would 
allow these communities to continue to observe their ethnic and sometimes religious 
dietary requirements. However, as these shops became established, a secondary 
service of acting as a social meeting space where members of the ethnic community 
could share information, support and meet together was provided (Virdee, 2009). 
However, with the encouragement of celebrity chefs and cookery writers who have 
championed the cause of cooking food from alternative ethnic backgrounds, ethnic 
food shops have become more common and more frequented by those not originally 
from these communities. 
 Therefore, as time has progressed, there has been a change from new 
communities adapting to their new culture and aiming to retain their cultural heritage 
by shopping in specialist ethnic food shops, while marketing their products to other 
communities in the United Kingdom who are interested to learn about other cultures 
and ethnicities through food. 
 With these communities observing the foods of other cultures and ethnicities 
through ethnic food shops in the community the awareness of other cultures living 
and working in the United Kingdom is heightened. This heightened awareness of the 
multicultural environment in which the young people live may affect their attitudes 
toward religious diversity. 
Supermarkets 
Economic and lifestyle developments in the United Kingdom have changed the 
consumption of food in the home and shopping patterns. Supermarkets, which were 
established in the 1960s and 1970s, now dominate the commercial market and 
provide a wealth of choice both from the United Kingdom and from other cultures 
and ethnicities. Panayi (2008) has traced the development of supermarkets and their 
provision of ethnic food for the public of the United Kingdom. 
 In some cases, the supermarkets developed from small Jewish businesses in the 
inter-war years, particularly Tesco and Marks and Spencer. However Panayi stresses 
that the Jewish roots of these supermarkets did not in the early years always 
guarantee the presence of Kosher food. The ethnic communities then began to shop 
at these supermarkets and recommend them as places where ethnic ingredients could 
be bought (Panayi, 2008). 
 The takeover of the supermarket in place of the ethnic food shop is said to have 
occurred most significantly when second generation immigrants chose not to adopt 
the family business because of the long hours involved and the employment 
opportunities which they now possessed having come through the British education 
system. In addition, the supermarkets began to sell products which appealed to 
people who lived in their locality and add delicatessen counters within their stores to 
sell food from other cultures. Supermarkets began marketing ethnic food, first with 
pre-cooked and frozen or chilled ready meals and by selling ingredients needed to 
make ethnic food. Supermarkets also began to sell meals which were similar to the 
meals which could be obtained in Indian restaurants for customers to sample what 
they had eaten whilst out in their own home. This increased presence of multicultural 
food commercially points to a more encouraging provision of food to reflect the 
cultural diversity of the United Kingdom. 
Conclusion 
The presence of food is a clear display of the fact that the United Kingdom in the 
twenty-first century is a society which is religiously and culturally diverse. The food 
laws which exist are implemented in the home and in public where required, the 
school canteen being one example. The variety of food seen in public eating places 
and commercially in specialist ethnic food shops and supermarkets is a clear display 
of the increasingly multi-cultural make up of the United Kingdom and testifies to an 
increasing demand for ethnic food, to retain a home culture or to embrace the 
traditions of another through food.  
 While these signs often give a clearer indication of ethnicity in the area rather 
than religious diversity, it can be argued that if it is acknowledged that ethnicity is 
inherently related to religious diversity then the public indication of religious 
diversity within the community becomes clearer. 
Chapter conclusion 
The chapter has identified how each religion has guidelines and rules concerning 
dress and food which is eaten by those who belong to that particular faith tradition. 
These guidelines influence the everyday lifestyle of the religious individual and 
serve as both and external and internal reminder of the beliefs and values which their 
faith teaches and encourages them to uphold.   
 The chapter also concludes that while these physical external displays act as the 
signs of internal beliefs and values, they also act as indications to others about the 
beliefs and values of the faith, and thus collectively give an indication of the 
religiously diverse nature of society which the United Kingdom has become. 
Through the visibility of religious dress and food however, reactions both positive 
and negative and the need for adjustments to embrace religious needs can emerge. 
As these reactions can often invoke both positive and negative attitudes toward 
religious diversity, the context invites further research into the attitudes of young 
people toward religious diversity within the United Kingdom. 
4. Religious diversity reflected in buildings and 
architecture 
Introduction 
One of the elements which the majority of religious traditions hold in common is 
that its members are encouraged to gather together and to participate in collective 
worship and or fellowship as a religious group or community.  This is a time where 
the beliefs and values of the religion can be put into practice through prayer, liturgy 
and worship. 
 As religious buildings are primarily built for the purposes of prayer and worship, 
the nature of the beliefs and values of the religious faith or tradition are often 
reflected in the architecture of these buildings. This chapter will explore some of the 
defining features and characteristics of Christian, Jewish, Islamic, Hindu, Sikh and 
Buddhist religious architecture which can increasingly be seen in the United 
Kingdom. The chapter will then trace and explain the need which arose for more 
diverse religious architecture and the reception with which this was met. The reasons 
for the emergence of more religious buildings from different religious traditions in 
the United Kingdom and the debates and responses which have met this evolution 
will then be examined.  
 As religious buildings serve as places where religious groups and communities 
gather, the chapter will also discuss how buildings are used within their local 
communities and how they contribute to the diversity of the wider society. The 
discussion of how these buildings serve the local community will, therefore, display 
how religious architecture diversifies itself in order to meet the needs of the diverse 
society of which it is a part.  
 The examination of religious architecture informs the dissertation because the 
religious buildings of the United Kingdom can provide a tangible example of how 
diverse the United Kingdom has become. By tracing the history of how the need for 
religious buildings developed it becomes possible to understand the emerging 
diverse population who require a practical provision for their spiritual needs. 
 In addition to examining the need from the perspective of those from diverse 
religious traditions who have expressed a need for religious buildings and 
architecture, the opposite perspective will also inform the dissertation, as by 
examining the negative and positive responses to these requests for religious 
buildings it becomes possible to asses and understand what the attitudes toward 
religious diversity are in the United Kingdom. 
 The chapter concludes that religious buildings from different faith traditions 
have become increasingly common, particularly during the last century. This acts, 
therefore, as a sign that the population of the United Kingdom has become 
increasingly diverse and that architecture has been introduced to meet the spiritual 
and practical needs of this changing population. As young people grow up within 
this society surrounded by these tangible signs of religious diversity, the need for an 
investigation which assesses and understands both the positive and negative attitudes 
of young people toward religious diversity becomes apparent. 
The religious meaning in religious architecture 
Christianity 
The churches and cathedrals in the United Kingdom clearly reflect the theologies, 
doctrines and beliefs of the denominations of Christianity which worship within 
them. One example of this is the traditional medieval church. The structure of the 
medieval church can be instantly recognised as a Christian building because of the 
fact that it forms the shape of a cross (Gwynne, 2009). A key feature which can often 
be observed upon entering the church is the font which is placed close to the main 
door. The font symbolises the first fundamental element of the Christian faith, that of 
baptism which initiates the individual into the Christian faith. The use of the altar as 
the focal point in the church, particularly in the Catholic tradition, highlights the 
centrality of the eucharist as a symbolic reminder of the death and resurrection of 
Jesus Christ and the transcendent presence of God through the participation in and 
the receiving of the eucharist. The location of the altar in the sanctuary is often set 
apart from the congregation and is sometimes hidden from view by a screen.  This is 
symbolic of the holy mystery of the God who is not always visible. The cross also 
forms a central focal point for Christians to be reminded of the saving power of God 
through the crucifixion and resurrection of Jesus Christ. 
 Other features of the church interior include the lectern which is often 
constructed in the shape of an eagle which symbolises John the evangelist in the 
book of revelation. It also symbolises the encouragement to carry the word of God 
across the world. In the non-conformist traditions which give more emphasis to the 
word of God in worship rather than the eucharist, more emphasis and focus is made 
on the pulpit within the church and this is often placed in a more central position to 
highlight the significance of the word of God. 
Judaism 
The Jewish synagogue is built with a rectangular layout with seats on three sides of 
the rectangle so that the focus is drawn towards the fourth side, which is the wall 
facing Jerusalem. Within this fourth side is the Holy Ark which contains the Jewish 
Holy Scripture or Torah. Either side of the Holy Ark on mounted tablets are the Ten 
Commandments which were given to the founder of the Jewish faith on Mount Sinai 
and a large menorah which acts as a reminder of the menorah which could once be 
found in the temple in Jerusalem (Weller, 2008). An additional symbolic interior 
feature is the lamp which hangs from the ceiling in front of the Ark as a reminder of 
the lamp which continuously burned in the temple. A raised platform can also be 
found at the front of a synagogue, known as a bimah where the Torah is read from 
and acts as a reminder to the Jewish people of the guidelines found in Nehemiah 8.4 
where Ezra gives the law standing on a wooden platform (Cole & Morgan, 2000). 
 The significance of the features of the synagogue therefore act not only as 
reminders of the temple which was originally the sole place where Jews could meet 
with God, but also are symbolic of the way that the Jewish religion has adapted, 
following the loss of the temple (Pilkington, 1995). The emphasis which is placed on 
the law is also clearly visible from the architecture of the synagogue and this 
emphasises how the dispersion of the Jews from the promised land into the diaspora 
has presented the need to focus on the law as a means of retaining the fundamentals 
of the Jewish faith (Pilkington, 1995). 
Islam 
The Islamic mosque is defined as a house which God has allowed to be built so that 
his name can be spoken in it (Smith, 1996). It is the place in which Muslims gather 
for prayers, but particularly for Salat prayers which take place on a Friday (Rippin, 
2001).  
 The distinguishing features of a mosque include its rectangular shape and the 
distinction of areas which are sacred where shoes must not be worn. Mosques also 
include places for washing, emphasising the need for purity and cleanliness before 
prayer. Mosques are carpeted and there are no chairs as Muslims pray on the floor.  
 One wall of the mosque has a subtle architectural difference and is known as the 
qibla wall. This contains a niche, alcove or indentation known as the mihrab which 
marks the direction for Muslims to pray in so that they face Mecca. The interior of a 
mosque is plain and is not allowed to be decorated with statues or imagery as this 
could pose the risk of encouraging idolatry or might imply an attempt from the artist 
to be greater than Allah by assuming the role of the creator (Weller, 2008). There is 
also a pulpit within the mosque known as a minbar, where addresses are made by the 
Imam. 
 Externally the mosque will have at least one tower, known as the minaret which 
broadcasts the call to prayer according to the times when the sun dictates that there 
should be a prayer. The exterior often has a dome which is symbolic of the universe 
and helps to magnify the voice of the imam who is leading the prayers (Cole & 
Morgan, 2000).  
Hinduism 
The Hindu mandir is recognised by Hindus as the home or dwelling place of a god. 
The mandir interior is often a large hall and the floor plan is a cosmic diagram or 
yantra, showing the centrality of the universe and its link to everyday life. The 
central square is often dedicated to Brama or another deity of prominence in the faith 
who is at the centre of the universe (Smith, 1996). The mandir houses the statue or 
image of the God to which the mandir is dedicated. This statue or image is covered 
by a canopy as a mark of care and respect towards the God. As in the Islamic 
mosque, there are no chairs as worship takes place with the congregation sat on the 
floor facing the shrine. 
 The exterior of the mandir varies, but there are three common characteristics 
which are often found outside each mandir. These features include the entrance 
which faces the rising sun.  The second feature is the steps which lead up to the 
mandir. These steps are symbolic of the journey up a mountain in order to meet with 
the God which is a sacred symbol in Hinduism. The mandir guardian which is often 
in the form of a statue of an animal or mythical creature is the third common external 
feature of the mandir (Cole & Morgan, 2000). 
Sikhism 
The Sikh place of worship is known as the gurdwara and comes from a Punjabi word 
meaning gateway of the Guru (Smith, 1996).  The criteria distinguishing a 
gurdwara from an ordinary building is that it contains a copy of the Sikh holy 
scriptures. However as Sikhism recognises itself as a congregational religion many 
gurdwaras are purpose built (Nesbitt, 2005).  The external distinguishing features of 
the gurdwara include the Sikh flag or the nishan sahib which is symbolic of the need 
to fight for truth through spiritual means (Weller, 2008). Two Punjabi symbols are 
also common on the outside of a gurdwara which translate as a reminder that God is 
the one being or eternal reality (Cole & Morgan, 2000). 
 The interior of the gurdwara is a prayer hall with the focal point being the Guru 
Granth Sahib or the Sikh holy scripture under its canopy and raised up on a platform 
a few feet from the wall in order that processions can move round it with ease. The 
canopy serves as a reminder of the way the Gurus taught in the past while sheltered 
from the sun. Similarly to the mosque and the mandir, there are no chairs in the 
gurdwara and those attending worship sit on the floor (Weller, 2008). This 
emphasises the high status of the Guru Granth Sahib and the equality of those 
attending worship in the eyes of the Guru Granth Sahib (Cole & Morgan, 2000). 
Buddhism 
The Buddhist temple or Vihara and its distinguishing features act as a reminder of 
the beliefs and values of simplicity and beauty which aid the individual on their 
journey towards enlightenment. The Buddhist temple often includes a shrine room 
and a meditation room, although the two are sometimes combined (Cole & Morgan, 
2000). The interior is decorated with pictures of the Buddha which are higher than 
everything else in the room as a mark of respect to the Buddha. There may also be 
smaller pictures which depict important events in the Buddhas life. There are raised 
chairs or platforms for the members of the sangha who lead the worship. These are 
both practical and symbolic so the congregation can follow the Buddhist sutras or 
teachings and the pictures of the Buddha are not blocked from sight. The room is 
empty of all furniture and people sit on the floor, rugs or cushions. This is intended 
to invite an experience of deeper simplicity. The shrines in Buddhist temples are also 
colourful and are often decorated with offerings of flowers, lights and incense from 
those attending the temple (Weller, 2008). The meditation room also contains no 
furniture and is a calm uncluttered atmosphere with space for both sitting and 
walking meditation. An image may provide a focal point and sometimes there is a 
seat for the meditation teacher. 
The development of purpose built religious architecture 
As previously stated in chapter one, the United Kingdom is traditionally a Christian 
country. It comes as no surprise therefore that the architecture and religious 
buildings most historically associated with the landscape of the United Kingdom are 
its cathedrals, abbeys, churches and chapels. These buildings form landmarks across 
the four nations and very often are centrally located in communities to mirror the 
fundamental part that they have played, and in many cases continue to play in 
community life (Weller, 2001). The earliest examples of non-Christian religious 
buildings to be built in the United Kingdom were the Jewish synagogues, the oldest 
being the Bevis Marks synagogue which was built in London in 1701 (Weller, 
2001). 
 However, in recent times the built landscape of the United Kingdom has begun 
to change with the introduction of religious buildings other than those from the 
Christian tradition. Mosques, mandirs and gurdwaras are now becoming increasingly 
common on the skylines of the United Kingdom alongside the cathedrals and 
churches of the country (Weller, 2001). When considering the reasons for this, it is 
generally acknowledged by Weller that the changes in the population of the United 
Kingdom, and the religious beliefs of this population increased the need for 
alternative religious buildings across the nation. This need for religious buildings has 
been traced back to the increase in migrant workers to the United Kingdom, 
particularly during the period following the Second World War as mentioned in 
chapter one. The existence of the British Empire had meant that links between the 
United Kingdom and other countries, which are now part of the Commonwealth, 
brought people from other countries and therefore brought other religions to the 
United Kingdom (Bluck, Gilliat-Ray, Singh, & Zavos, 2012). The most significant 
increase in those from other religions and cultures, however, came after 1945 with 
workers who had been given British citizenship as a result of the 1948 British 
Nationality Act. Those travelling under this act from the British Commonwealth, or 
from the former British Empire, to industrial areas of the United Kingdom met the 
demand of rebuilding the economy (Peach & Gale, 2003). This increased further 
between the 1950s and 1970s when new Commonwealth citizens from the Caribbean 
Islands, South Asia, and East Africa migrated to the United Kingdom for work. 
Following this period, immigration became more restricted and therefore many 
families of migrant workers came to live in United Kingdom and to be reunited with 
those who had arrived for work before legislation became more restrictive (Gale & 
Naylor, 2002). 
 Nasser (2005) highlights that many of the African Asian groups chose to settle 
in close proximity to other pre-established South Asian communities which 
increased the concentrated areas of ethnicity in the already ethnic areas of these 
industrial cities. 
 The implications of these changes to the population meant that there were 
increasing numbers of people who came to the United Kingdom from countries with 
religious traditions other than that of Christianity. The arrival of those who belonged 
to other faith groups to the United Kingdom alongside the increased secularization of 
many of the existing population meant that the United Kingdom quickly became 
more religiously diverse. Many of the newly arrived families required places where 
they could worship according to their own religious customs, traditions, and 
requirements with the symbolic architecture which was discussed in the previous 
section. As the economic means of these religious groups were often limited, at first 
this need was met by meeting in pre-existing buildings such as houses, community 
centres and church halls (Nesbitt, 2005). In some areas of the United Kingdom 
which are less multicultural this continues to be the case, for example in Northern 
Ireland.  McPhillips and Russell (2011) explain that in Belfast Protestant, Roman 
Catholic and Jewish buildings are purpose built, while the Islamic centre and Indian 
community centre are located in buildings which have either been converted or 
adapted for use. Nasser (2005) has used Islamic buildings as an example in order to 
highlight how the practice of Islam has only ever required cleanliness and an 
orientation towards Mecca which means that a broad range of buildings such as 
houses, churches, schools and warehouses have been used as mosques in the city of 
Birmingham (2010). Despite the simple requirements of many of the religions who 
had adapted buildings for religious uses, these needs began to change as time 
progressed. With the growth of these religious communities the desire for a sense of 
identity and an ability to practise their faith through purpose built religious buildings 
which resembled the ones they had left behind in their home countries also grew. 
However, the reception with which these needs were met was often mixed, which 
provides an introductory indication of the attitudes toward religious diversity in the 
United Kingdom. 
Reception of alternative religious architecture in the United Kingdom 
The desire for purpose built places of religious worship has not always encountered 
positive responses. Regardless of the proposed location for these religious buildings, 
conflict often arises (Naylor & Ryan, 2002). This can be the case during the planning 
process and both pre- and post-construction. Nesbitt (2006) highlights that in the 
case of the construction of Hindu temples, the difficulty centres around the fact that a 
Hindu impact is being made on a non-Hindu society and that there is still the need 
for the preservation of Hindu identity whilst sensitively respecting that which 
already exists. Therefore, communications between different religious and cultural 
backgrounds are essential whilst simultaneously considering the legal policies of the 
land. Whilst Nesbitt is referring to Hinduism in particular, the same could be argued 
for any religious building being planned and constructed in the United Kingdom 
which does not belong to the Christian tradition. 
 When presenting their case study of the issues in building and developing 
Londons first mosque, Naylor and Ryan (2002) present the three most common 
conflicts over the construction of religious buildings as follows: first, the lack of 
provision by law to cater for all religious groups equally and to prevent religious 
intolerance; second, the argument of planning permission in residential areas and the 
desire to protect and preserve the landscape of the United Kingdom; third the 
concern over protecting the investment value of an area which many fear would be 
reduced were a new religious building to be constructed there.  
 Naylor and Ryan (2002) emphasise that the lack of legal support and guidance 
for alternative religions is partly due to the Christian religion being part of the legal 
constitution of the country and thus protected by law, whilst there is no specific legal 
provision in place which might help to support other religious groups. While there is 
limited guidance for legal advisors to turn to when applications to construct religious 
buildings which are not for the purposes of Christian worship are submitted, there is 
also limited guidance for religious groups to turn to when planning to propose the 
construction of a mosque, mandir, gurdwara or other religious building. While there 
have been legal issues with proposed religious buildings, it is important to recognise 
that the responses differ regionally and that some councils have been better than 
others at responding to the plight of religious groups who desire a religious sacred 
space to be purpose built. Some councils have responded to the need by drawing up 
policy for proposed building plans, for example Birmingham city council (Gale, 
2002). Grant and Naylor (2002) also highlight how cities such as Preston and 
Leicester (both in England) have pioneered being more accommodating in issues of 
town planning and financial support to those wishing to purpose-build religious 
buildings. Gale and Naylor (2002) argue that this is the reason for some areas in the 
United Kingdom allowing minority religious architectural expression and others 
denying it.  
 Some of the issues which arise concerning religious buildings have prompted 
debate concerning the issues which lie hidden at the heart of the objections which are 
made. For example, having a gurdwara, mosque or mandir in a residential area has 
often sparked criticism and objections. These have often been heavily opposed in 
residential areas and instead been placed in unlikely places on inner-city sites such as 
the Shri Swamunarayan Mandir near Londons North Circular ring road and the Sikh 
Gurdwara in Southall which is located under the flight path of Heathrow airport 
(Peach & Gale, 2005). 
 Other objections on the grounds of health and safety and the issues of vehicles 
outside large purpose built places of worship have often been raised in response to 
the proposed construction of religious buildings. Grant and Naylor (2002) highlight 
how in the report Planning for a Multi-Racial Britain one of the most common 
reasons for planning applications being denied for religious buildings was the issue 
of car-parking and that this continues to be a stumbling block. Knights (2008) has 
emphasised how another challenge and frequent reason for opposition to planning 
applications for religious places of worship has been because of the risk of noise 
pollution. Using the examples of the mosques in Oxford and Birmingham, Knights 
introduces the conflict which emerged over the application to the council for the 
amplification of the Islamic call to prayer (azan). Naylor and Ryan also highlight 
that this has been an issue in Liverpool and London. Knight also refers to the case of 
the prosecution of a Hassidic Rabbi in Hackney, London with charges of noise 
nuisance at a synagogue during Sabbath celebrations.  
 The construction of religious buildings is also often met with opposition because 
aesthetically they are portrayed as unfitting and incongruous to their surrounding 
landscape and neighbouring architecture. In the case of the design and planning of 
Birmingham central mosque, Nasser (2005) reports that the council denied 
permission for a dome and minaret to be included as part of the building. The reason 
provided was that these were not considered to be in-keeping with the surrounding 
landscape and represented an alien cultural presence. Despite the success of the 
Muslim Association in contesting this decision, they were instructed to build the 
mosque with materials which would assimilate with pre-existing architecture across 
the city (Nasser, 2010).  
 For those issues which arise after the building has been constructed and is in use 
there is still a lack of litigation which would give clear guidance as to what is 
acceptable and appropriate to both parties as Knights (2008) has highlighted. Naylor 
and Ryan (2002) suggest that these objections which are common to any application 
for building a religious building which does not form part of the Christian tradition 
are often surface objections which are underpinned by prejudiced attitudes against 
religious difference. The challenge is therefore to seek out these underlying attitudes 
in order to assess and understand them. Additionally, Gale and Naylor (2002) 
identify that the Race Relations Act is ambiguous when referring to discrimination 
against those seeking planning permission They also add that while the Race 
Relations Act prevents discrimination against racial groups it makes no provision 
for discrimination against religious groups. Yet despite the negative reception which 
often meets the construction of the new alternative religious architecture, whether it 
be on legal, health and safety, aesthetic, or other grounds, the argument remains that 
these religious buildings and the communities who use them often feed valuable 
resources, time and services back into the communities in which they are situated. 
The use of religious buildings in the wider community 
Weller (2001) highlights how places of worship fulfil an important role in providing 
community resources, time and services within the local neighbourhoods in which 
they are situated. Not only does he recognise their function for religious worship and 
the opportunities which they provide for meeting other people from that religious 
faith, but he also argues that they provide a tangible example of the goals and values 
of that particular religious faith.  
 In terms of Christian worship, Weller points towards the wider use of buildings 
in Christianity by referring to their civic and social uses. The branch of the Church of 
England which is responsible for the maintenances and development of Christian 
places of worship highlights that within these buildings a location can be provided 
for cultural uses (such as arts festivals and exhibitions), commercial uses (such as 
community post offices shops or cybercafs), outreach and community group uses 
(such as inter-faith projects, uniformed organisations, and care for the homeless). 
Additionally, church buildings are becoming increasingly used for education with 
many of the cathedrals in the country having dedicated education centres to provide 
multi-sensory learning contexts. 
 Nesbitt (2006) highlights the uses of Hindu temples which are for the benefit of 
the wider community by their provision of health care, language classes, multi-faith 
religious education for both school groups and other faith groups, sports facilities, 
and the opportunity to welcome public political figures for the purposes of 
highlighting positive community relations between those of differing ethnic and 
religious backgrounds. 
 The gurdwara is also highlighted by Weller (2001) as being of use to the wider 
community by providing centres for religious education, classes for learning Punjabi, 
and provision of care for the needy and the elderly. It also provides social facilities 
for Sikhs who attend the gurdwara. 
 Nasser (2005) refers to Dodds definition of the mosque as a community which 
provides both spiritual and functional needs for the Islamic community through 
education, social and commercial activity, and prayer (Dodds, 2002). The mosque 
provides a place where the Zakat or the provision of charity to the poor can be 
organised. 
 Therefore, when religious buildings are used for the benefit of the wider local 
community rather than simply for the immediate faith community, the religious 
diversity of the communities across the United Kingdom becomes more apparent and 
tangible. However, whether they are used for community purposes or not, perhaps 
the most significant thing about religious buildings in the community is highlighted 
by Weller (2008) by stressing that religious buildings allow a place for the traditions 
and teachings of the faith to be incorporated and also to provide a witness of that 
religion to the surrounding locality and to society as a whole (2001). 
 It should be considered that some religions do not require religious buildings in 
the same way as others. This is particularly the case when the focus of regular 
religious worship is placed within the context of the home. Nesbitt (2006) explains 
the significance of Hindu religious practice and prayer within the home. Nesbitt also 
highlights that whilst there has been ambivalence towards setting up temples within 
the United Kingdom meaning that in many cities Hindus will gather in homes and 
hired halls, this has changed since the 1970s. While a wealth of literature concerning 
the construction of mosques and gurdwaras exists, the literature concerning the 
constructions of Hindu temples is not as extensive. This may be because an emphasis 
on worship in the home means that there are fewer Hindu temples in the United 
Kingdom. In contrast the Sikh and Muslim traditional emphasis on collective public 
worship might explain why there is more literature about mosques and gurdwaras. 
Chapter conclusion 
This chapter has addressed how religious architecture can narrate particular details of 
the different beliefs and doctrines of the faiths and has traced the increase in the 
building of religious architecture from all of the six major world religions in the 
United Kingdom.  
 While the sight of religious buildings other than those which were apparent 
before the twentieth century is increasing and these buildings reflect the increasingly 
diverse nature of the society that the United Kingdom has become, it is discovered 
that in many cases these are not built without meeting difficulty and opposition from 
local councils and local residents. As it is the attitudes toward religious diversity 
which will more than likely lie at the heart of these objections, it is important to 
know the attitudes of the people who live in the United Kingdom which will help to 
assess and understand how religious diversity is perceived by the population and 
especially the young people within the population. 
5. The hidden face of religious diversity. 
Introduction 
This chapter identifies three areas of life in which religion has historically played an 
important part in the United Kingdom and discusses how each of these areas has 
been affected by the growth in religious diversity. These areas are education, 
healthcare and death and dying. This chapter informs the dissertation because it 
illustrates how key areas of life may be informed by religious beliefs and values. 
Education 
The Christian heritage 
Christianity has an historical link with education which dates back to the early public 
schools which were attached to Anglican churches, chapels and cathedrals, for 
example Eton, St Pauls and Westminster (Kay, 1997). This was built upon when the 
popularity of the Sunday school system, which used scripture as a tool for teaching 
children to read, expanded beyond education on a Sunday into the National Society, 
an initiative to build schools in England and Wales pioneered by the Church of 
England (Kay, 1997). Therefore, the influence of Christianity on the education 
system initially came from the church rather than the state (Dinham & Jackson, 
2012).  
 State involvement with the initial efforts of the church to educate young people 
began with government funding being provided for voluntary societies such as the 
National Society to build schools (Marples, 2005). This developed when the 
Education Act of 1870 meant that board schools were introduced alongside the 
existing church schools resulting in a dual system (Francis & Robbins, 2005). The 
1944 Education Act resolved the dual system by allowing for two differing kinds of 
church schools, voluntary-aided where the church retained its influence within the 
school and some financial liability, and voluntary-controlled where the church 
transferred control and financial liability to the local education authority (Francis & 
Robbins, 2005). Despite these changes in 1944, the motive of serving the local 
community with Christian values, and providing an Anglican education for the 
children of Anglican parents remains a key ethos within some of these schools 
(Skinner, 2002). Anglican schools must provide an ethos statement which explains 
from where the policies and strategies of the schools arise (Francis & Robbins, 
2005).  
 More recently, church schools have begun to respond in four ways to the 
increasingly secular and multi-faith society which the United Kingdom has become: 
first, by commissioning reports as to how the church schools function in terms of 
educational content and collective worship, second by adapting their admissions 
policies to incorporate a theology of service as well as a theology of nurture, third by 
providing the appropriate resources to teach the fundamentals of the faith which the 
school ethos demands, and fourth by being distinctive while remaining inclusive 
(Francis & Robbins, 2005). 
 This historic relationship between the church and education of young people is 
an indication of the influences that religious values have nationally had on society 
within the education system (Dinham & Jackson, 2012). The next section will 
discuss whether the ethos of these schools and the relationship which they have with 
the church has an influence on the beliefs and values of their pupils. 
Church schools today 
The previous section highlighted an historical link between religion and the 
education system which still remains influential in the United Kingdom. This link 
has an impact on the beliefs and values of the pupils, teachers and at times the 
families of those who attend schools of a religious character such as Anglican 
schools. Weller (2008) supports this claim by stating that the education system acts 
as an area in which traditions, identities, and convictions which come from the home 
are brought into the wider diverse society for interaction with those from differing 
backgrounds. Weller adds that school is a context in which attitudes and values are 
formed and which can have an impact on the values which individuals may retain for 
the rest of their lives. 
 Studies which have supported the claims which Weller makes include the work 
of Lankshear (2005) who has found that pupils at Anglican voluntary aided 
secondary schools have higher levels of religious values and moral values in 
comparison to Anglicans attending non-denominational schools. This means that a 
relationship between school type and values exists and can be demonstrated 
empirically. 
 Additionally, a study conducted by Francis and Robbins (2005) which 
researched the beliefs and values of teenagers in urban areas of England and Wales 
found that those attending Anglican schools were more likely to believe in God but 
were also more concerned with humanitarian values such as world poverty, 
highlighting that education in Anglican schools can influence the values of those 
who experience the system. 
 More recently, Francis and Penny (2011) have studied the ethos of Anglican 
secondary schools and their influence on the beliefs and values of the pupils who 
attend these schools. Francis and Penny conclude that there is a marginal difference 
between the collective worldview of pupils at an Anglican school in comparison with 
the collective worldview of pupils at a school which does not have a religious 
character. 
New faith schools 
In addition to the religious beliefs and values which can be witnessed in the state-
maintained education system, there is also a clear development of religious beliefs 
and values being displayed in the independent education sector, particularly in the 
last thirty to forty years with the establishment of faith schools. For the purpose of 
clarity, when referring to faith schools in this section, the definition is intended to 
cover those schools in the private or independent sector where the school is 
exclusively affiliated to a particular religion and the ethos of the school is to pass on 
this religious faith to the members of the school community, notably including the 
new independent Christian schools and Muslim schools. 
 The development of faith schools was based on the example of schools found in 
countries such as America and Australia. In the United Kingdom these schools are a 
relatively new phenomena and the earliest records of schools being opened are traced 
back to the late 1960s and early 1970s. The most substantial growth of these schools, 
however, occurred during the 1980s (Francis & Robbins, 2005). Faith schools have 
been set up for the faith groups of Islam, Sikhism and Christianity. While 
independent Jewish schools do exist these are more historically established than the 
new religious schools (Freeman, 2012; Miller, 2001). 
 The schools were set up by faith groups, officials and parents who deemed the 
existing education system in the United Kingdom to be unsuitable and unsupportive 
of the fundamental beliefs and values of their childrens faith (McKinney, 2006; 
Walford, 2010). The schools were established to be completely separate from the 
state in terms of funding and control so that the pupils could receive an education 
which was approved of by the parents and faith groups and not subject to state 
guidelines or demands (Bluck, Gilliat-Ray, Graham, Singh & Zavos, 2012; Watson, 
2003). 
Beliefs and values 
The faith schools in the United Kingdom exist to relate the teaching of the religious 
faith from which they arise to all areas of school life (Francis & Robbins, 2005). 
Watson (2003) explains how independent Christian schools provide a Christian ethos 
in both the educational content of the school teaching, but also in the approach to 
management of the school, by employing staff who are practising members of the 
Christian community.  
 These schools support the beliefs and values of the faith through their ability to 
provide more time for prayer, scripture, and religious sources to teach the curriculum 
in the timetable. The schools also allow the use of religious references to teach other 
subjects such as the existence of God to teach probability in mathematics, science 
lessons which comply with the doctrine of the faith, and teaching creationism 
(Freeman, 2012).  The curriculum can also teach other religions from the perspective 
of the faith to which the school belongs (Freeman, 2012). 
  Studies conducted by Freeman (2012) and Baker (2009) have highlighted how 
faith schools support and comply with religious values, for example those 
concerning women, by establishing separate schools or classes for girls and boys to 
address concerns about mixed-sex education (Watton, 1993). Additionally, Freeman 
(2012) argues that the emphasis on academic performance within Islam and the 
views which state that Islamic education and way of life are both interlinked and the 
belief that the acquisition of knowledge leads to righteousness, have provided a 
credible explanation of why providing schools for the Islamic faith has become 
commonplace.  
 However, despite the specialist nature of these schools, with religious beliefs 
and values at their heart, the appeal is not always restricted to those from that 
particular faith. Kay, Francis, and Watson (2003) assert that these schools have been 
found to appeal to those from other faiths who are concerned that their children 
would not receive an appropriate education elsewhere and would rather their 
children received an education with religious teachings and moral grounding rather 
than a secular education (Watson, 2003). 
 Empirical studies such as the Teenage Religion and Values Project which have 
included the discussion of beliefs and values in faith schools, have demonstrated that 
pupils in Christian schools have a positive attitude toward Christianity in comparison 
to their peers attending secular schools. Additionally, pupils at Christian schools 
were found to be less favourable toward homosexuality, abortion, smoking, drug 
taking and drinking. However, the results also highlighted that pupils attending 
Christian schools were less racist and more concerned with issues of world 
development than their peers attending secular schools (Francis & Robbins, 2005). 
 Additional work by Baker (2009) has found the pupil values to be more 
conservative in the new Christian schools in comparison to their peers at secular 
schools, thus suggesting that the ethos of the school can become influential to its 
pupils. 
 This suggests that faith schools, such as the Christian and Muslim schools, can 
show signs of the religious beliefs and values of the faith being implemented into the 
life of the school in many different ways and the empirical studies imply that the 
religious beliefs and values of the schools also influence the religious beliefs and 
values of the pupils in attendance there. 
Debate 
The establishment of independent faith schools has not, however, taken place 
without debate or reaction from others (Short, 2006). The views in favour and 
against independent faith schools, for example Christian or Muslim schools, can 
reflect the religious beliefs and values of others and their attitudes toward other 
religions and cultures. The most common arguments against faith schools are 
summarised as follows: first that the schools are divisive and undermine social 
cohesion (Walford, 2010), second that the teaching can be poor quality because of 
the teaching being undertaken by faith leaders and parents who may not have 
qualified teacher status (Walford, 2010). Watson (2003) then adds that the education 
provided in the curriculum can be narrow and biased with a reluctance to 
acknowledge the beliefs and values of those from other religious traditions. The final 
criticism of these schools has heightened in recent years with the increased threat of 
fundamentalist terrorist activity in the United Kingdom.  Watson (2003) records the 
criticism which has stated that, if schools are teaching religious fundamentalist 
beliefs and values to their pupils, this could be promoting fundamentalist activity. 
 However, there are also researchers who welcome the establishment of 
independent schools of a religious character on four grounds. First, some argue that 
these schools encourage pupils to have a clear and positive self-awareness of their 
identity, beliefs and values (Pilkington, 1995; Short, 2002). This self-awareness will 
increase the likelihood of the pupils having positive values towards others, regardless 
of religious belief. Second, some argue that faith schools form part of the human 
rights system which gives all people a right to express their religious beliefs 
(Marples, 2006). Third, those who have conducted research in these schools, 
including Freeman (2012) who has conducted qualitative interviews in Muslim 
independent schools with a specific focus on faith-based education, highlight that the 
schools are not fragmented from society because in the age of the internet and 
heightened communication the young people attending these schools do not live in a 
vacuum and are aware of the beliefs and values which exist outside of the principles 
which their schools hold (Freeman, 2012). Finally, advocates of faith schools 
highlight that there is no evidence to suggest that state schools eliminate religious 
prejudice any more than a faith school might, thus justifying the existence of 
independent religious schools (Short, 2002). 
 The debate which has been briefly summarised here highlights that the matter of 
faith schools is a contentious issue where debate concerning their existence stems 
from the beliefs and values of the population. 
Conclusion 
The brief overview of the relationship between religion and the education system 
highlights the historic role which religious beliefs and values have played. The 
discussion of church schools demonstrates how the traditional Christian culture of 
the United Kingdom is embodied within the state-maintained education system, with 
the beliefs and values of Christianity lying at the heart of the school, and outreaching 
to those in the local community as well as those in the Christian community. A sign 
that the religious landscape of the United Kingdom is in transition is demonstrated 
by the increase of faith schools to reflect the beliefs and values of those from a range 
of religious and denominational backgrounds. Regardless of the different religious 
doctrines which have prompted the need for these schools, the fact that religious 
beliefs and values are still considered as something of worth within the education 
system indicates not only that religious beliefs and values influence society but that 
society has become increasingly religiously diverse. 
Healthcare 
The Christian heritage 
The Christian heritage of healthcare is demonstrated by the way that historically 
hospitals were set up by religious orders to fulfil their Christian vocation of caring 
for others. Porter (1993) mentions the religious philanthropy encouraged by clergy 
which led to the development of hospitals during the eighteenth and nineteenth 
century, such as St Georges hospital, and Guys and St Thomas hospital in London, 
frequently named after saints. Granshaw (1993) also argues that hospitals were 
originally attached to churches and monasteries, meaning that later purpose-built 
hospitals modelled that of ecclesiastical buildings and included a chapel as a central 
architectural focus (Neuberger, 1999). Despite the nationalisation of the health 
service in 1948 some of the signs of the original Christian heritage within the 
hospital as mentioned above still remain. 
 In addition, the establishment of the hospice movement, pioneered by Christian 
charities (Wright, 2001), and often accompanied by a religious ethos, provides 
another demonstration of how the Christian heritage was at the heart of care of 
patients suffering from cancer. While the religious ethos is no longer primarily 
obvious throughout the hospice movement, and staff are not required to be religious, 
the underlying religious values must be in sympathy with the original values of the 
hospice (Maclaren, 2003).  
Patients attitudes to healthcare 
Despite the nationalisation of the health service and its move away from religion, 
patients attitudes to healthcare may be influenced by their religious beliefs. Three 
examples where patient attitudes toward healthcare and religious beliefs or values 
are intertwined are their attitudes to accessing health care, attitudes to transplants, 
and their spiritual needs. 
 First, religious beliefs and values are reflected in whether or not patients choose 
to access medical care. For example a study of South Asian students discovers that 
ethnic identity, cultural mistrust and adherence to traditional Asian values all 
influence the lower likelihood of an individual from that community accessing 
psychological and medical help (Soorkia, Snelgar, & Swami, 2011).  
 Furthermore, in the case of accessing healthcare when an individuals belief is 
particularly orthodox or strong, it has been highlighted that a patient might be 
prevented from doing so because turning to a healthcare professional may imply the 
patient is not fully reliant on God (Dein, 2011). This tendency to avoid or be 
prevented from access to healthcare among religious and ethnic minorities is often 
due to religious or cultural differences, as well perhaps as language and 
communication difficulties (Gatrad, 2000), and mistrust of the medical profession 
because of its western ethos which differs in many ways from an eastern ethos 
(Sheikh, 2007; Siriwardena and Clark 2004). 
 Second, the areas of organ donation and transplants are some of the clearest 
examples of where the religious beliefs and values of the patient have to be taken 
into consideration by the healthcare system (Alkhawari, Stimson, & Warrens, 2005). 
Although there is little evidence that any of the six major world religions prohibit the 
practice of organ donation or transplant (Gillman, 1999), studies have shown that 
some members of religious faiths express uncertainty as to the guidance which their 
faith gives concerning organ donation and transplant (Randhawa, 1998). Randhawa 
has highlighted that this is of significance in some regions of the United Kingdom, 
where the Asian population are represented disproportionately more on waiting lists 
for organ transplants, but confusion still arises as to whether their faith allows it. 
Some religious groups have assisted with the need for better communication 
concerning religious values and organ donation such as the document released by the 
Muslim Law Council which confirms the positive attitude toward organ donation 
and transplant (Gillman, 1999). This acts as a sign that the religious beliefs and 
values lie at the heart of society within its different areas. 
 Third, the spiritual needs of a patient provide an accurate indication of religious 
beliefs and values being of significance to the way in which the healthcare system 
operates. Illness and the need for healthcare can often cause patients to confront their 
belief systems, their ultimate values, and the relationships which they have with 
others (Wright, 2001). Because of the salience of these questions about ultimate 
values and fundamental beliefs during illness and while receiving medical care, 
patients may experience faith loss, changes to their faith, or even a strengthening of 
their faith. Furthermore, studies which examine the religious and spiritual care 
offered to patients have confirmed that, when spiritual needs of patients are 
addressed, the morale of a patient has been discovered to improve (Siriwardena & 
Clark, 2004; Sheikh, 2007). This demonstrates not only how society shaping in the 
mould of the beliefs and values of the people who live in it can be positive but also 
give an inclination of how important the beliefs and values of those in society are. 
Healthcare professionals 
The transition from a predominantly Christian society into a multi-religious one has 
caused the need for a deeper awareness of the diversity of religious beliefs and 
values among healthcare practitioners, working in hospitals and hospices across the 
United Kingdom (Taylor, 2009). For healthcare professionals, such as doctors and 
nurses, there has been an increased awareness of the broad range of issues resulting 
from the diverse range of beliefs and values amongst their patients (Ward, Chazal, 
Mayberry, 2004). Within the nursing profession, specific NHS guidelines are 
provided which state that a policy of spiritual care must be ensured which is 
appropriate to the increasingly multicultural status of society (Maclaren, 2003). 
While this does not mean that nurses must provide specific religious care for the 
different religious beliefs of each individual, it does point towards a need for 
awareness of the religious beliefs and values of those for whom they care (Maclaren, 
2003). 
 Psychologists, psychiatrists and those working within mental healthcare are also 
an example of where an acute awareness and understanding of religious beliefs and 
values is necessary. Studies which have investigated the concept of spiritual care in 
mental health nursing have discovered that staff need to be aware of the implications 
of discussions about religion with their patients (Greasely, Chiu, & Gartland, 2000). 
Additionally studies have found that withdrawing patients from religious activity 
will have an effect on the wellbeing of the patient (Dein, 2004). There is also an 
indication of the importance of understanding the beliefs and values of the new 
religious movements, the provision of mental health training for chaplains and the 
need for religious awareness among mental health professionals (Dein; 2004, 
Koenig, 2008). All of these examples demonstrate the value of understanding 
religious beliefs and values. 
 Alongside the issue of complying with the religious beliefs of the service users, 
there is an additional dimension which relates to the religious beliefs and values held 
by the healthcare staff.  Rasool (2000) has demonstrated that the religious beliefs and 
values of healthcare staff has a positive relationship with the quality and level of care 
these staff offer their patients. This research suggests that a motive to care for others 
could be linked to the individuals religious beliefs. Despite these findings Rasool 
argues that religious belief can form a barrier to providing adequate healthcare. For 
example, the issues of alcoholism, sexual promiscuity, and lifestyle choices such as 
homosexuality are issues which might prevent healthcare professionals of an Islamic 
faith from caring effectively for patients suffering from liver damage, HIV/AIDS and 
other sexually transmitted diseases, despite the refusal of care not being based in 
Islamic scripture. 
Chaplaincy provision 
The acknowledgement of beliefs and values of patients receiving support from the 
healthcare system has also been responded to through rooms set aside for use as 
chapels. Such provision has been employed to meet the religious needs of patients 
and staff within hospitals and hospices since 1948 when the ministry of health made 
the decision that a provision of religious care was one of vital importance. This 
decision was reiterated in the 1990s when multifaith rooms and chaplaincies were 
established to meet the need of the increasingly diverse make up of the population in 
the United Kingdom (Wright, 2001). 
 Additionally, chaplains who have been employed within the National Health 
Service since 1948 have found that their roles have broadened in recent years to 
reflect the changing religious needs of the patients and staff whom they encounter 
(Wright, 2001). This demonstrates the way in which society is shaped by the 
religious beliefs and values of those who are a part of it and how this has adapted 
over time as society has become increasingly religiously diverse. 
Conclusion 
The healthcare system is therefore another central sign of the way in which religious 
beliefs and values are central to some key components of society. Through the 
original Christian heritage which characterised hospitals, the religious beliefs and 
values are clearly demonstrated. However, the increasing religious diversity in the 
United Kingdom has warranted a need to recognise the attitudes of patients to 
healthcare, to take seriously their spiritual needs, and to provide healthcare 
professionals, chaplains and multifaith teams with the skills and facilities to make 
sure that these religious values and needs are accommodated. 
Death and dying 
 The Christian heritage 
The Christian ethos of the United Kingdom has resulted in a strong Christian 
heritage in terms of death and dying. The western cultural attitudes toward death 
have resulted in a cultural trend where matters of care of the body are dealt with 
away from view to reduce the grief of the mourners (Parsons, 1999). This means that 
funeral directors most commonly deal with death and funeral arrangements in the 
United Kingdom and a monopoly market exists where Christian funerals tend to be 
the norm (De Waal, 1995). 
 Another sign of the Christian heritage surrounding death and dying are the ways 
in which the architecture in civic cemeteries and crematoria mirror that of traditional 
churches and chapels. There are, however, changes in beliefs and values which are 
beginning to move away from the traditional Christian heritage of the United 
Kingdom (Rugg, 2000). 
 The first change is the evolution of secularism. OGorman (1998) highlights 
that, unlike in the past, when beliefs and values concerning religion were common 
among the population, this is not always now the case with the influence of 
secularism. OGorman refers to society as being a-religious. A demonstration of this 
is that a lack of religious belief or affiliation has meant an increase in humanist and 
non-religious funerals. 
 The second shift in values concerning life and death in the United Kingdom is 
due to the increasingly diverse population of the United Kingdom. The diversity of 
religious beliefs and values concerning life and death mean that values concerning 
life and death are no longer simply Christian or secular but originate from other 
religious traditions. This has created a need for a better awareness and provision for 
religious beliefs and values in the case of death and dying.  
 The belief that death is a rite of passage where the individual moves from the 
current world to the next is a common feature of most religious beliefs in some form. 
Religious beliefs about death are also said to be for the benefit of human society to 
understand the death of an individual and overcome the emotions of grief and loss 
which accompany death (OGorman, 1998). The rituals associated with death, 
regardless of the faith from which they come also serve to give the mourners a sense 
of control over what they are unable to control (Firth, 2003) 
Implications for the care of the dying 
Within the Christian tradition, death is prepared for by a priest or chaplain reciting 
prayers for the dying (Neuberger, 2004). These prayers are often symbolic of 
forgiveness, healing and reconciliation (Siriwardena & Clark, 2004). After death, the 
body is prepared for burial or cremation by funeral directors and a ceremony is taken 
by a priest for mourners to celebrate the life of the deceased and commend his or her 
soul to God (Vardy, 1995).  
 Within Judaism, the rabbi will pray with those who are dying and listen to a 
final confession (Neusner, 1997). Judaism also states that the dying should not be 
left alone at the point of death and should be surrounded by family and friends 
(Siriwardena & Clark, 2004). At the point of death the family and friends will make 
a small tear in their clothing as a sign of mourning (Abeles & Katz, 2010; Pilkington, 
1995).  
 Hindu beliefs about death state that death is a progression within the process of 
reincarnation. As such Hindu rituals concerning death are concerned with the care of 
the soul and the assurance that it will progress to its next life. Hindu beliefs state 
that, where possible, death should occur in the home and that the dying should be 
accompanied by someone who can pray with them, sing hymns, read holy books and 
offer water from the Ganges to provide salvation for the departing soul.  
 Buddhism also stresses a belief in reincarnation as a form of life after death and 
believes that actions in this life affect actions in the next life. Dying Buddhists 
therefore discuss their death with those around them and often refuse pain relief to 
help keep them alert to what is happening. 
 The Muslim belief regarding death states that death acts as a gateway to an 
eternal afterlife and is a gift which is granted to the Muslim to be with God. The 
Muslim faces Mecca and if possible, the call to prayer is recited in the ear at the 
point of death (Neuberger, 2004). 
 Sikh beliefs about death are also of the view that death is a step towards 
reincarnation. Within Sikhism the dying person is not left alone by their family and 
listens to hymns and readings from the Guru Granth Sahib.  
Post death care and implications for funeral practice 
The care of the body following death is an example of where beliefs and values 
concerning life and death and the acceptance of them is becoming increasingly 
important. Some of these implications include what happens to the body, who is 
allowed to prepare the body for the last rites, and the time constraints which vary 
among religious beliefs. 
 The care of the body after death is one area where the beliefs and values of a 
religion can conflict with the traditional attitudes within the United Kingdom 
(Neuberger, 2004). The religions of Islam and Judaism particularly illustrate this 
with the religious belief that only someone belonging to that faith should be allowed 
to prepare the body for burial or cremation (Arblaster, 2006; Neuberger, 2004). 
Additionally Sikh beliefs illustrate this with the guidance that the 5 Ks must not be 
disturbed while the body is being prepared for cremation. 
 The implications for care of the dead according to religious beliefs and values 
also centre around the issues of time and access to the body. Firth (2003) has 
highlighted how many of the eastern religions place a strong emphasis on preparing 
the body for cremation or burial within twenty-four hours of death. However, the 
wait for an autopsy or the release of a body and the delay in registration of a death 
can mean that it is not always possible to prepare the body for cremation or burial in 
the way or the time frame that the faith demands (Sheikh, 2007). Many of these 
requirements are legal. This means that mourners have to observe them, even if this 
means that they are compromising religious beliefs in order to do so. 
 Funeral arrangements in the United Kingdom, as mentioned previously, are 
cared for by professional funeral directors. This can differ from the beliefs and 
values of other cultures living in the United Kingdom whose religious duty requires 
them to be involved in preparing the body for the funeral and making the planning of 
the funeral an event in which the whole community is involved so as to support the 
mourners (Arblaster, 2006; Neuberger 2004). Additionally, funeral practices, such as 
the cremation of bodies on funeral pyres and burials taking place on ground which is 
deemed appropriate by the faith, all highlight how different religious values are 
promoting the need for awareness and accommodation of religious beliefs in the 
United Kingdom (Neuberger,2004). 
Conclusion 
This section has examined the religious beliefs and values which relate to death and 
dying. With the traditional beliefs and practices of the rituals surrounding death and 
dying, the way in which death is dealt with and funeral practice in most cases still 
takes on a traditionally Christian format. However, this is undergoing change with 
the rise of secular beliefs and values and religiously diverse beliefs and values within 
the population. As such the necessity for providing funeral arrangements which 
accommodate the needs of those from other religions and cultures has become 
evident.  
Chapter conclusion 
This chapter has identified three areas of life in which religion has historically 
played an important part in the United Kingdom. While there is an influential 
Christian heritage at the heart of education, healthcare, and death and dying, it is 
clear that the changes in the values of the population mean that additional values are 
being brought to the forefront of these areas of public life. These religious values 
mean that the attitudes of those living in the United Kingdom toward religious 
diversity may be informed by these religious beliefs and values, whether they be the 
traditional beliefs shaped by the Christian heritage, or the newly introduced religious 
beliefs shaped by either faith traditions. 
6. The public significance of religious affiliation  
Introduction 
The previous chapters have discussed how religion is both tangible and of relevance 
within the society of the United Kingdom, both because religion forms part of the 
heritage within society and because of the increasing presence of other world faiths 
within it. Research concerning religion can approach the definition and 
understanding of it by categorising it into three dimensions or component parts.  
These are religious belief, religious practice, and religious affiliation (Francis, 
2001a). These components can act as understandings and definitions both 
collectively and individually and can each give different information about religion 
and the individual. 
 This chapter will discuss the dimension of self-assigned religious affiliation and 
argue that this provides the most effective tool for conducting empirical research 
concerning religious diversity. The problem which researchers highlighted against 
self-assigned religious affiliation being an appropriate measure of religiosity will 
also be introduced. The chapter will then discuss the three main theories which have 
contributed to the debate and argued for the value and credibility of self-assigned 
religious affiliation as an appropriate measure. The capacity of religious affiliation to 
be used in research concerning social and personal values and attitudes will then be 
argued. To support this idea, the chapter will highlight studies which have used self-
assigned religious affiliation to investigate the beliefs and values of different groups 
among the population, particularly young people. A discussion of self-assigned 
religious affiliation and its implication for beliefs and values informs the dissertation 
because self-assigned religious affiliation can be shown to be an effective research 
tool, and a successful predictor of the beliefs and values of individuals within a 
population. The dissertation is also informed by placing the current research in a 
wider context. 
The three dimensions of religiosity 
While religion has many elements or components, there are three dimensions to 
religion which have been particularly fruitful in empirical research: religious belief, 
religious practice, and religious affiliation (Francis, 2003). Religious belief describes 
the religious formularies and doctrines to which individuals may or may not 
subscribe (Francis, 2003 p. 47). Examples of religious belief can therefore include 
statements of belief in God or statements of unbelief, a belief in an afterlife, or a 
belief in a central doctrine of the faith such as the resurrection of Christ. Religious 
practice is defined by Francis (2003) as the range of religious activities in which an 
individual may or may not engage. Two key areas of religious practice which are 
relevant to the major world religions are the attendance at a place of religious 
worship and prayer. The third dimension of religiosity, which is of particular concern 
within this chapter, is religious affiliation. This is defined by Francis as the religious 
group with which individuals identify or to which they consider themselves to 
belong. Francis (2003) argues that religious affiliation is concerned with the social 
and public dimensions of religion. The public and social nature of religious 
affiliation means that religiosity can be divulged in a way that is sensitive to the fact 
that the individuals may not wish to disclose personal details of their religious 
behaviour and beliefs which they may consider private. 
 The theoretical and empirical problem raised by the use of religious affiliates 
within research concerns understanding and interpreting the situation of the affiliates 
who do not practice. More broadly this problem concerns the way in which the 
religious traditions and habits of the population have changed in the United 
Kingdom in recent years. Researchers including Voas and Crockett (2005) refer to 
the work of Grace Davie who has presented the theory that, since 1945, the 
population in Britain has developed from a population who mostly practised 
Christianity into a population which still maintains that they have a religious belief, 
but no longer retain the commitment of religious practice (Davie, 1994). For this 
reason Francis argues that religious affiliation serves as a poor predictor of religious 
practice (Francis, 2001b). As a consequence, some argue that religious practice or 
depth of commitment, regardless of how they are measured, are more suited to 
highlight the social influence of religion, rather than religious affiliation in its own 
right (Fane, 1999).  
 To highlight the view that religious affiliation is problematic, Voas and Bruce 
(2004) have examined responses to the 2001 census in terms of religious affiliation 
alongside responses to other national studies such as the British Social Attitudes 
Survey which includes questions concerning religious affiliation. Their observations 
conclude that there are discrepancies between the two datasets in terms of self-
assigned religious affiliation. This leads them away from the more widely employed 
conclusion that there are more Christians in the United Kingdom than expected. 
Their theory instead draws toward the conclusion that self-assigned religious 
affiliation can be explained as a means of responding to anxiety about national 
identity. This can be explained as the result of the religious affiliation question on 
the 2001 census form following the question concerning ethnicity. As such, the 
problem of religious affiliation being an indicator of identity rather than a predictor 
of belief or practice is highlighted. 
Religious affiliation 
The previous sections briefly introduced the three different dimensions of religiosity 
and the problems and concerns which have been raised concerning the use of 
religious affiliation in empirical research. As the theoretical background to this 
dissertation falls into a research tradition which has consistently supported religious 
affiliation as an appropriate way of understanding religion, this section will consider 
religious affiliation and argue in detail its ability to provide an explanation for the 
nature of an individuals religion and the public significance of religious affiliation.  
The section will do this by examining the theories of Bibby (1985; 1987), Bouma 
(1992), and Fane (1999), which give an indication as to the sources of Francis 
argument (2001a; 2003; 2008a; 2008b). Collectively the three key theories will 
provide a summary argument that self-assigned religious affiliation is a means of 
understanding how religion has remained encased within the Christian culture of a 
nation, is able to form an element of how a religions social identity can influence an 
individuals beliefs and values, and can be used as an effective tool measuring 
religiosity within the field of the social scientific study of religion.  
  These definitions and theories of religious affiliation, and their ability to provide 
an explanation for and definition of a particular dimension of an individuals 
religiosity, will also assist in explaining the significance of religious affiliation in 
terms of the whole population. The significance of the religious affiliation of the 
whole population will consequently act as a means of understanding the religious 
nature of the society of the United Kingdom as a whole. 
Bibbys theory of religious affiliation as encasement 
Bibbys (1985; 1987) theory of religious affiliation as encasement is the first theory 
for consideration regarding the understanding and significance of religious affiliation 
(Bibby, 1985; 1987).  This argument is a result of work which has been conducted 
by watching and observing the religious trends of the population in Canada during 
the 1980s. Bibbys work focuses on and is concerned with the low levels of religious 
practice in contrast to the high levels of self-assigned religious affiliation to the 
Christian faith among Canadians using results gained from data sets collected from 
national surveys (Fane, 1999).  
 Bibby (1985; 1987) claims that the historic nature of the Christian tradition in 
Canada means that Christianity is well established within Canadian society. As a 
consequence, this has an effect on the self-assigned religious affiliation of the 
population who struggle to separate themselves from that Christian tradition. Bibby 
refers to this as an encasement of the individual within the Christian tradition 
(Bibby, 1985). This means that the values of Christianity and the self-assigned 
religious identity of Christianity, but not the practices of church attendance or prayer, 
are taken up by the individual (Francis, 2003). Therefore Bibby (1985; 1987) 
believes that despite the fact that many Canadians no longer practise their religion, 
the encasement of the Christian tradition means that they have retained the beliefs 
and values of Christianity in their lives. 
 Developing his theory further, Bibby claims that those individuals who are 
encased within this Christian tradition can be defined as those who are committed in 
the traditional sense of Christian commitment, and those who are committed in a 
non-traditional way. Therefore, in terms of how religious affiliation functions Bibby 
argues that religious affiliation acts as a fairly comprehensive meaning system. 
With this change to the status of religion within Canadian society, religious meaning 
systems have become remarketed as a set of meanings where the individuals take on 
a role as religious consumers and can choose the amount and level of the meaning 
system that they are willing to take and apply to their own life (Fane, 1999). Despite 
a critique by Voas and Crockett (2005) that this is simply another means of saying 
that religious affiliation is in decline, the fact that these remarketed religious 
meanings still hold enough weight (for individuals to remain encased within the 
Christian tradition) gives an indication that religious affiliation is both useful and 
relevant.  
Boumas theory of religious affiliation as social identity 
Boumas (1992) understanding of religious affiliation argues that religious affiliation 
acts as an indicator of an individuals social identity. He argues that religious 
affiliation is a distinctly separate dimension from both religious belief and religious 
practice and is thus capable of giving an indication of the nature of an individuals 
religiosity in its own right rather than needing to employ religious behaviour and 
practice to explain and predict an individuals religion. In addition to the role that 
religious affiliation plays in providing an indication of the social identity of a person, 
Bouma argues that religious affiliation provides an indication of the source of the 
individuals quest to find existential meanings, resulting in the development and 
formation of beliefs and values from these meanings and explanations of existence.  
As a result of Boumas recognition of religious identity as a key element of an 
individuals social identity, the implication is that religious affiliation can serve as a 
defining category of a person in a similar way to that of age, gender, nationality and 
ethnic group (Fane, 1999). With this association between religious affiliation and 
social identity, the self-assigned religious affiliation of an individual is therefore an 
indication of the cultural background and general orientating values of a person p50 
(Francis, 2003). 
 If religious affiliation is to be understood therefore as an element of an 
individuals social identity, Bouma (1992) argues that it can also inform the attitudes 
and behaviour of the individual because religious self-affiliation not only informs 
individuals of who they are and why, but also informs individuals of who they are 
not and the reasoning behind this (Francis, 2001b). This acknowledgement of 
individuals sense of themselves and those around them could be argued as being 
one of the primary steps toward understanding others and shaping beliefs and values 
towards them. Having considered the two elements of social identity, and influence 
concerning beliefs and values, Bouma concludes that religious affiliation is a better 
and more inclusive way of understanding religion for the majority of the population, 
and thus a better way of investigation rather than examining the religious beliefs and 
behaviours of the population. 
 Therefore by examining Boumas theory three key points emerge: first, religious 
affiliation is significant because it shapes social identity and gives individuals the 
understanding of who they are; second, religious affiliation acts as a way of shaping 
the beliefs and values which individuals have within their life; and third, this way of 
looking at religious affiliation is a more inclusive indication of the religious 
demographic of the whole population. 
Fanes theory of the social significance of religious affiliation 
Religious affiliation has been supported as socially significant in the United 
Kingdom by Fane (1999). Fanes defence of religious affiliation is set in the context 
of the call to include a question concerning religious affiliation in the 2001 census of 
England and Wales. Fanes theory is built upon the arguments of Bibby (1985; 1987) 
and Bouma (1992) discussed above.  
 Fane highlights how evidence from the New Zealand and Canadian censuses, 
has shown the benefit of including religious affiliation as a separate category. 
Considering the arguments which both Bouma (1992) and Bibby (1985; 1987) have 
presented, Fane (1999) then unites these arguments and develops them to support the 
claim that self-assigned religious affiliation can be useful in predicting other 
indications of religiosity, such as belief and practice. Additionally Fane highlights 
that self-assigned religious affiliation can also act as a predictor of social attitudes 
and behaviours, particularly in the case of examining denominations and social 
attitudes (Fane, 1999).  
Religious affiliation and the 2001 census 
The concept of religious affiliation was brought to academic attention with the 
arguments in favour of including a religion question in the 2001 census (Francis, 
2008b). The theoretical background of the importance of religious affiliation to 
social identity, beliefs and values, and the benefit that this would generate from 
knowledge of the lifestyle and culture of society within the United Kingdom were all 
presented as evidence for the case of including a religion question on the census 
form in England and Wales. This would also allow for comparison with the Scottish 
and Northern Irish census. The eventual decision of the government to include a 
religion question within the census did not, however, include different faith 
denominations in the religion question for the 2001 census despite evidence in other 
census data, such as the Northern Ireland census and the Canadian census that 
denomination is a strong predictor of an individuals worldview (Francis, 2008a). 
Religious affiliation and denominational affiliation has a deep-seated history 
in the context of the United Kingdom with its history of struggles between 
Protestantism and Roman Catholicism (Francis, 2003). As a result, Francis argues 
that, when observed statistically in empirical studies, denomination makes a 
difference in terms of both religious affiliation and beliefs and values. Therefore he 
argues that research which generates knowledge about denominational affiliation as 
well as religious affiliation allows for a more detailed understanding of the 
population (Francis, 2003). This is supported by the evidence that when the nations 
of Northern Ireland and Scotland have included denomination questions within the 
census, more detailed analysis has been available but that this has not been the case 
for the census in England and Wales (Francis, 2001a).  
Empirical studies concerning religious affiliation 
 Building on the theories of Fane (1999), Bouma (1992), and Bibby (1985; 1987) 
which have been introduced in the previous section, Francis (2001a; 2003; 2008a; 
2008b) has championed the view that self-assigned religious affiliation can predict 
the social and personal beliefs, values, attitudes and worldview of the individual. 
Francis has applied this theory to empirical research and generated a rich collection 
of studies and data to support his claim. Many of these studies use self-assigned 
religious affiliation as an indicator of social identity to map an individuals beliefs 
and values about personal wellbeing, sexuality, and substance use among those of no 
faith, the Christian faith and other faiths. These studies have used samples of teenage 
girls and (Francis, 2008a) and mixed-sex teenagers (Francis, 2001a; Francis, 2001b; 
Francis, 2008b). Additionally Francis has conducted empirical studies concerning 
self-assigned religious affiliation which distinguishes between the different faiths 
and between the Christian denominations. This section investigates some of the most 
recent studies which have examined the connection between self-assigned religious 
affiliation to these particular groups and beliefs and values. As a representation of 
these beliefs and values, the section will look specifically at values concerning 
personal wellbeing, substance use, and sexuality to highlight how broad religious 
categories such as those with no religion, those affiliated to the Christian faith and its 
denominations and other faith traditions can predict values. 
The broad religious categories 
The Francis tradition has used empirical research to support the claim that his 
definition of self-assigned religious affiliation can predict the values of individuals. 
He uses this empirical research to examine the broader religious categories, namely 
those who claim no religious affiliation, those who belong to the Christian faith and 
those who belong to an other faith (Francis, 2001a). When these broad categories 
are applied to personal wellbeing, sexual morality, and substance use the following 
conclusions emerge. 
 As an indicator of personal wellbeing, purpose in life is measured by whether or 
not the individual believes that his or her life has a sense of purpose. Those who 
were affiliated to Christianity formed the group with the highest response of 61%, 
followed by 60% of those from other faith traditions. Those from the group which 
did not affiliate themselves with any faith tradition had the lowest percentage with 
50% agreeing that they felt that their lives had a sense of purpose. These data 
highlighted that individuals who had a religious faith were more likely to have a 
higher sense of purpose in life than those with no faith. 
 As an indicator of sexual morality, attitudes toward sex are measured by values 
concerning sexual intercourse outside marriage. The highest level of agreement that 
sexual intercourse outside marriage was wrong came from those affiliated with other 
faiths, 34% of whom agreed. This was followed by 15% of the Christian group. 
Within the group not affiliated to a faith, only 10% agreed that sex outside marriage 
was wrong. These data demonstrated that individuals who self-assigned themselves 
to a religious group were more likely to have conservative values concerning sexual 
morality. 
 As an indicator of the attitudes toward substance use, focus was placed on 
attitudes toward alcohol consumption. The group of other faiths had the highest 
percentage of individuals who believed that it is wrong to become drunk, with 47%, 
followed by the Christian group, 21% of whom believed it was wrong to become 
drunk. The lowest group were those not affiliated to a religion, 17% of whom 
believed that it is wrong to become drunk. These data demonstrated that individuals 
who did not self-assign themselves to a religious faith were more likely to have 
liberal attitudes toward substances such as alcohol. 
Faith groups 
Expanding on the broad religious categories, Francis has extended his research to 
examine the differences between the religions that were clustered within the other 
religious faiths. Francis (2001b) stands as a recent and detailed study of self-assigned 
religious affiliation and its influence on the values of those from different world faith 
traditions by measuring personal wellbeing and attitudes toward sex and substance 
use. The world faith respondents came from the Hindu, Jewish, Muslim and Sikh 
traditions. 
 Personal wellbeing was measured by a sense of purpose in life. The Muslims 
recorded the highest score with 68% who felt their lives had a sense of purpose, 
followed by the Jewish group with 64%, and the Hindu group with 62%. The Sikh 
group had the lowest number of individuals who felt that their lives had a sense of 
purpose with 51%. These data demonstrated that Muslims expressed a higher sense 
of purpose in life than the Hindu, Buddhist and Sikh groups. 
 Indices of attitude toward sex among the different faiths included attitudes 
toward sexual intercourse outside marriage, attitudes toward homosexuality, and 
attitudes toward abortion. The Muslim group were the group least in favour of sex 
outside marriage with 49%. The Hindu group were the next highest with 29%, 
followed by 27% of the Sikh group. The Jewish group were the group with the 
lowest agreement that sex outside marriage was wrong at 23%. Additionally among 
the faith groups, 55% of Muslims, 31% of Sikhs, 28% of Hindus and 24% of Jews 
agreed that homosexuality was wrong. Concerning abortion, 58% of the Muslim 
group, 40% of the Sikh group, 31% of the Hindu group and 27% of the Jewish group 
stated their belief that abortion is wrong. Therefore these data highlighted that 
Muslims were the most conservative concerning matters of sexual morality, while 
the Jewish were the most liberal. 
 The main index of attitudes towards substance use focused on alcohol 
consumption. The Muslim group was the highest group to disagree with excessive 
alcohol consumption; 68% agreed that it is wrong to become drunk, compared with 
35% of the Sikh group, and 31% of Hindus. The Jewish group had the lowest 
percentage of individuals who agreed that it was wrong to become drunk with 20%. 
The data demonstrated a reflection of the rules of the religions concerning excessive 
alcohol consumption. Muslims were the most intolerant of alcohol and Jews were the 
least intolerant. 
Christian denominations 
The work conducted by Francis to support the claim that self-assigned affiliation to a 
particular Christian denomination can be indicative of an individuals values is 
extensive. The most recently published study examines the denominational 
affiliation of teenage girls and the values which they hold, including personal 
wellbeing, and attitudes toward sexual morality and substance use (Francis, 2008a).  
The Christian denominations used for analysis within this study were Anglican, 
Roman Catholic, Methodist, Baptist, Pentecostal, Presbyterian and Jehovahs 
Witnesses. 
 When investigating values concerning personal wellbeing, the Pentecostals were 
the group with the highest sense of purpose in life at 75%. The Jehovahs Witnesses 
also had a high sense of purpose in life with 73% agreeing that they felt that their 
lives had a sense of purpose. Then, 65% of Baptists, 64% of Methodists, 63% of 
Roman Catholics, and 59% of Presbyterians also acknowledged that they felt a sense 
of purpose in life, while 58% of the Anglican group agreed that they felt that their 
life had a sense of purpose, making them the denominational group with the lowest 
sense of purpose in life. 
 When asked about personal wellbeing with a more negative approach, 29% of 
Roman Catholics stated that they had considered taking their own life making them 
the highest group to endorse this question. Then 28% of Anglicans agreed that they 
had sometimes considered taking their own lives, as did 28% of Baptists and 
Pentecostals. Additionally, 27% of Methodists and 24% of Jehovahs Witnesses 
agreed, with 17% of Presbyterians forming the lowest groups who agreed that they 
had also contemplated taking their own lives. Therefore these data demonstrated that 
there were important denominational differences in respect of the proportions of 
young people who have contemplated taking their own life. 
 In terms of attitudes toward sexual intercourse outside marriage, Francis found 
that 70% of the Jehovahs Witnesses agreed that it was wrong to have sexual 
intercourse outside marriage, making them the highest group to disagree with extra 
marital sex. Then, 54% of the Pentecostal group, 23% of the Baptist group, 16% of 
the Methodist group, and 14% of the Roman Catholic group also agreed that sex 
outside marriage was wrong, while 12% of the Anglican group and 12% of the 
Presbyterian group formed the two lowest groups against sex outside marriage. 
 When questioning whether or not homosexuality is wrong, the Jehovahs 
Witnesses group maintained their conservative values concerning sexual morality 
with 81% agreeing that homosexuality was wrong. Then, 59% of Pentecostals, 27% 
of Baptists, 21% of Methodists, 20% of Roman Catholics, and 19% of Anglicans 
also agreed with the statement that homosexuality was wrong, while 18% of 
Presbyterians formed the lowest group to believe that homosexuality was wrong. 
 When asked about values concerning abortion, 82% of Jehovahs Witnesses, 
68% of Pentecostals, 53% of Roman Catholics, 45% of Baptists, 37% of Methodists, 
36% of Presbyterians and 34% of the Anglican respondents agreed that abortion was 
wrong. The values concerning sexual morality therefore varied between 
denomination depending on the different measures of values concerning sexual 
morality employed. 
  The final measure of Christian denomination and its influence on values 
examined attitudes toward substances such as cigarettes and alcohol. When asked 
whether or not it is wrong to smoke cigarettes, 78% of Jehovahs Witnesses, 54% of 
Pentecostals, 52% of Presbyterians, 47% of Methodists, 43% of Baptists, 40% of 
Anglicans, and 35% of Roman Catholics, agreed that it was wrong to smoke 
cigarettes. 
 When asked whether it was wrong to become drunk, 59% of Jehovahs 
Witnesses agreed making them the highest group to hold negative values concerning 
alcohol consumption. Then 47% of Pentecostals, 32% of Presbyterians, 29% of 
Baptists, 24% of Methodists and 18% of Anglicans also agreed that it was wrong to 
become drunk, while 17% of Roman Catholics formed the lowest group to agree 
with the statement. Once again the Free Churches expressed more conservative 
attitudes toward substance use than the Anglican and Roman Catholic groups. 
Implications for beliefs and values 
The central point of the Francis (2001a; 2003; 2008a; 2008b) understanding of the 
place for self-assigned religious affiliation within social scientific research argues 
that self-assigned religious affiliation can give an indication of the personal and 
social beliefs and values of an individual. This indication of personal and social 
beliefs and values extends beyond solely describing the religiosity of individuals, 
and also extends beyond merely highlighting the beliefs and values of the individual 
as Bibby (1985; 1987), Bouma (1992) and Fane (1999) have suggested in their 
different understandings of self-assigned religious affiliation.  
 The argument that knowledge of the self-assigned religious affiliation of 
individuals can give an indication of their personal and social beliefs and values is 
supported by the empirical research discussed in the previous section. This empirical 
research supports the claims that individuals self-assigned religious affiliation can 
provide an indication of their values concerning personal wellbeing, sexual morality, 
and substance use. This empirical evidence of personal and social values can 
therefore make claims about the likelihood of self-assigned religious affiliates having 
personal and social values in common. Examples of this include whether individuals 
from one specific religious group are more likely to have a higher sense of personal 
wellbeing than others, or if individuals from one specific religious group are likely to 
be more conservative in their attitude toward sexual morality than others. 
 This method of using self-assigned religious affiliation to investigate personal 
and social beliefs and values also implies the potential for self-assigned religious 
affiliation to be used in making claims about individuals beliefs, values and 
attitudes toward those from other religious traditions. If this is possible, the 
consequence may be that self-assigned religious affiliation can be used to understand 
more about beliefs, values and attitudes toward those who are affiliated to other 
religions, religious denominations, and those with no self-assigned religious 
affiliation. 
 Therefore, it may be possible to use self-assigned religious affiliation as an 
indicator of an individuals beliefs and values towards those of other religious 
affiliations in a study which looks at young peoples beliefs, values and attitudes 
toward religious diversity. This implication generates a need for further research 
which this dissertation can address. 
Chapter conclusion 
This chapter has presented the Francis understanding of self-assigned religious 
affiliation as a development of three of the theoretical strands of religious affiliation: 
historical encasement, social identity, and social significance as presented by Bibby 
(1985; 1987), Bouma (1999) and Fane (1999).  
 The Francis (2001a; 2003;2008a;2008b) argument that self-assigned religious 
affiliation also serves as an effective way of describing the beliefs and values of 
individuals within the field of the social scientific study of religion is selected as the 
most appropriate theory for understanding the link between self-assigned religious 
affiliation and its relevance for understanding beliefs and values. The reason for its 
suitability is that Francis theory provides more insight into how self-assigned 
religious affiliation works in a practical sense, in a way that the sociological and 
historical approaches presented by Bibby (1985; 1987), Bouma (1992) and Fane 
(1999) do not. 
 This argument for the effectiveness of the Francis (2001a; 2003; 2008a; 2008b) 
tradition has been supported and discussed using examples of conducted empirical 
research (distinguishing between lack of affiliation, world faith affiliation, and 
denominational affiliation) have been used to map values concerning personal 
wellbeing, sexual morality, and substance use in order to make claims about the 
influence of self-assigned religious affiliation on personal and social beliefs and 
values.  
 When examining Francis understanding of self-assigned religious affiliation 
alongside his own empirical studies, and being aware of the findings from 
contemporary research such as the 2001 census, the argument for his particular 
definition of religious affiliation is strengthened. This combination of the Francis 
tradition of empirical research and the census also provide an insight into the 
practical uses of self-assigned religious affiliation.  
 This therefore implies that as self-assigned religious affiliation is both 
theoretically and empirically successful in predicting personal and social beliefs and 
values of individuals, religious affiliation may be able to predict beliefs and values 
toward those of other religious faiths in the research which this dissertation 
discusses. 
7. Learning from the REDCO project 
Introduction 
This chapter explores the key study concerning religious diversity among young 
people on which the present study builds. The chapter will summarise and analyse 
the project Religion in Education: a Contribution to Dialogue or a Factor of Conflict 
in Transforming Societies of European Countries (REDCO). This project was 
conducted across Europe in 2006 with a consortium of eight European universities, 
including the University of Warwick through the Warwick Religions and Education 
research unit (WRERU). Although the project was conducted across Europe with the 
instruments designed for use in multiple European countries and the data reflecting 
this, this chapter will concentrate on the findings of the English part of the project as 
this is the information which can best inform a new project taking place in the 
United Kingdom. 
 As the project on attitudes toward religious diversity, which this dissertation 
discusses, was designed to expand on REDCO the current WRERU research project 
is placed in context and a detailed study of REDCO is necessary. The chapter will 
discuss the origins of REDCO. Then the methods used for data collection, the 
findings and the conclusions from both the qualitative and quantitative parts of the 
project will be discussed, as well as the literature produced by the dissemination of 
the project, and finally other projects which have been inspired by its findings.  
 An explanation of this project and its influences will allow for a critique of the 
project to be included. This will assist in linking REDCO with the young peoples 
attitudes toward religious diversity project, thus informing the research which will be 
conducted as part of this dissertation.  
The REDCO project 
The REDCO project was a three-year mixed methods project funded by research 
department of the European commission Framework 6 initiative (Weisse, 2009).  
The project arose in order to approach religious education research from a dialogical 
perspective, thus responding to the recent religious issues which had prompted a 
need for the examination of intercultural and interreligious education within the 
education system (Ipgrave & McKenna, 2009). Consequently, the project aim was to 
investigate whether religious education in Europe is a contributing factor to assisting 
religious dialogue or a conflicting one, and whether religious dialogue can transform 
the societies of select countries in Europe. The project sought to identify and assess 
how religions and religious values could contribute to dialogue or heightening 
tension in Europe (Ipgrave & McKenna, 2009). 
 The mixed methodology employed both quantitative and qualitative methods, 
including a qualitative questionnaire, qualitative focus groups, and a quantitative 
survey. Troost, Ipgrave, Josza, and Knauth (2008) highlight how the qualitative 
study sought findings on a large scale concerning the importance of religions, 
attitudes toward religious diversity, and religious education among European young 
people as their approach to answering the research question. The qualitative element 
aimed to be explorative in preparation for a quantitative study.  
 The qualitative study included questions covering key themes such as tolerance 
and open-mindedness, individual experiences of religion, social and societal aspects 
of religion, and scholastic aspects of religion through questions about religious 
education (Troost, Ipgrave, Josza, & Knauth, 2008). Alongside questions which 
could generate information concerning these themes, the questionnaire contained 
questions which would provide basic demographic and background information 
about the participants. These questions included the self-assigned religious affiliation 
of the individual, their country of birth, and family origins. The qualitative 
questionnaire was further informed by the qualitative focus groups.  
 The focus groups were conducted among students who had completed the 
qualitative questionnaire to expand on the qualitative questionnaire findings. The 
focus groups were conducted in four schools chosen to be representative of the 
variety of different localities in England, for example rural, suburban and inner city. 
These schools were state funded but differed in religious and non-religious ethos to 
provide variety within the sample. The schools were also chosen where the 
population of the pupils included examples of the different religions and ethnicities 
which were known to be present in the population of the United Kingdom. Schools 
were also chosen in multi-ethnic areas to include a broad range of religions and 
ethnicities within the sample. 
 In total 31 students were interviewed at the same four schools as where the 
questionnaire was conducted. In addition to the aim of broadening the responses to 
the qualitative questionnaire, the interviews were undertaken to obtain a better 
understanding of the school ethos, its context, and its surrounding community, and to 
provide explanations in cases where data might have needed further support or 
information (Ipgrave & McKenna, 2009). For both the qualitative questionnaire and 
focus groups, students were encouraged to share and recall personal experiences, 
religious practices, and views concerning religion in society to provide more material 
concerning the thoughts of young people (Troost, Ipgrave, Josza, & Knauth, 2008). 
 The qualitative questionnaire was completed by 109 male and female students 
aged between 13 and 15 years and in years nine and ten. The sample was drawn from 
four schools across England and chosen to provide a preliminary example of the 
diversity of the state-funded secondary education system in England. Findings from 
individual schools were compared with the results of the other schools to identify 
patterns or common themes in the data, and to account for inconsistencies in the data 
from particular groups or schools.  
 The quantitative instrument design was informed by the responses from the 
qualitative questionnaire and focus group interviews by using direct quotations from 
statements made by the pupils in the interview transcripts to use as quantitative 
Likert questions. This ensured thematic continuity across the two research traditions 
and allowed for comparisons between the two data sets generating results with more 
depth to contribute to the project findings. Therefore there were similarities in the 
themes of the qualitative and quantitative strands, including experiences of religion 
in school, personal relationships with religion, and the role of religion in their 
relationship with others. The survey was conducted in sixteen state-funded English 
secondary schools. The 421 students who completed the questionnaire included both 
males and females and from years ten and eleven (McKenna, Neill, & Jackson, 
2009). 
The qualitative strand 
The qualitative questionnaire contained eight key questions. The common themes 
included the search for the religious views and experiences of the student, their 
opinions concerning the role of religion within society, and student opinions 
concerning the role of religion within school life (Troost, Ipgrave, Josza, & Krauth, 
2008). 
 Religious views and experiences were investigated through questions about 
personal views and experiences of religion, and personal connections with religion. 
The social dimension of religion was also investigated by asking about religion and 
the peer group, religious experiences and religious pluralism as a positive 
opportunity for social cohesion or a fuel for social divergence. The final theme of the 
qualitative questionnaire was religious education in school. This was covered by 
general attitudes toward religion in school, proposed contents of religious education 
in school, the religiousness of the teachers within school, and views concerning 
religious education being taught in segregated faith groups as opposed to collectively 
(Ipgrave & McKenna, 2009). 
Exploring religion and God 
The first of the eight questions asked students to write on the following themes: 
association with the terms religion and God; and the importance of these concepts 
in their personal lives. The two concepts of religion and God were analysed 
together because of the overlap in responses. Definitions and responses to the two 
concepts included general definitions rather than personal experiences, human 
perspectives on religion and God; religion as a way of life, including examples of 
religious practice such as prayer or worship; the association between religion and 
difference or a sense of otherness; theological perspectives; and finally, views 
concerning the socio-political force of religion. 
 Concerning their importance in everyday life, many claimed that religion and 
God had no personal or significant importance to them as a result of lack of belief, 
the harm caused by religion, the lack of proof for the existence of God, and a lack of 
interest in the subject. However, there was an acknowledgement that religion had a 
role in the students lives because of the people they knew who considered religion 
to be important. 
 Those considering religion and God to be of importance mentioned the positive 
influence of religious guidance in their lives, and the security which a relationship 
with God provided for them. In some cases the two terms generated responses 
indicating a sense of doubt about the role of religion and God in life. This was more 
common among those whose self-assigned religious affiliation was Christian or 
those with no self-assigned religious affiliation, in contrast to the Muslim students 
who were positive about the role of religion and God in their lives (Ipgrave & 
McKenna, 2008). 
Encounters with religion 
The second of the eight questions asked students to write on the following themes: 
important sources of religion; and student experiences of and encounters with 
religion. Family and school were the most frequently mentioned sources of religious 
knowledge. The family sources of information referred to religious teaching, 
instruction about the religious identity of the student, or family religious practices. 
School was described as a place of religious encounter where information 
concerning different religions was transmitted (Ipgrave & McKenna, 2008).  
Interest in religion 
The third of the eight questions asked students to write on the following themes: 
issues of religion which interest young people and prompt religious discussions 
among friends. 
The data demonstrated that approximately half of the respondents do not speak 
regularly about religion with friends due to the irrelevance of religion in their lives, 
lack of religious belief, or the risk of disagreement which discussion poses. Differing 
definitions of a religious discussion meant that some discussions occurred as 
extensions of religious discussions in class time concerning ethical topics on the 
curriculum.  
 Religious discussion also concerned perspectives on different faiths, experiences 
of interfaith encounters, and opportunities to challenge or defend a religion, when the 
religion of the individual was the topic of discussion. Those with religious beliefs 
were more likely to discuss religion than those with none (Ipgrave & McKenna, 
2008). 
Experiences of religion 
The fourth of the eight questions asked students to write on the following themes: 
student experiences of their own religion and the religion of others; the experiences 
of most importance. Experiences of religion included participation in religious 
ceremonies, celebrations, religious practices, visits to places of worship, encounters 
with religious people, and media representation of religion. These were often viewed 
positively; however some respondents expressed experiences of religion as personal 
matters and were reluctant to elaborate further.  
 Experiences of religion were related to the faith tradition of the family. Positive 
experiences were related to encounters with religious people, religious communities, 
and discussions with members of religious communities. Negative experiences 
included hearing racist comments, being abused on account of a religious belief, and 
those from other religions proselytising. 
Religions co-existing peacefully  
The fifth of the eight questions asked students to write on the following themes: 
student views concerning the possibility of different religions co-existing peacefully; 
and the requirements for different religions to live peacefully together. The concept 
of living together was defined in multiple ways, including people living together in 
a multi-cultural society, sharing households, co-habiting or married couples, and 
relations between those with a faith and those with no faith. Among some Muslim 
respondents the concept concerned divisions within faith traditions. 
 The students generally agreed that religious people should be able to live 
together harmoniously and agreed that certain conditions would make this possible, 
for example increased tolerance, respect and acceptance. Some respondents believed 
peaceful co-existence was an ideal, but might not be realistically possible. A 
minority group argued that it was impossible due to practicalities and the human 
tendency to use religion as a tool for conflict.  
 Support for religious co-existence included personal experiences of religions 
living together peacefully, the lack of significance of religion in society, humanist 
principles regarding the equality of humankind, and theological perspectives. Some 
students also mentioned schools and multicultural areas as examples of where 
religions already co-existed harmoniously (Ipgrave & McKenna, 2008). 
Religion in school 
The sixth of the eight questions asked students to write on the following themes: the 
place of religion in school; and the role religion should play in school. Interpretations 
of the place of religion in school included religious acknowledgement in school, 
permitting religious dress, including religious education on the curriculum, and 
providing space for worship in school. A large majority of the student respondents 
agreed that there was a place for religion in school in some form. Those claiming 
that there was no place for religion stated a personal dislike of the subject, the 
divisiveness of religion, the risk of preferential treatment for a religion, and the 
belief that religion should be restricted to places of worship rather than school 
(Ipgrave & McKenna, 2008). 
Religious topics 
The seventh of the eight questions asked students to write on the following theme: 
religious topics believed to be of importance for learning in school. The respondents 
valued the beliefs and teachings of different faiths, as well as expressing interest in 
exploring historical and doctrinal origins of different faiths in school. The 
importance of learning about the six major world religions was acknowledged 
alongside interest in learning about other religious movements. 
 Among the religious students, there was an interest in learning about their own 
faith in more detail before learning about the faiths of others (Ipgrave & McKenna, 
2008).  
Religious education 
The eighth question asked students to write on the following themes: the importance 
of the religiosity of the school teacher; the preferred model of religious education; 
and religious education being taught in segregated faith groups or collectively. The 
majority of students did not discourage teachers having a faith, but stated that it 
should not be a pre-requisite of teaching, influence teaching methods or be imposed 
onto the student. Some considered that the religious faith of a teacher might enhance 
their quality of teaching. The students also indicated that they were content with the 
current multi-faith, non-confessional approach to religious education in their school. 
   The majority of respondents supported the collective approach to religious 
education valuing the interaction between different faith groups, and the enhanced 
experiences and perspectives which this provided. A minority supported the idea of 
segregated religious education lessons arguing that this would reduce the risk of 
offending those with differing religious views, and reduce pupil confusion through a 
simpler curriculum (Ipgrave & McKenna, 2008). 
The quantitative strand 
The quantitative survey was designed to build on and enhance the results of the 
qualitative study. Its purpose was not to test theories but to make new theories. The 
questionnaire addressed three areas: first, the role which religion played in the lives 
of the students and in their environment; second, how students viewed religion in 
schools; and third, how students viewed the impact of religion in terms of others. 
The questionnaire also sought demographic information, for example gender, age, 
and the ethnic background of the pupils. 
 The quantitative sample included both male and female students aged 14- to 16-
years who attended a variety of schools representing the education system in 
England. This age range differed from the age range used for the qualitative element, 
as teachers at participating schools were asked to select any mixed-abilities class 
from years nine, ten or eleven. No year-nine classes were selected meaning that there 
were no 14-year-old pupil responses as had been the case in the qualitative part of 
the study. The total sample for the quantitative study was 421 students. The data was 
coded and analysed using SPSS and focused primarily on means, standard 
deviations, frequencies, and crosstablulations with independent variables (McKenna, 
Neill, & Jackson, 2008). 
The role of religion in the students lives and environment  
This was measured by religious observance. The researchers had included three 
questions in the survey to measure religious observance: first, how frequently the 
student prayed; second, how frequently the student read sacred texts (for example the 
Bible or the Quran) for themselves; and third, how frequently the student attended 
religious events such as acts of worship or youth groups. The importance of religion, 
sources of knowledge about religion and content of student discussions concerning 
religion were also employed to measure the role of religion in the students lives and 
their environment. 
 Concerning sourcing information about religion, the data identified that the most 
common sources which the students used to access information about religion were 
their families and their school. Other sources of information included media 
coverage of religious matters which the young people absorbed and learned from.  
 The data also highlighted that the personal religious backgrounds and the 
religion or lack of religion in the upbringing of the young people who participated in 
the survey provided varied experiences of religion.  
 The researchers highlighted the clear definitions in the data between groups who 
claimed to have an active religious life, demonstrated by practices including personal 
prayer, reading scripture and attending places of religious worship, and those who 
did not practise a religious faith. These two groups were further analysed to find that 
participation in these religious categories varied according to different religions and 
genders. 
 The data also demonstrated greater levels of tolerance towards people of 
different religious faiths among those who expressed that they were committed to a 
particular religious faith or worldview. However, the role of religion in the lives of 
the students, particularly in terms of religious beliefs and commitments, was found 
to be heavily influenced by modern youth culture and other factors such as 
adolescence, school examination pressures, relationships and the culture of 
indifference toward religion in which students lived (McKenna, Neill, & Jackson, 
2008). 
Student views of religion in schools 
This was measured by experiences of religion in school, the students opinion 
concerning how religion should appear in school were they in a position of authority 
at their school, and to what extent learning about religion in school influenced 
religious understanding, dialogue, and influenced the students as individuals. Other 
measures included the attitude toward different educational models, and expectations 
concerning religious matters in school. 
 The data demonstrated that the majority of students supported having religious 
education lessons in school, and supported religious education lessons with an 
inclusive approach in classes where all faiths were present rather than supporting 
religious education in segregated faith groups. This approval of inclusive religious 
education lessons supported the approach currently used in the religious education 
curriculum in England. 
 A majority of the respondents also supported the inclusion of religion in the 
broader context of school life rather than simply in religious education lessons. This 
was particularly the case among those who claimed that they had a religious belief or 
a worldview. This positive attitude toward the inclusion of religious education in 
school was further emphasised by pupil beliefs that school had a responsibility to 
provide an environment where the subject of religion and religious issues could be 
discussed. The belief that religious expression should be accepted positively was also 
voiced by many of the students (McKenna, Neill, & Jackson, 2008). 
How students view the impact of religion 
This was measured by asking the students whether people of different worldviews 
and religions could live together and how this might be possible. 
 Concerning the impact of religion on the individuals, the survey found that those 
with a religious faith or worldview were more tolerant of other world faiths and 
expressed a willingness to acknowledge and use the elements which the faiths had in 
common with their own as a basis for dialogue and understanding religions. 
Nevertheless, among the majority of students, regardless of their faith or lack 
thereof, there was a general agreement that a society in which different religions 
could co-exist amicably was of importance and something which should be aimed 
for in society. At the same time, some students expressed doubts as to whether this 
was an aim which could be realistically achieved.  
 This theme also highlighted that the frequency of discussion of religious issues 
could be linked to geographical area. Religious issues were discussed more 
frequently in the urban areas profiled for the survey than in the rural areas 
(McKenna, Neill, & Jackson, 2008).  
Overall conclusions from the quantitative survey 
 The data demonstrated that those who had a religious belief or worldview were 
more likely to be tolerant toward those who expressed different worldviews or had 
religious beliefs which differed from their own, and were more positive toward 
making connections with those from other religions than those who did not have a 
religious belief or worldview 
 This willingness to engage in dialogue among those with a religious faith or 
worldview showed their attitudes supported the view that dialogue and engaging 
with those from other religions would be the most successful means of achieving a 
society in which religions could co-exist amicably. The researchers concluded that 
the school was the most effective environment in which members of different 
religious faiths could be encountered, religious issues could be discussed, and where 
the environment was designed to foster harmonious relations between different 
religions. 
 The researchers also highlighted that throughout the quantitative survey, 
representatives of the Muslim faith consistently expressed positive attitudes toward 
other religions and were the most supportive of dialogue with other religions in order 
to foster harmonious relationships between religions (McKenna, Neill, & Jackson, 
2008). 
Impact of the REDCO project on other studies 
The legacy of the REDCO project is one of influence both in England and across 
Europe. This influence can be demonstrated in two ways: first, through the academic 
studies which have been conducted with the methodology and findings of the 
REDCO project in mind, for example in the areas of political sciences, sociology, 
law and philosophy; and second, through the areas of significance including politics 
and education where REDCO has proved influential. 
 The REDCO project was a large project which encompassed smaller research 
projects contributing to the overall research question. The results of the English 
element of REDCO are capable of standing separately from the European results, 
whilst being able to contribute to the wider data set. These small projects used the 
same research methods across the European countries and included comparisons 
between countries such as England and the Netherlands (Bertram-Troost & OGrady, 
2009), as well as examining and commenting on the data of one particular country or 
the eight European countries collectively. Therefore its ability to be an innovative, 
mixed method, cross European project contributes to its significance. 
 An additional impact of REDCO on further research was its success in creating 
a community of practice and bringing academics and educational practitioners 
together to work. The English branch of REDCO has also influenced the work of 
Moulin who cites REDCO in his justification of the necessity to research the 
experiences of religious students in secondary school religious education lessons 
(Moulin, 2011). 
Linking REDCO and the religious diversity project 
The overriding agenda of REDCO was to use a mixed methodology to answer 
whether or not religion in education contributes to dialogue or contributes to conflict 
between religions across Europe. The agenda of the religious diversity project looks 
to employ a similar mixed methodology of quantitative and qualitative tools such as 
those used in REDCO to answer questions about religious diversity in the United 
Kingdom. However, unlike the REDCO desire to answer one question about the 
contribution which religion in education makes to dialogue or conflict, the religious 
diversity project aims to understand the various attitudes toward religious diversity 
and the factors which influence them in young peoples lives. The current project 
agenda, therefore, looks to increase the explorative nature of the previous project by 
identifying a broad range of attitudes toward religious diversity and the different 
components of attitudes toward religious diversity, rather than examining specific 
topics like religious education, and religious dialogue, and conflict. However 
identifying these attitudes may provide explanations as to why religious dialogue or 
conflict occurs in the United Kingdom. This would inform the findings of the 
previous project and continue to provide a contribution to knowledge about the 
values of young people. 
 Additionally the REDCO agenda sought to conduct a project which examined 
the dialogical perspective of religious education. The current project will 
acknowledge this by asking about religious dialogue, the influence which religious 
education has on it, and examining where religious education has both positively and 
negatively influenced attitudes toward religious diversity. 
 The researchers were also concerned that the REDCO agenda should answer the 
question of whether or not religious dialogue can transform societies in European 
countries. This informs the agenda of the religious diversity project as an 
understanding of the attitudes toward religious diversity may help to argue whether 
religious dialogue is indeed possible, what might be needed to assist in making 
religious dialogue possible, and whether attitudes toward religious dialogue can 
transform different communities within the different nations of the United Kingdom 
as opposed to across Europe. 
 A subsequent element of REDCO agenda was to identify how religions and 
religious values can contribute to dialogue or conflict between religions. The 
REDCO examination of religions and religious views was found to be a successful 
indicator of views concerning religious dialogue and conflict. This could therefore 
inform the religious diversity project agenda in terms of content, by examining 
religions and values as a way of assessing and understanding attitudes toward 
religious diversity among young people. 
 In shaping the research tools to assist in answering the overall agenda of the 
project REDCO used sub-agendas. Both the qualitative and quantitative agenda used 
questions which investigated the personal, social and educational dimensions of 
religion to contribute to the research question. This sub-agendum can also inform the 
themes of the current project agenda. Thus the dimensions of personal, social and 
educational religion could be used as a means of identifying attitudes toward 
religious diversity either through adapting questions or using pre-existing REDCO 
questions. These themes could identify attitudes concerning religious diversity in 
terms of the personal and social connections which young people have with religion, 
as well as the educational dimension of religion which they experience in school. 
Learning from the REDCO project 
Three main conclusions arose from the REDCO quantitative study. First, those who 
self-assigned themselves to a religion or a worldview were more tolerant towards 
those who had a different religion or worldview than those who did not self-assign 
themselves to a religion or a worldview. This might inform subsequent research as 
the next survey could identify attitudes toward religious diversity to test this claim in 
more detail and to examine the different values which contribute to a more tolerant 
or negative attitude toward those with a different religion or worldview.  
 Second, the quantitative study highlighted school as the most effective 
environment for positive encounters with religious people, religious discussions, and 
as an environment to foster harmonious relations between different religions. By 
asking further questions about the school as an influential environment in its ability 
to shape and influence both positive and negative attitudes, the subsequent research 
is provided with a stable foundation with which to begin. The study will also discuss 
other factors which may influence attitudes toward religious diversity within the 
lives of the students as briefly highlighted by REDCO, for example family, media, 
society, and peers. 
 Third, the quantitative study concluded that the Muslim students were the most 
positive faith group concerning the encouragement of interfaith dialogue. This 
informs subsequent research as the conclusion proves that a project has previously 
succeeded in comparing the attitudes of different religious groups. This would 
therefore benefit a project concerning attitudes toward religious diversity as the 
different attitudes of members of specific religious groups could be compared in 
order to understand attitudes toward religious diversity. 
 The qualitative study generated three conclusions from the data which can also 
be used to inform future research concerning religious diversity. First, the REDCO 
team highlighted a caution about religion among young people as a result of the 
culture in which they live. This culture limits the opportunity and the willingness of 
students to engage in conversation concerning religion in their everyday lives. 
Therefore the current project has an opportunity to take this conclusion and to ask to 
what extent does religion impact on attitudes which might influence dialogue or 
conflict within the cultural context. 
 Second, the qualitative study concluded that religious education was considered 
to be a safe forum for discussion concerning religious dialogue. This informs 
subsequent research by highlighting that safe forums exist where religion can be 
discussed. The subsequent project might, however, examine the positive or negative 
attitudes and whether or not there are other forums aside from the school 
environment which provide an opportunity for religious discussion to take place. A 
subsequent study could also argue whether these forums influence attitudes toward 
religious diversity positively or negatively.  
 Third, it was concluded that dialogue in religious education lessons can provide 
support for students as they deal with the conflict of interest between their religious 
and moral lives, and the indifferent secular culture in which they live. A subsequent 
study concerning religious diversity could identify other areas which influence 
attitudes and reduce the conflict of interest among young people. 
 The overall REDCO conclusions were summarised in the policy 
recommendations document produced for the project dissemination. The key 
research findings have the potential to inform the current project and consequently 
this dissertation. 
 The REDCO team concluded that when sourcing information about religions 
and worldviews, the students stated family and school as the most common sources 
of religious information. This might inform subsequent research concerning attitudes 
toward religious diversity by giving an indication of how family and school 
influence the worldview of the individual concerning attitudes toward different 
religious groups. 
 An additional conclusion of REDCO was that students stated both an awareness 
of and experience of religious diversity. This generally occurred in school and 
occasionally outside school. This conclusion hints that student awareness of religious 
diversity is something which should be investigated in greater detail in order to 
understand how the experience of religious diversity can influence attitudes toward 
religious diversity. Furthermore, when discussing experiences of religious diversity, 
the REDCO team found that in general students were open to students from different 
religious backgrounds but that this was not necessarily reflected in their friendship 
groups, meaning the tolerant attitudes toward religious diversity were not always 
demonstrated in a practical way. This informs the current dissertation as this claim 
can be tested to see whether there are other practical demonstrations of positive 
attitudes toward religious diversity which were overlooked in the REDCO project. 
The project can also investigate the reasons as to why the tolerant attitudes are 
demonstrated in theory but not always in practice.  
 Finally the project also concluded that the majority of the participants were 
supportive of the right to wear religious symbols in school. This tangible example of 
the acceptance of religious diversity within school could be developed in a future 
project to measure attitudes toward different religions. The project would also 
investigate attitudes toward the individual symbols of each religion rather than 
asking about general attitudes as REDCO did. 
Beyond the REDCO project 
The research conducted in the REDCO project was pioneering for several reasons. 
The first was that the project was conducted across Europe. The investigation of 
multiple countries across Europe allowed for not just a perspective on religion in 
education in Europe as a whole, but also allowed for comparison between different 
European countries which are diverse by their nature and have different cultures and 
socio-historical backgrounds. Therefore given the diverse nature of the different 
nations within the United Kingdom it may be that using similar research methods 
would allow for claims and comparisons to be made concerning the different 
contrasting nations within the United Kingdom.  
 The REDCO project was also pioneering in its approach to the design of 
individual items in the questionnaire on the basis of qualitative interview findings. 
This provided a broader insight into the qualitative findings and the contextual 
reasons behind these responses. A future project might, however, use the results of 
qualitative data in a thematic way in addition to established quantitative questions to 
identify attitudes toward religious diversity. 
 At the end of the research project REDCO researchers highlighted that there 
were elements of the project which could be developed and pursued further in future 
research. It was acknowledged that the study struggled to be equally representative 
of the teenagers in each different country. This could be solved in another project by 
planning equal sample sizes for each nation thus allowing equal representation of 
young people in each nation. The findings could be used to highlight details about 
teenagers in individual nations as well as comparing the findings of the teenagers 
across the different nations of the United Kingdom.   
Conclusion 
This chapter has examined the REDCO project conducted by the Warwick Religions 
and Education Research Unit as a successful and effective study concerning young 
people and religious diversity, on which the present project has built. The REDCO 
project places the current project in context and explains the need for an 
investigation into the attitudes of young people toward religious diversity. The 
qualitative and quantitative findings provide a basis for what can be gained from a 
study which examines religious beliefs, values and attitudes toward religious 
diversity in an educational environment. 
8. Learning from the qualitative study 
Introduction 
This chapter discusses both the qualitative and quantitative elements of the AHRC 
Young Peoples Attitudes toward Religious Diversity Project. The chapter focuses 
on the way in which the two phases of the project were conducted. This chapter is 
divided into two sections. The first section discusses the qualitative study which 
formed the first phase of the project, and briefly presents the findings which 
informed the quantitative study. The second section then discusses the construction 
of the quantitative survey including the questionnaire design, the sampling strategy, 
and the pilot study, before concluding that the methods used were appropriate for 
collecting the data which will be presented in part two of this dissertation. By 
highlighting the mixed methods nature of the project, the layout of the data chapters 
with quotes from the qualitative study and statistics from the quantitative study is 
justified. 
The qualitative study 
This section focuses on the qualitative phase of the project. The section discusses 
how the qualitative data was collected and the sample which was used. Having 
identified these details the section then introduces the themes which emerged from 
the qualitative data which were deemed useful in designing the quantitative study. 
Sampling and data collection 
The qualitative study marked the first phase of the three year mixed method Young 
Peoples Attitudes toward Religious Diversity Project conducted by the Warwick 
Religions and Education Research Unit and funded by the AHRC and ESRC (Arts 
and Humanities Research Council and Economic and Social Research Council) as 
part of the Religion and Society Programme. The sample size was determined by the 
bid which had been granted by the funding body. The project briefing for the 
qualitative study had stated that fifteen schools should generate results from three 
group interviews per school. This would be to allow data to be gathered from years 
nine, ten, and eleven. 
 The final qualitative sample consisted of students from 21 secondary schools 
across the four nations of the United Kingdom, England, Northern Ireland, Scotland 
and Wales, with the additional inclusion of London as a special case or nation in its 
own right in order to accommodate the level of religious diversity which exists there 
and the size of the area. The qualitative sample therefore exceeded the agreed project 
target. Occasionally the age range was increased in order to accommodate the 
availability within the school and harvest a wider representation of religious 
backgrounds. The schools were selected to cover a variety of areas and contexts of 
diversity within each of the nations of the United Kingdom. This allowed sufficient 
width of school type and population type. The selection of schools for the qualitative 
study followed the qualitative emphasis on the varying contexts between the 
different nations of the United Kingdom. However, the types of schools were 
decided in conjunction with the needs of the quantitative sampling strategy and the 
schools selected for the study did not include more specialist schools such as Jewish, 
Christian or Islamic schools as the quantitative study would not be able to collect 
sufficiently large samples from these school types for comparative purposes. 
 . The justification for the qualitative study was that it was capable of acting as 
an exploratory scoping exercise which could in turn inform the quantitative study 
rather than test specific research questions. The desire of the qualitative researchers 
was that, through the interviews with the young people, areas and topics relating to 
young peoples attitudes toward religious diversity would be discovered rather than 
running the risk of mapping the thoughts of young people onto pre-existing topics 
and failing to present accurately the values, attitudes and opinions of young people. 
Through the proposed method, the qualitative researchers argued that hypotheses 
would be generated which the quantitative study might test. However, to ensure 
some level of structure across the interviews, the schedule developed by the 
researchers did follow three broad themes: first, values concept and empathy; 
second, social context including school, family, media and the local neighbourhood; 
and third, religious beliefs, frameworks and assumptions and in the impact of faith 
positions on responding to diversity. Therefore the project would be able to provide 
data which came from the young peoples ideas and discussions around these broad 
themes. 
 The interview groups took the form of discussion groups and, where possible, 
were divided into religious affiliation, meaning that those from different religious 
traditions were in groups together. This was to provide a more welcoming 
environment where students might be encouraged to be more honest in their 
responses due to the removed potential for peer pressure or religious discrimination. 
Additionally in most cases, the interview groups were mixed sex groups but this was 
dependent on the availability and accommodation of the school. 
 The interviews were recorded and notes were also taken by the qualitative 
researchers while the interviews were in progress and immediately afterwards. A 
combination of these notes and the typed up verbatim interview transcripts from the 
recorded material helped to form a detailed research report for each individual 
school. The individual school reports were circulated, as planned in the proposal for 
the quantitative team to use for the purposes of designing the questionnaire. These 
reports assisted the quantitative team in identifying the themes which the young 
people had expressed as important to them when discussing the broad topic of 
attitudes toward religious diversity and the topics mentioned above in the interview 
schedule. Therefore, the themes which are discussed in this section are the result of 
reading each qualitative report closely and selecting the key themes which might 
inform the quantitative questionnaire concerning young peoples attitudes toward 
religious diversity and those which seemed most relevant in being able to assess and 
understand attitudes toward religious diversity. These themes were also selected as 
themes which would benefit from further exploration by quantitative means. 
Identified themes 
The interviews explored the key themes and issues which the students identify with 
beliefs, values and attitudes toward religious diversity and the range and variety of 
positions which they adopt in response to attitudes toward religious diversity. The 
data which arose from the focus group interviews was both rich and extensive, 
giving insight into the lives and attitudes of young people living in the United 
Kingdom. Due to the length of interviews and number of groups in schools, it was 
not possible to include all of the material within the quantitative study. Therefore, 
this section draws out the key themes which were considered to be significant as a 
result of document content analysis. The document content analysis approach with a 
focus on analysis by issue, championed by Cohen, Manion, & Morrison (2008). The 
interview transcripts were read in detail and key themes documented. Where new 
themes arose later on in the analysis which were deemed of importance, the previous 
transcripts were revisited to look for content of these later themes and also 
documented. The purpose of the content analysis of the qualitative interview 
transcripts was to select the key beliefs, values, attitudes and commentary on the 
lives of young people in the United Kingdom. When reading the qualitative material, 
five key themes emerged through the process of document content analysis which 
could be used to assess and understand the attitudes of young people toward 
religious diversity and would also begin to tell a narrative concerning the young 
people in the United Kingdom who had contributed to the project. These five themes 
will formulate the chapter content of the five data chapters in the dissertation. The 
first of these five themes arising from the qualitative data concerned the social 
context of young people living in the United Kingdom. This would give an insight 
into the young peoples personal perceptions of their everyday lives, including 
family life, peers and friendship groups, their environment, their religious practices 
or lack of religious practices, and their school lives. This theme was directly 
incorporated to match the themes of social context, and encounter with diversity 
which had been used by the qualitative team in the interview, having been taken 
directly from the project proposal and briefing paper. 
 The second theme concerns the personal beliefs and practices of the young 
people, including their beliefs in God, their concepts of God, their beliefs about the 
conflict between science and religion, and their personal insights into their religious 
practices. This would allow an insight into their attitudes toward religious beliefs or 
non-religious beliefs and would be of particular relevance when considering whether 
young people who live in this society were influenced by religion or not. This theme 
was adapted from the section of the interview schedule which posed questions about 
the faith background and identity of the individual and therefore can be classed as a 
theme which arose from the qualitative study.   
 The third theme arising from the qualitative data concern the factors the young 
people perceive as influencing their beliefs and values. Sources which they identify 
as being influential will be discussed including, parents, peers and friends, school, 
religion, and media. This was another theme which arose from the qualitative study 
as an extension of the length of discussion concerning social context and its 
influence on attitudes. 
 The fourth and fifth themes arising from the qualitative study concern the 
attitudes of young people toward religious diversity in the United Kingdom. The 
fourth theme concerns attitudes toward religious diversity in the context of the 
broader world, including the negative impact of religious diversity on the world, the 
positive impact of religious diversity in on the world, desires to broaden 
understanding of religious diversity, and concerns, attitudes and stereotypes about 
religious diversity. From their own perspective, the values which the young people 
consider to be of primary importance will be discussed, including respect, personal 
integrity, non-violence, and equality.  
 The fifth theme arising from the qualitative study deemed important for shaping 
the quantitative study concerns the attitudes of young people toward religious 
diversity within a more immediate life context. This included attitudes toward 
religious diversity in school, attitudes toward religious diversity in the local 
environment, and attitudes toward diversity within the context of personal 
relationships. These two themes were adapted from the topics of attitudes toward 
religious diversity and encounter with religious diversity which formed part of the 
interview schedule.  
 These five themes which have been discussed above can be seen partly to have 
been shaped by the qualitative schedule and partly to have arisen from the qualitative 
material. The following sections discuss these themes in more detail and argue for 
their inclusion within the study, their influence on the questionnaire, and their 
discussion within this dissertation. 
Social context  
The first theme of social context of the young people living in the United Kingdom 
builds on the chapters previously discussed in this dissertation concerning the 
religiously diverse nature of the United Kingdom in the twenty-first century, as 
shown by the statistics from the 2001 census and the tangible signs of religious 
diversity in the United Kingdom. 
 One of the key research questions within the qualitative and quantitative briefing 
paper was to examine the social contexts of young people living in the United 
Kingdom. The interview schedule developed by the researchers therefore sought to 
ask questions about school, family, media, and local neighbourhood. On assessing 
the archive material of the interview transcripts, it became clear that the young 
people were articulate about their social context and the topics of family life, peers 
and friendship groups, the local environment, religious practice, school, and media. 
Their readiness to discuss this broad theme in depth allowed for accurate indications 
regarding their social context to be understood. The importance of including social 
context as a theme allows for an understanding of the particular areas in life which 
have surrounded the young people in their everyday lives. By discussing family life, 
an insight is gained into their everyday lives and those with whom they share their 
everyday lives. By discussing school life, an indication is given of the taught ethos 
which the students experience each day. By discussing the media an indication is 
given regarding what role the media plays in informing their opinions by discussing 
the local environment, an indication is provided of the varying neighbourhoods of 
the United Kingdom in which the young people live. Each of these areas provides 
the beginning of the narrative which states what constitutes daily life for young 
people in the United Kingdom. 
Religious beliefs 
For the theme of religious beliefs, is was felt that, in order to be able to understand 
attitudes toward religious diversity, that an understanding of young peoples 
religious beliefs might help to explain some of these attitudes. As one of the things 
learnt from the qualitative data was that comments often transcended the themes or 
topics from the briefing paper and developed into conversations about religious 
beliefs in life or the lack thereof, it seemed of key importance that understanding the 
religious or non-religious beliefs of the young people was included. This is also 
supported by the evidence in previous chapters which states that self-assigned 
religious affiliation can influence the beliefs and values of the individual. The 
qualitative data highlighted that the themes surrounding religious belief of most 
interest and relevance to this project were belief in God, concepts of God, science 
and religion, and life after death. Having learnt this from the qualitative these topics 
were then incorporated into the quantitative study. 
The influences on and of religion 
From the qualitative study, attention was drawn both to how young people saw the 
influence of religion on their lives and to how young people understood the factors 
that influenced their experience and perception of religion. From the qualitative data, 
the influences which they discussed and which were of most significance were 
parents, peers and friends, school, religion, and media. Therefore from the qualitative 
data these themes were discovered as important to examine further alongside 
quantitative questions which asked similar questions concerning the theme. This 
would be an opportunity to build on the chapter which had discussed social context 
as a means of testing whether or not the young people showed awareness of their 
social context contributing to their beliefs, attitudes and values in any way. 
Attitudes toward religious diversity in a broad context 
When reading and analysing the qualitative material which discussed attitudes 
toward religious diversity, it became clear that the young people had attitudes 
concerning religious diversity on two levels. The first level was attitudes toward 
religious diversity in a broad context. The young people were articulate and willing 
to discuss attitudes toward religious diversity in terms of the wider world. Therefore 
the topics which had been raised concerned the varying attitudes that religious 
diversity could have a positive and negative effect on the world, the desire of young 
people to learn more and increase their understanding of other religions, and 
concerns, attitudes and stereotypes about religious diversity. These attitudes at a 
broad level were incorporated into the design of the quantitative study. This would 
assist in understanding what common stereotypes and generalisations about other 
religions young people had, how common they were, and how these could be 
approached to foster more positive attitudes toward religious diversity among young 
people. It was also a means of concluding the narrative of the social context, belief 
and awareness of influential factors to reach the heart of whether or not these had 
any effect on young peoples attitudes toward religious diversity. 
Attitudes toward religious diversity in the immediate context 
Building on the attitudes toward religious diversity in the broad context, the 
qualitative material also highlighted the second level of attitudes toward religious 
diversity. Extensive material was raised by students who discussed their attitudes 
toward religious diversity as they observed it in their more immediate environment 
and the way in which they saw religious diversity having a direct impact on their 
lives. On closer analysis and study of the qualitative material these attitudes toward 
religious diversity in the immediate context were divided into four different areas: 
first, attitudes toward religious diversity in the school context; second, attitudes 
toward religious diversity in the local environment; third, and attitudes toward 
religious diversity in terms of personal relationships; and fourth, attitudes toward 
religious diversity in terms of observing the inter-religious and inter-cultural 
relationships of others. The incorporation of these themes into the quantitative study 
meant that a more detailed understanding of the attitudes toward religious diversity 
could be compiled, drawing closely on the students personal experiences. 
Conclusion 
This section has briefly introduced the qualitative study and the methods used to 
conduct it and collect the data. The themes discussed in this section are all themes 
which were gleaned from the data and considered to be of value in designing the 
qualitative study. Having identified the five themes it is the quotations which were 
then taken from the students which will be used alongside the quantitative findings 
to identify whether or not there are areas where the qualitative and quantitative can 
collaboratively form a richer picture concerning young peoples attitudes toward 
religious diversity. 
The quantitative study 
Having discussed the method of data collection for the qualitative study within the 
project, the nature of its approach, and some of the key findings which were deemed 
to be relevant to the quantitative project, this section discusses the quantitative 
element of the project in more detail. The section will discuss the process behind the 
questionnaire design, the sampling strategy and how the targets were achieved, and 
the pilot study which was conducted to test the instrument before it was sent out to 
the 10,000 participants in the study. 
Questionnaire design and layout 
The questionnaire was designed with two things in mind: first, that there had been a 
detailed qualitative study preceding the quantitative which needed to be incorporated 
in order to ensure that the project methodology could be accurately described as 
mixed methods, as had been promised in the bid to the funding body. The qualitative 
incorporation is discussed at length in the previous section of this chapter; second the 
questionnaire was designed in the light of the knowledge that the quantitative 
tradition already has a wealth of recognised and established instruments. In order to 
link the findings of this new study with established and developing fields of enquiry 
some pre-existing scales were incorporated into the design of the questionnaire. 
Examples of established scales included measures of attitude towards religion, God 
images, self-esteem, empathy, and personality. Additionally, other scales which had 
been observed in their use for other studies were also adapted and incorporated into 
the questionnaire design.  
 This section discussed some prominent features of the questionnaire design and 
the justification for including the, and where relevant, introducing previous studies 
which have used the tools which have been incorporated into this questionnaire. 
 The questionnaire was divided into three sections. The first section used nominal 
questions which allowed the student to answer demographic questions about 
themselves and self-select categories which applied to them. This section included 
key variables such as sex and school year (which would indicate age). Nominal 
levels of measurement were also included, for example the question concerning 
religious affiliation. Such questions allow individuals to be placed within categories, 
but there is no natural progression within and between these categories. This first 
section also included ordinal questions which measured frequency of prayer, 
frequency of attendance at places of worship, and frequency of media consumption 
as measured by frequency of watching television and following current affairs. 
Ordinal levels of measurement allowed individuals to be placed in rank order 
without making assumptions about the equality of distances between the points 
within the ranking. The question concerning frequency of praying may fall into this 
category when individuals are invited to check one of the five options: nearly every 
day, at least once a week, at least once a month, occasionally, and never. Although 
the intervals between the points are clearly not equal, such variables may be 
employed in linear models 
 The second section of the questionnaire was formed of Likert questions. These 
questions first addressed different factors which the young people considered to be 
of influence in shaping their views about different religious groups. The religious 
groups selected remained the same throughout the questions to allow for comparison 
across the different factors. These influential factors included parents, friends, and 
the media. Additionally the same format was applied for questions about attitudes 
toward other religious groups, for example interest in finding out about other 
religious groups. 
 The Likert questions were also used as individual items to ask questions about 
specific social contexts, religious beliefs, influential factors, and attitudes toward 
religious diversity in both a broad and an immediate context. Interval levels of 
measurement allow assumptions about the equality of distances between the points. 
Within the social sciences this assumption is conventionally made with Likert 
scaling, following Likert (1932). The form of Likert scaling employed in the 
quantitative component of the Young Peoples Attitudes to Religious Diversity 
project invites pupils to assess clear well-focused statements on the conventional five 
point scale: agree strongly, agree, not certain, disagree, and disagree strongly. 
 Scaled levels of measurement go one stage further and combine a set of items to 
assess a broader underlying construct. There are three main benefits from this 
process of scaling. The first is that it is possible to build a more complex theoretical 
understanding of what is being measured. For example, the notion of extraversion is 
more complex than something that can be captured by a single item, but may be 
more adequately captured by a set of items. The second benefit is that, while the 
individuals responses to a single item may fluctuate from day to day, the overall 
pattern of responses to a set of items remains much more stable. Scales access a 
deeper level of personal stability. The third benefit is that when a set of items are 
brought together, the range of scores is expanded. For example, on the Likert scale, 
each item has a range of just five points (1 through 5), but when ten Likert items are 
combined, the range expands (10 through 50). This provides greater differentiation 
between individuals. To be effective, scales require careful development and testing. 
  The final section of the questionnaire was composed using the abbreviated form 
of the Junior Eysenck Personality Questionnaire Revised (JEPQR (A)) as a means of 
including a personality measure within the questionnaire. 
Established Instruments 
As well as providing the opportunity for the development of new scales, the 
quantitative questionnaire included a range of recognized and established 
instruments in order to link the findings from this new study with established and 
developing fields of enquiry. Such established scales included measures of attitude 
towards religion, God images, self-esteem, empathy, and personality.  These scales 
arose from projects including the Attitudes toward Religion Project, the Teenage 
Religion and Values Survey, and the Outgroup Prejudice Project. The questions 
which were posed about attitudes toward other religions derived from the attitudes 
toward religion project. 
       The Attitudes toward Religion Project had its roots in a study published in the 
late 1970s (Francis, 1978) that argued for the primacy of the attitudinal dimension of 
religion in building a co-ordinated approach to the psychology of religion. Initially 
this body of research was shaped entirely within the Christian tradition, drawing on 
the Francis Scale of Attitude toward Christianity. The scope of the Attitude toward 
Religion Project was subsequently extended to other faith traditions through the 
Katz-Francis Scale of Attitude toward Judaism (Francis & Katz, 2007), the Sahin-
Francis Scale of Attitude toward Islam (Sahin & Francis, 2002; Francis, Sahin, & 
Al-Failakawi, 2008), and the Santosh-Francis Scale toward Hinduism (Francis, 
Santosh, Robbins, & Vij, 2008). More recently, the Astley-Francis Scale of Attitude 
toward Theistic Faith has allowed comparable studies to employ the same instrument 
within Christian, Islamic, and Jewish as well as secular contexts (Astley, Francis, & 
Robbins, 2012). In order to locate its findings alongside the growing body of 
empirical evidence organised by the Attitudes toward Religion Project, the 
quantitative component of the Young Peoples Attitudes to Religious Diversity 
project now includes the Astley-Francis Scale of Attitude toward Theistic Faith. 
 The questions concerning self-assigned religious affiliation had also been used 
previously in the Teenage Religion and Values Survey, which itself used the 
measures of self-assigned religious affiliation routinely gathered in many countries 
within the context of the national census and included for the first time in 2001 in the 
census for England and Wales and for Scotland. In England and Wales the census 
distinguished between the six main faith traditions (Buddhism, Christianity, 
Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, and Sikhism). In Scotland the census also distinguished 
between denominational strands within Christianity. Recognizing the importance of 
the denominational differences within Christianity, the Teenage Religion and Values 
Survey made fine distinctions between different groups (Robbins & Francis, 2010). 
 The Teenage Religion and Values Survey also included questions concerning 
self-reported attendance at public places of worship (including churches, 
synagogues, and mosques) to measure the extrinsic aspects of religiosity (Francis & 
Kay, 1995); self-reported personal prayer and self-reported reading of scripture to 
measure the intrinsic aspects of religiosity (Francis & Kay, 1995); religious belief 
(Robbins & Francis, 2010); and God images (Robbins & Francis, 2010); which 
alongside a well-established research tradition concerned with assessing the social 
significance of belief in God, has examined the important of the kind of God in 
whom people believe (that is to say their image of God). The Teenage Religion and 
Values Survey included items concerned both with belief in God and with the kind of 
God in whom individuals believe (Robbins & Francis, 2010). 
 Additionally, material from the Outgroup Prejudice Project, which has its roots 
in collaborative work with Adrian Brockett and Andrew Village at York St John 
University was incorporated into the quantitative study. The first database developed 
by this project was employed by Brockett, Village, and Francis (2009) to develop the 
Attitude toward Muslim Proximity Index by analysing attitudes of 1,777 non-
Muslim secondary school children in northern England. The scale was based on 
physical and social distance, using items related to the idea of having Muslims living 
at various distances from the respondent, to having Muslims marry into the family, 
and to mixing with Muslims wearing cultural dress (the hijab). The study showed 
that the notion of proximity could be used to measure prejudice towards Muslims 
among non-Muslim secondary school pupils. The advantage of the scale was that it 
was based on a range of notions surrounding proximity of the outgroup, including 
different levels of proximity. One limitation of the scale was that it was applicable to 
non-Muslim attitudes towards Muslims and not vice versa. 
 The second database developed by the Outgroup Prejudice Project was designed 
to develop a scale using concepts related to the Attitude toward Muslim Proximity 
Index, but one that could be generalised across ethnic or religious groups. This 
second database, comprising 930 pupils from Blackburn, 1,376 pupils from Kirklees, 
and 2,116 pupils from York, was employed by Brockett, Village, and Francis (2010) 
and Village (2011) to develop and test the Outgroup Prejudice Index as a reliable and 
valid scale that was comparable in measuring attitudes towards outgroup among 
Christians, among Muslims, and among those of no religious affiliation. 
 Drawing on the Outgroup Prejudice Project, the quantitative component of the 
Young Peoples Attitudes to Religious Diversity project now includes a wide range 
of proximity measures. 
The sampling strategy 
The quantitative component of the project was designed to collect the responses of at 
least 10,000 pupils in year 9 and year 10 (13- to 15-years) educated within the state-
maintained system of schools within the four nations of England, Northern Ireland, 
Scotland, and Wales in the United Kingdom. In the quantitative study, as in the 
qualitative study, London was also included as a separate nation within the study as 
the distinctiveness of London was considered to justify special treatment within the 
context of religious diversity. 
 To allow for a comparison of different school types and to assess whether the 
school type could influence the attitudes of its pupils concerning religious diversity, 
in each area, half of the students were recruited from schools with a religious 
character (for example Anglican, Catholic or joint Anglican/Catholic schools) and 
half from schools without a religious character, for example community schools or 
academies. To ensure that the project collected data from different areas of the 
United Kingdom which was representative of the different demographics, for 
England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, half of the pupils were recruited 
from urban areas and half from rural areas. Within London half of the pupils were 
recruited from inner London and half from outer London. Within the participating 
schools, questionnaires were administered by the religious education teachers under 
examination-like conditions. Pupils were assured of anonymity and confidentiality 
and given the option not to participate in the project. The total number of 
quantitative questionnaires which were analysed was 10,000 according to the project 
specification. This was achieved by oversampling and analysing sufficient 
questionnaires to meet the breakdown of pupils from different nations, school types, 
and different rural and urban backgrounds. This is presented in the sampling strategy 
table within the appendix. 
Ethical considerations 
This project was careful to conduct its research according to the University of 
Warwick Guidelines on Ethical Practice for research. The research proposal for the 
project was submitted to the Humanities and Social Sciences Research Ethics 
committee in order to obtain Ethical approval. CRB clearance was granted for the 
work that had to be undertaken in conducting the pilot study, and where other 
members of the project team were required to work in a school, CRB clearance was 
also sought and granted. 
       The questionnaire was designed so that no questions of a personal or distressing 
nature would be asked. Pupils were assured of confidentiality and anonymity, and 
that their replies would not be inspected by teachers within their school. In terms of 
consent for participation in the survey the class teacher administering the 
questionnaires was placed in loco parentis. Pupils were given the choice not to 
participate in the survey and to withdraw their questionnaire from being used in the 
project. The data archive, storage and destruction would follow the guidelines of the 
data protection act. 
The pilot study 
To ensure the success of the quantitative element, a pilot survey was conducted in a 
community secondary school with four classes of Religious Education students 
taking part. Two classes were in year nine and two were in year ten, these four 
classes were of different academic ability. The total sample for the pilot study was 
95 students. At this stage a long prototype questionnaire was designed containing 
options from which choices could be made. This long questionnaire was 
administered throughout one school that was particularly interested in working on 
the project. Following the completion of the questionnaires in class time, cognitive 
testing in the form of class discussion on the format, themes, and length of the 
questionnaire took place. The content of the class discussion and notes on pupil 
queries and reactions to particular questions was used as cognitive testing of the 
questionnaire. This content was then summarised in the pilot study report which 
influenced the decisions made when revising the questionnaire. Quantitative analysis 
of the pilot data also took place in order to check how the sections worked and to 
select the better performing components. The main lessons learnt from the report of 
the pilot study were the need to decrease the length of the questionnaire to ensure 
that the young people would be able to complete the questionnaire within lesson 
time,  and that one of the scales which had been used, which measured student 
perceptions of God images had been challenging to complete. As a result the length 
of the questionnaire was reduced and the structure of the God images scale was 
adapted into individual Likert questions which could be answered separately. The 
revised questionnaire which was sent out to the 10,000 pupil sample following the 
pilot study can be found in the appendix. 
Conclusion 
The data chapters which follow explore the themes of social context, religious 
beliefs, influences on and of religion, broader attitudes toward religious diversity and 
immediate attitudes toward religious diversity presented and justified in this chapter. 
Examples of quotations directly from the students support the inclusion of the 
quantitative questions which follow. The quotations are labelled to designate the 
nation which the student came from and the type of school which they attended. 
Part Two: research findings 
9. Social context 
Introduction 
This chapter discusses the theme of social context in terms of young peoples lives in 
the United Kingdom. Five broad themes will be discussed which were raised by the 
students when talking about their everyday lives. These were family life, friendships 
and peer groups, environment, religious practice, and school life. This chapter 
examines the sources of these themes from the qualitative material, using examples 
to support the inclusion of the themes, before demonstrating how the quantitative 
data interacts with and enhances the information gained from the quantitative 
research. 
Family life 
In terms of the broad theme of family life, three issues emerged as especially salient 
from the qualitative study. These were the importance of religion in the lives of their 
parents, parental levels of religious practice, and religious discussion with family 
members. 
Importance of religion in the lives of the parents 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about the 
importance of religion in the lives of their parents. This was demonstrated in two 
contexts from two students. 
Yeah, because my Mum, yeah, shes a very strong Catholic well shes part time so she 
goes to church every day shes free so she goes as often as she can and every evening or 
every morning she encourages us like me and Ive got two brothers to say a prayer to 
thank what God gave us and just to say like a wee prayer. (Scotland, Religious School) 
My parents adopt a kind of casual indifference to God they kind of dont really  they 
may be agnostic I dont know what they are to be honest  possibly atheist. They dont 
really talk about religion and God to be honest quite in contrast to me. I kind of struggle 
with religion a lot. (England, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which parents were seen to be taking 
religion seriously by asking these questions: My mothers religion is important to 
her; My fathers religion is important to him; and My parents think that religion 
is important. 
The data presented in tables 9.1 and 9.2 make it clear that parental religious 
identity is most important in London, closely followed by Northern Ireland. This is 
the case for pupils in both secular schools and religious schools. In London 57% of 
students in religious schools and 61% of students in secular schools claim that their 
mothers religious identity is important to her; 47% of students in secular schools 
and 33% of students in religious schools claim that their fathers religious identity is 
important to him.  
 In the other four nations, parental religious identity is considered to be more 
important by students in religious schools than by students in secular schools. In 
Northern Ireland, 47% of students in secular schools consider that their mothers 
religious identity is important to her, and the proportion rises to 58% in religious 
schools. In England the pattern is 27% in secular schools, rising to 41% in religious 
schools. In Wales the pattern is 17% in secular schools rising to 34% in religious 
schools. In Scotland the pattern is 16% in secular schools rising to 38% in religious 
schools. Similar patterns exist in respect of the fathers religious identity.  
Table 9.3 presents a similar pattern regarding the way in which students assess 
the importance attributed by their parents to religion. Again religion has greater 
salience in London and Northern Ireland. In London 56% of students in secular 
schools and 54% of students in religious schools claim that their parents think that 
religion is important. In Northern Ireland the figures are 47% in secular schools and 
60% in religious schools. In England the figures are 23% in secular schools and 39% 
in religious schools. In Scotland the figures are 14% in secular schools and 44% in 
religious schools. In Wales the figures are 16% in secular schools and 36% in 
religious schools. 
Parents religious practices 
The second issue concerned the way in which some students discussed religious 
practices of their parents and their personal view of these religious practices. 
Religions got an impact on my family because my Dad normally goes to the temple 
[gurdwara] sometimes and normally prays and stuff and Ill just like see what he does and 
try to follow when I grow up. (England, secular school)  
We have to pray 5 times a day but we dont. My dads quite strict with prayers and stuff. 
Sometimes he kicks off and you cant go out because you havent read the namaz and 
stuff and so he tells us. Sometimes I do it once a week, but not really very full. (England, 
secular school)  
[My mums]  a much stronger Christian than my dad ... I wouldnt call her extreme but 
quite close and so I dont necessarily think that I would have started going to church and 
things if it wasnt because of my mum. (England, Religious School) 
When I was younger I used to follow my dad when he goes mosque or when he prays, but 
now because Im independent, I do things by myself and I do less. (London, Religious 
School) 
The quantitative study checked the frequency of regular religious practice by asking 
these questions: Apart from special occasions (like weddings) how often does your 
father attend a place of religious worship? (e.g. in a church, Mosque, or 
Synagogue)?; and Apart from special occasions (like weddings) how often does 
your mother attend a place of religious worship? (e.g. in a church, Mosque, or 
Synagogue)? 
 Tables 9.4 and 9.5 display the proportion of mothers and fathers who never 
attend a place of religious worship. These data demonstrate that parental religious 
attendance is higher in London and in Northern Ireland than in the other three 
nations. In terms of secular schools, the proportions of fathers who never attend 
religious worship are much higher in Scotland (70%), Wales (68%) and England 
(59%) than in Northern Ireland (33%) and London (31%). A similar pattern 
appertains for mothers: the proportions of mothers who never attend a place of 
religious worship stand at 68% in Scotland, 66% in Wales, and 55% in England, 
compared with 28% in London and 24% in Northern Ireland. Across the five nations 
higher proportions of both mothers and fathers of students in religious schools attend 
a place of religious worship than is the case for students in secular schools. For 
example, in Scotland, while 70% of fathers of students in secular schools never 
attend a place of religious worship, the proportion falls to 47% among fathers of 
students in religious schools.  
Religious discussions with family members  
The third issue concerned the way in which some students recalled the frequency and 
content of religious discussions which took place with family members.  
Specially when Im alone at home I just ask my mum just to try to dig in about my religion, 
so every time I ask my mum a question it just goes deeper and deeper and theres new things 
to discover. (London, Religious School) 
When you start learning and then your Mum says something and youre, What How can 
you believe that?  thats wrong. (England, secular school) 
I start questioning my mum, I go home [from Islamic classes] and say to Mum, I learned 
this but what youre doing, thats culture, thats not Islam and then Im slowly getting my 
mum round now.  (England, secular school) 
I feel lucky that I have a religion  I often talk about this to my grandfather, and I feel Im so 
lucky that Ive got Catholicism (Scotland, Religious School)  
The quantitative study checked the frequency of religious discussions with family 
members by asking these questions: I often talk about religion with my mother; I 
often talk about religion with my father; and I often talk about religion with my 
grandparents. 
 Tables 9.6, 9.7, and 9.8 show that, for pupils attending secular schools, the 
highest level of conversation about religion with family members takes place in 
Northern Ireland and London, and the lowest level in Scotland. In Northern Ireland 
35% of students often talk about religion with their mother as do 40% in London, 
compared with 12% in Scotland.  In Northern Ireland 30% of students often talk 
about religion with their father, as do 30% in London, compared with 10% in 
Scotland. In Northern Ireland 26% of students often talk about religion with their 
grandparents, as do 29% in London, compared with 13% in Scotland. The variations 
across nations are much lower in the context of religious schools. Across the five 
nations between 26% and 37% of students in religious schools often talk about 
religion with their mother; between 18% and 28% often talk about religion with their 
father; and between 18% and 23% often talk about religion with their grandparents. 
Peers and friendship groups 
In terms of the broad theme of peers and friendship groups, four themes emerged as 
especially salient from the qualitative study. These were religious discussions with 
friends, having friends with a religious faith, experience of teasing or bullying, and 
the importance of religion to friends. 
Religious discussions with friends and peers 
The first issue concerned the students recollections of religious discussions which 
took place between friends and peer groups and stemmed from content in the 
curriculum or discussions outside of the school context. 
Sometimes I talk to X about it  hell usually ask me some question about what I think and 
thats about the only time that I talk about religion in school apart from with teachers in RE 
or something like that. (Scotland, Religious School) 
You wouldnt bring up these kinds of conversations with your mates.  So I feel if I talk to 
them it might be like Im trying to force it onto them  I dont want to talk about something 
they dont want to hear. (Scotland, secular school) 
Thats one main reason why religion doesnt turn up as a topic because if it does people just 
have massive arguments about it I mean people are content to just live in their own society 
and not cause fights. Im good friends with loads of different religions and we can get along 
without mentioning it and we just go our separate ways when it comes to prayer times. So I 
think not deliberately bringing up religion in the conversation is probably the best idea to be 
honest. (England, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which religious discussions took place 
among friends by asking the question: I often talk about religion with my friends. 
 Table 9.9 shows that for pupils attending secular schools, the highest level of 
conversation about religion with friends also takes place in Northern Ireland and 
London. In Northern Ireland 39% of students and in London 30% of students often 
talk about religion with their friends, compared with 20% in England, 14% in Wales, 
and 9% in Scotland. While the variation is less extensive among students attending 
religious schools, London and Northern Ireland still lead the way. In London 32% of 
students in religious schools often talk about religion with their friends; compared 
with 24% in Northern Ireland, 20% in England, 19% in Scotland, and 18% in Wales. 
Friends and peers with a religious faith 
The second issue was the way in which some students spoke about having friends or 
knowing peers who had a religious faith.  
My best friend shes Muslim but my other best friend shes Christian but she doesnt like 
show it  shes scientist, you know what I mean, she believes in evolution and stuff like that 
but just yesterday we were just talking about religion and science like me and her we were 
talking about religion versus science. (Scotland, Secular school) 
I would say out of the class of maybe less than 20 only 6 maybe were quite religious but 
thats not including me  people who go to mosque or go to church  and I would say maybe 
it was  just my year but I would say the majority of the class were pretty big atheists to be 
honest or people who just dont really know I suppose  there was maybe two people 
particularly who were very strong atheists and they were always getting into debates with 
everyone so its interesting to see it  because some people couldnt follow the idea of 
someone controlling them and they were saying I just dont believe it  its really 
interesting definitely. (Scotland, Secular School) 
The quantitative study checked how many of the students had friends who were 
religious and to what religions they belonged by asking the questions: I have friends 
who are Buddhist, Christian, Hindu, Jewish, Muslim, Sikh, or Humanist. 
 The students responses to these seven groups are displayed in tables 9.10 
through 9.16. The main trends in the students responses can be illustrated by 
detailed examination of contact with Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs (see table 9.14, 
9.12, and 9. 15).  
 Opportunities for forming friendship with people from these faiths reflect the 
variations in distribution across the five nations. London in particular or England in 
general provides greater opportunities for students to make friends with Muslims, 
Hindus and Sikhs. In the context of secular schools, 83% of students in London and 
52% in England have friends who are Muslims, compared with 37% in Northern 
Ireland, 34% in Wales, and 26% in Scotland; 76% of students in London and 34% in 
England have friends who are Hindus, compared with 22% in Northern Ireland, 18% 
in Wales and 7% in Scotland; 45% of students in London and 24% in England have 
friends who are Sikhs, compared with 6% in Wales, 5% in Northern Ireland and 4% 
in Scotland. Generally there seems less opportunity for students attending religious 
schools to form friendships with Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs. For example, while in 
London 83% of students in secular schools have friends who are Muslims, the 
proportion falls to 54% in religious schools; while 76% have friends who are Hindus 
in secular schools, the proportion falls to 40% in religious schools; while 45% have 
friends who are Sikhs in secular schools, the proportion falls to 29% in religious 
schools. 
 The opportunity for students to make friends with Humanists is much more 
equally distributed across the five nations, and only slightly less in religious schools 
(see table 9.16). Thus, the following proportions of students in secular schools have 
friends who are Humanists: 19% in England, 16% in London, 15% in Northern 
Ireland, 15% in Scotland, and 14% in Wales. In religious schools the proportions fall 
slightly to 15% in London, 13% in England, 11% in Wales, 10% in Scotland, and 
7% in Northern Ireland.  
Experience and fear of teasing or bullying 
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how they 
feared peer pressure or had experienced bullying on religious grounds.  
Its quite hard making friends with other religions without being judged by your own friends. 
(England, Secular School). 
Its quite hard to get other peoples mind around the fact that you can be friends with more 
than just the same type of people as you. (England, Secular School). 
The quantitative study checked the student fear of peer pressure and bullying by 
asking the question: I have been bullied because of who my friends are. 
 Table 9.17 shows that bullying because of friendship is at a relatively constant 
level in secular schools across the five nations, and only slightly lower in religious 
schools. In secular schools, the proportion varies from 14% in Wales to 19% in 
England. In religious schools, the proportion varies from 7% in Northern Ireland to 
15% in London. 
Importance of religion to friends and peers 
The fourth issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about the 
importance of religion in the lives of their friends and peers. 
Its very much in my year any way its Christianitys stupid and are you religious? rather 
than do you believe in God? is the question and religious people do such and such and 
there are people and there are religious people, the stupid ones. (England, Religious School) 
Ive got a lot of friends that sort of casually make fun of me for going up for a blessing or 
communion or whatever. (England, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the friends of students thought 
that religion was important by asking the question: Most of my friends think that 
religion is important. 
 The perception that friends think religion is important seems to reflect the 
salience of religion across the five nations. The differences are particularly visible in 
the secular schools (see table 9.18). Then, 40% of students in secular schools in 
London and 33% in Northern Ireland consider that most of their friends think that 
religion is important, compared with 10% in England, 7% in Wales and 6% in 
Scotland. In the religious schools there is a greater level of agreement among the 
pupils across the five nations. In religious schools the view that most of their friends 
think religion is important is accepted by 30% of students in London, 26% in 
Northern Ireland, 24% in Scotland, 21% in England, and 16% in Wales. 
Environment and community 
In terms of the third broad theme of environment and community four issues 
emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. These were inclusive and 
divisive communities, unease about community, discrimination within the 
community, and visibility of diversity within the community. 
Inclusive communities and divisive communities 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about whether or not 
they considered their local communities to be places of division or inclusivity.  
We have neighbours and stuff who are Muslim and we get on really well with them, we still 
talk to them and everything. (Scotland, Secular School) 
Where I live no one has fights  well there are fights but not about religion, I dont know, 
theyre about boyfriends and girlfriends/ its the same where I live as well, its just 
everybodys from different religions. (Northern Ireland, Religious school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students considered their 
communities to be inclusive by asking the question: Where I live, people respect 
religious difference.  
 Table 9.19 shows that respect for religious difference grows in line with the 
visibility of faith groups within the population. For students in secular schools, 62% 
in London and 52% in England agree that, where they live, people respect religious 
difference, compared with 43% in Northern Ireland, 43% in Wales and 37% in 
Scotland. 
 In Scotland and Wales there is no difference in the responses to this question 
between students in religious schools and students in secular schools. Elsewhere the 
response is lower among pupils in religious schools. For example, in England, while 
52% of students in secular schools agree that, where they live, people respect 
religious differences, the proportion falls to 44% of students in religious schools. 
Examples of those who considered their communities to be divisive were as follows. 
Over the next 10 years what do you think the situation will be like in your area?/worse/more 
Polish/worse/ I think everybodys going to be cut off from each other, I think its going to be 
worse.  (Scotland, Secular school) 
JI: Is that unusual to have someone who doesnt believe in anything?/GEN: no/ Not 
nowadays/ they dont want to get like jumped or something for just being like a certain 
religion because in certain areas of Derry you would like someone would just come over and 
[jump you] if you belong to a certain religion. (Northern Ireland, Religious school). 
Without sounding too horrible, they sort of section themselves off like we have no problem 
but by them putting themselves in one like specific area and staying together it makes them 
seem more distant like more away from us. (England, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students considered their 
communities to be divisive by asking the question: Where I live, people from 
different countries tend to stick together and not mix with others. 
 Table 9.20 shows that the experience of segregation is highest in Northern 
Ireland, and that there is very little difference between the perception of students 
attending secular schools and students attending religious schools. In secular 
schools, 29% of students in Northern Ireland consider that, where they live, people 
from different countries tend to stick together and not mix with others. The 
proportions then fall to 26% in London, 23% in Wales, 22% in England, and 19% in 
Scotland. In religious schools, 32% of students in Northern Ireland considered that 
where they live, people from different countries tend to stick together and not mix 
with others. The proportions then fall to 27% in London, 22% in Wales, 21% in 
England, and 18% in Scotland. 
Unease about communities 
The second issue was the way in which some students spoke about a sense of unease 
within their communities. 
Theres like an estate with houses and that and itd be all Muslims and you drive through the 
next estate and its all white people. I dont know how that happened but I guess it was 
people like buying all the houses and then other people dont want to go there/and theres an 
area with all the Polish/ and at X its all Slovakians and other people wouldnt go there. 
(Scotland, Secular School) 
Outside some Christians and the Muslims they dont mix together like some Muslim parents 
dont like them going over to the house of the Christians sometimes. (Scotland, Secular 
school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students felt a sense of unease 
within their community by asking the questions: I would not like to live next door to 
Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Jews, Muslims, Sikhs, and Humanists. 
 The students responses to these seven groups are displayed in tables 9.21 
through 9.27. The main trends in the student responses can be illustrated by detailed 
examination of responses to Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs (see tables 9.25, 9.23, and 
9.26). Overall there is no clear pattern distinguishing the five nations and the two 
types of schools. The highest level of rejection of living next door to Muslims is 
among students in religious schools in England (22%) and the lowest among 
students in secular schools in London (13%).  The highest level of rejection of living 
next door to Hindus is among students in secular schools in Wales (15%) and lowest 
among students in religious schools in Scotland (7%). The highest level of rejection 
of living next to Sikhs is among students in Secular schools in Wales (16%) and the 
lowest among students in religious schools in Scotland (8%).  
Discrimination within the community 
The third issue was the way in which some students from various contexts spoke 
about discrimination within their communities.  
The Polish are worse/the Slovakians are worse/they chase you. (Scotland, Secular school) 
Its very stereotypical I think, this place, its like you wouldnt spot a Polish person but 
...nearly every person thatll come to deliver things to your door or like hangs about on the 
street is Polish and every corner shop you go into now its very stereotypical like its always 
an Indian man or a Pakistani man wearing a turban  its sort of hard to separate yourselves 
from that sort of idea when its happening right now. (England, Secular school) 
Some of the lads ...they try to make funny jokes out of it ...theyre taking the mick out of like 
Jews because of the hats and that but Im just youre not funny. I think they know it as well 
but they think its making them look better, but its really not, it makes them look like bigots. 
(England, Secular school) 
The thing is they walk out in front of cars because they think God saves them. You go past 
Gateshead leisure centre and theres just Jews step out in front of you because they think 
God saves them. (England, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which discrimination was taking place 
within communities and toward which religious faiths it was most frequently 
directed by asking the following questions: Where I live there is a lot of 
discrimination against, Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Jews, Muslims, Sikhs, and 
Humanists. 
 The students responses to these seven groups are displayed in tables 9.28 
through 9.34. Again, the main trends in the students responses can be illustrated by 
detailed examination of responses to Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs (see tables 9.32, 
9.30, and 9.33). The perception that, where they live, there is a lot of discrimination 
against Muslims is shared by between 24% and 34% of the students across the five 
nations and the two types of schools. The proportion is highest among students in 
religious schools in London (34%) and lowest among students in secular schools in 
Scotland (24%). The perception that, where they live, there is a lot of discrimination 
against Hindus is shared by between 11% and 18% of the students across the five 
nations and the two types of schools. The proportion is highest among students in 
secular schools in London (18%) and lowest among students in secular schools in 
England (11%). The perception that, where they live, there is a lot of discrimination 
against Sikhs is shared between 9% and 14% of the students across the five nations 
and the two types of schools. The proportion is highest among students in religious 
schools in England (14%) and London (14%) and lowest among students in religious 
schools in Northern Ireland (9%). 
 Overall, table 9.33 shows that there is very little perception of discrimination 
against Humanists and that there is no real difference in the level of perceived 
discrimination against Humanists among students in secular schools and students in 
religious schools. The variation is between 7% among students at secular schools in 
Wales, religious schools in England and religious schools in Scotland, and 4% 
among students at secular schools in England and religious schools in London. 
Visibility of diversity within the community 
The fourth issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about the 
visibility of diversity within their communities. 
Theres like a mosque and theres the Church of Scotland and then theres Catholic 
churches./F: My neighbours are Jewish and  but then I used to know a Buddhism guy who 
was my friend but I dont know him anymore because he moved country. Yes theres quite a 
few different religions. (Scotland, Religious School) 
The place I see Jewish people most is X Park because maybe its the place that they like to 
go ...theyve got caps on their head which is quite obvious. (England, Secular school) 
Theres quite a few Polish people in this area but you dont really see them much/ J: It 
depends how they present themselves. (England, secular school) 
The quantitative study commented further on the visibility of diversity within the 
students local community by asking the questions: Where I live, people who come 
from different religious backgrounds get on well together; and Where I live, people 
who come from different countries get on well together.  
 Table 9.35 demonstrates that, where they live, people who come from different 
religious backgrounds get on well together was endorsed most highly by students in 
London: 67% of those attending secular schools and 65% of those attending 
religious schools. The lowest level of endorsement came from students attending 
religious schools in Northern Ireland (37%). Table 9.36 demonstrates the view that, 
where they live, people who come from different countries get on well together was 
also endorsed most highly by students in London: 67% of those attending secular 
schools and 68% of those attending religious schools. Again, the lowest level of 
endorsement came from students attending religious schools in Northern Ireland 
(46%). 
Religious practice 
In terms of the broad theme of religious practice, four issues emerged as especially 
salient from the qualitative study. These were attendance at a place of religious 
worship, personal prayer, reading Holy Scripture, and attendance at extra-curricular 
religious classes. 
Attendance at places of religious worship 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how regularly 
they attended a service at a religious place of worship. 
Every week I go to church. (Scotland, secular school) 
Im Hindu and I go to the temple every Sunday  every Sunday. (London, Religious school) 
Im a Christian ...Ive been christened in that religion. I dont know if youre expected to go 
to church or not but I dont. (England, secular school) 
The quantitative study checked how regularly the students attended a service at a 
place of religious worship by asking the question: Apart from special occasions 
(like weddings), how often do you attend a religious worship service? (e.g. at a 
church mosque or synagogue)? 
 Table 9.37 demonstrates that the proportion of students who never attend church 
is much higher in England, Wales and Scotland than in Northern Ireland and 
London. Thus, in the context of secular schools, 72% of students in Scotland never 
attend church, 68% in Wales and 56% in England, compared with 30% in London 
and 26% in Northern Ireland. Across all five nations students attending religious 
schools are more likely to attend church than students attending secular schools. 
Personal prayer  
The second issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how 
regularly they prayed. 
I do practise [] on a daily basis; what I do is I wake upas a Muslim I have to pray five 
times a day, so Id wake up and then Id pray and get ready, go to school; after I come back 
from school, I pray again and, then, when the sun sets, I have to do another prayer and then 
just before I go to bed, I also do another prayer. (London, Secular school) 
I pray before I go to sleep and before I leave the house or like on special occasions. (London, 
Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked how regularly the students prayed outside the context 
of a religious worship service by asking the question: How often do you pray in 
your home or by yourself? 
 Table 9.38 demonstrates that students in Northern Ireland and London are much 
more likely to engage in personal prayer than students in the other three nations. In 
respect of secular schools, 80% of students in Scotland, 76% in Wales and 68% in 
England never pray, compared with 36% in London and 36% in Northern Ireland. 
Although the level of prayer is higher among students in religious schools, the same 
pattern emerges across the nations. In religious schools, 49% of students in Scotland, 
50% in Wales and 53% in England never pray, compared with 35% in London and 
27% in Northern Ireland. 
Reading Holy Scripture 
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how 
regularly they read Holy Scripture. 
I go to the mosque every day and I do reading the Quran. (Scotland, Secular school) 
Not exactly practising Islam but I do as much as I can, but because were in schoolwe 
have to pray 5 times a day, but because were in school we cant do it at the right timing 
because we have lessons and that, but when were at home and weekends I try my best to 
recite the Koran when I have time. (London, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked how regularly the students read Holy Scripture by 
asking the question: How often do you read holy scripture (e.g. The Bible, Quran, 
Torah)? 
 Table 9.39 demonstrates that the proportions of students who never read 
scripture is quite high both in secular schools and in religious schools. In secular 
schools, the proportions of students who never read scripture varies from 84% in 
Wales and 74% in England to 51% in Scotland, 51% in London and 44% in 
Northern Ireland. In religious schools, the proportion of students who never read 
scripture varies from 64% in England, 56% in Northern Ireland, and 55% in Wales to 
45% in Scotland, and 45% in London. 
Extra-curricular religious classes 
The fourth issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about whether 
they attended or assisted at extra-curricular classes.  
I go to separate classes after school and stuff and I have Sunday classes in which I learn the 
Arabic words and the language and then have more classes teaching us knowledge like the 
belief in God and our religion and what are the basics we have to know. (England, Secular 
School) 
I often do like readings or do the offertory at mass but I also help with organising events at 
least once a year theres something going on in the summer for the young people in the 
parish. And I always help with that also I sometimes help with Sunday school with the little 
kids and stuff. (England, Religious school) 
The quantitative study checked attendance at extra-curricular religious classes by 
asking the question: Have you attended any religious classes outside school? (Like 
Sunday school, or Madrasah). 
 Table 9.40 demonstrates that quite a high proportion of students have 
experiences of attending religious classes outside school. In the context of secular 
schools, the highest experience of such classes occurs in Northern Ireland (58%) and 
London (43%), compared with England (22%), Scotland (22%) and Wales (22%). In 
the context of religious schools, the highest experiences of such classes occurs in 
London (59%) Wales (48%) and England (37%), compared with Northern Ireland 
(24%) and Scotland (21%). 
School life 
In terms of the broad theme of school life, three issues emerged as especially salient 
from the qualitative study. These were cultural diversity within school, religious 
diversity within school, and Religious Education. 
Cultural diversity in school 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about cultural 
diversity which was visible within their school. 
We own  no I dont mean we own  we sit in the social area ...we sit there and because 
people know we sit there they dont sit there .../ JI: So whos in your group?/ Well Im from 
Africa and theres six people except this girl, shes Scottish and she hangs around with us. 
But were not all from the same country. Three of us are from the same country and others 
are from other parts of Africa. But were not racist. (Scotland, Secular school) 
In this school theres not many different religions  theres plenty of different races and 
everyone mixes in but since theres not that many people with different religions you cant 
really not mix or stay together or whatever. (England, secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the visibility of cultural diversity in school by asking 
the question: People who come from different countries make my school or college 
an interesting place. 
 Once again, responses to this question reflect the population demographics 
across the five nations. The highest endorsement of the statement that people who 
come from different countries make my school or college an interesting place came 
from London: 65% of students in secular schools and 62% of students in religious 
schools. The lowest level of endorsement came from Scotland: 32% of students in 
secular schools and 41% of students in religious schools. The data presented in table 
9.41 also demonstrate that internationalisation is by no means the prerogative of 
secular schools. In some nations the religious schools reflect a wider cultural mix 
than the secular schools. In Scotland 32% of students in secular schools report that 
people who come from different countries make their school an interesting place, 
and the proportion rises to 47% among students in religious schools. A similar 
pattern exists in Wales with 39% of students in secular schools rising to 47% of 
students in religious schools. 
Religious diversity in school 
The second issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about the 
religious diversity which was visible within their school. 
I think there are a few [from other religions] dotted about/O: yes Jewish but not like strong 
Jews/D: theres some who are like your family and go for all the major holiday things but in 
a Jewish way so passive Judaism. They would celebrate Hannukah but they would celebrate 
it kind of half-hearted from what I take in from how they talk about it and then I think theres 
a few Muslims or there have been  there was a few years ago I think there was a Muslim, I 
remember someone mentioning it. (England, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the religious diversity within school by asking the 
question: Having people from different religious backgrounds makes my school or 
college an interesting place. 
 The presence of fellow students from different religious backgrounds is also 
most evident in London. Thus, in London 70% of students in secular schools and 
61% of students in religious schools report that having people from different 
religious backgrounds makes their school or college an interesting place. Table 9.42 
makes it plain once again that religious diversity is sometimes experienced more 
clearly in religious schools than in secular schools. In Scotland 35% of students in 
secular schools report that people from different religious backgrounds make their 
school or college an interesting place and the proportion rises to 53% among 
students in religious schools. A similar pattern exists again in Wales with 47% of 
students in secular schools and 55% of students in religious schools. 
Religious Education 
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about studying 
Religious Education at school. 
In this school, especially in RE youre kind of forced to think about things  well not forced 
but because you get to see things from so many different views you kind of just 
automatically start just thinking about things and different ways and stuff like that so Id 
definitely say that school has a big part in it. (Scotland, Secular school) 
I did RS GCSE as well, but for me its not so much about learning about Christianity it was 
more understanding the implications of Christianity in how it applies to different situations 
in life so we did the ethics part of the RS course for instance. When you compare that with 
Christian ethics or the ethics of Buddhism is another religion or quasi religion that we 
studied and so its kind of more understanding the implications of different religious aspects 
rather than trying to learn about it. (England, Religious School) 
I picked RE because I enjoy learning about different cultures. (Northern Ireland, Religious 
school) 
The quantitative study checked how many pupils had selected, or intended to select 
religious education as a subject for examination in year ten by including it as a 
category within the following question: What subjects are you studying (or would 
you like to study in year ten) for examination? 
 Table 9.43 demonstrates that interest in religious education as an examination 
subject varies from nation to nation and between the two types of schools. For pupils 
in secular schools, interest in religious education as an examination subject is highest 
in Northern Ireland at 72%, dropping to 55% in Wales, 48% in England, 46% in 
London and 37% in Scotland. For pupils in religious schools, interest in religious 
education as an examination subject is highest in London and Northern Ireland, both 
at 82%, dropping to 78% Wales, 77% in England and 55% in Scotland. 
Conclusion 
Chapter nine has examined the qualitative data and learnt that young people 
discussed their social context in considerable detail, particularly their home life, their 
peers and friendship groups, environment, religious practices and school life. These 
topics were deemed significant enough to warrant developing quantitative questions 
on these subjects. The answers to the quantitative questions have been crosstabulated 
according to the five nations and the two different school types. The discussion and 
findings of the data generate two conclusions. The first concerns the influence of 
nation and the second concerns the influence of school type. 
 Concerning nation, the conclusion arises that within the United Kingdom 
national differences do exist within the data set as demonstrated by the different 
responses of students from different nations concerning their social context. The data 
demonstrates that in terms of social context London and Northern Ireland are 
different from the other nations of the United Kingdom. This highlights that the 
students ability to articulate their different social context mirrors the differences in 
nation highlighted by the 2001 national census and discussed in chapter one. This is 
of importance as by demonstrating the students awareness of their surroundings the 
data shows that social context differs from nation to nation. These differences imply 
that the experiences of young peoples everyday lives are considerably different and 
may influence their attitudes. For the project as a whole the findings of national 
differences allow a deeper understanding of who the young people are from their 
own perspective, and may give a background explanation of their varying attitudes. 
This will contribute to the overall conclusions of this dissertation, as by listening to 
the contexts of the students in different nations, it becomes possible to take note of 
areas of concern and areas of success which may predict positive or negative 
attitudes and respond to these accordingly.  
 The second conclusion is that comment on social context can be influenced by 
the type of school which the student attends, particularly in the case of comment on 
family life, peers and friendships, and religious practice, but less so in the case of 
environment and community. This is demonstrated by the different attitudes which 
students attending religious schools have from the students attending secular schools. 
This also relates back to the theory discussed in chapter 5 about the history of 
religion within the education system, and demonstrates that the ethos of a school, 
whether religious or non-religious can influence the comments which students have 
to make concerning the background to their everyday lives.  The finding suggests 
that different school types are teaching in different ways, attracting different groups 
of people, and promoting different values. This means that the inclusion of 
contrasting school types within the sample strategy has generated the successful 
capture and profile of young people from a variety of different educational 
backgrounds which can give insights into different social backgrounds. The 
influence of school type on different social contexts also suggests that school type 
may have an influence on young peoples beliefs, and attitudes toward religious 
diversity. This insight into the different backgrounds contributes to assessing and 
understanding attitudes toward religious diversity as it offers a preparation and 
explanation of the different attitudes which the further data chapters will discuss.  
With these conclusions in mind, the next chapter will discuss the religious beliefs of 
young people. 
10. Religious beliefs 
Introduction 
This chapter discusses the theme of religious beliefs. Four broad themes will be 
discussed which were raised by the students when talking about their religious 
beliefs. These were belief in God, concepts of God, the relationship between 
religious and scientific belief, and belief in life after death. This chapter examines 
the sources of these themes from the qualitative material, using examples to support 
the inclusion of the themes, before demonstrating how the quantitative data interacts 
with and enhances the information gained from the quantitative research. 
Belief in God 
In terms of the broad theme of belief in God which was raised by the students, four 
issues emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. These were belief in 
God, difficulties with belief, belief in one God, and belief in many Gods.  
Belief in God 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about their belief in 
one God. This was demonstrated in two contexts by two students who described 
their beliefs in God. 
JI: What is it that makes you a Christian? ...A: What we believe in. We believe in God 
...B: Yeah, like believe that he made the world and then he sent his son to die for you ...C: 
Like he died to take away our sins and then like you believe in him. (Northern Ireland, 
Religious School) 
I suppose in some ways it all comes down ultimately to theres a belief that theres 
something else there which is may be controlling us may be like a creator. (Scotland, 
Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed in God by 
asking the question: I believe in God. 
 Table 10.1 demonstrates how belief in God varies between the nations and 
between the two types of schools. Belief in God is highest in Northern Ireland and in 
London where there is little difference between the two types of schools. In Northern 
Ireland 64% of students in secular schools and 70% of students in religious schools 
believe in God. In London 63% of students in secular schools and 63% of students in 
religious schools believe in God. Elsewhere there are considerable differences 
between secular schools and religious schools. In England 30% of students in secular 
schools believe in God, rising to 47% in religious schools. In Wales 27% of students 
in secular schools believe in God, rising to 54% in religious schools. In Scotland 
24% of students in secular schools believe in God, rising to 54% in religious schools. 
Difficulties in belief 
The second issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about their 
doubts concerning the existence of God.  
When I get older I might change my views on religion and stuff because at the moment I 
dont really believe in anything because I dont know  when Im older I might change 
my mind. (England, secular school) 
I think just at the end of primary school I started not to believe in God. (England, secular 
school) 
The quantitative checked the extent to which students had doubts about the existence 
of God by asking the question: I find it hard to believe in God.  
 Table 10.2 demonstrates that, within religious schools, around one third of the 
students across the five nations find it hard to believe in God (between 34% in 
London and 37% in Northern Ireland). In secular schools, there is greater variation: 
30% in London, 35% in Northern Ireland, 41% in Scotland, 43% in England, and 
46% in Wales. 
Belief in one God 
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about just one God 
when discussing their belief or non-belief in God. 
I dont know really like I used to say that I didnt believe in God but I do a bit more now 
that I know more about it like at school. (England, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked how many students believed in one God by asking 
the question: There is only one God. 
 Table 10.3 demonstrates that the belief there is only one God is highest in 
Northern Ireland and London both in secular schools and in religious schools. In 
secular schools the belief there is only one God is supported by 49% of students in 
Northern Ireland and 41% in London, compared with 23% in England, 19% in Wales 
and 18% in Scotland. In religious schools the belief that there is only one God is 
supported by 53% of students in Northern Ireland and 53% in London, compared 
with 42% in Wales, 36% in England and 31% in Scotland. 
Belief in many Gods 
The fourth issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about their belief 
in more than one God.  
I dont believe in the God thats about the Christian, but I kind of believe in Greek Gods. 
[] I think of like Zeus being the embodiment of the sky and like Poseidon the 
embodiment of the sea and storms. [] Like with[out] Aphrodite, there wouldnt be love 
and beauty in the world. (England, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked how many of the students believed in more than one 
god by asking the question: There are many Gods.  
 Table 10.4 demonstrates that belief in many Gods is highest in London and by 
no means restricted to students in secular schools. In secular schools, belief in many 
Gods is supported by 23% of students in London, 19% in Wales, 11% in England, 
11% in Scotland and 9% in Northern Ireland. In religious schools, belief in many 
Gods is supported by 17% of students in Scotland, 16% in Wales, 14% in England, 
9% in Northern Ireland, and 8% in London. 
Concepts of God 
In terms of the broad theme of concepts of God which was raised by the students, 
four themes emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. These were the 
concept of a God who is close to individuals, God as a reliable being, a loving God, 
and negative concepts of God. 
God who is close to the individual 
The first issue concerned the students who discussed God as someone with whom it 
is possible to have a close relationship, because of the knowledge of Gods 
omnipresence. 
You know that theres someone there thats always going to help you and you know if 
youre helpless and if youre down that its reassuring to know theres someone to get 
you back up to where youre supposed to be and I guess its that reassuring feeling that 
you get. (England, Secular school) 
I dont think I could ever imagine having a life without the feeling of God watching over 
me or something. (England, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students perceived God as 
someone who was close to them by asking the question: I know that God is very 
close to me. 
 Again it is in London and Northern Ireland that students are most aware of 
Gods presence (see table 10.5). In London 44% of students in secular schools and 
38% of students in religious schools know that God is very close to them; and the 
same is the case in Northern Ireland for 43% of students in secular schools and 44% 
of students in religious schools. In the other nations there is a higher awareness of 
the presence of God among students in religious schools than in secular schools. In 
England 17% of students in secular schools know that God is very close to them, 
rising to 28% in religious schools. In Wales the pattern is 13% in secular schools 
rising to 31% in religious schools. In Scotland the pattern is 13% in secular schools 
rising to 30% in religious schools. 
God as a reliable being 
The second issue was the way in which some students spoke about being comforted 
by their belief in a God who could be relied on to help them.  
I think that if something bad happens to you, sometimes you do think, is there someone 
that I can like rely on, like God. (England, secular school) 
I think a lot of people, especially in like richer countries I think, they sort of have 
everything like with money and nice clothes and I think most people think they dont 
need a God ... theyre set in their ways like I dont need a God, Ive got money you 
know it gives me happiness or whatever. (Northern Ireland, secular school)  
The quantitative study checked how many of the students believed in a God who 
they felt they could rely on to help them by asking the question: I know that God 
helps me. 
 Table 10.6 demonstrates that perception of Gods help follows closely the same 
patterns as perception of Gods presence. Awareness of Gods help is highest in 
London and in Northern Ireland and in these nations there is little difference between 
secular schools and religious schools. In London 49% of students in secular schools 
and 45% of students in religious schools know that God helps them. In Northern 
Ireland 48% of students in secular schools and 51% of students in religious schools 
know that God helps them. In the other three nations there is higher endorsement of 
this item among students in religious schools. In England 19% of students in secular 
schools know that God helps them, rising to 32% in religious schools. In Scotland 
15% of students in secular schools know that God helps them, rising to 33% in 
religious schools. In Wales 15% of students in secular schools know that God helps 
them, rising to 35% in religious schools.  
God as a loving being 
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how they 
recognised God as a loving being.  
If like an earthquake happens or something, then you think, if Gods omniscient, then 
hed see what was happening and then hed change it or prevent it, but then you think 
well, things happen for a reason, but then you think, God loves everyone, so why does 
he do it?, so it does get confusing. (Wales, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked how many students perceived God as a loving being 
by asking the question: I think of God as loving. 
 Table 10.7 demonstrates that support for the image of God as loving is highest 
in London and Northern Ireland and similar in the two types of schools. In London 
59% of students in secular schools and 59% of students in religious schools think of 
God as loving. In Northern Ireland 59% of students in secular schools and 63% of 
students in religious schools think of God as loving. In the other three nations, 
support for the image of God as loving is higher in religious schools. In England 
30% of students in secular schools think of God as loving, rising to 43% in religious 
schools. In Wales 26% of students in secular schools think of God as loving, rising 
to 46% in religious schools. In Scotland 19% of students in secular schools think of 
God as loving, rising to 43% in religious schools.   
Negative concepts of God 
The fourth issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about their 
perception of God as a negative being. 
 Suffering [] actually does make me question God because I believe, if a god is so good 
why would he allow innocent people to suffer? As I said, Im not that religious and I also 
believe in science a lot, so the views conflict quite a lot. (London, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students had a negative 
perception of God by asking the questions: I think of God as strict; I think of God 
as disapproving; and I think of God as demanding. 
 Tables 10.8 to 10.10 suggest that within religious schools the levels of support 
for these negative God images remain relatively stable across the five nations. In 
religious schools, the image of God as strict was endorsed by 22% or 23% of 
students in England, Northern Ireland, Scotland, and Wales, rising to 28% in 
London; the image of God as disapproving received between 14% and 16% 
endorsement across all five nations; the image of God as demanding received 
between 15% and 18% endorsment across all five nations. In secular schools, 
however, there was greater variation across the five nations. Endorsement of the 
image of God as strict varied from 11% in Scotland to 31% in London. Endorsement 
of the image of God as disapproving varied from 8% in Scotland to 17% in London. 
Endorsement of the image of God as demanding varied from 9% in Scotland to 20% 
in London. 
Scientific beliefs and religious beliefs 
In terms of the third broad theme of scientific and religious beliefs, four issues 
emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. These were, the theories of 
creationism and evolutionism, the big bang theory, scientific explanations about the 
world, and the possibility of scientific and religious beliefs being able to stand 
alongside each other. 
Creationism and evolutionism 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about the theories of 
creationism and evolutionism.  
Its kind of like strange to think that He created us, so there was just two people that 
started out and now everyone is just here, so it is kind of weird to think that He did create 
this world. (England, secular school) 
I think that God created evolution ...Im not a literal Christian but I do believe some 
things in the Bible. (London, Religious school) 
I find that a bit funny cos if evolution actually did happen then we would have come from 
monkeys and we would have looked a bit like monkeys but we actually dont and in 
Genesis it says yeah that man was made in the image of God so if were meant to be apes 
or monkeys then why didnt we stay monkeys or apes? Its not being a literal Christian 
its just thinking about what the Bible says. (London, Religious School) 
Its harder [to relate to atheists] you know because if you know that like life starts from 
God they bring up some crap like were from animals. (London, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students believed in the theories 
of creationism and evolutionism by asking the questions: God made the world in six 
days of twenty hours; and Evolution created everything over millions of years.  
 Table 10.11 demonstrates that belief in the six days of creation is highest in 
Northern Ireland, both in secular schools and in religious schools. In secular schools, 
32% of students in Northern Ireland believe God made the world in six days of 
twenty-four hours, compared with 18% in London, 13% in Wales, 10% in England, 
and 10% in Scotland. In religious schools, 32% of students in Northern Ireland 
believe God made the world in six days of twenty-four hours, compared with 23% in 
London, 21% in Wales, 19% in England and 17% in Scotland.  
 Table 10.12 demonstrates that religious schools are no more likely than secular 
schools to discourage belief in evolution. In Scotland 39% of students in secular 
schools believe evolution created everything over millions of years, and so do 40% 
of students in religious schools. The pattern was repeated in Wales (with 44% of 
students in secular schools and 44% of students in religious schools) and in Scotland 
(with 39% of students in secular schools and 40% of students in religious schools). 
While in England evolution received lower support in religious schools (41% 
compared with 54%), in Northern Ireland evolution received lower support in secular 
schools (35% compared with 47%).  
The big bang theory 
The second issue was the way in which some students spoke about their belief in the 
big bang theory. 
Well I partly think about Xs Big Bang theory was right but I partly think that God was 
right as well. (England, secular school) 
I think that theyve kind of like heard the story of the Big Bang  and I believe in the Big 
Bang but I believe that God caused all those things to happen because its such a 
coincidence because if it was one bit off it wouldnt have worked so I think that theyve 
heard the Big Bang and theyve thought how come that happened and they havent really 
taken into account the other side and then other people have gone oh yeah and their 
parents have done that and through the generations like Sam says science has developed 
and its like releasing a lot more and its like science is reliable because you can see it  
this is a product of it and with like in Church its the Bible it was written a couple of 
thousand years ago thats what weve got and I think its more like to the modern  
future. (England, Religious school) 
People that are atheist they believe that it was the Big Bang that created the world yeah 
like when they say things like that I just look around look up to the sky and its so 
beautiful and Im not  its impossible for a bang to have caused something so beautiful. I 
find it hard. But in some perspectives I understand them but it doesnt really affect the 
way I look at God. (London, Religious school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students believed the big bang 
theory to be correct by asking the question: Science disproves the biblical account 
of creation. 
 Table 10.13 demonstrates that in England, Northern Ireland, Wales and London 
pupils in secular and religious schools shared similar views, with between 29% and 
33% taking the position that science disproves the biblical account of creation. This 
view was less strongly endorsed in Scotland where 24% of students in secular 
schools and 21% of students in religious schools maintained that science disproves 
the biblical account of creation. 
Scientific explanations about the world 
The third issue was the way in which some students discussed the influence of 
science which had encouraged them to draw scientific conclusions when making 
explanations about the world.  
Ive been brought up in a kind of like science is right but then also religion comes into it 
like that the Big Bang theory is there but God has some part it cant just all be science 
because otherwise the world probably wouldnt have just survived. (England, Secular 
school) 
From really young my parents gave me lots of science books and told me a lot of stuff 
about how things were in the world I think thats kind of got me quite questioning about 
whats actually happening in religion and whats actually real. (Scotland, Religious 
School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students held scientific views 
about the world by asking the following questions: Science can give us absolute 
truths; and Science will eventually give us complete control over the world. 
 Table 10.14 shows that acceptance of scientism varies from nation to nation, and 
that there is not a consistent difference between secular schools and religious 
schools. The view that science can give us absolute truths was endorsed in secular 
schools by between 23% of students in London and 32% of students in England. In 
religious schools, the proportions varied from 22% of students in Scotland to 30% of 
students in both London and Northern Ireland. 
 Table 10.15 shows that the acceptance of the view that science will eventually 
give us complete control over the world is endorsed by around one in five students 
(between 18% and 22%) in all but two of the ten contexts. The proportion rises to 
23% among students in religious schools in Northern Ireland and to 27% among 
students in secular schools in Wales.  
Compatibility of science and religion 
The fourth issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about the ability 
of both scientific and religious views about the world to stand alongside each other 
credibly.  
I think thats a problem I face as well because I agree with a lot of the scientific theory 
and then go home to religious beliefs. You cant really put the two and two together. 
(London, Secular school) 
Theyre the two subjects that conflict with each other, science is always proving religion 
wrong and religion is trying to prove science is wrong so its a bit  it seems to sort of be 
a bit ironic that people would have to choose one of them over the other. (Scotland, 
Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students believed that scientific 
and religious views were compatible by asking the questions: I cannot trust both 
science and religion; and It is possible to believe in evolution and believe in God.  
 Table 10.16 demonstrates that around one in five students take the view that 
they cannot trust both science and religion and that there is little variation between 
students in secular schools and students in religious schools. The highest level of 
endorsement comes from students in secular schools in Northern Ireland (21%) and 
the lowest for students in secular schools in Scotland (14%). 
 Table 10.17 shows that the debate between belief in evolution and belief in God 
reveals greater variation than the debate between science and religion discussed in 
table 11.18. The highest levels of agreement that it is possible to believe in evolution 
and believe in God are shown by students in religious schools in Northern Ireland 
(56%) and by students in religious schools in London (54%). The lowest levels of 
agreement that it is possible to believe in evolution and in God are given by students 
in secular schools in Scotland (30%) and by students in secular schools in Wales 
(37%). 
Life after death 
In terms of the broad theme of life after death which was raised by the students, three 
issues emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. These were belief in 
life after death, belief in heaven, and belief in hell. 
Belief in life after death 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about their beliefs 
about the possibility of there being life after death. 
Because youve just got to believe that theres something after the world thats so 
fantastic nobody can think about it. (Scotland, Religious School) 
I think it boils down to one question, what happens after death? and people want 
something to believe in I think. (England, secular school) 
I think a lot of people like the idea of the security of having somewhere to go to after they 
die, somewhere where they can be looked after. (England, secular school) 
The quantitative study checked how many students believed in the idea of life after 
death by asking the question: I believe in life after death. 
 Table 10.18 demonstrates that the highest levels of belief in life after death 
occur in London and Northern Ireland. This is most pronounced in the secular 
schools. In secular schools, 59% of students in London and 52% in Northern Ireland 
believe in life after death, compared with 42% in Wales, 41% in England and 36% in 
Scotland. In religious schools, 61% of students in Northern Ireland believe in life 
after death, compared with 54% in Wales, 53% in London, 51% in Scotland and 
49% in England. 
Belief in heaven  
The second issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about their belief 
in the idea of heaven. 
I believe in heaven, but Im not a Christian. I dont have any religion, but most of my family 
is [religious] and I actually think there is actually life after death. [] he is like ... you know, 
theres a headmaster of school whos in charge of the whole school, I think God is in charge 
of heaven. (England, Secular School) 
I think its important for me religion because when before a couple of years ago I dont think 
I was that  I didnt really believe in God or anything but when my Dad passed away a 
couple of years ago I started to believe in it and then started to go to church with my family 
and then I just started  and I became an altar boy and yes, I think its very important to 
believe that after  that when you die there is heaven and there is something after you die. 
(Scotland, Religious school) 
The quantitative study checked how many of the students believe in heaven by 
asking the question: I believe in heaven. 
 Like so many other indicators of religiosity in this survey, table 11.21 shows 
that the highest levels of belief in heaven occur in London and Northern Ireland and 
that in these nations there is little difference between secular schools and religious 
schools. In London 62% of students in secular schools and 65% of students in 
religious schools believe in heaven. In Northern Ireland 65% of students in secular 
schools and 67% of students in religious schools believe in heaven. In the other three 
nations belief in heaven is clearly higher in religious schools. In England 39% of 
students in secular schools believe in heaven, rising to 53% in religious schools. In 
Scotland 38% of students in secular schools believe in heaven, rising to 57% in 
religious schools. In Wales 40% of students in secular schools believe in heaven, 
rising to 57% in religious schools. 
Belief in hell 
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about their belief in 
the idea of hell. 
 Theres got to be a heaven and a hell, I think. (Scotland, Religious school) 
A: [It will get] a lot worse. / Z: People will kill people and then people will kill them in 
return. /H: Itll be like fighting and violence coming to the Day of Judgement./ A: So in 
10 years it might be that the Day of Judgement has come. (England, Secular School) 
The quantitative study checked how many of the students believe in hell by asking 
the question: I believe in hell. 
 Like heaven, hell receives more support in London and Northern Ireland than in 
the other three nations (see table 10.20), but unlike heaven, levels of belief in hell 
vary in London and Northern Ireland between secular and religious schools. In both 
London and Northern Ireland fewer students attending religious schools believe in 
hell. Thus in London 47% of students in religious schools believe in hell compared 
with 53% in secular schools. In Northern Ireland 46% of students in religious 
schools believe in hell compared with 53% of students in secular schools. In the 
other three nations higher proportions of students in religious schools believe in hell. 
In England 40% of students in religious schools believe in hell, compared with 31% 
in secular schools. In Scotland 43% of students in religious schools believe in hell, 
compared with 31% in secular schools. In Wales 47% of students in religious 
schools believe in hell, compared with 32% in secular schools. 
Conclusion 
Chapter ten has examined the qualitative data and learnt that young people discussed 
their religious beliefs in considerable detail, particularly belief in God, concepts of 
God, scientific and religious beliefs, and beliefs about life after death. These topics 
were deemed significant enough to warrant the quantitative questionnaire developing 
questions to provide further data on these themes. The answers to the quantitative 
questions have been crosstabulated according to the five nations and the two 
different school types. The discussion and findings of the data generate two 
conclusions. The first concerns the connection between nation and religious beliefs, 
and the second concerns the connection between school type and religious belief. 
 The finding that religious beliefs differ according to nation is demonstrated by 
the students responses which vary from nation to nation. The conclusion that 
London and Northern Ireland are the nations which differ from the rest of the United 
Kingdom in terms of religious belief indicates an emerging pattern of London and 
Northern Ireland being different because of their social contexts. These findings and 
the suggestion of an emerging pattern are important as, having identified that the 
social context of London and Northern Ireland is different, the data begins to support 
that these differences are manifested in the religious beliefs of students in Northern 
Ireland and London in a way which differs from the religious beliefs of students in 
the rest of the United Kingdom. This contributes to the findings of the dissertation as 
a whole, as an awareness of religious beliefs which mirror the social context of the 
young people suggests that attitudes toward religious diversity may differ from 
nation to nation, and the religious beliefs of the young people may be a contributing 
factor to these attitudes. 
 The findings that religious beliefs do differ according to school type, is 
demonstrated by the traditional religious beliefs which occur more in religious 
schools, and the non-traditional religious beliefs which occur more in secular 
schools. These findings conclude that, to an extent, school type does influence 
religious beliefs. This relates back to the discussion in chapter five about the role of 
religion within the education system. This conclusion is of importance because an 
understanding of traditional or modern religious beliefs among young people can 
give an indication of how school type can have an influence over these beliefs 
through its ethos, curriculum content, assembly topics, or teaching styles and how 
this contributes to how open-minded or closed-minded students from different 
school types are. This therefore contributes to the dissertation as a whole because an 
understanding of school type and its effect on religious beliefs gives a further 
understanding of another dimension in the lives of young people, what their beliefs 
are, and may be able to provide an explanation as to their attitudes toward religious 
diversity. With these conclusions concerning nation and school type in mind which 
give a further indication of the background of the students, the next chapter will 
discuss the students awareness of external influences on their beliefs about others, 
and whether or not this is affected by nation and school type.  
11. The influences on and of religion 
Introduction 
This chapter discusses two issues of what influences religious views and what 
religion influences. Four broad themes will be discussed which were raised by the 
students when talking about the factors which influence their beliefs and values. 
These were influence of parents, influence of peers and friends, influence of school, 
and influence of media. The fifth theme is the influence of religion on the lives of 
young people. This chapter examines these themes from the qualitative material, 
using examples to support the inclusion of the themes, before demonstrating how the 
quantitative data interacts with and enhances the information gained from the 
quantitative research.  
Influence of parents 
In terms of the broad theme of parents which was raised by the students, four issues 
emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. These were parental 
influences on beliefs about religion in general, parental influences on beliefs about 
other world faiths, parental influences on beliefs about other denominations, and 
parental influence on rejection of religion. 
Parent influences on beliefs about religion in general 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how their 
parents had influenced their beliefs about religion in general. 
I think that [my parents] would be the first influence on religion that I had but not 
necessarily the thing that completely made up my mind about religion for me, I think that 
I made that for myself and my parents always said that they would never pressure me into 
doing anything like that. I chose, I think it was about two years ago now, to be confirmed 
and baptised  they didnt force me to or anything, so I feel that they did spark my belief 
but they didnt ignite it. (England, Religious school). 
I think my parents had a big impact on me believing in God because theyve been 
teaching me since I was really young not necessarily like forcing me to learn it but almost 
hinting  pointing me in the right direction. (England, religious school)  
My parents have always raised me to believe in God and just follow the commandments. 
(Scotland, Religious school) 
You were still taught your morals by your mother. She did not teach you the religion but 
she taught you morals and she was influenced by the religion. (Northern Ireland, 
Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students felt that their parents 
had influenced their views concerning religion in general by asking the questions: 
My father has influenced my views about religion and My mother has influenced 
my views about religion. 
 Tables 11.1 and 11.2 demonstrate that parental influence on views about religion 
are greater in Northern Ireland and London than in the other three nations. In secular 
schools, 56% of students in Northern Ireland and 50% of students in London 
consider that their father has influenced their ideas about religion, compared with 
35% in England, 23% in Wales and 19% in Scotland; 65% of students in Northern 
Ireland and 56% of students in London consider that their mother has influenced 
their views on religion, compared with 38% in England, 26% in Wales and 23% in 
Scotland. In religious schools, 65% of students in Northern Ireland and 50% of 
students in London consider that their father has influenced their views about 
religion, compared with 38% in England, 35% in Wales, and 35% in Scotland; 70% 
of students in Northern Ireland and 63% of students in London consider that their 
mother has influenced their views on religion, compared with 51% in England, 48% 
in Wales and 48% in Scotland. These figures also show that generally parental 
influence is seen as stronger among pupils in religious schools. 
Parental influences on beliefs about world faiths 
The second issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how their 
parents had influenced their views concerning world faiths.  
My parents always said, you grow up with manners and you do certain things because 
thats the way it is and thats probably way down the line because their grandparents have 
taught them that and theres probably some way [in which this is] connected to Judaism, 
but I just treat people like they treat me and be nice to everyone and try and get along 
with everyone. Not really too much to [do] with being Jewish or not being Jewish, its 
just being human. (London, Secular school) 
The quantitative checked the extent to which students who felt that their parents had 
influenced their views concerning world faiths by asking the questions: My father 
has influenced my views about Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Jews, Muslims, Sikhs, 
and Pagans and My mother has influenced my views about Buddhists, Christians, 
Hindus, Jews, Muslims, and Sikhs. 
 Tables 11.3 to 11.14 provide a great deal of detailed information about the 
comparative influence of mothers and fathers across a range of faith traditions. This 
range of information will be illustrated by references to Christians (tables 11.4 and 
11.10). In terms of Christians, these data demonstrate that mothers exert more 
influence than fathers, that both parents exert more influence in the context of 
religious schools, and that both parents exert more influence in Northern Ireland than 
elsewhere. In terms of secular schools, 50% of pupils in Northern Ireland consider 
that their mother has influence their views about Christians, compared with 33% in 
London, 29% in England, 22% in Wales, and 17% in Scotland. In terms of religious 
schools, 47% of pupils in Northern Ireland consider that their mother has influenced 
their views about Christians, compared with 53% in London, 41% in England, 36% 
in Wales and 32% in Scotland. While the same basic pattern exists, the level of 
influence exerted by fathers is lower. For example, while 33% of students in secular 
schools in London agree that their mother has influenced their views about 
Christians, the proportion drops a little to 27% who agree that their father has 
influenced their views about Christians. 
Parental influences on beliefs about Christian denominations  
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how their 
parents had influenced their views concerning those from Christian denominations. 
I would think of like Catholics in a different way because my Dad used to be funny about 
Catholics and would never let me go out with one or anything so it made me think about 
them in a different kind of way and things like  Id be friends with one of them but would 
never like marry one  I suppose it changes my perception like my Dad. (Northern Ireland, 
Secular School) 
The quantitative study checked how many students believed that their parents had 
influenced their views concerning Christian denominations by asking the questions: 
My father has influenced my views about Catholics and Protestants and My 
mother has influenced my views about Catholics and Protestants. 
 Tables 11.15 to 11.18 demonstrated that the two categories of Protestant and 
Catholic carry much greater salience in Northern Ireland than in the other five 
nations and that parental influence on shaping views about Catholics or Protestants is 
stronger in religious schools than in secular schools throughout the five nations. 
These general trends can be illustrated by reference to the influence of mothers. In 
secular schools, 43% of students in Northern Ireland feel that their mother has 
influenced their views about Catholics, compared with 19% in London, 16% in 
England, 11% in Wales and 11% in Scotland. In religious schools, 61% of students 
in Northern Ireland feel their mother has influenced their views about Catholics 
compared with 45% in Scotland, 31% in Wales, 31% in England, and 27% in Wales. 
In secular schools, 48% of students in Northern Ireland feel that their mother has 
influenced their views about Protestants, compared with 12% in London, 11% in 
Scotland, 10% in England, and 8% in Wales. In religious schools, 44% of students in 
Northern Ireland feel that their mother has influenced their views about Protestants, 
compared with 21% in Scotland, 18% in London, 18% in England and 15% in 
Wales.  
The influence of non-religious parents on rejection of religion 
The fourth issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how their 
parents had influenced their views on the rejection of religion.  
My Dad is no religion at all, hes never been taught it at all but hes brought me up alright 
and he was on his own. (Northern Ireland, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked how many of the students believed that their parents 
had influenced their views concerning rejection of religion by asking the questions: 
My father has influenced my views about Atheists and Humanists; and My mother 
has influenced my views about Atheists and Humanists.  
 Tables 11.20 and 11.22 draw attention to how parents have specifically 
influenced views about Humanists. These data make four clear points. First, the 
extent of parental influence on this issue is quite small, varying between 5% and 9%. 
Second, there is little variation between the five nations. Third, roughly the same 
level of parental influence is experienced by students in religious schools and by 
students in secular schools. Fourth, there is little difference in the extent to which 
influence is exerted by mothers and by fathers. 
Influence of peers and friends 
In terms of the broad theme of peers and friends, which was raised by the students, 
four themes emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. These were the 
influence of peers and friends on beliefs about religion in general, the influence of 
peers and friends on beliefs about world faiths, the influence of peers and friends on 
beliefs about Christian denominations, and the influence of peers and friends on 
rejection of religion. 
Influence of peers and friends on views about religion in general 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how their 
friends could influence their beliefs about their own religion in general. 
I agree. I think thats a really good point, because people do become a bit less religious, 
thats what stood out really, because people do become less religious around their friends, 
because you have to, in order to fit in and basically youve just summed up exactly what I 
think. (London, secular school) 
But I think if youre with someone as the same religion as you and you hang out with 
them a lot, then I think your religion becomes stronger, because youre with people that 
you can practise your religion with, but youll still be accepted, and so I think on that 
basis religion, or the way you believe, it will become stronger, but with people thats not, 
I think it will go down and kind of get pushed aside. (London, secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which friends had an influence on 
student beliefs about religion in general by asking the question: My friends have 
influenced my views about religion. 
 Table 11.23 demonstrates that the influence of friends on views about religion is 
perceived to be greatest in Northern Ireland. In secular schools, 39% of students in 
Northern Ireland consider that their friends have influenced their views about 
religion, compared with 28% in London, 21% in England, 18% in Wales and 11% in 
Scotland. Apart from in Northern Ireland the influence of friends on views about 
religion is generally perceived to be greater in religious schools. In London 28% of 
students in secular schools consider friends have influenced their views about 
religion, and the proportion rises to 33% in religious schools. The comparable 
figures for England are 21% and 24%, for Wales 18% and 27%, and for Scotland 
11% and 23%. In Northern Ireland the difference is in the opposite direction with 
34% in religious schools compared with 39% in secular schools. 
Influence of peers and friends on views about world faiths 
The second issue was the way in which some students spoke about how their friends 
could influence their views concerning world faiths.  
Quite fun actually because its a change but because theyre your friends you know 
youre not going to get into a really big fight over it which means you can ask questions 
which means you can learn more about another religion at the same time debating and 
having a conversation because theres still that small conflict but good conflict. 
(Northern Ireland, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students felt that their friends 
had influenced their beliefs about world faiths by asking the question: My friends 
have influenced my views about Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Jews, Muslims, 
Sikhs, and Pagans. 
 Tables 11.24 to 11.29 show that the influence of friends on views about faiths 
differ according to location, according to school type, and according to the faith 
discussed. Taking views about Muslims as an illustration (table 11.28) the highest 
level of influence of friends is acknowledged in London, and the lowest in Scotland. 
In secular schools, 30% of students in London say that their friends have influenced 
their views about Muslims, compared with 19% in England, 18% in Northern 
Ireland, 10% in Wales, and 9% in Scotland. In religious schools, 23% of students in 
Scotland say that their friends have influenced their views about Muslims, compared 
with 18% in Northern Ireland, 15% in Wales, 13% in Scotland, and 12% in England. 
Table 11.26 shows that a similar pattern appertains in respect of Hindus. In secular 
schools, 24% of students in London say that their friends have influenced their views 
about Hindus, compared with 10% in Northern Ireland, 8% in England, 6% in 
Wales, and 3% in Scotland. In religious schools, 10% of students in London say that 
their friends have influenced their views about Hindus, compared with 8% in 
Northern Ireland, 8% in England, 7% in Wales, and 5% in Scotland. 
Influence of peers and friends on views concerning Christian denominations 
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how their 
friends had influenced their beliefs about Christian denominations.  
JI: Do you know anyone who has a different religion? ...E: well yeah, Ive got Catholic 
friends...F: Yeah, Ive got Catholic friends...JI: So whats different about their religion? 
...E: Theyd pray to Mary while wed pray to the Lord ...F: they believe you go to a place 
before you go to heaven or hell  and I cant remember what the name of it is  but you 
have to be prayed for and perform good works. (Northern Ireland, Religious School) 
JI: So if you have Catholic friends do you talk about religion to them? G: it may be that 
they dont want to talk about it  you can sometimes tell; as soon as you mention the 
subject they may go cold on you. They may like try to change the subject and you simply 
know, Oh, they dont want to talk about it, thats fine. (Northern Ireland, Religious 
School) 
The quantitative study checked how many students believed that their friends had 
influenced their views concerning Christian denominations by asking the question: 
My friends have influenced my views about Protestants, and My friends have 
influenced my views about Catholics. 
 Tables 11.30 and 11.31 demonstrate that the influence of friends on views about 
Protestants and Catholics is higher in Northern Ireland than in the other four nations. 
Considering first Protestants in secular schools 46% of students in Northern Ireland 
consider that their friends have influenced their views about Protestants, compared 
with between 9% and 11% in the other nations. Second, considering Catholics in 
secular schools, 38% of students in Northern Ireland consider that friends have 
influenced their views about Catholics, compared with between 11% and 16% in the 
other nations. In religious schools, 51% of students in Northern Ireland consider that 
friends have influenced their views about Catholics, compared with between 25% 
and 35% in the other nations. 
Influence of peers and friends on views about rejection of religion 
The fourth issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how their 
friends had influenced their beliefs about religious rejection. 
I think at times its difficult to balance, especially with non-Christians, friends you know, 
because they do things that maybe you want to do but think that you shouldnt do and 
then youre sort of like what do I do? you know what I mean, so I just find it really 
difficult to draw a line somewhere. And now that we are all getting older and being given 
more independence, its what youre going to do with your independence. (Northern 
Ireland, Secular School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students had friends who had 
influenced their beliefs about religious rejection by asking the questions: My friends 
have influenced my views about Atheists; and My friends have influenced my 
views about humanists. 
 Table 11.33 demonstrates that friends exert comparatively little influence on 
views about Humanists. The proportions vary between 5% of students in religious 
schools in Northern Ireland and 11% of students in secular schools in England who 
consider that their friends have influenced their views about humanists. 
Influence of school 
In terms of the third broad theme of school, four issues emerged as especially salient 
from the qualitative study. These were school influencing beliefs about religion in 
general, school influencing beliefs about world faiths, school influencing beliefs 
about other racial backgrounds, and school influencing beliefs about Christian 
denominations. 
Influence of school on views about religion in general 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how school 
had influenced their beliefs about religion in general.  
When I was younger, I used to be like a really strict Christian, only because I went to a 
Christian school and now when I left school, I started thinking I dont believe in any of 
that, I just listened to what they said and went along with it. (London, Secular school) 
[Divinity and Philosophy] is kind of broadening our horizons as to the way the world 
works and how our religion is, its not like heres the Bible just sit and read the Bible. 
(England, Religious school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which school influenced student beliefs 
about religion in general by asking the question: Studying religion at school has 
shaped my views about religion. 
 Table 11.34 demonstrates the significant part played by studying religion at 
school in shaping students views about religion. There are, moreover, some 
important differences between the nations and between the types of school. In 
secular schools, three fifths of students in England (60%) and Wales (57%) consider 
that studying religion in school has shaped their views about religion. The proportion 
rises to 66% in London and 67% in Northern Ireland, but drops to 37% in Scotland. 
The situation for religious education is clearly different in Scotland. Overall, the 
endorsement for the influence of studying religion at school is higher among 
students in religious schools. In Wales the proportion rises from 57% to 68%, in 
England from 60% to 63%, in London from 66% to 72%, in Northern Ireland from 
67% to 80%. In Scotland the proportion rises from 37% of students in secular 
schools to 51% of students in religious schools; but the endorsement in religious 
schools in Scotland still remains lower than in the other four nations. 
Influence of school on views concerning world faiths 
The second issue was the way in which some students spoke about how school had 
influenced their beliefs about world faiths. 
In our school we learn that everybodys equal no matter what religion theyre normal and 
theyre allowed anywhere like if we go to their country they should be allowed to our 
country. (Northern Ireland, Religious School) 
I think its just because there are so many Christians in the school and we dont really 
know how we would react if other religions came in. (Northern Ireland, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students believed that school had 
influenced their beliefs about world faiths by asking the questions: Studying 
religion at school has shaped my views about Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Jews, 
Muslims and Sikhs; and Studying religion at school helps me understand people 
from other religions.  
 Tables 11.35 to 11.41 demonstrate how the influence of school on shaping views 
on faith groups varies according to the faith group, according to the location and 
according to the type of school. It is table 11.41 that offers the most helpful overview 
by considering the general category of people from other religions. These data also 
show that, in secular schools, between 77% and 85% of students in England, 
Northern Ireland, Wales, and London consider that studying religion at school helps 
them to understand people from other religions. The population, however, dips to 
68% of students in secular schools in Scotland. Overall, the percentages are slightly 
higher among students in religious schools. In religious schools, between 80% and 
89% of students in England, Northern Ireland, Wales and London consider that 
studying religion at school helps them to understand people from other religions. The 
proportion, however, drops to 71% among students in religious schools in Scotland. 
Influence of school on views about other racial backgrounds 
The third issue was the way in which some students spoke about how school had 
influenced their beliefs about other racial backgrounds to their own. 
All different cultures like some people come over here and we learn about the effects  
the things that they go through from other people, maybe they dont like being in our 
country or something like that and we talk about it. (Northern Ireland, Religious School) 
Yes, they do tend to make it a big thing if you say something out of line in this school 
because its so diverse and its so wrong to say something like that to some people. 
(London, secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students believed that school had 
influenced their beliefs about other racial backgrounds by asking the following 
question: Studying religion at school helps me to understand people from other 
racial backgrounds. 
 Table 11.42 demonstrates that around three quarters of students in England, 
Northern Ireland, Wales and London, whether educated in secular or religious 
schools consider that studying religion in school helps them to understand people 
from other racial backgrounds (varying between 71% at secular schools in England 
and 80% at religious schools in Northern Ireland). The endorsement, however, is 
lower among students in Scotland, with 62% from secular schools and 65% from 
religious schools taking this view. 
School influence on views about Christian denominations 
The fourth issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how school 
had influenced their beliefs concerning Christian denominations.  
I think the fact that weve come to an integrated school  Ive been at an integrated 
school for my whole life  and I think its like you know like go back to the Troubles you 
know theres still that divide there but theres people on my bus  we pick people up from 
C which is a typically Catholic area and just down the road theres T which is a typically 
protestant area and theres two people on my bus and theyre the best friends though 
theyre both from both C and T. (Northern Ireland, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students believed that school had 
influenced their beliefs about Christian denominations by asking the questions: 
Studying religion at school has shaped my views about Catholics; Studying 
religion at school has shaped my views about Protestants; and Studying religion at 
school helps me understand people from other denominations.  
 Tables 11.43 and 11.44 demonstrate that religious education is more likely to 
concentrate on learning about Protestants and Catholics in Northern Ireland than in 
the other four nations. In secular schools, 50% of students in Northern Ireland say 
that studying religion at school has shaped their views about Catholics and the same 
population (50%) say that studying religion at school has shaped their views about 
Protestants. In religious schools, 76% of students in Northern Ireland say that 
studying religion at school has shaped their views about Catholics and 72% say that 
studying religion at school has shaped their views about Protestants.  
 Table 11.45 demonstrates that the more general question studying religion at 
school helps me understand people from other denominations was endorsed in 
Northern Ireland by 67% of students in secular schools and 74% in religious schools. 
In London the proportion was only slightly less: 63% of students in secular schools 
and 71% in religious schools. In England and Wales the proportion was a little lower 
still: 57% in secular schools and 61% in religious schools. The lowest response, 
however, was recorded in Scotland: 51% in secular schools and 55% in religious 
schools.  
Influence of media 
In terms of the broad theme of the media which was raised by the students, four 
issues emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. These were the 
frequency of media consumption, media influencing beliefs concerning religion in 
general, the media influencing beliefs about world faiths, and the media influencing 
beliefs about Christian denominations. 
Frequency of media consumption 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how regularly 
they were exposed to various forms of media influence. 
I watch them because I think really that helps my opinion with religion and it helps me 
criticise my own and others more. (London, Secular school) 
 If its like a breaking news story and it involves religion, then yeah [I listen/watch]. 
Like if it was like someone like killed the president or something like that (England, 
Secular school) 
 If it interests me, then yeah, I probably would [watch specific programmes on religion].  
Its just telly; it doesnt affect anything to do with religion. Not a lot of programmes I 
watch bring religion into anything. (Wales, Religious school) 
 Sometimes (I hear how the media talk about other religions) on the news or in the 
paper, but thats about it. (Wales, Religious school) 
 I watched one Question Time with Nick Griffin. (London, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students were exposed to the 
media by asking the questions: Do you watch, or listen to, current affairs? (e.g. 
News, Panorama); and Last Monday, how much did you watch programmes on 
television, iplayer etc.?. 
 Tables 11.46 and 11.47 confirm the high exposure students experience in respect 
of media. Across all five nations and two types of schools, between 83% and 94% of 
students watch or listen to current affairs programmes. Across all five nations and 
two types of schools, between 93% and 96% of students watched or listened to 
programmes on television, iplayer etc. 
Influence of the media on beliefs about religion in general 
The second issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how they 
felt that the media influenced their beliefs about religion in general. 
 The news is much more critical on religion. (Wales, Secular school) 
 Negative on religion, definitely. (Wales, Secular school) 
Religion is misinterpreted by a lot of people because they think that just because theres 
some extremists in every religion, that that religion is really aggressive and is out to kill 
everyone because thats what they claim it says in their holy book, whereas really, 
theres people from every religion that are extremists, but in the media you only hear one 
side of the story, so theyre misrepresented by the media. (Wales, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students believed that the media 
influenced their beliefs about religion in general by asking the questions: Television 
has influenced my views about Religion; and The internet has influenced my views 
about Religion. 
 Tables 11.48 and 11.49 demonstrate that television continues to exert more 
influence than the internet on views about religion. Taking secular schools, the 
proportion of students who consider that the television and the internet have 
influenced their views on religion show the following pattern: in decreasing order of 
influence: in London 40% and 33%; in Northern Ireland 38% and 28%; in England 
36% and 23%; in Wales 34% and 21%; and in Scotland 22% and 13%.  
Influence of the media on beliefs about world faiths 
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how they felt 
that the media influenced their views concerning world faiths. 
The media are very quick to portray peoples flaws rather than their good points so as an 
impressionable 11 year old, I thought all Muslims were terrorists and even now theres 
something still inside me because of that that feels Islams quite a violent religion  
spreading it by the sword as it were and thats just because the media portray it that way. 
(Scotland, Secular school) 
Islam is picked on quite a lot. Because Judaism and Islam are so closely linked and share 
some of the same valuesif one gets picked on, the other ones probably gonna get 
picked on as well, because theyre so similar.  (London, Secular school) 
In the media it looks like theres only Muslim terrorists and Muslim extremists but 
theres surely other extremists in other religions, there may be Christian extremists or 
Hindu extremists. (London, Secular school) 
 You get a lot of people that are very anti-Israel and theyll always be that way but then 
you do get some newspapers especially that are for Israel and the news as well. (London, 
Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students believed that the media 
influenced their views concerning world faiths by asking the questions: Television 
has influenced my views about Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Jews, Muslims, Sikhs, 
and Pagans.; and The internet has influenced my views about Buddhists, 
Christians, Hindus, Jews, Muslims, Sikhs, and Pagans. 
 Tables 11.50 to 11.61 demonstrate that the influence of television and internet 
vary according to the location, the type of schools and the religious group. For 
example, the influence of television on views about Muslims varies from 16% 
among students in secular schools in Scotland to 38% among students in religious 
schools in London. The influence of the internet on views about Muslims varies 
from 10% among students in secular schools in Scotland to 27% among students in 
secular schools in London. 
Influence of the media on beliefs about Christian denominations 
The fourth issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how they 
felt that the media influenced their beliefs about other denominations. 
I was happy to see [the Bloody Sunday Report] shown [on tv] because it shows people 
that things have changed and that its been looked into and its not going on any more 
like I actually found it quite interesting to hear what they were saying. I was happy to see 
it on tv./It was nice to know they were trying to do something. (Northern Ireland, 
Religious School) 
Even Christianity, if you think about it like the fact that just recently ...theyre 
condemning the Pope for not condemning some of the sexual abuse and stuff- some of 
these things are just blown out of proportion and I guess because Britains a more secular 
society and a lot of societies are more secular now than they were before, that plays a big 
part. (England, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students believed that the media 
influenced their beliefs about Christian denominations by asking the questions: 
Television has influenced my views about Catholics.; Television has influenced 
my views about Protestants.; The internet has influenced my views about 
Catholics; and The internet has influenced my views about Protestants. 
 Tables 11.62 and 11.63 demonstrate that the television has more influence in 
shaping views about Protestants and Catholics among students in Northern Ireland 
than in the other four nations. In secular schools, 37% of students in Northern Ireland 
say that television has influenced their views about Protestants, compared with 
between 13% and 15% in the other four nations; 37% of students in Northern Ireland 
say that television has influenced their views about Catholics, compared with 
between 14% and 20% in the other four nations. A similar pattern emerges in 
religious schools. In religious schools, 45% of students in Northern Ireland say that 
television has influenced their views about Protestants, compared with between 14% 
and 19% in the other four nations; 46% say that television has influenced their views 
about Catholics, compared with between 21% and 26% in the other four nations.  
 Tables 11.64 and 11.65 demonstrated that similar patterns exist in respect of the 
influence of the internet. 
Influence from Religion 
In terms of the broad theme of religion in general which was raised by the students, 
four issues emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. These were 
religion influencing the life of the individual, religion influencing decision making, 
and the values of a religion shaping the identity of the individual. 
Religion influencing the life of the individual 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how they 
believed that their religion had influenced and shaped their lives.   
You kind of go to church and theyre talking, talking and youre going like yeah, yeah, 
yeah like trying to push out what theyre saying, but then like when you get home and 
you actually do reflect on it then you think, yes, hold on, I could do this, I could do that 
or this affects my life in this way and I can change it how. (London, religious school) 
What people believe is right is set by their religion ... So if we didnt have religion people 
would have no sense of where their moral values lie because religion has such an impact 
on peoples lives. (Northern Ireland, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed that their 
religion had shaped their lives by asking the question: My life has been shaped by 
religious faith.  
 Table 11.66 demonstrated that religious faith has greatest impact on the lives of 
students in Northern Ireland and London, and least impact in Scotland. In secular 
schools, 39% of students in London and 38% in Northern Ireland feel that their life 
has been shaped by religious faith, compared with 16% in England, 12% in Wales, 
and 9% in Scotland. In religious schools, 38% of students in London and 42% in 
Northern Ireland feel that their life has been shaped by religious faith compared with 
30% in England, 30% in Scotland, and 28% in Wales. 
Religion influencing decision making 
The second issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how their 
religion had influenced their beliefs in terms of the important life decisions which 
they made. 
If youre a different religion like say an atheist would think that sex before marriage is OK 
but then if youre a catholic maybe you think its wrong and stuff like that/ kind of the same 
like drinking, like most people would believe that drinkings OK but there are some religions 
that say no, you should never drink or you can drink when youre the right age but you 
should never get drunk. (Northern Ireland, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked how many of the students believed that religion in 
general had influenced the important life decisions which they made by asking the 
question: When making important decisions in my life my faith plays a major role. 
 Table 11.67 demonstrates that faith plays a more central role in students 
decision-making in London and Northern Ireland than in the other four nations. In 
secular schools, 39% of students in London and 34% in Northern Ireland agree that, 
when making important decisions in their life, their faith plays a major role, 
compared with 13% in England, 11% in Scotland, and 10% in Wales. In religious 
schools, 32% of students in London and 30% in Northern Ireland agree that, when 
making important decisions in their life, their faith plays a major role, compared with 
25% in England, 25% in Scotland, and 22% in Wales. 
Religion influencing a sense of identity 
The fourth issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how they 
felt that their religion had helped them to value their sense of identity. 
In a way [religion] does play a big part in my life because in a way its half of me  its 
like who I am so it does play a big part for me even outside school and I have to act and 
speak according to what Ive been told to do by my religion. (Scotland, Secular school) 
People who are brought up religious ...they behave in a certain way and we kind of pick 
that up straight away like immediately pick up theres something about the way they 
behave  especially if theyre from the same religion. (England, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students believed that religion 
encouraged them to value their sense of identity by asking the question: My 
religious identity is important to me. 
 Table 11.68 demonstrated that religious identity is more important to students in 
London and Northern Ireland than in the other four nations, and more important to 
students in religious schools than in secular schools. In secular schools, 52% of 
students in London and 48% in Northern Ireland feel that their religious identity is 
important to them, compared with 21% in England, 15% in Wales, and 14% in 
Scotland. In Northern Ireland, England, Wales, and Scotland, the proportion of 
students who feel their religious identity is important to them is higher in religious 
schools than in secular schools. In Northern Ireland the proportion increases from 
48% to 53%, in England from 21% to 33%, in Wales from 15% to 33% and in 
Scotland from 14% to 34%. In London, however, the opposite is the case. While 
52% of students in London feel that their religious identity is important to them, the 
proportion falls to 43% in religious schools. 
Conclusion 
Chapter eleven has examined the qualitative data and learnt that young people 
discussed the factors which influenced their beliefs about other groups of people in 
considerable detail, particularly influence of parents, influence of peers and friends, 
influence of school, and influence of media. These topics were deemed significant 
enough to warrant the quantitative questionnaire developing questions to provide 
further data on these themes. The discussion and findings of the data generate two 
conclusions which support the emerging patterns from previous conclusions about 
nation and school type. 
 The first conclusion is that the influences on and of religion on the lives of 
young people do differ according to nation with London and Northern Ireland being 
the nations which differ from the other nations of the United Kingdom. This 
demonstrates that student awareness of religion differs according to nation in the 
same way that social context and religious belief differ according to nation. These 
national differences highlight how the national diversity of the United Kingdom has 
influenced students attitudes toward religion in general and other religious groups in 
particular, and why they may have the attitudes that they do about others. The 
finding that responses from students in London and Northern Ireland differ from the 
rest of the United Kingdom is of importance for the dissertation as it continues to 
support the emerging pattern that students in London and Northern Ireland not only 
have different backgrounds, but different attitudes to religion, religious groups and 
denominations than their peers in the rest of the United Kingdom. This will be 
expanded upon in the attitudes discussed in the next chapter. 
 The second conclusion is that young peoples awareness of the influences on 
their views concerning religion and other religious groups does differ according to 
the type of school which they attend. The data demonstrates that students attending 
religious schools are more aware of the influences which affect their beliefs about 
religion, other religious groups, and Christian denominations. This data shows how 
influential a school type can be in its ability to shape the beliefs and attitudes of the 
young people attending that school and relates back to the discussion concerning the 
role of religion within the education system. This conclusion is of importance 
because the implication is that students from different schools have an awareness of 
influences, and therefore may provide further background for understanding different 
attitudes toward religious diversity in the two forthcoming chapters. 
 With these two conclusions about influences on and of religion in mind which 
build on the background of the students from information gained in previous 
chapters, the next chapter will draw together what has been learnt about social 
context, religious beliefs and influences on their beliefs about others, and whether or 
not this is affected by nation and school type by discussing the broader more 
generalised attitudes toward religious diversity.  
12. Attitudes toward religious diversity: the broader views 
Introduction 
This chapter discusses the theme of attitudes toward religious diversity in terms of 
broad views about religious diversity in the world. Four broad themes will be 
discussed which were raised by the students when talking about attitudes toward 
religious diversity. These were the negative impact which religious diversity has on 
the world, the positive impact which religious diversity has on the world, the desire 
of the individual to broaden their understanding of religious diversity, and concerns, 
attitudes and stereotypes about religious diversity. This chapter examines the sources 
of these themes from the qualitative material, using examples to support the 
inclusion of the themes, before demonstrating how the quantitative data interacts 
with and enhances the information gained from the qualitative research. 
Negative impact of religious diversity on the world 
In terms of the broad theme of the negative impact of religious diversity on the world 
which was raised by the students, four issues emerged as especially salient from the 
qualitative study. These were the negative impact of religion in general, the negative 
impact of other faiths, the negative impact of Christian denominations, and the 
negative impact of religious rejection on the world. 
Negative impact of religion in general 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how religion 
in general was the cause of harmful activity in the world. 
When religion consumes their lives. I know that sounds a bit  harsh and [like an] 
atheist view, but I believe if [] religion is in front of everything else in certain peoples 
lives [] it could become a bad thing. (London, secular school) 
 I think if some people start judging other people based on what religion they are, and if 
their religion is different to the one that they believe, that causes a lot of problems. 
(London, secular school) 
If it [religion] wasnt like its spoken about people wouldnt compare and see which one 
was wrong or right or whatever there wouldnt be as many fights as such. (Scotland, 
religious school) 
Its just a load of people squabbling over their ideas of whats going to happen when you 
die, whos supposed to be the real god and all that. (England, secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed that religion 
in general had a negative impact on the world by asking the question: Religion 
brings more conflict than peace. 
 Table 12.1 demonstrates that the highest level of endorsement of the view that 
religion brings more conflict than peace occurs in Northern Ireland. In secular 
schools this view is taken by 52% of the students in Northern Ireland, compared with 
51% in Wales, 47% in London, 44% in England and 40% in Scotland. In religious 
schools this view is taken by 57% of the students in Northern Ireland, compared with 
49% in London, 45% in Wales, 44% in Scotland, and 42% in England. 
Negative impact of world faiths on the world 
The second issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how world 
faiths were the cause of harmful activity in the world. 
All these religions, they cause conflict, but at the end of the day they all believe in God so 
 [] Except for them [the Buddhists], but there shouldnt be any conflict, its 
something that they should value and something that they should be proud of and work 
together. (Wales, secular school) 
People get the wrong idea because I used to think that Jews were really wrong. I used to 
think that Jews were really bad and it was their fault that the world war happened. [] I 
dont know [why I thought that]; its like when I was in  [primary] school, I used to 
think really strongly that it was [the] Jews fault that loads of people died and it wasnt 
until later on that I found out that it was actually them that were being [ab]used. (Wales, 
secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed that world 
faiths had a negative impact on the world by asking the questions: A lot of harm is 
done in the world by Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Jews, Muslims, and Sikhs.  
 Tables 12.2 through to 12.7 demonstrate that there is not a great deal of variation 
in response to the set of questions according either to nation or to type of school. The 
level of response does, however, vary from one religious group to another. Overall, 
the students rate Muslims and Christians more negatively than the other faith 
traditions. Thus, between 8% and 13% of the students agree that a lot of harm is 
done in the world by Buddhists; between 11% and 15% agree that a lot of harm is 
done in the world by Hindus; between 10% and 15% agree that a lot of harm is done 
in the world by Sikhs; and between 13% and 19% agree that a lot of harm is done in 
the world by Jews. The proportions then rise to between 12% and 21% who agree 
that a lot of harm is done in the world by Christians; and to between 30% and 48% 
who agree that a lot of harm is done in the world by Muslims. 
Negative impact of Christian denominations on the world   
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how 
denominations of Christianity were the cause of harmful activity in the world. 
Some people were brought up not to like Protestants because of the Troubles. Where we 
were we were brought up not to respect Protestants because they used to always fight/R: 
yeah from when we were just kids/ A: You just hear it where you live and the slogans 
people use/G: Like people saying bad things about them just made us think they were 
bad. (Northern Ireland, religious school) 
I live in a Catholic area but all around us its all Protestants and years ago there used to be 
loads of ratting and fighting and stuff but there isnt really as much any more ...its 
calmed down a lot from what it was. I think its just because they dont really bother 
anymore. (Northern Ireland, religious school) 
All like the IRA its groups like that got started because Catholics couldnt get jobs 
anywhere, and you know the Bloody Sunday thing theyre all talking about, my gran told 
me that that happened in a protest and it was for rights because they couldnt get jobs and 
the newspapers said, Job wanted, Catholics need not apply ... and it all comes from that 
and all of the groups started from that because they wanted the jobs and they wanted the 
rights and they would do anything for it. (Northern Ireland, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed that 
Christian denominations had a negative impact on the world by asking the questions: 
A lot of harm is done in the world by Protestants; and A lot of harm is done in the 
world by Catholics. 
 Tables 12.8 and 12.9 demonstrate that the highest level of endorsement of the 
views that a lot of harm is done in the world by Protestants and Catholics occurs in 
Northern Ireland. Thus, in secular schools, 33% of pupils in Northern Ireland agree 
that a lot of harm is done in the world by Protestants, compared with 18% in 
Scotland, 17% in Wales, 15% in England, and 11% in London. In secular schools, 
38% of students in Northern Ireland agree that a lot of harm is done in the world by 
Catholics, compared with 18% in Scotland, 18% in England, 17% in Wales and 12% 
in London. In religious schools, 37% of students in Northern Ireland agree that a lot 
of harm is done in the world by Protestants, compared with 20% in Scotland, 15% in 
London, 15% in England, and 13% in Wales. In religious schools, 28% of students 
in Northern Ireland agree that a lot of harm is done in the world by Catholics, 
compared with 17% in England, 16% in Scotland, 16% in London, and 15% in 
Wales. 
Negative impact of rejection of religion  
The fourth issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how 
rejection of religion contributed to harmful activity in the world. 
I think its easier [for a Christian] to understand like atheists or Buddhists or whatever 
than perhaps an atheist would be able to understand a Christian. You see the total kind of 
indignance and outrage on someone who doesnt believe in God when you talk about it 
whereas I think being a Christian makes you more accepting and a lot more kind of open 
arms and well thats your thing I mean you dont get Christians attacking atheists in the 
press like Dawkins but you get atheists attacking Christians. (England, religious school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed that 
rejection of religion had a negative impact on the world by asking the questions: A 
lot of harm is done in the world by Atheists; and A lot of harm is done in the world 
by Humanists.  
 Tables 12.10 and 12.11 demonstrate that there is no great variation in the level 
of endorsement given to these two questions according to nation or according to 
school type. Overall, between 11% and 20% of the students take the view that a lot 
of harm is done in the world by Atheists, and between 9% and 13% take the view 
that a lot of harm is done in the world by Humanists. 
Positive impact of religious diversity on the world 
In terms of the broad theme of the positive impact of religious diversity on the world 
which was raised by the students, three issues emerged as especially salient from the 
qualitative study. These were the positive impact of world faiths, the positive impact 
of Christian denominations, and the positive impact of religious rejection on the 
world. 
Positive impact of world faiths on the world 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how other 
world faiths provided positive activity in the world.  
They all seem to have a similar sort of moral law, so theyre not actually all that different, 
thats from what Ive noticed, so they all kind of have the same sort of passageway and 
theyre slightly veering off from each other. (London, Secular school) 
In a way, yeah, but  I believe there is a God a long time and theyve believed it for 
time, so Im not going to say, oh youre wrong or anything like that, but they still 
believe in God, thats the main thing, that they believe in God and they live their life right 
and they dont go out killing people or robbing, stuff like that. They just live their life 
right and do right things and not like change the world for [the] wrong reasons. (London, 
secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed that world 
faiths provided examples of positive activity in the world by asking the questions: A 
lot of good is done in the world by Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Jews, Muslims, 
and Sikhs.  
 Tables 12.12 through to 12.17 demonstrate that responses to the question are not 
merely a mirror image of responses to the questions in tables 13.2 through to 13.7. 
These data show that belief that good is done in the world by Buddhists, Hindus, 
Jews and Sikhs are most positively endorsed in London and Northern Ireland. For 
example, in secular schools 39% of students in London and 34% in Northern Ireland 
agree that a lot of good is done in the world by Hindus, compared with 31% in 
England, 22% in Wales, and 21% in Scotland. In religious schools, 36% of students 
in London and 33% in Northern Ireland agree that a lot of good is done in the world 
by Hindus, compared with 28% in England, 26% in Wales, and 25% in Scotland. 
Overall, Christianity is rated most highly among the six religious traditions, but there 
is considerable variation between the nations. In secular schools, 72% of students in 
Northern Ireland agree that a lot of good is done in the world by Christians, 
compared with 55% in London, 49% in England, 43% in Wales, and 36% in 
Scotland. In religious schools, 71% of students in London and 68% in Northern 
Ireland agree that a lot of good is done in the world by Christians, compared with 
62% in Wales, 59% in England and 48% in Scotland. Views on Muslims also vary 
according to nation. In secular schools, 37% of students in London agree that a lot of 
good is done in the world by Muslims, compared with 32% in Northern Ireland, 28% 
in England, 19% in Scotland and 18% in Wales. In religious schools, 31% of 
students in Northern Ireland, 27% in London, 25% in Scotland, 24% in England and 
23% in Wales agree that a lot of good is done in the world by Muslims.  
Positive impact of Christian denominations on the world 
The second issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how 
Christian denominations provided positive activity in the world. 
We have integration week in March and its like everybody has mixed form classes you 
get put in these different form classes and you play games and answer questions and then 
workshops go on throughout the week as well. And we do another thing thats called the 
Unity Project and I went to America with the schools and we mix with Americans and 
different religions and we talk about all this  talk about hatred and that. (Northern 
Ireland, Religious school) 
The governments doing more about it  the peace process and things that theyve 
brought in and its calmer now. (Northern Ireland, Religious School) 
With our religion teacher we went on a residential with [X School] boys  they were 
Protestants and we got along [these projects] have really helped. (Northern Ireland, 
Religious school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed that 
Christian denominations provided examples of positive activity in the world by 
asking the questions: A lot of good is done in the world by Catholics; and A lot of 
good is done in the world by Protestants. 
 Tables 12.18 and 12.19 demonstrate that, just as the most negative assessment of 
Christian denominations was voiced in Northern Ireland, so the most positive 
assessment is voiced in Northern Ireland as well. Thus, in secular schools, in 
Northern Ireland 45% of students agree that a lot of good is done in the world by 
Catholics, compared with 38% in London, 33% in England, 25% in Scotland, and 
24% in Wales. In secular schools, in Northern Ireland 53% of students agree that a 
lot of good is done in the world by Protestants, compared with 31% in London, 31% 
in England, 23% in Scotland, and 23% in Wales. In religious schools, 65% of 
students in Northern Ireland agree that a lot of good is done in the world by 
Catholics, compared with 50% in Scotland, 50% in Wales, 48% in London, and 45% 
in England. In religious schools, 49% of students in Northern Ireland agree that a lot 
of good is done in the world by Protestants, compared with 39% in London, 34% in 
England, 34% in Wales, and 29% in Scotland.  
Positive impact of rejection of religion on the world 
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about how rejection 
of religion provided examples of positive activity in the world. 
You dont have to be religious to have a general sense of morality   - do as you would be 
done by I think that is something that is essentially innate to human beings along with our 
immorality and our nastier aspects. (England, Religious school) 
With atheists just because they dont believe in the god it doesnt mean they cant take 
the Christian beliefs like love your neighbour as you would yourself, do not kill, do not 
steal and the 5 pillars of Islam  just give to charity  one of the pillars  you can take bits 
and bobs from each religion and youd still be on a boat youd still be trying to reach 
eudaemonia. (England, Religious School) 
Because I think society teaches even people who are atheists like that theyre supposed to 
be respectful to one another, so even if they dont have a religion, they still know where 
they are. (London, secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed that 
rejection of religion provided examples of positive activity in the world by asking 
the questions: A lot of good is done in the world by Atheists; and A lot of good is 
done in the world by Humanists. 
 Tables 12.20 and 12.21 demonstrate that there is little consistent variation in 
attitudes towards Atheists and Humanists according to nation or according to type of 
school. Overall, between 23% and 32% of the students agree that a lot of good is 
done in the world by Atheists, and between 21% and 35% of the students agree that 
there is a lot of good done in the world by Humanists. 
Desire to broaden understanding about religious diversity 
In terms of the third broad theme of broadening understanding concerning religious 
diversity, three issues emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. These 
were broadening understanding about other world faiths, broadening understanding 
about Christian denominations, and broadening understanding about rejection of 
religion. 
Desire to broaden understanding about world faiths 
The first issue concerned the way in which the students spoke about their interest in 
broadening their understanding about world faiths. 
I think its important because this is a Catholic school and I think we should learn about 
other religions too to be more aware and respect other people more say if like we meet 
someone that believes in a different religion then maybe we could try to understand them 
better than just say theyre different or theyre worse or whatever  I dont think that 
anyway but some people might because they would have never learnt about their religion 
before. (Scotland, religious school) 
When people say religion to me, the first thing that comes to my mind is Christianity 
because its  what I know, but its not something that I just want to know. I want to 
know about other religions. Like we had a teacher who come in who was actually Jewish 
and everyone was just so fascinated with his culture and the way he was and the way he 
dressed and stuff, it was just so fascinating. (England, secular school) 
I personally think [that] because we havent been brought up with different religions and 
all that, some of them will think its a bit weird and they will start wondering, but I think 
quite a few of the kids in school do respect other religions and I think they will just carry 
on and I think they will be fascinated to learn about these other people, because we only 
really learn about Christianity in school, but if we learnt more about different religions, 
wed accept them more in the community. (Wales, secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students were interested in 
broadening their understanding about world faiths by asking the question: I am 
interested in finding out about Buddhists, Christians, Hindus, Jews, Muslims, and 
Sikhs.  
 Tables 12.22 through to 12.27 demonstrate the highest level of interest in 
finding out about all six world faiths is among students in Northern Ireland and 
London. Moreover, the level of interest does not vary greatly from one religion to 
another. For example, in secular schools, 48% of students in Northern Ireland and 
44% in London are interested in finding out about Buddhists, compared with 37% in 
England, 33% in Wales and 26% in Scotland; 44% of students in London and 43% 
in Northern Ireland are interested in finding out about Muslims, compared with 31% 
in England, 27% in Wales and 22% in Scotland. In religious schools, 47% of 
students in Northern Ireland and 45% in London are interested in finding out about 
Buddhists, compared with 40% in Wales, 34% in England, and 34% in Scotland; 
44% of students in Northern Ireland and 40% in London are interested in finding out 
about Muslims, compared with 37% in Wales, 32% in Scotland, and 29% in 
England. 
Desire to broaden understanding about Christian denominations 
The second issue concerned the way in which the students spoke about their interest 
in broadening their understanding about Christian denominations. 
You still want to learn about being a Catholic but you want to make other friends, 
Protestant friends, and find out about them. (Northern Ireland, Religious school)  
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students were interested in 
broadening their understanding about Christian denominations by asking the 
question: I am interested in finding out about Protestants; and I am interested in 
finding out about Catholics. 
 Tables 12.28 and 12.29 demonstrate that interest in finding out about Catholics 
and Protestants is also highest in Northern Ireland, followed by London. In secular 
schools, 55% of students in Northern Ireland and 37% in London are interested in 
finding out about Protestants, compared with 27% in England, 25% in Wales and 
23% in Scotland. In secular schools, 51% of students in Northern Ireland and 40% in 
London are interested in finding out about Catholics, compared with 30% in 
England, 27% in Wales and 23% in Scotland. In religious schools, 48% of students 
in Northern Ireland are interested in finding out about Protestants compared with 
33% in London, 33% in Wales, 33% in Scotland and 28% in England. In religious 
schools, 55% of students in Northern Ireland are interested in finding out about 
Catholics, compared with 46% in Scotland, 40% in Wales, 39% in London and 32% 
in England.  
Desire to broaden understanding about rejection of religion 
The third issue concerned the way in which the students spoke about their interest in 
broadening their understanding about rejection of religion. 
 You get to see it from another persons view and then I think its quite interesting to 
understand why people dont believe in God (London, secular school) 
So I think definitely that if you are an atheist just because youre an atheist it doesnt 
mean you dont want to know about any religion because you could say I definitely want 
to know about what Im not believing in because some of the ideas in religions actually 
do make sense  I mean believing in something that we have no idea exists is quite 
farfetched but other ideas in it do make sense. (England, Religious school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students were interested in 
broadening their understanding about rejection of religion by asking the question: I 
am interested in finding out about Atheists; and I am interested in finding out about 
Humanists. 
 Tables 12.30 and 12.31 demonstrate that interest in finding out about Atheists 
and Humanists was also highest in Northern Ireland and London. For example, in 
secular schools 47% of students in London and 45% in Northern Ireland are 
interested in finding out about Humanists, compared with 38% in London, 31% in 
Wales, and 24% in Scotland. In religious schools, 45% of students in Northern 
Ireland and 43% in London are interested in finding out about Humanists, compared 
with 38% in Wales, 32% in England and 32% in Scotland.  
Concerns, stereotypes and attitudes 
In terms of the broad theme of concerns, stereotypes and attitudes which were raised 
by the students, three issues emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. 
These were religion and intolerance, the importance of religious respect, and the 
importance of religious equality in the world.  
Religion and intolerance 
The first issue concerned the way in which the students spoke about how they 
believed that religion could be criticised as a source of intolerance.   
I think people who are very, very strong about their religion will be very stubborn about it 
and wont really listen to what other peoples point of views are. I dont think theyll 
have a problem with them being there, they just wont take into account what theyre 
saying and reflect on it. (London, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed that religion 
was a source of intolerance by asking the religion could be criticised as a source of 
intolerance question: Religious people are often more intolerant of others.  
 The view that religious people are often more intolerant of others was endorsed 
by a higher proportion of students in Northern Ireland than elsewhere (see table 
12.32). Thus, in secular schools, 38% of students in Northern Ireland agreed that 
religious people are often more intolerant of others, compared with 32% in Wales, 
31% in England, 30% in London, and 25% in Scotland. In religious schools, 40% of 
students in Northern Ireland agreed that religious people are often more intolerant of 
others, compared with 33% in London, 28% in England, 28% in Wales and 22% in 
Scotland. 
Importance of religious respect 
The second issue concerned the way in which the students spoke about the 
importance of respect for religious diversity. 
Yeah, weve let them in, I think we respect their religion and they should respect ours a 
tiny bit more, because I think that sometimes you just feel a bit like you cant do some 
things like what your normal religion would do, because there are other religions around 
that dont like the concept of us doing that. (England, Secular) 
I disagree. I respect people of other religions, but Id like to be able to talk to them about 
it and argue and[][] but if I was with someone of a different faith to mine that 
I didnt know that well, Id obviously try harder not to disrespect them, because if I was 
with a friend theyd know I wasnt trying to, but lots of other people would think 
differently. (London, secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed that respect 
for religious diversity was important by asking the question: We must respect all 
religions. 
 Table 12.33 demonstrated that the view that we must respect all religions was 
endorsed by over 80% of students in both types of schools in Northern Ireland and in 
London, falling to between 65% and 73% in Wales, between 66% and 72% in 
England and to between 59% and 66% in Scotland. 
Importance of religious equality 
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about the 
importance of religious equality. 
Equality  everybodys - were all people and we all breathe and all whats the 
difference why are there categories like were from this religion and theyre from this 
religion so stay away from them. (Northern Ireland, Religious school) 
 Like at Christmas you get two weeks off school and a one day festival and thats just 
the same like Eid. Were allowed to take a day off school, but its not everyone, so its 
not seen exactly equally between different cultures. (London, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed that 
religious equality was important by asking the question: All religious groups in 
Britain should have equal rights; and Promoting equality in society is important to 
 Table 12.34 demonstrated that, in secular schools, concern that all religious 
groups in Britain should have equal rights was highest in London (77%) and 
Northern Ireland (74%) and lowest in Scotland  (55%), with England (68%) and 
Wales (61%) coming in between. In religious schools, Northern Ireland (78%) and 
London (70%) also shared higher endorsement than in the other nations: Wales 
(67%), Scotland (65%) and England (61%). Table 12.35 shows that endorsement of 
the view that promoting equality in society is important to me followed a similar 
pattern, with Northern Ireland (65% in secular schools and 67% in religious schools) 
and London (66% in secular schools and 67% in religious schools) leading the way. 
Conclusion 
Chapter twelve has examined the qualitative data and learnt that young people 
discussed their attitudes toward religious diversity in considerable detail, particularly 
the negative and positive impact of religious diversity on the world, their desire to 
broaden their understanding about religion and other faiths and denominations, and 
their concerns, stereotypes and attitudes. These matters were deemed significant 
enough to warrant the quantitative questionnaire developing questions to provide 
further data on these themes. The answers to the quantitative questions have been 
crosstabulated according to the five nations and the two different school types. The 
discussion and findings of the data generate conclusions about nation and school 
type. 
 Concerning nation, the conclusion arises that the broader attitudes of students in 
Northern Ireland and London are different from the broader attitudes of students in 
the other nations of the United Kingdom. The discovery that students in Northern 
Ireland have both the most negative and the most positive attitudes toward religious 
diversity suggest that this may be due to the historical religious divisions in Northern 
Ireland. The combination of this finding with the finding that the highest desire to 
broaden understanding about different religious faiths, denominations and non-
religious groups, and the positive endorsement for religious respect and equality is 
among students in Northern Ireland suggests that the young people demonstrate 
positive attitudes and desires for positive religious diversity rather than negative 
religious division as a result of their experiences demonstrated by the findings of the 
previous chapters concerning social context and influences on attitudes toward 
religion and other religious groups. The high levels of students in London who are 
interested in finding out more about other religious groups and the positive attitude 
toward religious equality and the importance which they play on religious respect 
suggests that being surrounded by religious diversity has made these students more 
agreeable to the idea of an increased understanding in order to promote positive 
attitudes toward religious diversity. This is of importance for the dissertation as it 
demonstrates the influence that national context can have on attitudes, and how both 
negative and positive environments can inspire students to leave negative attitudes 
aside in favour of developing more positive attitudes. 
 Concerning school type, the data concludes that, unlike previous chapters which 
exhibited clear differences between school type and awareness of context, belief, and 
influences, the influence of school type rarely seems to affect broader attitudes 
toward religious diversity. The two cases for exception are first that students from 
religious schools often endorse more highly their view that good is done in the world 
by Catholics and Protestants which may be a direct result of the positive slant which 
the students have received from the school, and second that they highly endorse their 
desire to learn more about Catholics and Protestants. This may suggest a desire to 
learn about the denomination which they are not part of because of the 
denominational focus of the school. This suggests that the broader attitudes 
concerning religious diversity are not affected by school type, but where they are, 
schools with a religious character have a responsibility to deliver a more rounded 
education about different denominations to their students. This is of importance for 
the thesis particularly in its ability to identify areas in which denominational division 
is an issue. These two findings give an insight into the broader attitudes toward 
religious diversity as perceived by the students. The next chapter will assess the 
more focused attitudes toward religious diversity which have a daily influence on the 
lives of the young people. 
13. Attitudes toward religious diversity: The immediate 
context 
Introduction 
This chapter discusses the theme of attitudes toward religious diversity within the 
immediate context of the daily lives of the young people. Three broad themes will be 
discussed which were raised by the students when talking about attitudes toward 
religious diversity. These were religious diversity and school, religious diversity and 
the local environment, and religious diversity and personal relationships. This 
chapter examines the sources of these themes from the qualitative material, using 
examples to support the inclusion of the themes, before demonstrating how the 
quantitative data interacts with and enhances the information gained from the 
qualitative research. 
Religious diversity in school 
In terms of the broad theme of religious diversity in school which was raised by the 
students, three issues emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. These 
were tangible signs of religious diversity in school, attitudes toward the school 
curriculum, and attitudes toward school ethos. 
Tangible signs of religious diversity in school 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about the visibility 
of religion through the visibility of religious symbols. 
Jewish people wear the hats and stuff like that. I dont really know what Buddhists do 
actually. Dont they wear orange suit things and go to some place? And Christians, you 
can have a cross and sometimes they go to church or some dont. (England, secular 
school) 
Like with Muslims you often see them wearing their headdresses but what I want to know 
is how come if we go over to their country and we say practice our faith we can be put in 
prison and tortured but if they come over here we let them wear their head bands and we 
let them worship but theres no force but over in some countries Christians are being 
prosecuted by Muslims but I dont think its fair that they have rights but the Christians 
dont. (Northern Ireland, Religious school) 
When I went to England [Bridgewater]...I couldnt get over the number of people with 
coloured skin or the number of people I saw with head dresses cos like here itd be sort of 
rare. (Northern Ireland, Religious school) 
The quantitative study checked the student attitudes toward the physical visibility of 
religion within the context of the school environment by asking the questions: 
Christians should be allowed to wear crosses in school; Muslims should be 
allowed to wear the headscarf in school; Muslims should be allowed to wear the 
Burka in school; Muslims should be allowed to wear the Niqab in school; Sikhs 
should be allowed to wear the Turban in school; Sikhs should be allowed to wear 
the Kara in School; Jews should be allowed to wear the Star of David in School; 
Sikhs should be allowed to wear the Kirpan in School; Jews should be allowed to 
wear the Kippah/ Yamulke in school; and  Hindus should be allowed to wear the 
Bindi in School. 
 Tables 13.1 through to 13.10 demonstrate that attitudes toward visible signs of 
religious dress within school vary according to nation, type of school and religion. 
Thus, differences can be illustrated by reference to some specific examples. In 
secular schools, acceptance of the Christian cross varies from 76% of students in 
London to 50% in Scotland, with England at 68%, Northern Ireland at 67% and 
Wales at 56%. In secular schools, acceptance of the Muslim headscarf varies from 
75% of students in London to 49% in Scotland, with Northern Ireland at 65%, 
England at 63% and Wales at 53%. The differences in student attitudes in secular 
schools and in religious schools vary from nation to nation. For example, in Wales 
and Scotland students in religious schools are more accepting of the Muslim 
headscarf than students in secular schools: in Scotland 55% compared with 49%, and 
in Wales 57% compared with 53%. In London and England students in religious 
schools are less accepting of the Muslim headscarf than students in secular schools: 
in London 68% compared with 75%, and in England 49% compared with 63%. 
School curriculum content 
The second issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about their 
attitudes concerning the content of the school curriculum with particular reference to 
religious Education and citizenship. 
 I first learnt about different religions in school, like year 5 or 6, [when I was] like 9 or 
10. (Wales, religious school) 
In citizenship I think we cover all the religions  we just like learn what they expect and 
how they worship. It was in the first year. In the first year we learnt about Muslims. 
(Northern Ireland, Religious school) 
 [RE is] based on every religion not focussed on one more than another because its 
unfair just because theres a majority of one religion shouldnt mean that one religion 
gets more focussed on  it wouldnt really be fair on other people. (Northern Ireland, 
Religious School) 
The quantitative checked the student attitudes toward the content of the school 
curriculum by asking the questions: Religious Education should be taught in 
school; Citizenship should be taught in school; and Learning about different 
religions in school is interesting.  
 Table 13.11 demonstrates that in secular schools there is much lower student 
support for religious education in Scotland than in the other nations. Thus, just 35% 
of students in secular schools in Scotland agree that religious education should be 
taught in school, compared with 51% in Wales, 60% in England, 64% in Northern 
Ireland and 66% in London. In religious schools there is less variation among the 
nations, with 56% agreement in England, 56% in Scotland, 63% in Wales, 67% in 
Northern Ireland and 70% in London.  
 Table 13.12 demonstrates that overall there is less support for citizenship 
education than for religious education across all five nations and both types of 
school. For example, while just 35% of students in secular schools in Scotland agree 
that religious education should be taught in schools, the proportion falls to 29% who 
agree that citizenship should be taught in schools. While 66% of students in secular 
schools in London agree that religious education should be taught in schools, the 
proportion falls to 46% who agree that citizenship should be taught in schools. 
 Table 13.13 demonstrates that views on learning about different religions in 
schools follow the same trajectory as views on religious education. Thus, in secular 
schools, just 30% of students in Scotland agree that learning about different religions 
in schools is interesting, compared with 43% in Wales, 48% in England, 60% in 
Northern Ireland and 63% in London. 
School ethos 
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about the religious 
ethos of their schools and the opportunity for religious encounter which this 
provided.  
I kind of disagree with having mixed religions in the school, because Im for a Christian 
school and when I signed up for this school, it said it was a Christian school, and I want a 
Christian school. I respected peoples religion, but I wanna stay Christian. (England, 
secular school) 
I just think you shouldnt have this Catholic only school, Muslim only school. Youre not 
there to just be in your religion, youre there to learn and you should just go in one school 
to learn, thats it. (England, secular school) 
If you were still here [rather than in a Muslim school] and other people all knew about 
your religion that would actually be better and people would understand you more and 
get you to explain everything and theyll understand you more. You feel more special. 
(Northern Ireland, religious school) 
I would like to go [to Islamic school] because Im doing Christianity here in religion 
whereas I would want to do Islam, thats why I would prefer there was an Islamic school. 
(Northern Ireland, religious school) 
The quantitative study checked attitudes toward school ethos by asking the 
questions: I am in favour of Christian schools; and I am in favour of Muslim 
schools. 
 Table 13.14 demonstrated that across the five nations there is a higher level of 
support for Christian schools among students in religious schools than in secular 
schools: in England 50% compared with 26%; in Northern Ireland 62% compared 
with 48%; in Scotland 45% compared with 21%; in Wales 53% compared with 32%; 
and in London 62% compared with 38%. Table 14.15, on the other hand shows that 
there is little difference in the level of support for Muslim schools voiced by students 
in religious schools and in secular schools: in England 19% and 17%; in Northern 
Ireland 22% and 20%; in Scotland 23% and 17%; in Wales 22% and 20%; and in 
London; 27% and 24%. 
Religious diversity and the local environment 
In terms of the broad theme of religious diversity and the local environment which 
was raised by the students, three themes emerged as especially salient from the 
qualitative study. These were attitudes toward those from different religious 
backgrounds in the local environment, attitudes toward those from different 
countries and racial backgrounds in the local environment, and attitudes toward those 
from different Christian denominations in the local environment. 
Different religious backgrounds in the local environment  
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about their attitudes 
toward different religious backgrounds in the local environment. 
Yeah in a way it does [make a difference where you live]; when youre off school for a 
religious occasions, if you dont have a lot of people who are the same religion around 
you, then you might feel isolated; but in my area Im lucky because I have lots of people 
who are the same religion and so when I take a day off to celebrate religious occasions, I 
have people to celebrate with. (London, secular school) 
From a very young age I was brought up in like a mixed religion part of an area and  
even before we discussed this in primary school, I knew lots about religion. (England, 
secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which the students believed that the 
presence of different religions within their environment was a positive thing by 
asking the question: People from different religious backgrounds make where I live 
an interesting place. 
 The highest endorsement of this item came from students in London (see table 
13.16). In secular schools, 58% of students in London agreed that people from 
different religious backgrounds make where they live an interesting place, compared 
with 48% in Northern Ireland, 44% in England, 36% in Wales and 28% in Scotland. 
In religious schools, 47% of students in London agreed that people from different 
religious backgrounds make where they live an interesting place, compared with 
43% in Northern Ireland, 37% in Wales, 35% in Scotland, and 34% in England. 
Different cultural and racial backgrounds in the local environment 
The second issue was the way in which some students spoke about their attitudes 
toward different cultural and racial backgrounds in the local environment.  
I think we stand out because with our neighbours, sometimes, they bring their ethnic food 
over to us and sometimes we give them something and theres sort of a divide there, not a 
divide, but you can notice it more, because were trading different sort[s] of foods and 
recipes and what not, so that highlights it. (London, secular school) 
I can [remember when I realised] because I grew up in Egypt and everyones Muslim, or 
theres some Christians, but its Muslims and Christians and everyone looks the same, 
and when I came to Britain, it was the first time I saw a black person, the first time I saw 
a Chinese person and things like that. It was a bit of a shock, really, but you get used to it 
really quickly. I was actually surprised how quickly I adapted. (London, Secular school) 
The quantitative study checked how many of the students considered that different 
cultures and races within the environment was a positive thing by asking the 
question; People who come from different countries make where I live an 
interesting place. 
 The highest endorsement of this item, too, came from students in London (see 
table 13.17). In secular schools, 61% of students in London agreed that people who 
come from different countries make where they live an interesting place, compared 
with 52% in Northern Ireland, 48% in England, 39% in Wales, and 30% in Scotland. 
In religious schools, 55% of students in London agreed that people who came from 
different countries make where they live an interesting place, compared with 47% in 
Northern Ireland, 42% in Wales, 39% in England, and 38% in Scotland. 
Different Christian denominations in the local environment 
The third issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about their attitudes 
toward different Christian denominations in the local environment.  
People dont want others living in our country. They believe that the British came over 
and took over our country and they dont want them here or something because they 
changed like the name of Londonderry and people dont like it and they dont want peace 
until its sorted. (Northern Ireland, Religious School). 
There is still a divide although it is getting better it is still there, you can almost sense it 
whenever youre walking down ...like a rough part of town like wheres theres big 
murals and flags and things like that, there is always people standing on street corners 
and it can be sort of intimidating. (Northern Ireland, Religious school) 
The quantitative study checked the students attitudes toward different Christian 
denominations in their local environment by asking the question: I would not like to 
live next door to Catholics; and I would not like to live next door to Protestants. 
 Table 13.18 demonstrated that, across the five nations, between 5% and 13% of 
students say that they would not like to live next door to Catholics. The highest 
agreement with this statement (13%) was voiced by students in secular schools in 
Wales. Table 13.19 demonstrated that, across the five nations, between 6% and 17% 
of students say that they would not like to live next door to Protestants. The highest 
agreement with the statement (17%) was voiced by students in religious schools in 
Northern Ireland.  
Diversity in personal relationships 
In terms of the third broad theme of diversity and personal relationships, three issues 
emerged as especially salient from the qualitative study. These were relationships 
with those from different faiths, relationships with those from different Christian 
denominations, and relationships with those from different racial backgrounds. 
Relationships with those from different faiths 
The first issue concerned the way in which some students spoke about relationships 
which they had or potential relationships which they would be happy to have with 
those from different religious faiths.  
I definitely think if youve got a religion and you find someone whos the same religion, 
its sort of like a relationship start or a bonding point, because you can both share what 
you believe in. I dont think it hinders too much, if youve got different religions, but if 
you always talk about it, then maybe one person will get frustrated about the topic, but I 
dont think its a bad thing not to be friends with other people of different religions. 
(London, secular school) 
It depends on the person because you could be a Muslim and a Christian and that Muslim 
could like that Christian and that Christian could like that Muslim, but thats depending 
on the person, not on the religion, but then you could have a person that is Muslim and 
Christian, but their own personality just does not like that person, and that one person 
doesnt like that person so[So, again, religion is just one element?]Yeah, I think it 
depends more on the person. (London, secular school) 
Like my Mum said to me shes like, if you do find someone as long as hes Muslim you 
can marry him Im not going to force you to marry someone you dont want to and shes 
had this talk with me and my brothers  its not a forceful thing just when youre ready 
because its a really big decision but thank God shes not that strict in this kind of 
situation. (Scotland, religious school) 
I think if I was going to have a boyfriend I would think if its a right decision or a wrong 
decision because I know that its a wrong decision  youre not supposed to have 
boyfriends because in the religion its arranged. (Northern Ireland, Religious School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students would be willing to 
engage in relationships with those from different faiths by asking the question: I 
would be happy to go out with someone from a different faith. The quantitative also 
checked the extent of attitudes toward relationships of close relatives by asking the 
question; I would be happy about a close relative marrying someone from a 
different faith. 
 According to table 13.20, openness to going out with someone from a different 
faith varied from 46% to 71% across the five nations and the two types of schools. In 
secular schools, greatest openness was shown in Northern Ireland at 65%, falling to 
60% in England, 59% in London, 53% in Wales, and 46% in Scotland. In religious 
schools, greatest openness was also shown in Northern Ireland at 71%, falling to 
65% in Scotland, 59% in London, 57% in Wales, and 49% in England. According to 
table 14.21 a similar pattern exists in relationship to openness to a close relative 
marrying someone from a different faith. Here the levels of openness varied from 
53% to 73%. In secular schools, greatest openness was shown in Northern Ireland at 
69%, falling to 66% in England, 59% in Wales, 57% in London and 53% in 
Scotland. In religious schools, greatest openness was also shown in Northern Ireland 
at 73%, falling to 66% in London, 65% in Scotland, 61% in Wales and 55% in 
England. 
Relationships with those from different Christian denominations 
The third issue was the way in which some students spoke about relationships which 
they had or potential relationships which they would be happy to have with those 
from different Christian denominations.  
I would think of like Catholics in a different way because my Dad used to be funny about 
Catholics and would never let me go out with one or anything so it made me think about 
them in a different kind of way and things like  Id be friends with one of them but 
would never like marry one  I suppose it changes my perception like my Dad. (Northern 
Ireland, Secular School) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students would be willing to 
engage in relationships with those from different Christian denominations by asking 
the question: I would be happy to go out with someone from a different 
denomination. The quantitative also checked the extent of attitudes toward 
relationships of close relatives by asking the question; I would be happy about a 
close relative marrying someone from a different denomination. 
 Tables 13.22 and 13.23 demonstrate the responses to the proximity questions 
referring to different denominations follow a similar pattern to the responses to the 
proximity questions referring to different faiths (see table 13.20 and 13.21). Across 
the five nations and the two types of schools, openness to going out with someone 
from a different denomination varied from 52% to 72%.  In secular schools, greatest 
openness was shown in Northern Ireland at 68%, falling to 61% in England, 59% in 
London, 52% in Wales, and 46% in Scotland. In religious schools, greatest openness 
was also shown in Northern Ireland at 71% and London at 72%, falling to 64% in 
Scotland, 57% in Wales and 55% in England. Across the five nations and the two 
types of schools openness to a close relative marrying someone from a different 
denomination varied for 45% to 70%. In secular schools, greatest openness was 
shown in Northern Ireland at 66%, falling to 62% in England, 55% in London, 49% 
in Wales and 45% in Scotland. In religious schools, greatest openness was shown in 
London at 70% and Northern at 67%, falling to 56% in Wales, 54% in Scotland and 
51% in England. 
Relationships with those from different racial backgrounds 
The second issue was the way in which some students spoke about relationships 
which they had or potential relationships which they would be happy to have with 
those from different racial backgrounds. 
Its because he or she is a nice person, its not what race they are. (London, secular 
school) 
Some people dont want to go out with other people because of their culture or where 
theyre from or [their] religion. (England, secular school) 
The quantitative study checked the extent to which students would be willing to 
engage in relationships with those from different faiths by asking the question: I 
would be happy to go out with someone from a different racial background. The 
quantitative also checked the extent of attitudes toward relationships of close 
relatives by asking the question; I would be happy about a close relative marrying 
someone from a different racial background. 
 Tables 13.24 and 13.25 demonstrate that openness to people from different 
racial backgrounds, according to these proximity measures, is also highest in 
Northern Ireland. Across all five nations and the two types of schools, openness to 
going out with someone from a different racial background varies from 41% to 67%. 
In secular schools, greatest openness was shown in Northern Ireland at 64%, falling 
to 59% in London, 59% in England, 46% in Wales, and 41% in Scotland. In 
religious schools greatest openness was shown in London at 67% and Northern 
Ireland at 66%, falling to 57% in Wales, 56% in Scotland, and 50% in England. 
Across the five nations and the two types of schools, openness to a close relative 
marrying someone from a different racial background varied from 49% to 72%. In 
secular schools, greatest openness was shown in Northern Ireland at 70%, falling to 
64% in England, 61% in London, 55% in Wales, and 49% in Scotland. In religious 
schools, greatest openness was shown in Northern Ireland at 73% and London at 
72%, falling to 61% in Wales, 60% in Scotland, and 53% in England. 
Conclusion 
Chapter thirteen has examined the qualitative data and learnt that young people 
discussed their attitudes toward religious diversity in the sense of how religious 
diversity has implications for their everyday lives in considerable detail. Of 
particular note within these conversations were the topics of religious diversity and 
school, religious diversity and the local environment, and religious diversity and 
personal relationships. These topics were deemed significant enough to warrant the 
quantitative questionnaire developing questions on these subjects. Questions shaped 
by these topics were crosstabulated with the responses of students from each nation 
and from each school type within the sample. The discussion and findings of the data 
generate conclusions concerning the influence of nation, and the influence of school 
type on attitudes toward religious diversity in the immediate context. 
 The conclusion arising from the data concerning the influence of nation and the 
immediate attitudes toward religious diversity demonstrates that, in a similar way to 
the patterns indicated by the data in previous chapter conclusions, the nations of 
London and Northern Ireland are different from the other nations of the United 
Kingdom in terms of the immediate attitudes toward religious diversity. The data 
demonstrates that in terms of nation, attitudes toward religious diversity are more 
positive and tolerant in London and Northern Ireland than in the rest of the United 
Kingdom, especially with regard to curriculum content, local environment, and 
diversity in personal relationships. This is of importance as it demonstrates the 
students awareness of their surroundings and suggests that external influences have 
been reflected in their attitudes, whether this means an adoption of the attitudes or a 
reaction against the attitudes of others around them.  This also means that the 
dissertation has been successful in tracing the students awareness of social context, 
religious beliefs, awareness of influences and broader religious beliefs to show that 
they can collectively influence immediate attitudes toward religious diversity from a 
national perspective.  
 In terms of school type, the data demonstrates that in terms of school curriculum 
content, and diversity in personal relationships, students attending religious schools 
have more positive and tolerant immediate attitudes toward religious diversity than 
their peers attending secular schools. The only exceptions to this rule are the nations 
of England and London which suggests that the education system in religious 
schools in England differs from the rest of the United Kingdom. This is of 
importance for the dissertation as it demonstrates that there are differences 
concerning school types and highlights that in some cases, school type does have an 
influence on attitudes toward religious diversity. This contributes to the argument 
which has emerged throughout the dissertation in some cases there are differences in 
school types which can influence attitudes of young people toward religious 
diversity. Having drawn these conclusions concerning the immediate attitudes 
toward religious diversity among young people in the United Kingdom, the next 
chapter will draw the conclusions of each data chapter together to make final claims 
about assessing and understanding attitudes toward religious diversity in light of the 
findings of the literature review and the methodology used to collect the reported 
findings. 
Conclusion 
Introduction  
This dissertation has mapped the progress of the young peoples attitudes toward 
religious diversity project which identified the increased religious diversity of the 
population of the United Kingdom within the last century, and noted the lack of 
empirical research which could assist in assessing and understanding the attitudes of 
young people aged 13- to 15-years toward this increase in religious diversity. The 
dissertation addressed this problem in two parts. Part one of the dissertation 
addressed this problem by discussing how religious diversity is visible in the 
population of the United Kingdom; the literature which indicated examples of areas 
in which religious diversity has become apparent through public life; relevant theory 
and past empirical study; and the mixed methodology and research strategy which 
was used to gather the data. Part two of the dissertation reported the findings of both 
the qualitative and quantitative data sets both to assess and understand attitudes 
toward religious diversity among young people and to assess the influence which 
nation and school type had on attitudes toward religious diversity, and concluded 
that nation and school type did influence attitudes toward religious diversity in 
different ways.    
 This chapter summarises the findings of each chapter and explains how these 
chapters are threaded together as a research narrative. This gives weight and 
background to the findings that national differences and differences in school type 
are apparent across many different areas of discussion concerning attitudes toward 
religious diversity which were discussed by the students. This concluding chapter 
addresses how the earlier chapters of the dissertation stand together as a coherent 
argument, and as an original contribution to knowledge for studies concerning young 
people and religious diversity and within the field of the social scientific study of 
religion in two ways: first, because of the scale on which the project is conducted; 
and second, because of the content on which the project produces findings. Finally, 
the chapter highlights that, in the light of these important findings, implications arise 
which could generate additional research for future researchers to address. The 
chapter also raises critical reflections on the project and the implications which this 
had for the project findings, and how answering these critical reflections could 
enhance a future research project. 
Part one: examining the context  
Part one of the dissertation addressed the context in which the research took place by 
discussing the different theories and observations of the United Kingdom which 
warranted a study concerning young peoples attitudes toward religious diversity to 
take place. Part one also included the methodology required to address the research 
question and to gain the answers about young peoples attitudes toward religious 
diversity which were sought. 
Examining the religious affiliation of the population of the United Kingdom 
Chapter one began to address the question by introducing the three different religion 
questions included in the 2001 census, and each drew attention to the different 
emphases of the religion question in Northern Ireland, in Scotland, and in England 
and Wales. The chapter also examined the data from the answers to these religion 
questions to profile the religious landscape of the United Kingdom. Comment on this 
census data includes comment on the general population, the population of young 
people at the most detailed level possible provided by the census output (the 10- to 
15-year-old age group), and the comments which can be made regarding sex 
differences among the general population and sex differences among young people. 
The conclusions from this chapter demonstrate that religious diversity is manifested 
in different ways across the United Kingdom, for example Christian denominational 
diversity in Northern Ireland. The conclusion also, however, highlight that the 
comment on population demographics and particular areas of the United Kingdom 
are not always clear. This analysis placed the research in a context where an original 
contribution to knowledge concerning religious diversity in the United Kingdom 
could be conducted. 
Religious diversity reflected in holy days and festivals 
Chapter two was the first of three chapters which addressed the visual landscape of 
the United Kingdom by complementing the statistics demonstrated in chapter one 
with literature which could give an indication of the tangible nature of religious 
diversity in the United Kingdom. This first chapter discussed the increased 
prominence of different holy days and religious festivals celebrated across the 
nations of the United Kingdom in both a private and public context. This chapter 
built on the findings of the previous chapter, as by reporting the increase in numbers 
of people in the United Kingdom who belong to different faiths as reported in the 
census data it was demonstrated that the number of people in the United Kingdom 
who wish to celebrate these different festivals has increased. Thus it could be seen 
that there is a need for awareness of how these holy days and festivals could be 
celebrated publically in a way which was understood and respected by members of 
the public in the United Kingdom who might not share the same religious beliefs. 
This acted as a further justification for a study which addressed young peoples 
attitudes toward religious diversity. 
Religious diversity reflected in dress and food 
Chapter three addressed a second example of the increasingly visible religiously 
diverse landscape of the United Kingdom by discussing the literature concerning 
religious dress and food. The assessment of the literature concluded that the religious 
rules regarding food and dress laws not only act as a personal reminder to the 
individual of the doctrines of the faith, but also act as a demonstration of the 
individuals faith to others. The chapter concludes that both the positive and negative 
responses to the demands of religious dress and dietary laws from those of different 
faiths indicates the importance of conducting a study to better understand attitudes 
toward religious diversity which would potentially succeed in embracing the needs 
of the majority when discussing matters of fundamental importance such as religious 
food and religious dress. This also prepared a background literature for the empirical 
data in part two of the student responses about their attitudes toward religious dress. 
Religious diversity reflected in buildings and architecture 
Chapter four addressed the third example of the increasingly visible religiously 
diverse landscape of the United Kingdom by discussing the literature concerning 
religious buildings and architecture. The chapter concluded that while religious 
buildings from different religious traditions were becoming more common on the 
skylines of the United Kingdom, the positive and negative reactions to the presence 
of these religious buildings showed the warrant for further research which addressed 
attitudes toward religious diversity. This also prepared a background literature for 
the student responses which emerged about student attendance at places of religious 
worship within the findings of the questionnaire which were discussed in chapter ten. 
The hidden face of religious diversity 
Chapter five developed the three examples of the visibility of religious diversity 
across the United Kingdom (as demonstrated by holy days and festivals, religious 
dress and food, and religious buildings and architecture) by moving on to assess the 
hidden face of religious diversity. This chapter discussed examples of areas of life 
which historically have been influenced by a religious tradition and have been 
adapted or modified to meet the needs of the increasingly religious diverse 
population over the last century. This chapter focused on three specific areas 
(education, healthcare, and death and dying) and identified the religious role which 
had historically lay at the heart of them, even if only a few signs remain to indicate 
that this was so. The chapter then concludes that the change in population 
demographic means that accommodation needed to be made for this and an 
understanding of attitudes toward religious diversity was therefore vital. This 
literature also provided the background for responses about the student religious 
beliefs about life and death which were discussed in chapter ten, and student 
attitudes toward education with a particular focus on religious diversity within 
education as were discussed in chapters nine, eleven and thirteen when looking to 
understand social contexts, influences on and of religion, and attitudes toward 
religious diversity within an educational context. 
The public significance of religious affiliation 
The wealth of literature in chapters two, three and four therefore indicated the 
change in the United Kingdom from a traditionally Christian mono-cultural society 
into a multi-religious and multi-cultural society, particularly within the last century. 
This justified the need for a research project concerning attitudes toward religious 
diversity, and the preparation for the data in part two of the dissertation. Chapter six 
developed this literature review further by discussing the public significance of 
religious affiliation and what religious affiliation provided in terms of information 
about individuals, their religion, and their beliefs and values. From the various 
approaches to self-assigned religious affiliation which were presented, the chapter 
concluded that selecting the Francis argument for understanding self-assigned 
religious affiliation was the most appropriate means of understanding beliefs and 
values within the field of the social-scientific study of religion. This understanding 
of self-assigned religious affiliation is adopted as a means of understanding attitudes 
toward religious diversity. The case for this was argued by using examples of 
previous research projects conducted among young people without religious 
affiliation, with world faith affiliation, and with denominational affiliation to 
understand values concerning personal wellbeing, sexual morality, and substance 
use. This chapter and its conclusions therefore provide a vital link between the 
findings of census data concerning self-assigned religious affiliation with particular 
regard to young people and their values in the context of the United Kingdom. 
The REDCO project 
Having identified the context in which the research takes place and provided samples 
of literature to support this contextual background from which the young peoples 
attitudes toward religious diversity project arose, chapter seven justified the case for 
conducting a new project which could complement the findings of previous WRERU 
projects concerning young people. Chapter seven presented an overview and record 
of the influence y of the REDCO project which had been conducted by WRERU 
prior to the AHRC attitudes toward religious diversity project as an example of an 
existing study concerning young people and attitudes toward religion and other 
religions. The assessment of the findings and conclusions of the REDCO project 
allowed the case to be made that another research project would be necessary to 
understand the students in the United Kingdom further, alongside the European 
perspective developed by the REDCO project and with a specific focus on the issue 
of religious diversity. This chapter also demonstrated the need for a mixed-methods 
project where research approaches were planned, designed, and analysed 
collaboratively, which has shaped the methodology of the research reported in this 
dissertation. Chapter seven also concludes that while the REDCO project does give 
an indication of attitudes toward religion, it is not representative of the whole of the 
United Kingdom.  
Learning from the qualitative and setting up the quantitative 
Chapter eight discusses the methodology and project design to gather the data on 
which the dissertation reports. This includes the rationale, sampling strategy and 
design of both the qualitative interview schedule and the quantitative questionnaire. 
The chapter also focuses on the vital link between understanding where the ideas for 
the data chapter structure come from through its discussion of the arising themes 
from the qualitative data which would influence the design of the quantitative study 
and provide the material for analysis. The understanding of the research design and 
sampling for both the qualitative and quantitative research methods also indicates the 
original contribution to knowledge by moving away from previous styles of 
methodology such as those indicated by the literature discussing the REDCO project 
in chapter seven. This chapter also provides the link between the two parts of the 
dissertation as it is the chapter which bears the findings of the previous literature 
chapters in mind and justifies that the research tools were designed in the light of 
these findings to answer questions about attitudes toward religious diversity in the 
data chapters which follow. 
Part two: examining the new data 
Developing from the materials discussed in of the first part of the dissertation, part 
two presents the empirical findings of the project data and consists of five data 
chapters. The five data chapters allowed the findings and conclusions about the 
young people to progress and develop an accurate portrayal of the young people. The 
five data chapters all contain quotations from the qualitative interview transcripts 
which were considered to epitomise the themes and to give a personal student voice 
to the numerical data which is presented.   
 The qualitative data found that the students across the different nations and 
schools responded to the questions in the interview schedule in a way which 
demonstrated their varying experiences and attitudes in many areas of life which 
could give an indication of their beliefs, values, and attitudes toward religious 
diversity. 
Social context of young peoples lives in the United Kingdom 
The first data chapter concerned the social context of the young people and their 
comments about their lives in the United Kingdom. The data concluded that students 
in London and Northern Ireland live in noticeably different environments to that of 
their peers in other parts of the United Kingdom and that social context varies 
according to school type. Therefore conclusions which can be drawn concerning 
nation are that perhaps the tangible signs of religious diversity which are present in 
London and Northern Ireland have made the students more aware of their social 
context. The conclusions, which can be drawn concerning school type are that 
religious schools and secular schools may draw on different groups of students. This 
may mean that different schools attract pupils from different social backgrounds. 
Additionally the admissions process for religious schools, with the criteria of 
students having a religious connection, may suggest why the students at religious 
schools have such different comments to make concerning their social context. 
Religious beliefs of young people 
The second data chapter concerned the religious beliefs of the young people and 
concluded that, concerning nation, the more traditional religious beliefs were to be 
found among students in London and Northern Ireland. The conclusion which can be 
drawn from this is that because of the higher concentration of different religious 
backgrounds in these nations, the more historical religious contexts in these nations 
and the visible presence of these beliefs in the different religious traditions means 
that young people feel more comfortable about expressing the traditional religious 
doctrines of their faith. The finding that school type has an effect of religious belief, 
particularly with regard to encouraging more traditional religious beliefs among 
students in secondary schools draws the conclusion that the religious ethos of the 
school and the religious clientele of the students it attracts means that these doctrines 
are being adopted by the young people attending religious schools. 
The influences on and of religion: Self-identified sources and effects 
The third data chapter concerned the self-identified influences on and of religion. 
The findings concerning nation that students in London and Northern Ireland 
identified the sources of influence more highly than their peers in the rest of the 
United Kingdom drew the conclusion that young people in these areas are 
surrounded by more factors which influence these attitudes, whether this be because 
of their social context or the constant presence of religious diversity where they live. 
The finding that school type did influence the awareness of influential factors on and 
of religion drew the conclusion that religious schools and secular schools may be 
teaching differently which is affecting student awareness of influences. In turn this 
presents a challenge to different school types to assess the way in which they teach 
about different religious groups. 
The broader attitudes toward religious diversity 
The fourth data chapter concerned attitudes toward religious diversity in terms of 
broader views toward religious diversity. The data concluded that students in 
Northern Ireland are most positive and most negative in their attitudes, but the most 
open to broadening understanding. The conclusion which might be drawn from this 
may lie in the qualitative comments made by some students that expressed a desire to 
move away from difficult opinions which had been expressed by their relatives in the 
past. This interest in increasing understanding is something which should be taken 
into consideration by those who have the responsibility of influencing young people 
in Northern Ireland. The positive attitudes of young people in London suggests that 
their experiences of living in an area of such multi-religious and multi-cultural 
diversity has caused them to consider religious diversity as a part of everyday life 
and not something which should be considered a threat. In the case of broader 
attitudes toward religious diversity the finding that school type does not always 
influence attitudes toward religious diversity suggests that it is social context which 
has more influence over attitudes. When combined with the finding that in one case 
school type does influence attitudes toward different Christian denominations, the 
conclusion can be drawn that religious schools have a particular responsibility not 
only to teach the doctrine of the faith of the school, but also to teach about other 
denominations in a sensitive and accurate way, particularly in areas where there is 
division on account of sectarianism and different Christian denominations. 
The immediate attitudes toward religious diversity 
The fifth and final data chapter concerned attitudes toward religious diversity in 
terms of the immediate views toward religious diversity. The data concluded that 
immediate attitudes toward religious diversity are more positive in London and 
Northern Ireland than in the rest of the United Kingdom. The conclusion can, 
therefore, be drawn that the data chapters have traced that social context, religious 
beliefs, awareness of influences, and the broader attitudes toward religious diversity 
all contribute to the attitudes which young people have toward religious diversity in 
their immediate context and in ways which directly affect them. This highlights the 
success of the research in successfully profiling the young people in the different 
nations of the United Kingdom and the success in being able to identity particular 
nations as being different from the rest of the United Kingdom. The finding of the 
chapter that students attending religious schools tend to be more tolerant than 
students attending secular schools in respect of school curriculum content and 
personal relationships suggests that those responsible for designing the curriculum 
may want to assess the decisions in light of these findings and that citizenship and 
PSCHE programmes might need to direct a focus on building effective relationships 
with those from different backgrounds in Scotland and Wales. The difference in 
school type in England and London suggest that the curriculum may be tailored 
differently to the needs of the context in which the different schools are. 
Summary of overall findings 
As the analysis which is conducted consists of crosstabulating the student responses 
to the different quantitative questions according to the responses of students from 
different nations and the responses of students from different school types, the key 
findings and conclusions arising from the dissertation concern nation and school 
type. 
 The first main finding was that nation could both inform and influence attitudes 
toward religious diversity, with the examples having already been mentioned of the 
responses of students from London and Northern Ireland regularly being different 
from the responses of students in the rest of the United Kingdom. This complements 
previous research such as the national census of 2001 by demonstrating how the 
differences in the demographics of the population are reflected in the attitudes of the 
young people within the population. It also complements the findings of the 
literature by demonstrating that students are responding to the tangible signs of 
religious diversity around them, whether this be a positive or a negative response. 
 The second main finding was that school type could both inform and influence 
attitudes toward religious diversity. This finding was not always as clear as the 
findings concerning nation. However, this does complement the literature discussion 
concerning the religious heritage of the education system, particularly in the case of 
the responses of students from religious schools. 
Final conclusions, implications for further research and critical reflections 
The data reported within this dissertation can only give information about a few 
specific areas of the project, and has limited the reporting of data to focus on 
differences in nation and differences in school type because of the need to focus on a 
specific field to present an innovative contribution to knowledge. However, the data 
collected from the project could, in future, include other elements which would 
enhance the findings presented in this dissertation. Examples of potential further 
study could include comment on the differences in students. For example, further 
analysis of the dataset could be conducted to determine sex differences to understand 
better whether or not males and females express different attitudes toward religious 
diversity, and whether there are trends in sex differences to suggest that one sex is 
more tolerant than another. Additionally the data could be analysed to look at the 
differences in the different school years to understand better how age and maturity 
can give more information about attitudes toward religious diversity among different 
year groups.  
 To understand better the claims made in this dissertation about location and to 
build on the existing conclusions about the national differences concerning attitudes 
toward religious diversity, an additional analysis of the data to make claims about the 
differences in attitudes from students in rural and urban locations would give a 
further weight to the findings about location and would provide a more detailed 
insight into the different contexts of the United Kingdom and also the differences in 
nations by perhaps looking at national differences for the north and south of England 
as an example for further development. 
 When considering implications for further research outside the possibilities of 
the current project database, there are areas which would enhance the knowledge and 
understanding gained from the current dissertation. Research which could enhance 
the current project could include the gathering of a sample of 2000 students from 
The Republic of Ireland to compare and contrast attitudes toward religious diversity 
with Northern Ireland to give a more detailed idea of how Northern Ireland is 
different from the rest of the United Kingdom in light of its social and religious 
history. 
 As this dissertation arose from a funded research project with specific conditions 
on research methods, data collection, and the research questions to be addressed, 
there are critical reflections which can be made in light of the research which was 
conducted. The first critical reflection is on the questionnaire which was used for the 
quantitative study. This questionnaire was partly dictated by the conditions of the 
project funding. As a result, some of the questions from the questionnaire are not 
analysed and presented within this dissertation, such as the JEPQ. Had this not been 
a condition of the project questionnaire, it might have been possible to use other 
questions about the topics addressed within this dissertation, such as questions which 
surrounded the themes of the literature review including food, architecture, and 
religious festivals, or more exploratory questions about differences in school type.  
 Another critical reflection is that in hindsight it might have been of more benefit 
to involve more schools in the pilot study. However due to project time constraints 
there was only a set amount of time provided for the project questionnaire to be 
produced, administrated and analysed. A future benefit might be to allow more time 
for a more detailed pilot to be conducted with more schools to allow the different 
school types to be piloted which may have influenced the final design of the 
questionnaire.  
 Expanding further on a critical reflection of the project, a mixed methods project 
where the two datasets are combined produces challenges in collecting research 
material from the sample in an efficient and accurate way which answers the 
research questions promised to the funding body and keeps to project targets and 
deadlines. This research project met these targets as far as possible. However, it 
might have been possible to answer research questions more fully and in more detail 
were it possible to extend the project deadlines, if more time had been budgeted for 
both the qualitative and quantitative strand of the research, or if the quantitative 
study had been conducted first and the qualitative focus group interviews had been 
conducted in the light of the quantitative project findings instead. 
 Another difficulty in the research project was collecting the sample which had 
been agreed with the funding body. The project initially stated that the sample should 
be secondary school pupils of 13- to 16-years-old. However when sourcing schools 
for participation within the research project it quickly became clear that it would not 
be possible to collect data from those in the 16 year-old age group, due to GCSE 
exams. Therefore, a decision had to be made to reduce the project sample to the 13- 
to 15-year-old school pupils. This still allowed data to be collected from a wide age 
range of teenagers with clear attitudes toward religious diversity for analysis which 
would answer the research questions. 
 Involvement on the research project, and interpreting one area of its finding also 
allows an element of realising that there are clear lessons to be learnt in 
understanding what constitutes a successful and accurate research project. The first is 
the utmost importance of administrating a research project efficiently in order that 
the data gathered is guaranteed to be accurate, representative of the sample who 
participated in the research, and answers the questions which the research sets out to 
address. The second is the importance of keeping to project deadlines, or planning 
for issues which may delay a research project. 
 Therefore, as a reminder of how this dissertation has made an original 
contribution to knowledge and is of significance to its field it can be summarised that 
this dissertation is capable of informing about Religious Diversity in a way that has 
not been investigated before, and more particularly has never been supported 
empirically before, on such a large scale in the United Kingdom, sample which takes 
account of enough young people from each nation for the findings to be statistically 
reliable and valid. 
 The findings concerning national differences are of particular significance as 
they provide a statistical indication of how different London is from the rest of the 
United Kingdom on account of the increased diversity which is present there. 
 The findings concerning differences in attitudes with regard to school type give 
an indication about the different types of education being offered in the education 
system within the United Kingdom and how they might serve their pupils better. 
References 
Abeles, M., & Samson Katz, J, (2010). A time to mourn: Reflections on Jewish bereavement 
practices. Bereavement Care, 29 (1), 19-22. 
Archbishops Council. (2013). The Church of England: detailed history. Retrieved January 
12 2013, from http://www.churchofengland.org/about-us/history/detailed-
history.aspx 
Arblaster, S. (1998). Doing as death demands: Encountering crisis in the context of 
migration. Journal of Beliefs and Values, 19 (2), 211-217. 
Aspinall, P. (2000). The new 2001 census question set on cultural characteristics: Is it useful 
for the monitoring of the health status of people from ethnic groups in Britain? 
Ethnicity and Health, 5 (1), 33-40. 
Alkhawari, F.S., Stimson, G.V., & Warrens, A.N. (2005). Attitudes toward transplantation 
in U.K. Muslim Indo-Asians in West London. American Journal of Transplantation, 
5, 1326-1331. 
Baker, S. G. (2009).  An investigation of the new independent Christian schools: What kind 
of citizens are they producing? Unpublished PhD dissertation, University of 
Warwick. 
Ball, L. (2009). Fasting, fairness, friendship, fun and feeling fine: The roles of food in Islam. 
Food, faith and community 2009/2010 (pp 1-7). Shap Working Party. 
Bibby, R.W. (1985). Religious encasement in Canada: An argument for Protestant and 
Catholic entrenchment. Social Compass, 16, 287-303. 
Bibby, R.W. (1987). Fragmented Gods. The poverty and potential of religion in Canada. 
Toronto: Irwin. 
Bluck, R., Gilliat-Ray., Graham,D.J., Singh, G., & Zavos, J. (2012). Judaism, Sikhism, 
Islam, Hinduism and Buddhism. Post-war settlements. In L. Woodhead & R. Catto 
(Eds.). Religion and change in modern Britain (pp 85-149). London: Routledge.  
http://www.churchofengland.org/about-us/history/detailed-history.aspx
http://www.churchofengland.org/about-us/history/detailed-history.aspx
Bouma, G.D. (1992). Religion. Meaning transcendence and community in Australia. 
Melbourne: Longman Cheshire. 
Bowker, J. (ed). (1997). The Oxford dictionary of world religions. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Boyle, P., & Dorling, D. (2004). The 2001 UK Census: Remarkable resource or bygone 
legacy of the pencil and paper era? Area, 35 (2), 101-110. 
Bruce, S. (2001). Christianity in Britain, R.I.P. Sociology of Religion, 62, 191-203. 
Buettner, E. (2008). Going for an Indian: South Asian restaurants and the limits of 
multiculturalism in Britain. The Journal of Modern History, 80, 865-901. 
Cairns, E., & Darby, J. (1998). The conflict in Northern Ireland: Causes, consequences, and 
controls. American Psychologist, 53 (7), 754-760. 
Church of Scotland. (2013). The Church of Scotland: History. Retrieved January 12 2013, 
from http://www.churchofscotland.org.uk/about_us/how_we_are_organised/history 
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2008). Research methods in education. Routledge: 
Abingdon. 
Cole, W.O., & Morgan P. (2000). Six religions in the twenty-first century. Cheltenham: 
Stanley Thornes.  
Council of Christians and Jews. (2013). Study Seder. Learn about Passover. Retrieved May 
23 2013, from 
http://www.ccj.org.uk/Articles/344191/Council_of_Christians/Branches/Harlow/Stu
dy_Seder_learn.aspx  
Davie, G. (1994). Religion in Britain since 1945. Believing without belonging. Oxford: 
Blackwell. 
Dein, S. (2004). Working with patients with religious beliefs. Advances in Psychiatric 
Treatment, 10, 287-295. 
http://www.churchofscotland.org.uk/about_us/how_we_are_organised/history
De Waal, (1995). Deaths rituals. In D. Cohn-Sherbock & C. Lewis (Eds.). Beyond death: 
Theological and philosophical reflections on life after death (pp 95-103). Ipswich: 
Macmillan. 
Dinham, A., & Jackson, R. (2012). Religion, welfare and education. In L. Woodhead & R. 
Catto (Eds.). Religion and change in modern Britain (pp 272-295). London: 
Routledge.  
Dodds, J. (2002). New York Masjid. The Mosques of New York City. New York: Powerhouse 
Books. 
Erriker, C. (2001). Buddhism. London: Hodder and Stoughton.  
Fane, R. S. (1999). Is self-assigned religious affiliation socially significant? In L.J. Francis 
(Ed.). Sociology, theology and the curriculum (pp 113-124). London: Cassell. 
Firth, S. (2003). Changing attitudes to Hindu cremation in the UK. Bereavement Care, 22 
(2), 25-28.  
Francis, L.J. (2001a). The social significance of religious affiliation among adolescents in 
England and Wales. In H.G Ziebertz (Ed.). Religious individualisation and Christian 
religious semantics (pp 115-138). Munster: Lit Verlag. 
Francis, L.J. (2001b). Religion and values: A quantitative perspective. In L.J. Francis, J. 
Astley, & M. Robbins (Eds.). The fourth R for the third millennium. Education in 
religion and values for the global future (pp 47-281). Dublin: Lindisfarne Books.  
Francis, L.J. (2003). Religion and social capital. The flaw in the 2001 census in England and 
Wales. In Avis, P. (Ed.). Public faith? The state of religious belief and practice in 
Britain (pp 45-64). London: SPCK. 
Francis, L.J. (2008a). Family, denomination, and the adolescent world view. An empirical 
enquiry among 13- to 15-year-old girls in England and Wales. Marriage and Family 
Review, 43, 185-204. 
Francis, L.J. (2008b). Self-assigned religious affiliation. A study among adolescents in 
England and Wales. In B. Spalek, & A. Imtoual (Eds.). Religion, spirituality and the 
social sciences. Challenging marginalisation (pp 149-161). Bristol: Policy Press. 
Francis, L.J., & Kay, W.K. (1995). Teenage religion and values. Leominster: Gracewing. 
Francis, L.J., & Robbins, M. (2005). Urban hope and spiritual health. The adolescent voice. 
Peterborough: Epworth. 
Francis, L.J., & Penny, G. (2011). The ethos of Anglican secondary schools reflected 
through pupil values: An empirical enquiry among 13- to 15-year-olds. 
Unpublishedmanuscript. 
Freeman, D. (2012). Muslim independent schools: A qualitative study concerning faith-
based education.  Unpublished MPhil Dissertation, Glyndwr University. 
Gale, R., & Naylor, S. (2002). Religion, planning and the city: The spatial politics of ethnic 
minority expression in British cities and towns. Ethnicities, 2, 387-409.  
Gale, R., (2002). The multicultural city and the politics of religious architecture: Urban 
planning, mosques and meaning-making in Birmingham, UK. Built Environment, 30, 
18-32. 
Gale, R., & Naylor, S. (2002). Religion, planning and the city: The spatial politics of ethnic 
minority expression in British cities and towns. Ethnicities, 2, 387-409.  
Ganiel, G., & Jones, P. (2012). Religion, politics and law. In L Woodhead & R. Catto (Eds.) 
Religion and change in modern Britain (pp 299-321). London: Routledge. 
Gatenby, L.A., Donnelly, J., & Connell, R. (2011). Cooking communities: Using 
multicultural after-school cooking clubs to enhance community cohesion. British 
Nutrition Foundation. Nutrition Bulletin, 36, 108-112. 
Gatrad, A.R. (2000). A completed audit to reduce hospital outpatients non-attendance rates. 
Archives of Disease in Childhood, 82, 59-61. 
General Register Office for Scotland. (2003). Scotlands Census 2001: Supporting Information. 
Edinburgh: General Register Office for Scotland. 
Ginty, R.M., Muldoon, O.T., & Ferguson, N. (2007). No war, No Peace: Northern Ireland 
after the agreement. Political Psychology, 28 (1), 1-11. 
Gillespie, M. (1989). Technology and tradition: Audio-visual culture 
among South Asian families in West London, Cultural Studies, 3 (2), 226-239. 
Gillman, J. (1999). Religious perspectives on organ donation. Critical Care Nursing 
Quarterly, 22 (3), 19-29.  
Gohil, N.S., & Sidhu, D.S. (2008). The Sikh turban: Post- 9/11 challenges to this article of 
faith. Rutgers Journal of Law and Religion, 9 (2), 1-60. 
Gombrich, R. (1998).  Buddhist festivals. In P. Woodward, R. El-Droubie, & C. Gould 
(Eds.). Festivals in world religions (4th ed) (pp 23-37). Norwich: Religious and 
Moral Education Press. 
Granshaw, L. (1993). The hospital. In W.F. Bynum & Porter. R. (Eds.) Companion 
encyclopedia of the history of medicine (pp 1180-1203). London: Routledge. 
Greer, J. (1985). Viewing the other side in Northern Ireland: Openness and attitudes to 
religion among Catholic and Protestant adolescents. Journal of the Social Scientific 
Study of Religion, 24 (3), 275-292. 
Greasley, P., Chiu, L.F., & Gartland, M. (2000). The concept of spiritual care in mental 
health nursing. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 33 (5), 629-637. 
Guest, M., Olson, E., & Wolffe, J. (2012). Christianity: loss of monopoly. In L. Woodhead 
& R. Catto (Eds.). Religion and change in modern Britain (pp 57-78). London: 
Routledge. 
Gwynne, P. (2009). World religions in practice: A comparative introduction. Oxford: 
Blackwell publishing.  
Hamlett, J., Bailey, A.R., Alexander, A., & Shaw, G. (2008). Ethnicity and consumption: 
South Asian shopping patterns in Britain, 1947-75. Journal of Consumer Culture, 8, 
91-116. 
Harvey, P. (1990). An introduction to Buddhism: Teachings, history and practices. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Haw, K. (2008). Being, becoming and belonging: Young Muslim women in contemporary 
Britain. Journal of Intercultural Studies, 31 (4), 345-361. 
Hennesey, T. (2000). The Northern Ireland peace process. Ending the troubles? Dublin: 
Gill & Macmillan. 
Hussain, A. (2009). The Muslims and British Curry: Food, Faith and Community 2009-
2010 (pp 1-4). Shap Working Party. 
Ipgrave, J. & McKenna, U. (2008). Diverse experiences and common vision: English 
Students perspectives on religion and religious education. In T. Knauth, D.P Jozsa, 
G. Bertram-Troost and J. Ipgrave (Eds.).  Encountering religious pluralism in school 
and society. A qualitative study of teenage perspectives in Europe (pp 113-147). 
Munster: Waxmann. 
Jackson, R. (1998).  Hindu festivals. In P. Woodward, R. El-Droubie, & C. Gould (Eds.). 
Festivals in world religions (4th ed) (pp 60-75). Norwich: Religious and Moral 
Education Press. 
Kaur-Singh, K. (1998). Sikh festivals. In P. Woodward, R. El-Droubie, & C. Gould (Eds.). 
Festivals in world religions (4th ed) (pp 121-126). Norwich: Religious and Moral 
Education Press. 
Kay, W.K. (1997). Church schools: History and philosophy. Historical development of 
church schools. In W.K. Kay & Francis, L. (Eds.).  Religion in education volume 1 
 ed) (pp 7-35). Leominster: Gracewing. 
Kilic, S. (2008). The British veil wars. Social Politics: International studies in gender, state 
and society, 15 (4), 433-454. 
Kilic, S., Sawitri, S., & Sauer, B. (2008). The veil: Debating citizenship, gender and 
religious diversity. Social Politics: International Studies in Gender, State and 
Society, 15 (4), 397-410. 
Knights, S. (2008). Sacred space and the city: Religious buildings and noise pollution. 
Harvard International Law Journal, 49, 50-55.  
Koenig, H.G. (2008). Religion and mental health: what should psychiatrists do? Psychiatric 
Bulletin, 32, 201-203.  
Lankshear, D.W. (2005). The influence of Anglican secondary schools on personal moral 
and religious values. In L.J. Francis, M. Robbins, & J. Astley (Eds.), Religion, 
education and adolescence: International empirical perspectives (pp 55-69). Cardiff: 
University of Wales Press. 
Lawton, C.A. (2009). God-related, family connected and animal-conscious: Food in the 
Jewish tradition. Food, faith and community 2009-2010 (pp 1-3). Shap Working 
Party. 
Levinson, D. (1996). Religion: A cross cultural encyclopedia. California: ABC-CLIO inc. 
Liederman, L.M. (2000). Religious diversity in schools: The Muslim headscarf controversy 
and beyond. Social Compass, 47 (3), 367-381. 
Logan, E. (2006). Practising religion: British Hindu children and the Navarati festival. 
British Journal of Religious Education, 10 (3), 160-169.   
Maclaren, J. (2003). A Kaleidoscope of understandings: Spiritual nursing in a multi-faith 
society. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 45 (5), 457-464. 
Marples, R. (2005). Against faith schools: A philosophical argument for childrens rights. 
International Journal of Childrens Spirituality, 10 (2), 133-147. 
McGrath, A.E. (1997). An introduction to Christianity. Oxford: Blackwells Publishing. 
McKenna, U., Neill, S. & Jackson, R., (2009). Personal worldviews, dialogue and tolerance: 
Students views on Religious Education in England. In P. Vauls, G. Bertram Troost, 
M. Friederici, & C. Beraud (Eds.). Teenagers perspectives on the role of religion in 
their lives, schools and societies (pp. 49-73). Munster: Waxmann.  
McKinney, S.J. (2006). The faith-based schools debate: Challenging assumptions and 
stereotypes. Journal of Moral Education, 35 (1), 105-115. 
McPhillips, K., & Russell, J. (2011). The relationship between youth identity and spatial 
perception within the context of religious architecture and Northern Ireland. The 
International Journal of the Constructed Environment, 1, 98-114. 
Morgan, D.D. (2011). The Span of the cross: Christian religion and society in Wales, 1914-
2000. Cardiff: University of Wales Press. 
Moulin, D. (2011). Giving voice to the silent minority: The experience of religious 
students in secondary school religious education lessons. British Journal of Religious 
Education, 33, 313-326. 
Miller, D. (1995). Unwrapping Christmas. Oxford University Press: Oxford.  
Miller, H. (2001). Meeting the challenge: The Jewish schooling phenomenon in the UK. Oxford 
Review of Education, 27 (4), 501-513. 
Mitchell, C. (2005). Behind the ethnic marker: Religion and social identification in Northern 
Ireland. Sociology of religion, 66 (1), 3-21. 
Nasser, N. (2005). Expressions of Muslim identity in architecture and urbanism in 
Birmingham, UK. Islam and Christian-Muslim Relations, 16, 61-78. 
Naylor, S., & Ryan, J. R. (2002). The mosque in the suburbs: Negotiating religion and 
ethnicity in south London. Social and Cultural Geography, 3, 39-59. 
Nesbitt, E. (2005). Sikhism: A very short introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Nesbitt, E. (2006). Locating British Hindus sacred space. Contemporary South Asia, 15, 
195-208. 
Neuberger, J. (1999). The NHS as a theological institution: The ideal remains strong, but the 
practice too has to measure up. British Medical Journal, 319, 1588-1589. 
Neuberger, J. (2004). Caring for dying people of different faiths. Oxford: Radcliffe Medical 
Press.  
Neusner, J. (1997). The way of Torah: An introduction to Judaism. Wadsworth, Belmont: 
California. 
NFO Social Research. (2003). Sectarianism in Glasgow: Final report. Edinburgh: NFO. 
Northern Ireland Statistics and Research Agency. (2003). Census forms. Retrieved January 12 
2013, from http://www.nisra.gov.uk/archive/census/Householdform.pdf 
Office of the Chief Statistician. (2005). Analysis of religion in the 2001 Census: Summary report. 
Edinburgh: Scottish Executive National Statistics. 
Office for National Statistics (2003).  2001 Census questionnaires. Retrieved January 12 2013, 
from http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/census/census-2001/about-census-
2001/census-2001-forms/index.html 
Office for National Statistics (2012). Religion in England and Wales 2011. Retrieved May 23 
2013, from http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/dcp171776_290510.pdf 
OGorman, S.M. (1998). Death and dying in contemporary society: An evaluation of current 
attitudes and the rituals associated with death and dying and their relevance to recent 
understandings of health and healing. Journal of Advanced Nursing, 27, 1127-1135. 
Owen Cole, P., & Morgan P. (2000). Six religions in the twenty-first century. Cheltenham: 
Stanley Thornes. 
Panayi, P. (2008). Spicing up Britain: The multicultural history of British food. London: 
Reaktion books.  
Parrinder, G. (1998).  Introduction. In P. Woodward, R. El-Droubie, & C. Gould (Eds.). 
Festivals in world religions (4th ed) (pp 11-16). Norwich: Religious and Moral 
Education Press. 
http://www.nisra.gov.uk/archive/census/Householdform.pdf
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/census/census-2001/about-census-2001/census-2001-forms/index.html
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/guide-method/census/census-2001/about-census-2001/census-2001-forms/index.html
Parsons, B. (1999). Yesterday, today and tomorrow: The lifecycle of the UK funeral 
industry. Mortality, 4 (2), 127-145. 
Parsons, G. (1994). The growth of religious diversity: Britain from 1945. London: 
Routledge. 
Peach, C., & Gale, R. (2003). Muslims, Hindus and Sikhs in the new religious landscape of 
England. Geographical Review, 93, 469-490. 
Pilkington, C.M. (1995). Judaism. London: Hodder headline PLC. 
Porter, R. (1993). Religion and medicine. In W. Bynum, & R. Porter (Eds.). Companion 
encyclopedia of the history of medicine (pp 1449-1468). London: Routledge.  
Pye. M. (1994). Macmillan dictionary of religion. London: Macmillan Press. 
Randhawa, G. (1998). An exploratory study examining the influence of religion on attitudes 
towards organ donation among the Asian population in Luton, UK. Nephrol Dial 
Transplant, 13, 1949-1954. 
Rankin, J. (1998).  Christian festivals. In P. Woodward, R. El-Droubie, & C. Gould (Eds.). 
Festivals in world religions (4th ed) (pp 45-59). Norwich: Religious and Moral 
Education Press. 
Rasool, G. (2000). The crescent and Islam: healing, nursing and the spiritual dimension. 
Some considerations towards an understanding of the Islamic perspectives on caring. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing, 32 (6), 1476-1484. 
Riadh El- Droubie. (1998). Muslim festivals. In P. Woodward, R. El-Droubie, & C. Gould 
(Eds.). Festivals in world religions (4th ed) (pp 110-120). Norwich: Religious and 
Moral Education Press. 
Rippin, A. (2001). Muslims: Their religious beliefs and practices (2
 ed). London: 
Routledge. 
Robbins, A., & Francis, L.J. (2010). The teenage religion and values survey in England and 
Wales: An overview. Journal of Beliefs and Values, 32 (3), 307-320. 
Rugg, J. (2000). Defining the place of burial: What makes a cemetery a cemetery? 
Mortality, 5 (3), 259-275. 
Ruthven, M. (1997). Islam: A very short introduction. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Sheikh, A. (1998). Death and dying: A Muslim perspective. Journal of the Royal Society of 
Medicine, 91, 138-140. 
Sheikh, A. (2007). Should Muslims have faith based health services? British Medical 
Journal, 324, 74. 
Short, G. (2006). Faith schools and social cohesion: Opening up the debate. British Journal 
of Religious Education, 25 (2), 129-141. 
Singh, J. (2010). Head first: Young British Sikhs, hair, and the turban. Journal of 
Contemporary Religion, 25 (2), 203-220. 
Siriwardena, N., & Clark, D. H. (2004). End-of-life care for ethnic minority groups. Clinical 
Cornerstone, 6 (1), 45-48. 
Skinner, G. (2002). Religious pluralism and school provision in Britain. Intercultural 
Education, 13 (2), 171-181. 
Soorkia, R. Snelgar, R., & Swami, V. (2011). Factors influencing attitudes towards seeking 
professional psychological help among South Asian students in Britain. Mental 
Health, Religion and Culture, 14 (6), 613-623. 
South Asian Arts. (2013). A Holi Celebration. Retrieved 24 May 2013, from 
http://www.sampad.org.uk/event/a-holi-celebration 
Southwark Council. (2012). Eid Celebrations in Southwark. Retrieved 24 May 2013, from 
http://www.southwark.gov.uk/news/article/918/eid_celebrations_in_southwark 
Smith, J.Z. (Ed.). (1996). The HarperCollins dictionary of religion. London: HarperCollins. 
Taylor, K. (2009). Asylum seekers, refugees, and the politics of access to healthcare: A UK 
perspective. British Journal of General Practice. 59 (567) 765-772 
http://www.sampad.org.uk/event/a-holi-celebration
http://www.southwark.gov.uk/news/article/918/eid_celebrations_in_southwark
Twiner, A., Cook, G., & Gillen, J. (2009). Overlooked issues of religious identity in the 
school dinners debate. Cambridge Journal of Education, 39 (4), 473-488. 
Vardy, P. (1995). A Christian approach to eternal life. In D. Cohn-Sherbock & C. Lewis 
(Eds.). Beyond death: Theological and Philosophical Reflections on life after death 
(pp 13-26). Ipswich: Macmillan. 
Voas, D, & Bruce, S. (2004). The 2001 census and Christian identification in Britain. 
Journal of Contemporary Religion. 19, 23-28.  
Voas, D., & Crocket, A. (2005). Religion in Britain. Neither believing nor belonging. 
Religion in Contemporary Britain, 39, 11-28. 
Virdee, P. (2009). From Diasporas to multi-locality: Writing British Asian cities. Retrieved 
20 January 2013, from www.leeds.ac.uk/writingbritishasiancities 
Walford, G. (2010). Faith schools and community cohesion. In M. Grimmit (Ed.). Religious 
education and social and, community cohesion. An exploration of challenges and 
opportunities (pp. 88-104) Great Wakering: McCrimmon. 
Ward, B., de Chazal, P., Mayberry, J.F. (2004). Can an information booklet on an ethnic 
minority increase the knowledge base of junior doctors? British Medical Journal, 80. 
219-220.  
Watson, K. (2003). International perspectives on Religiously-affiliated schools. In W.K 
Kay., L. Francis, & K. Watson (Eds.). (2003). Religion in education. (pp. 377-403). 
Leominster: Gracewing. 
Watton, V.W. (1993). Islam. London: Hodder and Stoughton. 
Weisse, W. (2009). Quantitative Study in the Context of the REDCo Project. In P. Valk, G. 
Bertram-Troost, M. Friederici, and C. Beraud (Eds.). Teenagers perspectives on the 
role of religion in their lives, schools and societies (pp 9-12). Munster: Waxmann.  
Weller, P. (2001). Religions in the UK 2001-2003. Derby: Multi-faith Centre, University of 
Derby.  
file:///C:/Documents%20and%20Settings/Alice%20Pyke/Application%20Data/Microsoft/Word/www.leeds.ac.uk/writingbritishasiancities
Weller, P. (2004). Identity, politics, and the future(s) of religion in the UK: the case of the 
religion questions in the 2001 decennial census. Journal of Contemporary Religion, 
19 (1), 3-21.   
Weller, P. (2008). Religious diversity in the UK: Contours and issues. London: Continuum. 
127- 131. 
Woodward, P. (2009). When is a seder a Seder? Food, faith and community 2009-2010. 
(pp 1-5). Shap Working Party. 
Wright, M.C. (2001). Chaplaincy in hospice and hospital: Findings from a survey in 
England and Wales. Palliative Medicine, 15, 229-242. 
Appendix 
Project sampling strategy and number of questionnaires collected and analysed 
Context requirement 
Number of students 
required 
Number of 
participants 
England Urban Secular Schools 500 500 
England Urban Religious Schools 500 500 
England Rural Secular Schools 500 500 
England Rural Religious Schools 500 500 
Northern Ireland Urban Secular Schools 500 500 
Northern Ireland Urban Religious Schools 500 500 
Northern Ireland Rural Secular Schools 500 500 
Northern Ireland Rural Religious Schools 500 500 
Scotland Urban Secular Schools 500 500 
Scotland Urban Religious Schools 500 500 
Scotland Rural Secular Schools 500 500 
Scotland Rural Religious Schools 500 500 
Wales Urban  Secular Schools 500 500 
Wales Rural Secular Schools 500 500 
Wales Urban  Religious Schools 500 500 
Wales Rural Religious Schools 500 500 
London Urban (inner) Secular Schools 500 500 
London Rural (outer) Religious Schools 500 500 
London Urban (inner) Secular Schools 500 500 
London Rural (outer) Religious Schools 500 500 
Total 10000 10000 
Questionnaire 
Religious Diversity and Young People 
This questionnaire looks at what you think about religious diversity. 
Please say what you really think and try to be as honest and 
accurate as possible. There are no right or wrong answers to 
these questions. We want to know your views. Please do not discuss 
your answers with anyone else, and do not pause for too long over 
any one question. 
Everything you tell us is completely private and confidential. 
Please do not write your name on this booklet. No one in your 
school will read your answers. 
Thanks for your help 
Alice Pyke         
Research Assistant 
University of Warwick 
Part 1      Information about yourself.  Please tick (       ) the appropriate box  
Are you?   
 Male 1   
 Female 2   
Please write in your school year   
What subjects are you studying (or would you like to study in year ten) for 
examination? 
(please tick all that apply)   
 Art and design (graphics, photography)  1   
 Business studies 1   
 Design and technology (textiles, resistant materials) 1   
 English 1   
 Geography 1   
 History 1   
 Information Communication Technology (ICT) 1   
 Mathematics 1   
 Modern Foreign Languages (French, German, Spanish) 1   
 Music 1   
 Physical Education 1   
 Religious Education 1   
 Science (Biology, Chemistry, Physics) 1   
 Other (please specify) 1   
How long have you lived in the UK? 
 All my life 4   
 0-4 years 1   
 5-9 years 2   
 10 years or more 3   
How often do you read holy scripture 
(e.g. The Bible, Quran, Torah)?   
 Nearly every day 5   
 At least once a week 4   
 At least once a month 3   
 Occasionally 2   
 Never 1   
Do you speak English as your main language at home? 
 Yes 2   
 Asian-Bangladeshi 1   
 Asian-Indian 2   
 Asian-Pakistani 3   
 Other Asian 4   
 Black-African 5   
 Black-Caribbean 6   
 Chinese 7   
 Mixed 8   
 White  9   
 Other (please specify) 10   
What is your religion? 
 No religion 1   
 Buddhist 2   
 Hindu 3   
 Jewish 4   
 Muslim 5   
 Sikh 6   
 Other world faith (please specify) 7   
 Anglican (Church of England, Ireland or Episcopal) 8   
 Baptist 9   
 Methodist 10   
 Pentecostal 11   
 Presbyterian (Church of Scotland) 12   
 Roman Catholic 13   
 URC 14   
 Christian, no denomination 15   
 Other Christian denomination (please specify) 16   
How often do you pray in your home or by yourself?   
 Nearly every day 5   
 At least once a week 4   
 At least once a month 3   
 Occasionally 2   
 Never 1   
Have you attended any religious classes outside school?    
(like Sunday School, or Madrasah)   
 Yes 2   
What would you say is the most important to your identity?   
(please tick only one)   
 Being Christian  1   
 Being Hindu 2   
Being Muslim 3   
 Being Buddhist 4   
 Being Jewish 5   
 Being British  6   
 Being Welsh 7   
 Being Irish 8   
 Being Scottish 9   
 Being English 10   
 Being Catholic 11   
 Being Protestant 12   
 Other (please specify) 13   
Apart from special occasions (like weddings), how often do you attend a 
religious worship service, e.g. in a church, mosque or synagogue? 
 Never  1   
 Sometimes 2   
 At least once a year 3   
 At least 6 times a year 4   
 At least once a month 5   
 Nearly every week  6   
 Several times a week 7   
Tick the one statement that comes closest to your own belief.   
 Only one religion is really true and all others are totally false 1   
 Only one religion is really true but at least one other is partly true 2   
 All religions are equally true  3   
 All religions express the same truth in different ways 4   
 Real truth comes from listening to all religions 5   
 All religions are totally false 6   
 I do not know what to believe about religions 7   
What is your mothers religion?   
 No religion 1   
 Buddhist 2   
 Hindu  3   
 Jewish 4   
 Muslim 5   
 Sikh 6   
 Other world faith (please specify) 7   
 Anglican (C of E, Church of Ireland or Episcopal) 8   
 Baptist 9   
 Methodist 10   
 Pentecostal 11   
 Presbyterian (e.g. Church of Scotland) 12   
 Roman Catholic 13   
 URC 14   
 Christian, no denomination 15   
 Other Christian denomination (please specify) 16   
 Dont know 17   
Apart from special occasions (like weddings), how often does your 
mother attend a religious worship service, e.g. at church, mosque or 
synagogue? 
 Never  1   
 Sometimes  2   
 At least once a year 3   
 At least 6 times a year 4   
 At least once a month 5   
 Nearly every week  6   
 Several times a week 7   
 Dont know 8   
What is your fathers religion? 
 No religion 1   
 Buddhist 2   
 Hindu  3   
 Jewish 4   
 Muslim 5   
 Sikh 6   
 Other world faith (please specify) 7   
 Anglican (Church of Ireland, Church of England) 8   
 Baptist 9   
 Methodist 10   
 Pentecostal 11   
 Presbyterian (Church of Scotland) 12   
 Roman Catholic 13   
 URC 14   
 Christian, no denomination 15   
 Other Christian denomination (please specify) 16   
 Dont know 17   
Apart from special occasions (like weddings), how often does your father 
attend a religious worship service, e.g. at church, mosque or synagogue? 
 Never 1   
 Sometimes 2   
 At least once a year 3   
 At least 6 times a year 4   
 At least once a month 5   
 Nearly every week  6   
 Several times a week 7   
 Dont know 8   
Would you call where you live mainly rural, village or countryside? 
 Yes 2   
Last Monday, how much did you watch programmes on television, iPlayer etc?  
 None  1   
 Less than one hour 2   
 1-2 hours 3   
 3-4 hours 4   
 5-6 hours  5   
 7-8 hours 6   
 over 8 hours  7   
Do you watch, or listen to, current affairs?   
(E.g. News, Panorama etc.)   
 Nearly every day  5   
 At least once a week 4   
 At least once a month 3   
 Occasionally 2   
 Never 1   
What is your Nationality?   
Part two. The following questions are about your attitude toward different issues.  
Please read each statement and think: how true is this? 
If you Agree Strongly put a ring around    AS   A   NC   D   DS 
If you Agree put a ring around     AS   A   NC   D   DS 
If you are Not Certain put a ring around    AS   A   NC   D   DS 
If you Disagree put a ring around     AS   A   NC   D   DS 
If you Disagree Strongly put a ring around    AS   A   NC   D   DS 
 My friends have influenced my views about... 
 Religion                 AS A NC D DS 
 Buddhists      AS A NC D DS 
 Christians      AS A NC D DS 
 Hindus       AS A NC D DS 
 Jews       AS A NC D DS 
 Muslims                 AS A NC D DS 
 Sikhs       AS A NC D DS 
 Pagans       AS A NC D DS 
 Catholics      AS A NC D DS 
 Protestants      AS A NC D DS 
 Atheists                 AS A NC D DS 
 Humanists      AS A NC D DS 
My father has influenced my views about... 
 Religion                 AS A NC D DS 
 Buddhists      AS A NC D DS 
 Christians      AS A NC D DS 
 Hindus       AS A NC D DS 
 Jews        AS A NC D DS 
 Muslims                 AS A NC D DS 
 Sikhs       AS A NC D DS 
 Pagans       AS A NC D DS 
 Catholics      AS A NC D DS 
 Protestants      AS A NC D DS 
 Atheists      AS A NC D DS 
 Humanists      AS A NC D DS 
My mother has influenced my views about... 
 Religion      AS A NC D DS 
 Buddhists      AS A NC D DS 
 Christians      AS A NC D DS 
 Hindus       AS A NC D DS 
 Jews       AS A NC D DS 
 Muslims      AS A NC D DS 
 Sikhs       AS A NC D DS 
 Pagans       AS A NC D DS 
 Catholics      AS A NC D DS 
 Protestants      AS A NC D DS 
 Atheists      AS A NC D DS 
 Humanists      AS A NC D DS 
Television has influenced my views about... 
 Religion      AS A NC D DS 
 Buddhists      AS A NC D DS 
 Christians      AS A NC D DS 
 Hindus       AS A NC D DS 
 Jews       AS A NC D DS 
 Muslims                 AS A NC D DS 
 Sikhs       AS A NC D DS 
 Pagans       AS A NC D DS 
 Catholics      AS A NC D DS 
 Protestants      AS A NC D DS 
 Atheists      AS A NC D DS 
 Humanists      AS A NC D DS 
The internet has influenced my views about... 
 Religion      AS A NC D DS 
 Buddhists      AS A NC D DS 
 Christians      AS A NC D DS 
 Hindus       AS A NC D DS 
 Jews       AS A NC D DS 
 Muslims      AS A NC D DS 
 Sikhs       AS A NC D DS 
 Pagans       AS A NC D DS 
 Catholics      AS A NC D DS 
 Protestants      AS A NC D DS 
 Atheists      AS A NC D DS 
 Humanists      AS A NC D DS 
A lot of good is done in the world by... 
 Buddhists      AS A NC D DS 
 Christians      AS A NC D DS 
 Hindus       AS A NC D DS 
 Jews       AS A NC D DS 
 Muslims      AS A NC D DS 
 Sikhs       AS A NC D DS 
 Pagans       AS A NC D DS 
 Catholics      AS A NC D DS 
 Protestants      AS A NC D DS 
 Atheists      AS A NC D DS 
 Humanists      AS A NC D DS 
I have friends who are... 
 Buddhists      AS A NC D DS 
 Christians      AS A NC D DS 
 Hindus       AS A NC D DS 
 Jews       AS A NC D DS 
 Muslims      AS A NC D DS 
 Sikhs       AS A NC D DS 
 Pagans       AS A NC D DS 
 Catholics      AS A NC D DS 
 Protestants      AS A NC D DS 
 Atheists      AS A NC D DS 
 Humanist      AS A NC D DS 
I am interested in finding out about... 
 Buddhists      AS A NC D DS 
 Christians      AS A NC D DS 
 Hindus       AS A NC D DS 
 Jews       AS A NC D DS 
 Muslims      AS A NC D DS 
 Sikhs       AS A NC D DS 
 Pagans       AS A NC D DS 
 Catholics      AS A NC D DS 
 Protestants      AS A NC D DS 
 Atheists      AS A NC D DS 
 Humanists      AS A NC D DS 
A lot of harm is done in the world by... 
 Buddhists      AS A NC D DS 
 Christians      AS A NC D DS 
 Hindus       AS A NC D DS 
 Jews       AS A NC D DS 
 Muslims                 AS A NC D DS 
 Sikhs       AS A NC D DS 
 Pagans       AS A NC D DS 
 Catholics      AS A NC D DS 
 Protestants      AS A NC D DS 
 Atheists      AS A NC D DS 
 Humanists      AS A NC D DS 
Where I live there is a lot of discrimination against... 
 Buddhists      AS A NC D DS 
 Christians      AS A NC D DS 
 Hindus       AS A NC D DS 
 Jews       AS A NC D DS 
 Muslims      AS A NC D DS 
 Sikhs       AS A NC D DS 
 Pagans       AS A NC D DS 
 Catholics      AS A NC D DS 
 Protestants      AS A NC D DS 
 Atheists      AS A NC D DS 
 Humanists      AS A NC D DS 
I would not like to live next door to... 
 Buddhists      AS A NC D DS 
 Christians      AS A NC D DS 
 Hindus       AS A NC D DS 
 Jews       AS A NC D DS 
 Muslims      AS A NC D DS 
 Sikhs       AS A NC D DS 
 Pagans       AS A NC D DS 
 Catholics      AS A NC D DS 
 Protestants      AS A NC D DS 
 Atheists      AS A NC D DS 
 Humanists      AS A NC D DS 
Studying religion at school has shaped my views about... 
 Religion      AS A NC D DS 
 Buddhists      AS A NC D DS 
 Christians      AS A NC D DS 
 Hindus       AS A NC D DS 
 Jews        AS A NC D DS 
 Muslims      AS A NC D DS 
 Sikhs       AS A NC D DS 
 Pagans       AS A NC D DS 
 Catholics      AS A NC D DS 
 Protestants      AS A NC D DS 
 Atheists      AS A NC D DS 
 Humanists      AS A NC D DS 
Studying religion at school helps me understand people from... 
 other religions      AS A NC D DS 
 other racial backgrounds    AS A NC D DS 
 other denominations     AS A NC D DS 
I have been bullied because of... 
 who my friends are     AS A NC D DS 
 my family comes from another country  AS A NC D DS 
 my race or colour                AS A NC D DS 
 my religion      AS A NC D DS 
 my name      AS A NC D DS 
 my language      AS A NC D DS 
 my clothes      AS A NC D DS 
Schools should hold a religious assembly every day   AS A NC D DS 
Citizenship should be taught in school    AS A NC D DS 
Promoting equality in society is important to me   AS A NC D DS 
I often talk about religion with my friends    AS A NC D DS 
I often talk about religion with my father    AS A NC D DS 
I often talk about religion with my mother    AS A NC D DS 
I often talk about religion with my grandparents   AS A NC D DS 
My religious identity is important to me    AS A NC D DS 
My fathers religious identity is important to him   AS A NC D DS 
There are many gods       AS A NC D DS 
The earth is billions of years old     AS A NC D DS 
My mothers religious identity is important to her   AS A NC D DS 
Religion brings more conflict than peace    AS A NC D DS 
Religious people are often intolerant of others   AS A NC D DS 
All religious groups in Britain should have equal rights  AS A NC D DS 
Religious Education should be taught in school   AS A NC D DS 
I am in favour of Muslim schools     AS A NC D DS 
We must respect all religions      AS A NC D DS 
My life has been shaped by religious faith    AS A NC D DS 
I believe in heaven       AS A NC D DS 
I believe in hell       AS A NC D DS 
I believe in life after death                   AS A NC D DS 
Learning about different religions in school is interesting  AS A NC D DS 
There is only one God       AS A NC D DS 
I feel my life has a sense of purpose     AS A NC D DS 
I would be happy to go out with someone  
       from a different denomination     AS A NC D DS 
Tarot cards can tell the future      AS A NC D DS 
I find life really worth living      AS A NC D DS 
God made the world in six days of 24 hours    AS A NC D DS 
I am in favour of Christian schools     AS A NC D DS 
Theories in science can be proved to be definitely true  AS A NC D DS 
I am a religious person      AS A NC D DS 
The earth is only a few thousand years old    AS A NC D DS 
Most of my friends think religion is important   AS A NC D DS 
Evolution created everything over millions of years   AS A NC D DS 
I often feel depressed       AS A NC D DS 
I have sometimes considered taking my own life    AS A NC D DS 
Science will eventually give us complete control over the world AS A NC D DS 
Everyone has a guardian angel/spirit     AS A NC D DS 
I would be happy about a close relative marrying  
       someone from a different faith     AS A NC D DS 
Magic can be used for good      AS A NC D DS 
I believe in my horoscope      AS A NC D DS 
I am a spiritual person       AS A NC D DS 
My grandparents think religion is important    AS A NC D DS 
Religion is mainly a force for bad in the world today  AS A NC D DS 
It is possible to contact the spirits of the dead   AS A NC D DS 
I believe in Ghosts       AS A NC D DS 
I would be happy to go out with someone from a different faith AS A NC D DS 
I believe in God       AS A NC D DS 
The laws of science will never be changed    AS A NC D DS 
My parents think religion is important    AS A NC D DS 
I cannot trust both science and religion    AS A NC D DS 
I am a superstitious person      AS A NC D DS 
Fortune-tellers can tell the future     AS A NC D DS 
Having people from different religious backgrounds makes my  
          school/college an interesting place    AS A NC D DS 
Science can give us absolute truths     AS A NC D DS 
Where I live, people who come from different countries  
         get on well together      AS A NC D DS 
Where I live, people from different religious backgrounds  
         get on well together      AS A NC D DS 
Where I live, people respect religious differences   AS A NC D DS 
People from different religious backgrounds make where I live  
 an interesting place      AS A NC D DS 
Science disproves the biblical account of creation   AS A NC D DS 
People who come from different countries make where I live  
           an interesting place      AS A NC D DS 
Having people who come from different countries make my  
 school/college an interesting place    AS A NC D DS 
When making important decisions in my life,  
          my religion plays a major role     AS A NC D DS 
I would be happy to go out with someone  
          from a different racial background    AS A NC D DS 
I would be happy about a close relative marrying someone from 
  a different racial background     AS A NC D DS 
I would be happy about a close relative marrying someone from 
 a different denomination      AS A NC D DS 
I feel that Im a person of worth, at least on an equal plane  
           with others       AS A NC D DS 
Where I live, people from different countries tend to stick  
           together and not mix with others    AS A NC D DS 
Its possible to believe in evolution and believe in God  AS A NC D DS 
All in all I am inclined to feel that Im a failure   AS A NC D DS 
I feel that I have a number of good qualities    AS A NC D DS 
I am able to do things as well as most other people   AS A NC D DS 
I feel I do not have much to be proud of    AS A NC D DS 
I take a positive attitude towards myself    AS A NC D DS 
On the whole, I am satisfied with myself    AS A NC D DS 
I wish I could have more respect for myself    AS A NC D DS 
I certainly feel useless at times     AS A NC D DS 
At times I think I am no good at all     AS A NC D DS 
I find it hard to believe in God     AS A NC D DS 
Prayer helps me a lot       AS A NC D DS 
I think going to a place of worship is a waste of my time  AS A NC D DS 
I know that God is very close to me     AS A NC D DS 
God helps me to lead a better life     AS A NC D DS 
I know that God helps me      AS A NC D DS 
God means a lot to me      AS A NC D DS 
I think of God as loving      AS A NC D DS 
I think of God as strict      AS A NC D DS 
I think of God as forgiving      AS A NC D DS 
I think of God as disapproving     AS A NC D DS 
I think of God as demanding      AS A NC D DS 
I think of God as accepting      AS A NC D DS 
Christians should be allowed to wear crosses in school  AS A NC D DS 
Muslims should be allowed to wear the headscarf in school  AS A NC D DS 
Muslims should be allowed to wear the Burka in school  AS A NC D DS 
Muslims should be allowed to wear the Niqab in school  AS A NC D DS 
Sikhs should be allowed to wear the Turban in school  AS A NC D DS 
Sikhs should be allowed to wear the Kara in school   AS A NC D DS 
Jews should be allowed to wear the Star of David in school  AS A NC D DS 
Sikhs should be allowed to wear the Kirpan in school  AS A NC D DS 
Jews should be allowed to wear the Kippah/Yamulke in school AS A NC D DS 
Hindus should be allowed to wear the Bindi in school  AS A NC D DS 
Can you get a party going?        YES   NO 
Would you feel sorry for a lonely stranger in a group?    YES   NO 
Do you enjoy hurting people you like?      YES   NO 
Do you often get very interested in your friends problems?   YES   NO 
Is it important to have good manners?      YES   NO 
Do you think that people are too bothered about the feelings of animals?  YES   NO 
Do you always do as you are told at once?      YES   NO 
Do you feel sorry for very shy children?      YES   NO 
Are you rather lively?        YES   NO 
Do you think it is silly for people to cry out of happiness?    YES   NO 
Would you enjoy practical jokes that could sometimes harm people?  YES   NO 
Does it affect you very much when one of your friends seems upset?  YES   NO 
Do you often feel fed-up?        YES   NO 
Do you ever get deeply involved with the feelings of a character  
in a film, play or novel?       YES   NO 
Are you easily hurt when people find things wrong with the work you do?  YES   NO 
Do you get very upset when you see someone cry?     YES   NO 
Do you find it hard to get to sleep at night because  
you are worrying about things?      YES  NO 
Do you go very carefully when you are in unusual situations?   YES   NO 
Do you sometimes feel that life is just not worth living?    YES   NO 
Does it make you laugh when you see others in your group laughing?  YES   NO 
Do you throw waste paper on the floor when there is not a waste 
 paper basket handy?        YES   NO 
Do you get worried when others around you are worrying and panicky?  YES   NO 
Do you get into more trouble at school than most other pupils?   YES   NO 
Can you make decisions without worrying about peoples feelings?  YES   NO 
Do you like going out a lot?        YES   NO 
Can you understand why some people get upset so easily?    YES   NO 
Have you ever said anything bad or nasty about anyone?    YES   NO 
Part three. This part of the questionnaire explores some of your personal 
attitudes to life. Please answer each question by putting a circle around 
YES or the NO following the question. Work quickly and do not think 
too long about the exact meaning of the questions. 
Do you stay happy even though your friends are upset over something?  YES   NO 
Do you worry for a long while if you have made a fool of yourself?  YES   NO 
Do you feel more annoyed than sorry for someone who is crying?   YES   NO 
Did you ever take anything (even a sweet) that belonged to someone else?  YES   NO 
Do you like watching people open presents?      YES   NO 
Were you ever greedy by helping yourself to more than  
your share of anything?        YES  NO 
Would you find it very hard to tell someone bad news?    YES   NO 
Do you find it hard to enjoy yourself at a lively party?    YES   NO 
Can you imagine the sadness someone would feel if their pet 
 suddenly died?        YES   NO 
Do you always say you are sorry when you have been rude?   YES   NO 
When you watch a favourite TV programme, can you feel with  
the hero or heroine, when they are sad, happy or angry?   YES  NO 
Would you rather be alone instead of being with other people?   YES   NO 
Can you imagine what it must be like to be very lonely?    YES   NO 
Do you sometimes like teasing animals?      YES   NO 
Do you think it is stupid to think animals have the  
same sort of feelings as we have     YES  NO 
Can you let yourself go and enjoy yourself a lot at a lively party?   YES   NO 
Do you feel very sorry for children who get bullied a lot?    YES   NO 
Do you seem to get into more fights than other young people?   YES   NO 
Are you happy when you are with a cheerful group and  
sad when the others are glum?      YES   NO 
Are your feelings rather easily hurt?       YES   NO 
Statistical Appendix 
Chapter 9. Family life. 
Table no. 9.1 
My Mothers religious identity is important to her 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 27 47 16 17 61 
religious school 41 58 38 34 57 
Table 9.2  
My Fathers religious identity is important to him  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 18 36 11 11 47 
religious school 25 48 27 23 33 
Table 9.3  
My parents think that religion is important 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 23 47 14 16 56 
religious school 39 60 44 36 54 
Table no. 9.4 
Apart from special occasions (like weddings) My father never attends a place of 
religious worship (e.g. in a church, Mosque or Synagogue) 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 59 33 70 68 31 
religious school 45 17 47 43 32 
Table no. 9.5 
Apart from special occasions (like weddings) My mother never attends a place of 
religious worship (e.g. in a church, Mosque or Synagogue) 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 55 24 68 66 28 
religious school 35 12 36 36 18 
Table no. 9.6 
I often talk about religion with my mother 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 21 35 12 14 40 
religious school 26 30 27 27 37 
Table no. 9.7 
I often talk about religion with my father 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 18 30 10 12 30 
religious school 19 27 20 18 28 
Table no. 9.8 
I often talk about religion with my grandparents 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 15 26 13 13 29 
religious school 20 23 23 22 18 
Peers and friendship groups 
Table no. 9.9 
I often talk about religion with my friends 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 20 39 9 14 30 
religious school 20 24 19 18 32 
Table no. 9.10 
I have friends who are Buddhist 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 20 16 8 11 43 
religious school 10 5 7 15 18 
Table no. 9.11 
I have friends who are Christian 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 83 95 63 73 95 
religious school 84 88 81 86 96 
Table no. 9.12 
I have friends who are Hindu 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 34 22 7 18 76 
religious school 22 6 7 18 40 
Table no. 9.13 
I have friends who are Jewish 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 39 28 12 18 39 
religious school 15 14 13 21 36 
Table no. 9.14 
I have friends who are Muslim 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 52 37 26 34 83 
religious school 33 11 27 43 54 
Table no. 9.15 
I have friends who are Sikh 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 24 5 4 6 45 
religious school 23 3 4 9 29 
Table no. 9.16 
I have friends who are Humanist 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 19 15 15 14 16 
religious school 13 7 10 11 15 
Table no. 9.17 
I have been bullied because of who my friends are 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 15 16 13 15 12 
religious school 15 16 13 15 15 
Table no. 9.18 
Most of my friends think that religion is important 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 10 33 6 7 40 
religious school 21 26 24 16 30 
Environment and community 
Table no. 9.19 
Where I live, people respect religious difference 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 52 43 37 43 62 
religious school 44 34 40 44 58 
Table no. 9.20 
Where I live, people from different countries tend to stick together and not mix with 
others 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 22 29 19 23 26 
religious school 21 32 18 22 27 
Table no. 9.21 
I would not like to live next door to Buddhists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 8 9 11 14 7 
religious school 12 13 7 10 9 
Table no. 9.22 
I would not like to live next door to Christians  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 5 7 9 12 5 
religious school 7 8 4 7 6 
Table no. 9.23 
I would not like to live next door to Hindus  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 9 10 12 15 9 
religious school 13 13 7 10 10 
Table no. 9.24 
I would not like to live next door to Jews  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 9 11 13 16 12 
religious school 15 15 9 11 9 
Table no. 9.25 
I would not like to live next door to Muslims  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 18 15 18 21 13 
religious school 22 20 14 16 17 
Table no. 9.26 
I would not like to live next door to Sikhs  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 10 9 12 16 9 
religious school 14 13 8 10 10 
Table no. 9.27 
I would not like to live next door to Humanists  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 7 7 9 13 7 
religious school 9 10 9 8 8 
Table no. 9.28 
Where I live there is a lot of discrimination against Buddhists  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 6 11 9 10 7 
religious school 9 10 11 12 7 
Table no. 9.29 
Where I live there is a lot of discrimination against Christians  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 6 14 8 9 6 
religious school 10 18 17 10 7 
Table no. 9.30 
Where I live there is a lot of discrimination against Hindus  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 11 16 12 15 18 
religious school 14 17 14 17 16 
Table no. 9.31 
Where I live there is a lot of discrimination against Jews  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 17 22 17 20 26 
religious school 23 27 20 23 20 
Table no. 9.32 
Where I live there is a lot of discrimination against Muslims  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 27 30 24 26 29 
religious school 31 32 28 33 34 
Table no. 9.33 
Where I live there is a lot of discrimination against Sikhs  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 11 11 10 13 13 
religious school 14 9 12 13 14 
Table no. 9.34 
Where I live there is a lot of discrimination against Humanists  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 4 5 6 7 5 
religious school 7 6 7 5 4 
Table no. 9.35 
Where I live, people who come from different religious backgrounds get on well 
together  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 56 45 39 45 67 
religious school 46 37 47 50 65 
Table no. 9.36 
Where I live, people who come from different countries get on well together  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 60 49 43 48 67 
religious school 48 46 51 53 68 
Religious practice 
Table no. 9.37 
Apart from special occasions (like weddings) I never attend a place of religious 
worship (e.g. in a church, Mosque or Synagogue)  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 56 26 72 68 30 
religious school 36 13 34 29 19 
Table no. 9.38 
I never pray in my home or by myself  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 68 36 80 76 36 
religious school 53 27 49 50 35 
Table no. 9.39 
I never read holy scripture (e.g. The Bible, Quran, Torah)  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 74 44 51 84 51 
religious school 64 56 45 55 45 
Table no. 9.40 
I have attended religious classes outside school (e.g. Sunday School, Madrasah)  
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 24 58 22 22 43 
religious school 37 24 21 48 59 
School life 
Table no. 9.41 
People who come from different countries make my school or college an interesting 
place 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 53 61 32 39 65 
religious school 45 47 41 47 62 
Table no. 9.42 
Having people from different religious backgrounds makes my school or college an 
interesting place 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 54 67 35 47 70 
religious school 50 50 53 55 61 
Table no. 9.43 
I am studying or would like to study Religious Education for examination 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 48 72 37 55 46 
religious school 72 82 55 78 82 
Chapter 10. 
Table no. 10.1 
I believe in God 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 30 64 24 27 63 
religious school 47 70 54 54 63 
Table no. 10.2 
I find it hard to believe in God 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 43 35 41 46 30 
religious school 35 37 35 36 34 
Table no. 10.3 
There is only one God 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 23 49 18 19 41 
religious school 36 53 31 42 53 
Table no. 10.4 
There are many Gods 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 11 9 11 19 23 
religious school 14 9 17 16 8 
Table no. 10.5 
I know that God is very close to me 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 17 43 13 13 44 
religious school 28 44 30 31 38 
Table no. 10.6 
I know that God helps me 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 19 48 15 15 49 
religious school 32 51 33 35 45 
Table no. 10.7 
I think of God as loving 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 30 59 19 26 59 
religious school 43 63 43 46 59 
Table no. 10.8 
I think of God as strict 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 17 27 11 15 31 
religious school 22 22 22 23 28 
Table no. 10.9 
I think of God as disapproving 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 9 14 8 9 17 
religious school 14 16 15 14 16 
Table no. 10.10 
I think of God as demanding 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 11 16 9 10 20 
religious school 16 16 16 15 18 
Scientific beliefs and religious beliefs 
Table no. 10.11 
God made the world in six days of twenty four hours 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 10 32        10        13 18 
religious school 19 32 17 21 23 
Table no. 10.12 
Evolution created everything over millions of years 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 54 35 39 44 39 
religious school 41 47 40 44 43 
Table no. 10.13 
Science disproves the biblical account of creation 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 33 30 24 29 29 
religious school 29 33 21 30 32 
Table no. 10.14 
Science can give us absolute truths 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 32 26 26 29 23 
religious school 25 30 22 25 30 
Table no. 10.15 
Science will eventually give us complete control over the world 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 22 18 21 27 19 
religious school 19 23 19 22 19 
Table no. 10.16 
I cannot trust both science and religion 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 19 21 14 19 20 
religious school 19 20 16 19 20 
Table no. 10.17 
It is possible to believe in Evolution and believe in God 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 43 42 30 37 40 
religious school 40 56 41 43 54 
Life after death 
Table no. 10.18 
I believe in life after death 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 41 52 36 42 59 
religious school 49 61 51 54 53 
Table no. 10.19 
I believe in heaven 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 39 65 38 40 62 
religious school 53 67 57 57 65 
Table no. 10.20 
I believe in hell 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 31 53 31 32 53 
religious school 40 46 43 47 47 
Chapter 11. Influence of parents 
Table no. 11.1  
My father has influenced my views about religion 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 35 56 19 23 50 
religious school 38 65 35 35 50 
Table no. 11.2 
My Mother has influenced my views about religion 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 38 65 23 26 56 
religious school 51 70 48 48 63 
Table no. 11.3 
My father has influenced my views about Buddhists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 8 7 4 6 10 
religious school 6 6 8 6 8 
Table no. 11.4 
My father has influenced my views about Christians 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 24 43 14 19 27 
religious school 31 43 27 29 41 
Table no. 11.5 
My father has influenced my views about Hindus 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 7 7 4 5 24 
religious school 7 5 7 6 9 
Table no. 11.6 
My father has influenced my views about Jews 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 9 10 6 7 13 
religious school 9 12 9 7 12 
Table no. 11.7 
My father has influenced my views about Muslims 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 13 13 7 7 28 
religious school 11 11 11 10 18 
Table no. 11.8 
My father has influenced my views about Sikhs 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 5 6 4 5 10 
religious school 7 3 5 4 7 
Table no. 11.9 
My Mother has influenced my views about Buddhists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 7 10 5 6 10 
religious school 8 8 7 7 8 
Table no. 11.10 
My mother has influenced my views about Christians 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 29 50 17 22 33 
religious school 41 47 32 36 53 
Table no. 11.11 
My mother has influenced my views about Hindus 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 6 8 5 4 26 
religious school 9 6 7 6 9 
Table no. 11.12 
My mother has influenced my views about Jews 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 9 12 5 6 12 
religious school 10 10 11 8 12 
Table no. 11.13 
My mother has influenced my views about Muslims 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 11 12 7 6 29 
religious school 11 9 14 10 17 
Table no. 11.14 
My mother has influenced my views about Sikhs 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 4 6 4 4 10 
religious school 8 6 6 4 6 
Table no. 11.15 
My father has influenced my views about Catholics 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 15 40 12 10 15 
religious school 24 60 31 26 22 
Table no. 11.16 
My father has influenced my views about Protestants 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 11 44 12 8 10 
religious school 16 45 21 14 17 
Table no. 11.17 
My mother has influenced my views about Catholics 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 16 43 11 11 19 
religious school 31 61 45 31 27 
Table no. 11.18 
My mother has influenced my views about Protestants 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 10 48 11 8 12 
religious school 18 44 21 15 18 
Table no. 11.19 
My father has influenced my views about Atheists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 15 19 8 12 14 
religious school 12 14 12 9 17 
Table no. 11.20 
My father has influenced my views about Humanists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 9 7 6 6 8 
religious school 7 5 6 6 8 
Table no. 11.21 
My mother has influenced my views about Atheists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 14 19 8 11 13 
religious school 13 13 10 9 17 
Table no. 11.22 
My mother has influenced my views about Humanists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 9 7 7 6 9 
religious school 9 6 6 6 7 
Influence of peers and friends 
Table no. 11.23 
My friends have influenced my views about religion 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 21 39 11 18 28 
religious school 24 34 23 27 33 
Table no. 11.24 
My friends have influenced my views about Buddhists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 8 7 4 6 9 
religious school 5 6 7 7 5 
Table no. 11.25 
My friends have influenced my views about Christians 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 24 44 14 20 29 
religious school 31 32 26 29 41 
Table no. 11.26 
My friends have influenced my views about Hindus 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 8 10 3 6 24 
religious school 8 8 5 7 10 
Table no. 11.27 
My friends have influenced my views about Jews 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 15 17 7 10 16 
religious school 12 23 10 14 17 
Table no. 11.28 
My friends have influenced my views about Muslims 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 19 18 9 10 30 
religious school 12 18 13 15 23 
Table no. 11.29 
My friends have influenced my views about Sikhs 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 8 4 3 5 11 
religious school 7 5 3 5 9 
Table no. 11.30 
My friends have influenced my views about Protestants 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 9 46 11 10 10 
religious school 16 50 23 16 17 
Table no. 11.31 
My friends have influenced my views about Catholics 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 15 38 11 11 16 
religious school 25 51 35 29 24 
Table no. 11.32 
My friends have influenced my views about Atheists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 21 34 10 18 21 
religious school 17 22 14 15 27 
Table no. 11.33 
My friends have influenced my views about Humanists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 11 8 6 8 10 
religious school 7 5 6 7 7 
Influence of School 
Table no. 11.34 
Studying religion at school has shaped my views about religion 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 60 67 37 57 66 
religious school 63 80 51 68 72 
Table no. 11.35 
Studying religion at school has shaped my views about Buddhists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 43 36 27 37 44 
religious school 30 34 20 29 44 
Table no. 11.36 
Studying religion at school has shaped my views about Christians 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 48 58 30 51 58 
religious school 57 71 45 61 64 
Table no. 11.37 
Studying religion at school has shaped my views about Hindus 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 41 35 24 42 49 
religious school 33 32 21 34 47 
Table no. 11.38 
Studying religion at school has shaped my views about Jews 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 43 48 26 39 42 
religious school 46 61 29 41 54 
Table no. 11.39 
Studying religion at school has shaped my views about Muslims 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 46 46 27 37 50 
religious school 44 53 28 38 53 
Table no. 11.40 
Studying religion at school has shaped my views about Sikhs 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 37 15 22 34 39 
religious school 28 20 16 24 40 
Table no. 11.41 
Studying religion at school helps me understand people from other religions 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 79 83 68 77 85 
religious school 80 89 71 82 86 
Table no. 11.42 
Studying religion at school helps me understand people from other racial 
backgrounds 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 71 77 62 73 78 
religious school 73 80 65 73 75 
Table no. 11.43 
Studying religion at school has shaped my views about Catholics 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 40 50 25 37 42 
religious school 48 76 47 56 50 
Table no. 11.44 
Studying religion at school has shaped my views about Protestants 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 37 50 24 33 33 
religious school 38 72 32 42 43 
Table no. 11.45 
Studying religion at school helps me understand people from other denominations 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 57 67 51 57 63 
religious school 61 74 55 61 71 
Influence of media 
Table no. 11.46 
I never watch, or listen to, current affairs (e.g. News, Panorama etc.) 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 8 9 17 14 6 
religious school 11 9 14 12 6 
Table no. 11.47 
Last Monday, I watched no programmes on television, iplayer etc. 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 7 6 5 4 5 
religious school 5 4 6 5 6 
Table no. 11.48 
Television has influenced my views about Religion 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 36 38 22 34 40 
religious school 32 49 30 37 45 
Table no. 11.49 
The internet has influenced my views about Religion 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 23 28 13 21 33 
religious school 23 32 21 25 30 
Table no. 11.50 
Television has influenced my views about Buddhists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 14 14 10 13 14 
religious school 11 23 10 14 16 
Table no. 11.51 
Television has influenced my views about Christians 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 26 33 15 26 31 
religious school 25 41 20 28 37 
Table no. 11.52 
Television has influenced my views about Hindus 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 31 14 9 14 23 
religious school 11 20 8 14 19 
Table no. 11.53 
Television has influenced my views about Jews 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 22 24 13 21 23 
religious school 19 36 17 21 29 
Table no. 11.54 
Television has influenced my views about Muslims 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 27 28 16 22 34 
religious school 23 36 18 25 38 
Table no. 11.55 
Television has influenced my views about Sikhs 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 11 8 7 10 13 
religious school 9 11 7 10 13 
Table no. 11.56 
Internet has influenced my views about Buddhists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 9 9 6 8 13 
religious school 8 12 9 10 11 
Table no. 11.57 
Internet has influenced my views about Christians 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 16 23 9 15 25 
religious school 18 24 15 20 27 
Table no. 11.58 
Internet has influenced my views about Hindus 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 9 8 5 8 20 
religious school 8 11 8 9 11 
Table no. 11.59 
Internet has influenced my views about Jews 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 13 14 7 10 19 
religious school 13 21 11 14 19 
Table no. 11.60 
Internet has influenced my views about Muslims 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 17 16 10 12 27 
religious school 14 18 12 16 24 
Table no. 11.61 
Internet has influenced my views about Sikhs 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 7 5 5 7 13 
religious school 7 8 7 7 9 
Table no. 11.62 
Television has influenced my views about Protestants 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 15 37 13 15 14 
religious school 14 45 17 19 19 
Table no. 11.63 
Television has influenced my views about Catholics 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 18 37 14 18 20 
religious school 21 46 25 26 25 
Table no. 11.64 
The internet has influenced my views about Protestants 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 9 25 9 8 10 
religious school 11 29 12 12 13 
Table no. 11.65 
The internet has influenced my views about Catholics 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 12 24 9 10 15 
religious school 15 31 16 19 16 
Influence from religion 
Table no. 11.66 
My life has been shaped by religious faith 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 16 38 9 12 39 
religious school 30 42 30 28 38 
Table no. 11.67 
When making important decisions in my life my faith plays a major role 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 13 34 11 10 39 
religious school 25 30 25 22 32 
Table no. 11.68 
My religious identity is important to me 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 21 48 14 15 52 
religious school 33 53 34 33 42 
Chapter 12. Negative impact of religious diversity on the world 
Table no. 12.1 
Religion brings more conflict than peace 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 44 52 40 51 47 
religious school 42 57 44 45 49 
Table no. 12.2 
A lot of harm is done in the world by Buddhists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 8 12 8 11 7 
religious school 10 13 12 11 9 
Table no. 12.3 
A lot of harm is done in the world by Christians 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 17 20 12 16 15 
religious school 16 21 16 14 17 
Table no. 12.4 
A lot of harm is done in the world by Hindus 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 11 14 11 14 10 
religious school 12 15 13 11 12 
Table no. 12.5 
A lot of harm is done in the world by Jews 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 13 15 12 18 15 
religious school 16 19 17 13 13 
Table no. 12.6 
A lot of harm is done in the world by Muslims 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 37 40 30 35 33 
religious school 40 38 30 35 48 
Table no. 12.7 
A lot of harm is done in the world by Sikhs 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 13 13 12 15 10 
religious school 13 14 14 13 14 
Table no. 12.8 
A lot of harm is done in the world by Protestants 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 15 33 18 17 11 
religious school 15 37 20 13 15 
Table no. 12.9 
A lot of harm is done in the world by Catholics 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 18 38 18 17 12 
religious school 17 28 16 15 16 
Table no. 12.10 
A lot of harm is done in the world by Atheists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 15 18 11 16 13 
religious school 14 14 13 15 20 
Table no. 12.12 
A lot of harm is done in the world by Humanists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 11 12 10 12 9 
religious school 12 11 11 11 13 
Positive impact of religious diversity on the world 
Table no. 12.12 
A lot of good is done in the world by Buddhists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 40 39 27 27 41 
religious school 32 39 29 29 44 
Table no. 12.13 
A lot of good is done in the world by Christians 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 49 72 36 43 55 
religious school 59 68 48 62 71 
Table no. 12.14 
A lot of good is done in the world by Hindus 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 31 34 21 22 39 
religious school 28 33 25 26 36 
Table no. 12.15 
A lot of good is done in the world by Jews 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 32 37 22 22 32 
religious school 32 39 28 28 38 
Table no. 12.16 
A lot of good is done in the world by Muslims 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 28 32 19 18 37 
religious school 24 31 25 23 27 
Table no. 12.17 
A lot of good is done in the world by Sikhs 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 28 25 18 18 29 
religious school 26 26 24 20 29 
Table no. 12.18 
A lot of good is done in the world by Catholics 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 33 45 25 24 38 
religious school 45 65 50 50 48 
Table no. 12.19 
A lot of good is done in the world by Protestants 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 31 53 23 23 31 
religious school 34 49 29 34 39 
Table no. 12.20 
A lot of good is done in the world by Atheists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 32 33 23 24 29 
religious school 29 32 25 24 32 
Table no. 12.21 
A lot of good is done in the world by Humanists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 30 29 21 21 29 
religious school 25 35 23 23 28 
Table no. 12.22 
I am interested in finding out about Buddhists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 37 48 26 33 44 
religious school 34 47 34 40 45 
Table no. 12.23 
I am interested in finding out about Christians 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 34 56 26 33 48 
religious school 39 50 41 43 50 
Table no. 12.24 
I am interested in finding out about Hindus 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 29 41 20 26 41 
religious school 29 42 28 33 35 
Table no. 12.25 
I am interested in finding out about Jews 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 33 46 24 31 39 
religious school 32 49 34 38 44 
Table no. 12.26 
I am interested in finding out about Muslims 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 31 43 22 27 44 
religious school 29 44 32 37 40 
Table no. 12.27 
I am interested in finding out about Sikhs 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 28 39 19 24 36 
religious school 29 37 25 32 34 
Table no. 12.28 
I am interested in finding out about Protestants 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 27 55 23 25 37 
religious school 28 48 33 33 33 
Table no. 12.29 
I am interested in finding out about Catholics 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 30 51 23 27 40 
religious school 32 55 46 40 39 
Table no. 12.30 
I am interested in finding out about Atheists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 34 46 24 30 42 
religious school 31 44 31 35 40 
Table no. 12.31 
I am interested in finding out about Humanists 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 38 45 24 31 47 
religious school 32 45 32 38 43 
Table no. 12.32 
Religious people are often more intolerant of others 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 31 38 25 32 30 
religious school 28 40 22 28 33 
Table no. 12.33 
We must respect all religions 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 72 82 59 65 84 
religious school 66 80 66 73 81 
Table no. 12.34 
All religious groups in Britain should have equal rights 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 68 74 55 61 77 
religious school 61 78 65 67 70 
Table no. 12.35 
Promoting equality in society is important to me 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 56 65 34 41 66 
religious school 52 67 50 49 67 
Chapter 13. Religious diversity in school 
Table 13.1  
Christians should be allowed to wear crosses in school 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 68 67 50 56 76 
religious school 57 72 58 64 82 
Table 13.2  
Muslims should be allowed to wear the headscarf in school 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 63 65 49 53 75 
religious school 49 66 55 57 68 
Table no. 13.3 
Muslims should be allowed to wear the Burka in school 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 47 58 41 49 52 
religious school 41 61 51 53 52 
Table no. 13.4 
Muslims should be allowed to wear the Niqab in school 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 49 57 41 50 51 
religious school 41 61 52 52 52 
Table no. 13.5 
Sikhs should be allowed to wear the Turban in School 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 63 63 47 53 72 
religious school 51 67 53 57 68 
Table no. 13.6 
Sikhs should be allowed to wear the Kara in school 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 59 59 45 51 68 
religious school 47 63 52 53 61 
Table no. 13.7 
Jews should be allowed to wear the star of David in school 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 65 65 49 55 70 
religious school 53 65 55 60 74 
Table no. 13.8 
Sikhs should be allowed to wear the Kirpan in school 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 49 59 40 51 56 
religious school 42 62 50 52 56 
Table no. 13.9 
Jews should be allowed to wear the Kippah/Yamulke in school 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 57 61 44 52 64 
religious school 46 63 52 54 61 
Table no. 13.10 
Hindus should be allowed to wear the Bindi in school 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 62 60 45 53 69 
religious school 47 63 52 55 66 
Table no. 13.11 
Religious Education should be taught in school 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 60 64 35 51 66 
religious school 56 67 56 63 70 
Table no. 13.12 
Citizenship should be taught in school 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 46 46 29 32 46 
religious school 40 59 40 39 55 
Table no. 13.13 
Learning about different religions in school is interesting 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 48 60 30 43 63 
religious school 44 62 47 54 57 
Table no. 13.14 
I am in favour of Christian schools 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 26 48 21 32 38 
religious school 50 62 45 53 62 
Table no. 13.15 
I am in favour of Muslim schools 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 17 20 17 20 27 
 religious school 19 22 23 22 24 
Religious diversity and the local environment 
Table no. 13.16 
People from different religious backgrounds make where I live an interesting place 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 44 48 28 36 58 
religious school 34 43 35 37 47 
Table no. 13.17 
People who come from different countries make where I live an interesting place 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 48 52 30 39 61 
religious school 39 47 38 42 55 
Table no. 13.18 
I would not like to live next door to Catholics 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 7 11 11 13 5 
religious school 8 10 5 8 6 
Table no. 13.19 
I would not like to live next door to Protestants 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 6 7 10 12 6 
religious school 8 17 7 7 7 
Religious diversity and personal relationships 
Table no. 13.20 
I would be happy to go out with someone from a different faith 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 60 65 46 53 59 
religious school 49 71 65 57 59 
Table no. 13.21 
I would be happy about a close relative marrying someone from a different faith 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 66 69 53 59 57 
religious school 55 73 65 61 66 
Table no. 13.22 
I would be happy to go out with someone from a different denomination 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 61 68 46 52 59 
religious school 55 71 64 57 72 
Table no. 13.23 
I would be happy about a close relative marrying someone from a different 
denomination 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 62 66 45 49 55 
religious school 51 67 54 56 70 
Table no. 13.24 
I would be happy to go out with someone from a different racial background 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 59 64 41 46 59 
religious school 50 66 56 57 67 
Table no. 13.25 
I would be happy about a close relative marrying someone from a different racial 
background 
England 
N Ireland 
Scotland 
Wales 
London 
secular school 64 70 49 55 61 
religious school 53 73 60 61 72 
	coverpyke.pdf
	University of Warwick institutional repository: http://go.warwick.ac.uk/wrap
