Microsoft Word - Master document
The London School of Economics and Political Science 
State-led coercive takeovers in Putins Russia: explaining the 
underlying motives and ownership outcomes 
Andrew Yorke 
A thesis submitted to the Department of Government at the 
London School of Economics and Political Science for the 
degree of Doctor of Philosophy, London, April 2014 
Declaration 
I certify that the thesis I have presented for examination for the MPhil/PhD degree of the 
London School of Economics and Political Science is solely my own work other than where I 
have clearly indicated that it is the work of others (in which case the extent of any work 
carried out jointly by me and any other person is clearly identified in it). 
The copyright of this thesis rests with the author. Quotation from it is permitted, provided that 
full acknowledgement is made.  This thesis may not be reproduced without my prior written 
consent. 
I warrant that this authorisation does not, to the best of my belief, infringe the rights of any 
third party. 
Abstract 
Since Vladimir Putin first became Russias President in 2000, the state has played an 
increasingly active and interventionist role in the economy, including through its involvement 
in a large number of coercive takeovers of privately-owned businesses. The best known case 
is the Yukos affair, but there have been many other, less prominent takeovers. These have 
largely been explained as predatory acts by state officials seeking to enrich themselves or 
increase their power. This has contributed to the perception that Putins Russia is a 
kleptocracy, with the state given free rein to engage in economically-destructive attacks on 
property rights.  
This thesis studies a number of state-led coercive takeovers in Putins Russia, including the 
Yukos affair, and argues that they cannot be explained as predatory acts initiated by rent-
seeking state officials. Instead, they were the work of state officials attempting to pursue 
economic development while countering perceived threats to state sovereignty.  
The Yukos affair resulted in the companys de facto nationalisation and heralded a broader 
trend of expanding state ownership in the economy. But two other coercive takeovers studied 
here instead resulted in the companies being transferred to new private owners. In other cases 
where nationalisation was the clear goal, the state-owned companies who emerged as buyers 
chose indirect forms of ownership over their new assets. The varying ownership outcomes are 
found to have been determined by institutional factors which constrained the behaviour of the 
state, contributing to its preference for takeovers that were negotiated rather than entirely 
coercive, and turning each case into a bargaining game between state and targeted business 
owner. Thus Russia is some way from kleptocracy, not only because of the developmental 
aspirations of its political leadership, but also thanks to partial progress towards institutional 
checks on arbitrary state coercion. 
Acknowledgements 
This thesis is dedicated to my sons Gideon and Laurence, whose arrival is the reason for it 
having taken longer than expected, and also to my wife Rachel, who is the reason I have 
nevertheless managed to complete it. She has never doubted the value of what I was doing and 
always ensured that I had the space and time necessary to keep making progress. 
I am deeply grateful to my supervisor David Woodruff, who has been immensely supportive 
whilst also nudging me to venture out of my comfort-zone. I could not have asked for a better 
mentor. I am also indebted to Archie Brown, whose encouragement and example (both during 
my postgraduate study at St Antonys over a decade ago, and subsequently) are the reason I 
have been pulled towards academic research. 
I would like to acknowledge the generous financial support provided to me by the LSE in the 
form of a full PhD scholarship. 
My research trip to Moscow proved to be both productive and lots of fun, thanks largely to my 
friends and hosts, Dima Ganovsky, Nastya Galochkina, Lena Isen and Hugo Stolkin. I am 
particularly grateful to Hugo both for his hospitality and his determination to help me get to 
the bottom of some obscure but pertinent points of Russian law. I am greatly indebted to him, 
and to all the Moscow-based journalists and experts who took the time to talk to me about my 
work.   
Contents 
Research question 1: what motivates state actors to instigate state-led coercive takeovers?15 
Chapter 5. State-led coercive takeovers, kleptocracy and the developmental state .. 267 
List of figures and tables 
Today I am absolutely sure that the main reason for the Yukos affair was the wish of four or 
five individuals to gain control of a large and successful oil company. Politics in general and 
state policy in particular were used as a pretext in order to convince the countrys leadership 
to use the whole might of the state to redistribute the assets 
Mikhail Khodorkovsky (2005) 
The crux is that in Russia, there is a kleptocracy run by Putin, and all the guys around him. 
Theyre not in their job for the execution of public service; their job is to steal money 
Bill Browder, quoted in Bohlen (2013) 
States can sometimes act on behalf of developmental goals, but they are always imperfect 
instruments 
Peter Evans (1995) 
Chapter 1: State-led coercive takeovers in 
Putins Russia 
On 25 October 2003, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, the Chairman, CEO and largest single 
shareholder of the flourishing privately-owned Russian oil company Yukos, was arrested on 
board his chartered plane at Novosibirsk airport. In the months and years that followed, he and 
his associates either fled the country or were imprisoned on charges of questionable validity, 
and the company was broken up and sold off to pay inflated demands for back taxes. The 
majority of these assets were sold to the state-owned oil company Rosneft, often for sums of 
money that did not approach their market value.  
The Yukos affair has been analysed from many different perspectives, including as a 
demonstrative act aimed at warning Russias oligarchs to stay out of politics, or as an attack 
on autonomous social forces by an increasingly authoritarian and corporatist state. But one of 
the most common themes has been to highlight the predatory nature of the attack. In other 
words, as the quotation from Khodorkovsky indicates above, the company is seen as having 
been singled out as a lucrative target by a group of state officials intent on self-enrichment 
and/or self-aggrandisement. There is widespread consensus that the attack on Yukos and 
individuals associated with it involved abuses such as the arbitrary and selective application of 
the law, fabricated criminal charges and manipulation of the courts. It is therefore taken to be 
evidence that contemporary Russia is essentially a kleptocracy, and this impression is only 
reinforced by high-profile cases such as the death in prison of lawyer Sergei Magnitsky
. The 
 Magnitsky worked for a law firm named Firestone Duncan, and was tasked by hedge fund manager 
Bill Browder with investigating the theft of subsidiaries of his company Hermitage Capital by 
individuals linked to the Russian Interior Ministry. In response to criminal complaints lodged by 
Magnitsky and Hermitage, police arrested Magnitsky on charges that he was director of two Hermitage 
companies that had failed to pay taxes in 2001. He died in prison of severe pancreatitis in November 
2009, having been singled out for inhumane treatment by the prison authorities. See Weiss (2012). 
above quotation from Bill Browder echoes a widespread perception of contemporary Russia 
as a country that is both rife with corruption extending to the highest levels of government, 
and lacking the institutions that might provide an effective constraint on state predation
. The 
fact that Russias economy has nevertheless enjoyed strong rates of growth since Putin 
assumed the presidency in 2000 has been explained by reference to benign external 
conditions, particularly high world prices for oil, gas and other basic commodities that Russia 
can offer to the world market (Gaddy & Ickes, 2010, p. 284).  
The Yukos affair has also come to symbolise two prominent trends of business-state relations 
in Russia since Vladimir Putin became President in 2000: expanding state ownership in the 
economy and an assault on property rights through takeovers of privately-owned businesses 
using state coercion. Not all of the increase in state ownership has arisen from coercive 
takeovers such as the Yukos affair: much of it has arisen from the voluntary sale of private 
business to state-owned companies. But this trend is nevertheless often associated with the 
notion that Russias state officials are mainly interested in enriching themselves and their 
associates. There is some justification for this: not only is state ownership typically seen as 
having negative implications for economic performance (Boardman & Vining, 1995)
, but 
there are also allegations that state-owned companies have overpaid substantially when 
buying companies from favoured private businessmen (Belkovsky, 2010)
, while using state 
coercion and other forms of administrative pressure to drive down the price of other purchases 
(Heinrich, 2008). In weak institutional environments, state-owned companies create 
opportunities for corruption and rent-seeking by insiders (Tompson, 2008, p. 8). It is also 
assumed that state officials are able to use directorships of state-owned companies to enrich 
 The pioneering investigative work of another lawyer, Aleksei Navalny, has helped to bring to light 
some of the worst examples of high-level corruption and misuse of public money. The English-
language version of his blog is available at http://navalny-en.livejournal.com.  
 Though see Hertog (2010) for an examination of the circumstances under which state-owned 
companies have enjoyed successful performance even in rentier states. 
 The best-known example is Gazproms purchase of oil company Sibneft in September 2005 for 
$13bn.  
themselves; this is no doubt true to a significant extent, although the precise mechanism by 
which they do this is rarely explained
The two trends of expanding state ownership and state-led coercive takeover have tended to 
be conflated in the minds of analysts, but they are in fact analytically quite distinct. Not only 
has some nationalisation arisen from voluntary purchases, but some state-led coercive 
takeovers have not led to nationalisation. For example, the owners of the oil companies 
Russneft and Bashneft came under substantial pressure from the state to give up their 
businesses, but the situation was resolved when they sold instead to a different private 
business actor who was apparently more acceptable to the Kremlin
Why, having taken the trouble to force a change of ownership, do state officials not always 
claim the spoils for themselves? This question is not necessarily a genuine puzzle: it may be 
that the private business actor who stepped in as buyer to resolve the situation was colluding 
with the state officials responsible for the coercion, and that afterwards they intended to share 
the spoils. Alternatively, these cases may represent attempts at nationalisation that failed for 
one reason or another. But if the evidence does not bear out either of these explanations, then 
the cases may present a serious challenge to the view that such takeovers were the actions of 
predatory, kleptocratic state actors. 
Accordingly, the thesis examines closely these and numerous other cases of state-led coercive 
takeover. It does so with two related central research questions in mind. Firstly, what was 
motivating the Russian state (or a particular group of state actors) to instigate such takeovers? 
 The innocent westerner may ask how being on the board of a state company can bring the sort of 
wealth acquired by the Yeltsin-era oligarchs. The question will be greeted with a pitying smile 
(Hanson, 2007a, p. 881). The answer does not lie in dividends and official salaries, the details of which 
are publicly disclosed; it may instead lie in the relationships between a state-owned company and the 
suppliers and trading companies it favours. 
 Granted, in the Russneft case, the original buyer, Oleg Deripaska, was not welcomed by some 
elements within the Kremlin. But, as will be explained in Chapter Two, the subsequent sale of 
Russneft to another private businessman, Vladimir Yevtushenkov, brought an end to Russnefts 
problems with the authorities. 
Secondly, what causal factors were determining whether such takeovers end with the target 
company being nationalised, or alternatively end with its transfer to a new private owner?  
With respect to the first question, the task is to consider whether the evidence from these 
particular cases supports the view that state actors (in line with the kleptocracy hypothesis) 
were prompted by predatory and venal motives to instigate the takeovers, or whether an 
alternative hypothesis, which is elaborated below and is based on state actors having broadly 
developmental motives, fits better with the evidence. 
Specifying and naming the domain of cases  
Because the project asks the question of what the state was trying to achieve by forcing a 
change of ownership at particular privately-owned businesses, it requires a term to describe 
such takeovers that does not imply any preconceived ideas regarding the states motivations. 
One term that is commonly used to describe coercive takeovers is expropriation. This term 
can be misleading, however, in that expropriation by the state implies taking an asset into state 
ownership or otherwise confiscating it for the material benefit of the public
. Moreover, its use 
in the political economy literature extends to cases where the property rights of a private 
business owner are attacked without the business itself changing hands, such as through 
arbitrary or excessive taxation
When coercion is used to deprive a private business owner of his assets without any 
suggestion that this has been done in favour of the state, and without even a pretence that this 
was done for the public good, then in the Russian context this is often labelled reiderstvo. 
 In the Shorter Oxford Dictionary, the first of three definitions given for expropriate is take out of 
the owners hands, esp. for ones own use; spec. (of a public authority) take away (land) for public use 
or benefit. 
 e.g. Markus (2008, p. 75 fn. 3) defines expropriation as the transfer of corporate value among 
stakeholders, which is (a) not consensual and (b) not transparent or generally applicable. Hence, 
contractual deals, or a universal application of a standard tax rate, do not count as expropriation; 
arbitrary applications of criminal law or company-specific taxation do. 
Firestone (2008) defines  reiderstvo in terms of three criteria: 1) it is illegal (and linked to 
organised crime), 2) it uses ostensibly legal means, and 3) unlike less ambitious protection 
racketeering, it seeks to take over an entire business rather than just a share of the profits
all accounts, reiderstvo is a widespread phenomenon which contributes to citizens insecurity 
regarding property rights. It commonly includes actual or threatened physical force, which 
during the 1990s typically provided by private (i.e. criminal) actors, but has since then 
increasingly been provided by state actors (Gans-Morse, 2011, 2012; Volkov, 2004). But such 
force is not always employed, and Firestone rightly excludes it as a defining characteristic of 
reiderstvo.  
Both expropriation and reiderstvo are terms that imply actions intended to be for the 
material benefit of the state on the one hand, or of corrupt individuals on the other. Because 
the present thesis argues that other considerations are behind some of the states coercive 
takeovers, it requires a more neutral term to describe the phenomenon of interest. 
Furthermore, neither of the more commonly used terms have a scope that matches the present 
projects specific focus on coercive takeovers in which the state plays a leading role. Hence 
the decision to use the more unwieldy but more exact term state-led coercive takeover. For 
ease of use, this term will henceforth be abbreviated to SLCT. 
Figure 1 illustrates how the set of cases that can be correctly termed SLCTs relate to cases of 
expropriation and reiderstvo. The areas shaded blue are not the focus of this project (either 
they did not involve a change of controlling owner, or they did not involve the state). As the 
areas of intersection indicate, some SLCTs are simultaneously cases of reiderstvo (involving 
state agencies for the material benefit of certain predatory individuals) or expropriation (intent 
on boosting state revenues or otherwise citing the public good as justification). The domain of 
 While this definition is undoubtedly correct, its application in the Russian context is problematic. 
Deciding whether a specific takeover was illegal despite using ostensibly legal means is 
particularly difficult in a country whose legal system is subject to corrupt influence and influence from 
the executive. It is natural for the victims of takeovers to cry reiderstvo and for the media to use the 
term to sensationalise takeovers. 
takeovers that qualify as SLCTs, and therefore as valid cases for study, is everything inside 
the orange circle. Depending on the answer to the first research question, cases will either fall 
inside the clear orange space (i.e. not explained by reference to the material gain of the state 
or individual state actors), or in one of the intersecting areas (which would indicate that they 
are both SLCTs and cases of expropriation or reiderstvo).  
Figure 1. State-led coercive takeovers, expropriation and reiderstvo 
Research question 1: what motivates state actors to instigate 
state-led coercive takeovers? 
Although reinforced in the Russian case by considerable evidence of high-level corruption, 
the notion that state actors are inherently venal and predatory by nature, and that states make 
predatory interventions in the economy unless constrained or incentivised not to do so, is one 
that in any case has a strong tradition in the comparative political economy literature. The 
neoliberal strand of economics that rose to prominence in the late 1970s views interventions 
by the state as creating distortions in what would otherwise be a purely efficient, self-
regulating free market. Such distortions in turn are believed to generate rents
. As Evans 
(1995, p. 25) observes, the state is viewed in this literature as merely an aggregation of 
individual maximizers, and economic interventions are seen as deliberate attempts to distort 
the economy on the part of state actors keen to capture the ensuing rents, either for their own 
financial benefit or to buy support from constituents. The key to development, in this view, 
lies in reducing to a minimum the scope and scale of the state, and its ability to engage in 
inherently destructive economic intervention.  
North (1990) sought to correct this reductive view of the states role by emphasizing the 
importance of institutions as the underlying determinant of the long-run performance of 
economies. He also noted that the state is needed as a third-party enforcer of contracts in the 
modern worlds increasingly impersonal markets. The starting-point for his theory of 
institutions is an attack on some of the assumptions of rational choice theory that are strongly 
associated with neoliberal economics: he says that individuals may be utility-maximisers, but 
they respond to their environment based on limited information, and consequently ideology 
and institutions are vitally important factors when modelling their behaviour and that of 
societies. Nevertheless, North displayed a continuing wariness regarding the states role in the 
economy: if the state has coercive force, then those who run the state will use that force in 
their interest at the expense of the rest of society (North, 1990, pp. 589). This is a reference 
to the commitment problem, which takes as its starting point the notion that a government 
that is strong enough to protect property rights and enforce contracts is also strong enough to 
confiscate the wealth of its citizens (Weingast, 1993, p. 287). Thus, although the new 
institutionalist school represented by North, Weingast and others saw a more extensive role 
for the state in the economy and society, it still saw the state as a serious threat to economic 
 For a thoughtful definition of the term rent, see Gaddy and Ickes (2010, pp. 310311). They argue 
that, although the textbook definition equates rent with profit, corrections should be made in the 
Russian case because of two ways in which that countrys economy deviates from an efficient market 
economy: firstly, resources are not used efficiently, and secondly, production is for various reasons 
(including the prevalence of side-payments) more costly than in an efficient economy. Benchmarking 
Russia against an ideal-type efficient market economy is therefore central to their use of the term. 
development. Unless the commitment problem was solved, the state would confiscate the 
wealth of its citizens through excessive taxation or asset seizure, either to raise state revenues 
(which are in turn required to sustain the incumbent regime), or for the greed of the ruler who 
makes no distinction between state revenues and his own wealth.  
Various suggestions have been made as to how the commitment problem is solved in 
practice. Olson (1993) has argued that leaders of autocratic countries who feel secure enough 
in power behave like investors who enjoy long time-horizons. These wealth-maximising 
stationary bandits calibrate their stealing by setting taxation and expropriation at an optimal 
rate that still allows for economic development, thus yielding a higher overall income in the 
long term. The alternative institutionalist explanation (e.g. North & Weingast (1989), 
Weingast (1993)) involves limited government through a set of coercion-constraining 
institutions which ensure that the states predatory appetites (or those of individual state 
actors) are kept in check.  
Haber, Razo and Maurer (2003) were (rightly, in this authors view) dismissive of Olsons 
explanation, in part because it is entirely based on what the ruler decides independently to 
. Regarding the limited government explanation, they pointed out, firstly, that the 
number of countries where this can truly be said to pertain is small, and secondly, that the 
economic data do not confirm the negative correlation that is implied between political 
instability (i.e. the absence of limited government) and economic growth. They instead 
presented the model of vertical political integration (VPI) to explain how state predation 
might be kept in check and satisfactory rates of economic growth achieved in a country where 
property rights are fragile at best. Under VPI, authoritarian political leaders who are interested 
in economic development establish a narrow rent-seeking coalition with trusted business 
leaders so that the property rights of the latter are guaranteed, even if lawlessness and 
 They also pointed out that Olsons model implies that other factors (such as approaching old age or 
illness) would reduce time-horizons and prompt rulers to engage in a last-gasp frenzy of predatory 
activity. 
predation dominate outside of this coalition. The fortunate few who are inside the coalition 
can then think with long time-horizons and invest accordingly, providing the impetus for 
economic growth. Notably, the VPI model retains the assumption that rulers are motivated to 
a large extent by harvesting rents (which they do in collusion with their business allies). The 
model therefore offers a different form of institutional solution (besides limited government) 
to the problem of wealth-maximising, predatory rulers and states. 
What unites the literature discussed above is a narrow conception of the states role in 
economic development. The extreme neoliberal view is that the state should be reduced as far 
as practicably possible, while the new institutionalist vision of the state extends only as far 
as submitting to institutional constraints on its own predatory appetites, providing some public 
goods such as national defence, protecting individual property rights from other (non-state) 
threats, enforcing contracts between private citizens and putting in place the appropriate 
institutions of a market economy. By contrast, the developmental state writers (e.g. 
Amsden, 1989; Evans, 1995; Johnson, 1982; Wade, 2004; Waldner, 1999) explore what types 
of active economic intervention by the state, and under what circumstances, have historically 
been successful in playing an instrumental role in economic development. They have been 
inspired by the work of Gerschenkron (1962), who argued that late developing countries 
would not be able to catch up with the economic performance of developed countries unless 
the state intervened, including by assuming the role of investment banker when insufficient 
private investment was forthcoming. Another inspiration is Polanyi, who argued that free 
markets were (contrary to the views expounded later by the neoliberals) in fact created and 
maintained through continuous, centrally organized and controlled interventionism by the 
state (Polanyi, 2001, p. 146). At the same time, the literature reflects an awareness that even 
good developmental intentions on the part of rulers can descend into kleptocracy when they 
translate into concrete policies and implementation. Following Weber, Evans argues that one 
crucial factor in determining whether states can translate development-minded policies into 
successful outcomes is the quality of the bureaucracy. Success requires that the bureaucracy 
be united by a sense of corporate coherence, without which bureaucrats will behave much as 
the uncoordinated group of venal interest-maximisers envisaged by neoliberals (Evans, 1995, 
p. 28). 
Rent-seeking, kleptocracy and the sovereign development 
hypothesis 
Given the corruption that has been discussed above, it is perhaps not surprising that the 
literature on business-state relations in Russia has mainly favoured explanations based on 
kleptocracy and rent-seeking. The Yeltsin-era state is said to have been captured by the 
vested interests of big business, which preferred to block further economic reforms so that 
they could maximise the rents they were enjoying under partial reform equilibrium 
(Hellman, Jones, & Kaufmann, 2003; Hellman, 1998)
. The Putin regime is seen as having 
been able (through demonstrative actions against big business, most notably its crackdown on 
Yukos) to put big business back into a subordinate position vis--vis the state. But the result 
was simply state recapture by a new set of rent-seekers (Podplatnik, 2005). The oligarchs 
are described as having been supplanted by the new siloviki
-oligarchs or silovarchs 
(Treisman, 2007), as well as some St Petersburg-based businessmen from civilian life who are 
commonly referred to as Putins friends (Partiya Narodnoi Svobody, 2011). According to 
Gaddy and Ickes (2010), Putin has put in place a management system to maintain, secure and 
distribute the rents from oil and gas, to which the economy remains addicted; this rent 
management system, also known as Putins Protection Racket, is key to the entire political 
economy
. If not a protection racket, then the new system is seen as a more-or-less exact 
 See also Aslunds description of Russia as one of the outstanding examples of the rent-seeking 
state in the post-Communist region (Aslund, 2002, p. 3). 
 The term used to describe Russians with a background in the security services, armed forces or law 
enforcement. 
 See also Holmberg (2008), Rochlitz (2010) and Wilson (2012). 
analogue of the aforementioned VPI model based on rent-seeking (Volkov, 2010). 
Alternatively, Putin is thought to be hostage to rival rent-seeking factions, and survives in 
office only by deftly maintaining the balance of power between them (Mehdi & Yenikeyeff, 
2013). 
Crucially, however, widespread corruption does not negate the possibility that the state 
apparatus contains within it a group of individuals who seek development and take active 
steps in pursuit of it with the approval of the head of state. As Leftwich notes, The politics of 
transition in some developmental states have displayed extraordinary mixtures of 
patrimonialism, centralisation, technocratic economic management, coercion and corruption 
(Leftwich, 1995, p. 407). Markus (2007, p. 290) suggests a way to reconcile the co-existence 
in Russia of predatory corruption and some genuine efforts in pursuit of economic 
development: there is a lack of coordination between individual government departments, 
each of which may be variously predatory or developmental and may change their stance over 
time. But the present author would argue that corruption and the pursuit of development are 
not mutually exclusive opposites even at the level of the individual state official. Olsons 
stationary bandits and other models based on wealth-maximising state actors provide a 
crude caricature of how individuals make choices and rationalise and justify those choices. 
The same can be said of the aforementioned description by Bill Browder of Putin and his 
associates as not in their job for the execution of public service; their job is to steal money. 
Olivier De Sardan (1999, pp. 3435) has observed that the practices that come under the 
complex of corruption, while being legally culpable and widely reproved, are none the less 
considered by their perpetrators as being legitimate, and often as not being corruption at all 
[...] In one sense, corruption is someone else [...] Whoever practices corruption auto-
legitimates his own behaviour, by presenting himself, for example, as the victim of a system 
in which he is bound to this kind of practice [...] And at any rate, doesnt everyone do it?. 
Thus it is possible for lofty ideals of altruism and patriotism to coexist comfortably with 
corrupt behaviour inside the minds of those who practice such behaviour. Corrupt behaviour 
certainly undermines and at times will negate the positive effect of any action taken in pursuit 
of economic development. But this does not mean that any talk of developmental goals on the 
part of such officials is nothing more than a smoke-screen for their true, thieving nature. In 
making this point, the present author does not in any way intend to justify corruption or act as 
an apologist for the Yukos affair or other excesses of the Putin regime. But an undue focus on 
rent-seeking as the central motive of state actors risks obscuring our understanding of how and 
why states attempt to shape economic processes.  
There have without doubt been many cases in recent years where the Russian states coercive 
resources have been effectively hired by private predators in order to take over business 
assets. State officials sometimes also initiate such takeovers themselves in order to materially 
benefit from it, either by taking ownership or by some other means (Gans-Morse, 2012). 
However, it is argued in the following chapters that the case studies therein demand an 
alternative explanation.  
The literature of the developmental state provides a promising analytical framework for 
such an alternative approach, as it allows for the possibility that factors other than rent-
seeking can influence state policies and their outcomes. The suggestion that Russia might be a 
form of developmental state, rather than a kleptocracy, is a minority view, but it is one that 
has gained ground in recent years (Barnes, 2006b; Markus, 2007; Wengle, 2012). For 
instance, Barnes describes Putin as an economic nationalist who does not seek the passive 
sort of integration into the global economy that too many policymakers and journalists (and 
not a few scholars) seem to expect
. Putin is in Barness view a (probably unconscious) 
 cf. Olcotts view that Putin does not believe in relying on global market forces to provide the 
economic opportunities and social supports necessary for the Russian people to make a successful 
transition from communist rule to a modern, European-style economy and political system. Instead, he 
believes that premature globalization of the Russian economy will lead to greater hardship for the 
majority of Russian people and that it will lead to the concentration of vast wealth in a relatively limited 
number of hands of people with little or no incentive to reinvest in the Russian economy (Olcott, 2004, 
p. 16). 
follower of Gerschenkron, Hamilton and Baldwin. He believes that private businesses can be 
an important part of Russias development, but his support for private business actors is 
conditional on their participating in his dirigiste plan to achieve economic growth and 
international influence. If they actively undermine this plan, they can expect to meet a fate 
similar to that of Khodorkovsky and Yukos.  
Analysts who argue that the Putin regime has any genuine developmental ambitions still need 
to explain away the apparently negative implications of expanding state ownership for 
economic performance, and the undoubted impact on investor sentiment of shocking and 
legally dubious state expropriations of private businesses. Wengle (2012) stresses that the 
Russian state under Putin began its developmental push with certain significant disadvantages 
over the Asian and Latin American countries that are held up as successful examples of state-
led development. Firstly, Russia had to tackle simultaneously the fragmentation of state 
sovereignty that resulted from the collapse of the Soviet Union approximately a decade 
earlier. Secondly, it had negligible prior experience in its role as regulator of a market 
economy, and the requisite institutions had to be created from scratch. Thirdly, while other 
developmental states began as largely agrarian economies and pursued de novo 
industrialisation, Russia inherited a huge Soviet industrial legacy, much of which, for 
geographical and/or technological reasons, was unable to adjust overnight to market 
conditions.  
Wengles point is that these initial conditions make the task of state-led development 
particularly complicated in the Russian case. Many of the same initial conditions are cited by 
Tompson (2008) as factors explaining the expansion of state ownership in the 2000s. State 
ownership, in his view, was used as a developmental tool by a state that was struggling to 
achieve its goals through indirect methods such as regulation. Acquisitions by state-owned 
companies were in part used to correct market failure, some of which was down to the 
inability of inherited Soviet enterprises to adjust to market conditions. And state ownership 
was also a response to the perceived political threat from the oligarchs, the source of whose 
political power was the highly concentrated ownership of industrial assets, which had in turn 
arisen from the Soviet industrial legacy and the way this was privatised in the 1990s. 
Tompson notes that the state possessed both money and coercive power, and accordingly the 
expansion of state ownership had taken place both through voluntary sales and coercive 
takeovers. It is therefore all the more significant to point out that not all of the coercive 
takeovers have had nationalising outcomes: engineering the transfer of a privately-owned 
business to a new, less threatening private owner has been an alternative response to the same 
factors which Tompson sees as leading only to state ownership. Thus both nationalisation and 
coercive takeover, despite their negative direct impact on the economy, can be consistent with 
developmental motives in the specific circumstances of post-Soviet Russia. 
The rhetoric of Russias state actors supports the hypothesis that they perceived Russias 
sovereignty to be fragile, viewed this as of direct relevance to economic policymaking and 
treated powerful business interests inside the country as one of the principal threats to that 
sovereignty
. In his 2004 presidential address to parliament, Putin stated that in the last 
decade of the last century  in conditions of a destroyed economy and lost positions on world 
markets  Russia was obliged to restore its statehood and create a market economy that was 
new to us (Chadaev, 2006, pp. 151152). At the same event a year later, he called the 
collapse of the USSR at the end of 1991 the largest geopolitical catastrophe of the century 
and noted that the epidemic of collapse extended to Russia itself in the 1990s, posing a 
threat to the countrys territorial integrity (Putin, 2005). These concerns were echoed by 
Putins influential deputy chief of staff Vladislav Surkov in a 2005 speech to the business 
association Delovaya Rossiya (Sokolov, 2005). He noted that globalisation was making the 
term sovereignty look old-fashioned, but that people were deluding themselves if they 
 cf. Krasners (1999, p. 4) definition of domestic sovereignty as the formal organization of political 
authority within the state and the ability of the public authorities to exercise effective control within the 
borders of their own polity. 
thought that this meant sovereignty could be ignored. Many of the threats to sovereignty that 
he listed (including terrorism and the alleged role of the United States in Ukraines Orange 
Revolution) were not economic in nature. But he implied that sovereignty was the principal 
reason for the Yukos affair, saying that we will not allow a small group of companies to be 
the centre of power [vlast] in our country. And he argued that concern for sovereignty 
entails certain economic restrictions [] we see that national capital must either be in control 
or dominate in certain sectors. In an article on economic issues published in the run-up to the 
2012 presidential elections, Putin wrote that at the very beginning of my first presidential 
term we encountered persistent attempts to sell key assets into foreign hands. The preservation 
of strategic resources in the private hands of a few individuals meant that in the next five to 
ten years control of our economy would be exercised from outside (Putin, 2012). 
The same arguments have been made by Surkov and others in defence of what they term 
sovereign democracy. Ostensibly a brand of democracy intended for Russias specific 
conditions of fragile sovereignty, sovereign democracy has rightly been dismissed as little 
more than the illusion of democracy (Wilson, 2005). What the present author would call 
sovereign development, i.e. the Russian political leaderships pursuit of economic 
development in the specific conditions of fragile sovereignty, is quite different in that 
development is a genuine aim, for the sole reason that it enhances the power and prestige of 
the Russian state. But when a state is less than confident of its ability to exercise effective 
control within its own borders, and sees politically powerful economic actors (oligarchs) as 
one of the groups undermining such control, its developmental task is considerably more 
complex and fraught with conflict. Relying on privately-owned businesses as agents of 
development would risk augmenting their power further and worsening the perceived threat to 
sovereignty. The Russian developmental state was following two vectors: the strengthening of 
state sovereignty and state capacity on the one hand, and the pursuit of economic growth on 
the other. Occasionally, as when big business began to involve itself directly in policymaking 
areas normally reserved for the state, these two vectors pulled in opposite directions. State 
actors could then justify the seizure of Yukos (at least in their own minds), even if the impact 
on overall economic development was likely to be negative (and was certain to be negative in 
the short-term). As Tompson (2008, pp. 67) notes, state ownership presented an appealing 
option, despite the likelihood that it would lead to inferior economic performance, because of 
the apparent political threat posed by domestic and foreign private capital. But while 
simplistic models of interest-maximising state actors stress the importance of threats to 
incumbency, the political threat posed by private capital to the Putin regime exclusively 
related to diminished sovereignty rather than any credible danger that Putin would be 
unseated
The Soviet-era industrial legacy also contributed towards making Russias developmental 
state necessarily different in nature from its more successful counterparts. The latter have 
tended to focus on a few sectors that, with the right kind of targeted state assistance, are 
believed to hold the greatest potential to provide a major developmental breakthrough (Evans, 
1995, p. 58). Because many of Russias inherited industrial enterprises were both vast and 
located in towns where there was no other significant source of employment, simply giving 
them up to the forces of creative destruction would have had negative social consequences 
that even an authoritarian leadership ignored at their peril. But if a concern for the welfare of 
citizens will seem to some observers an unlikely motivation for Russias state actors, there 
were also pressing technical reasons why allowing much of the Soviet industrial legacy to fail 
would have had dire consequences. As Wengle (2012, p. 104) notes, While the Russian state 
promotes nanotechnology and seeks to create high-tech industrial clusters that imitate Silicon 
Valley, its development strategy cannot afford to lose track of infrastructure and other sectors 
that form the backbone of regional economies. The preoccupation with sovereignty included 
concerns regarding technological sovereignty, i.e. an unwillingness to permit the collapse of 
 See Chapter Two for an elaboration of this argument. 
strategically-important domestic industries because this would mean an unacceptable level of 
economic dependence on trade with foreign partners
. The SLCT and nationalisation of the 
giant Soviet-era car plant AvtoVAZ at the end of 2005 (Fedorinova & Stolyarov, 2006) was 
almost certainly driven by an unwillingness to see an end to Russias history of truly domestic 
automobile production on the one hand, and concern on the other hand that the plants 
collapse would have serious social consequences in the local town of Togliatti and the 
surrounding Samara region. Chapters Three and Four include additional cases where such 
considerations, if they were not the primary factor behind the decision to instigate the SLCT, 
certainly affected how the state and its allies managed the assets after they had taken control. 
Indeed, the way these assets were managed by the new owners provides powerful supporting 
evidence of the underlying developmental motives. When rent-seeking motives are central to 
coercive takeovers, one expects the new owners to engage in asset-stripping, or at best (if they 
feel secure enough to think in terms of long time-horizons) to invest in their acquisitions only 
insofar as it makes commercial sense to do so. Chapters Three and Four include cases where 
the new owners, by contrast, chose and invested in their acquisitions in ways that at times 
defied commercial logic, continuing to search for ways to keep the companies alive when they 
looked increasingly unviable
Although the above structural factors go some way towards explaining why the Putin regime 
pursued sovereign development, it would be wrong to portray the latter as merely a 
spontaneous and unmediated reaction to objective conditions. As North (1990, p. 17) 
observed, individuals make choices based on subjectively derived models that diverge among 
individuals and the information the actors receive is so incomplete that in most cases these 
 As discussed in Chapter Four, the preoccupation with technical sovereignty and the economic 
rationale behind it was made explicit in a 2010 government strategy document regarding the need to 
preserve the countrys heavy engineering capability. 
 See, in particular, Gazproms decision to take over the entirety of Zapsibgazprom (Chapter Three) 
despite the fact that the only asset of value was the gas field licence which it no longer owned; and 
Gazprombanks continuing to lend to OMZ (Chapter Four) after serious doubts had arisen as to its 
ability to continue as a going concern. 
divergent subjective models show no tendency to converge. What mattered more than the 
objective threats to sovereignty were the subjective perceptions of those threats on the part of 
state actors. These are mediated by ideology, and it is likely that the security service 
backgrounds of Putin and many of his associates gave rise to an exaggerated sensitivity to 
perceived threats to sovereignty and national security
. However, Putins speeches and 
writings also contained indications that he sympathised with more liberal conceptions of 
economic development. The increasing role of the state in the economy was nowhere and 
never announced openlyand it could not have been announced alongside declarations made 
about moving onwards to a competitive market economy, de-bureaucratisation and 
administrative reform (Radygin, 2008). In the aforementioned 2012 article on the economy, 
Putin did talk openly of the importance of the newly-created state corporations
, and of 
targeting certain promising sectors for state-led development (are we prepared to put 
Russias future at such great risk for the sake of the purity of economic theory?); but at the 
same time he denied that such policies amounted to state capitalism and pledged to reduce 
the states presence in numerous sectors. This is typically taken as a sign that Putins speeches 
(as well as his decisions on appointments relevant to economic policy) sought to maintain and 
reflect the balance of power between the liberal and siloviki factions. But it could equally 
well reflect his ambivalent attitude towards the appropriate role of the state in economic 
development: on the one hand, a belief that state intervention was a necessary corrective to the 
negative effects more liberal economic policies would have on Russias fragile sovereignty, 
and on the other, support for greater liberalisation as an engine of economic growth. 
 For anecdotal evidence of this mindset, see the remarks made by Vladimir Yakunin, a close associate 
of Putins, former diplomat and head of state-owned Russian Railways, to the effect that the overthrow 
of Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovich in February 2014 was the work of a global financial 
oligarchy aimed at destroying Russia as a geopolitical opponent (Belton, 2014). See also the 
discussion of the siloviki world-view in Kryshtanovskaya and White (2005, pp. 10714). 
 For a discussion of the state corporations and their significance, see Volkov (2008b). 
Research question 2: ownership outcome of state-led coercive 
takeovers 
As noted earlier, the fact that two of Russias recent SLCTs (at Russneft and Bashneft) did 
not result in nationalisation does not on its own negate the possibility that rent-seeking 
motivates state actors to instigate such takeovers. It does, however, suggest the need for 
further investigation in order to understand exactly what led to these non-nationalising 
outcomes. 
An alternative explanation starts with the explanation given by Tompson (2008) for the 
expansion of state ownership in Putins Russia. As noted earlier, Tompson sees state 
ownership as a developmental response to the particular conditions Russia found itself in at 
the beginning of Putins first presidency, but also as the only option that remains when the 
state no longer trusts foreign capital or domestic private capital. He also believes that rent-
seeking forms part of the explanation, noting that the developmental motive dovetails neatly 
with the effect of providing patronage opportunities for the elite. 
Hanson (2009) was the first to note (with Russneft as his main example) that some SLCTs 
have private ownership outcomes, and to discuss the implications of such outcomes for our 
understanding of the trend towards greater state ownership. Going back to first principles, he 
breaks down the possible motivations of state actors engaging in micro-targeted state 
interventions into 1) the pursuit of economic growth, 2) neutralising threats to their power, 
and 3) self-enrichment. He suggests that, at least for the oil industry, Russian state actors are 
likely to be driven by a combination of the two self-interested motivations rather than 
economic development. For either of these motivations, state-owned and privately-owned 
companies are, in his view, of roughly equivalent value: the rent-seeking potential in private 
companies is approximately the same as for state-owned companies
, and if the state actors 
are instead in the business of undermining potential political adversaries, then this can be 
achieved without the need for nationalisation.  
Hanson does not, however, offer an explanation that would help us to answer the second 
research question of the thesis, i.e. to understand what causal factors determine whether a 
particular SLCT results in nationalisation, transfer to a new private owner, or some kind of 
half-way quasi-state ownership. For the purposes of this second research question, the 
dependent variable ownership outcome is operationalised along similar lines to the 
approach taken by Pappe and Galukhina (2009, p. 162). State ownership of a business is 
defined as possession of a majority of voting shares in that business
. Importantly, the state 
can own these shares either directly, or indirectly via entities that it controls on the same basis. 
For example, if the state directly owns a majority of the voting shares in a company, and that 
company then buys a majority voting stake in a previously privately-owned business, that 
business is itself considered to have been transferred to state ownership
Correspondingly, private ownership of a business is defined as a situation where no state 
ownership pertains. Thus even if no individual private actor controls a majority of shares in a 
company, it is still considered to be under private ownership if there is no majority state 
ownership.  
Between these two outcomes there are also situations where a company is only de facto under 
state control, i.e. where state control pertains despite the absence of a formal majority voting 
stake. For example, Chapter Three discusses the situation at Gazprom in the early 2000s, 
 Hanson cites the example of Leonid Reiman, who while serving as Russias Telecoms Minister is 
alleged to have been the hidden beneficial owner of a Bermuda-registered company which held stakes 
in two of Russias three main mobile operators. 
 Also under state ownership are those state-owned enterprises that have not issued shares (e.g. the 
Russian legal form state unitary enterprise, or GUP). But since the companies discussed in this thesis 
are primarily joint-stock companies, the emphasis is on control through possession of voting shares. 
  Also in common with Pappe and Galukhina, the term nationalisation is used to describe this 
transfer into state ownership, irrespective of how it is brought about. 
where the state did not control a majority of voting shares in the company but was able to 
cobble one together through ad hoc agreements with other shareholders. The state was 
unhappy with this situation, and went to considerable effort to increase its stake to above 50%. 
The fact that it saw this as so important underlines the extent to which voting control is crucial 
in Russian corporate governance, and hence the appropriateness of voting control as the 
criterion for operationalising ownership outcomes.   
Towards a theory of the ownership outcomes 
Four Russian expertsPappe and Galukhina (2009, pp. 1615) and Radygin and Malginov 
(2006)have compiled a set of considerations that might prompt a particular company to be 
taken into state ownership. These can be synthesised as follows: 
1) a government-level decision that a certain enterprise or sector should be state-dominated, 
either 
a) in order to simplify the task of administration in that sector and the wider economy, 
b) to protect the enterprise or sector (and that section of society which is particularly 
dependent on it) from global competition or market failure, or 
c) to capture for the state the rents from that enterprise or sector, or 
d) for reasons of national security; 
2) a decision taken at the level of the state-owned company, acting on purely commercial 
considerations. This can be at the state-owned companys initiative (with the existing owner 
either cooperating or resisting) or at the sellers initiative. 
The above framework applies to any M&A activity, however. In the specific context of 
SLCTs, the likelihood is reduced that they have been undertaken for purely commercial 
considerations at the initiative of a state-owned company, though that is still possible in 
principle. All of the proposed explanations in the above framework assume that 
nationalisation was the intended outcome of the takeover. How to incorporate private 
ownership outcomes into the model, to arrive at an explanation that helps predict which 
outcome will result from a particular SLCT? 
In the cases studied in Chapter Two, it is argued that the primary concern of the state was to 
deprive the existing owners of their assets: whether those assets were transferred to state or 
private hands was a matter of secondary importance. Understanding which of these outcomes 
resulted starts with viewing the takeover process in SLCTs as a form of bargaining game.  
The Yukos affair involved the full-scale use of the states coercive resources to effectively 
seize the company and pursue criminal convictions against a large number of shareholders, 
managers and other associated individuals. Although there have been many mini-Yukos 
cases subsequently, and some similar cases came before it, the scale of the coercive operation 
against Yukos has not come close to being repeated in any other case. All of the case studies 
in the following chapters have one important element in common that promises to explain 
why the Yukos affair has not been repeated: they all (including Yukos) saw the state first 
making an offer to end the coercion if the existing owner agreed to sell.  
What prompted the state to first make such a carrot-and-stick offer
, instead of simply 
seizing the companies from the outset, was the fact that full-scale coercive methods are a 
substantial drain on bureaucratic resources. As the discussion of the Yukos affair in Chapter 
Two will demonstrate, they involve coordination across government departments and coercive 
agencies, and large teams of lawyers and accountants. 
 For the use of the term carrot-and-stick in bargaining in an international relations context, see 
Greffenius and Gill (1992). 
The case studies will also highlight significant institutional constraints that mean SLCTs are 
not just a one-way trampling of private business owners property rights by the state. Various 
legal and institutional factors, both domestic and international in nature, provide business 
owners with important defensive tactics. These tactics may not prevent a determined state 
from pursuing full-scale asset seizure once it has resolved to do so. But they offer a way to 
increase the costs of such an approach, and to reduce the material benefits to the state; as a 
result, they contribute to the states preference for a negotiated solution, which gives the 
targeted business owner the opportunity to bargain for a less-bad outcome. 
One such defensive tactic, which plays a part in many of the case studies, is the 
internationalisation of the targeted business. Within Russias jurisdiction, corners can be cut 
by the state: judges ordered to hand down a certain verdict, defence lawyers intimidated, 
criminal charges fabricated and assets physically seized. If a company has offshore ownership 
and an international banking infrastructure, it can move to transfer a large proportion of the 
businesss value out of the reach of the Russian state (if it was ever physically located inside 
Russias borders in the first place). If the state wants to pursue international asset seizures 
through the courts, it can no longer rely on fabricating the charges that form the legal basis for 
such seizures. The states own international assets become vulnerable to legal counter-claims 
brought by the business owner.  
The existing literature indicates that Russian companies defend their property rights from 
expropriation by enlisting foreign minority shareholders who can apply pressure on the 
government at the diplomatic level (Markus, 2008), forming horizontal alliances through 
business organisations (Markus, 2007), or investing in public goods to increase the 
reputational costs to the state if it decides to expropriate (Frye, 2006). But the 
internationalisation and offshoring of ownership and financial flows is arguably far more 
important as a defensive tactic. The case studies will also show, however, that it is not just 
international exposure that constrains the behaviour of the state actors involved in SLCTs: 
significant domestic leg
of the cases. 
Figure 2 represents the takeover process as a bargaining game between state and existing 
owner. With the carrot
to the business owner 
pair). The number 3 represents the optimal outcome
Figure 2. The takeover as bargaining game
significant domestic leg
of the cases.  
represents the takeover process as a bargaining game between state and existing 
With the carrot
to the business owner (the first number of each pair) and the state (the second number of each 
pair). The number 3 represents the optimal outcome
. The takeover as bargaining game
significant domestic legal and institutional factors also shape the specific ownership outcomes 
represents the takeover process as a bargaining game between state and existing 
With the carrot-and-stick offer as the starting point, t
to the business owner (the first number of each pair) and the state (the second number of each 
pair). The number 3 represents the optimal outcome
. The takeover as bargaining game
al and institutional factors also shape the specific ownership outcomes 
represents the takeover process as a bargaining game between state and existing 
k offer as the starting point, t
(the first number of each pair) and the state (the second number of each 
pair). The number 3 represents the optimal outcome
. The takeover as bargaining game 
al and institutional factors also shape the specific ownership outcomes 
represents the takeover process as a bargaining game between state and existing 
k offer as the starting point, t
(the first number of each pair) and the state (the second number of each 
pair). The number 3 represents the optimal outcome. 
al and institutional factors also shape the specific ownership outcomes 
represents the takeover process as a bargaining game between state and existing 
k offer as the starting point, the numbers repres
(the first number of each pair) and the state (the second number of each 
al and institutional factors also shape the specific ownership outcomes 
represents the takeover process as a bargaining game between state and existing 
he numbers represent the payoffs 
(the first number of each pair) and the state (the second number of each 
al and institutional factors also shape the specific ownership outcomes 
represents the takeover process as a bargaining game between state and existing 
ent the payoffs 
(the first number of each pair) and the state (the second number of each 
It should be stressed that this is intended not as a formal model to be solved by backward 
induction, but rather as an illustration of the bargaining process involved
. As discussed 
earlier, the basic payoffs given above are altered in practice by defensive tactics available to 
the existing owners, and by certain institutional constraints on the states ability to seize assets 
at will. The case of Bashneft, where the bargaining process dragged on for many years, will 
highlight the fact that the state is not forced to choose immediately between full-scale asset 
seizure and abandoning the takeover when faced with a recalcitrant owner: it can choose 
instead to restart the process on the basis of a revised offer.  
Some SLCTs will undoubtedly take place with a specific ownership outcome (e.g. state 
ownership, or even ownership by a specific state-owned company) in mind. But others may 
not, and it is suggested that the cases in Chapter Two are among them. Either way, the 
argument is that the ownership outcome is affected by the outcome of the takeover as 
bargaining game, as follows: 
1) If the state pursues full-scale asset seizure following refusal of the carrot-and-stick 
offer, then nationalisation is likely to result. 
2) Acceptance of the carrot-and-stick offer can lead to either ownership outcome, 
depending on which kinds of company have the means and appetite to make the 
acquisition. However, private buyers can be favoured because they can act as 
intermediaries between state and existing owner, thereby increasing the likelihood of 
the negotiated solution that the state prefers.  
The review of the thesis structure, at the end of this introductory chapter, shows how this 
argument is developed and justified over the course of the case studies that follow. 
 cf. Przeworski (1991) for similar use of game trees to illustrate interactions without subscribing fully 
to formal game theory models. 
Do institutions constrain state coercion in Russia? 
Categorising Russia as a kleptocracy implies not only that state actors are intent on stealing 
from citizens, but that there are few or no meaningful constraints on their doing so. As 
mentioned earlier, the central argument of the commitment problem literature is that states 
that are strong enough to protect property rights are also strong enough to attack them, unless 
there are coercion-constraining institutions in place to keep state predation in check. In the 
cases that follow, this central argument of the commitment problem still pertains, despite 
the fact that the state is shown to be attacking property rights for reasons other than self-
enrichment or self-aggrandisement. 
Frye (2004) notes that we have little knowledge about which specific institutions are 
especially important in ensuring the security of property rights. From his survey of Russian 
businesses aimed at addressing this problem, he concludes that the state is a major threat to 
property rights, and that the main coercion-constraining institution (or set of institutions) 
required to address this problem is a legal system and judiciary that is independent of the 
executive. 
The term telephone law (or telephone justice) is commonly used to describe how Russias 
political leadership can influence the outcomes of court cases, by issuing direct or indirect 
instructions to judges (e.g. Hendley, 2009; Ledeneva, 2008). Telephone justice, then, 
denotes the lack of independence of the legal system from the executive, i.e. the absence of 
the main set of institutions necessary to prevent attacks by the state on property rights. But 
while there is consensus among scholars that telephone justice is an important characteristic 
of Russias legal system, there is an ongoing debate regarding whether the entire system can 
be dismissed as having no independence from the executive. Ledeneva (2008, 2011) uses 
survey evidence to support her claim that telephone justice best characterises the 
relationship between the executive and the legal system
. However, she also calls for further 
research to be undertaken before this can be confirmed. Hendley (2006, 2009) does not 
dispute the existence of telephone justice and cites the Yukos affair as the most infamous 
example; but importantly, she argues that there is a functioning legal system operating in 
parallel that is free from political influence. She notes that this was the case even in Soviet 
times, but also that there has been considerable progress in post-Soviet Russia in some areas 
of the law. She therefore describes Russias legal system as dualistic, arguing that it is 
better seen as an equilibrium that somehow balances rule by law and rule of law 
(Hendley, 2009). Hendley has also offered the most plausible explanation for how these two 
contrasting legal domains coexist in one jurisdiction: while telephone justice holds sway in 
cases where the Kremlin or regional leaders have taken a specific interest in the outcome, 
outside that sphere the courts operate with a reasonable degree of professionalism and largely 
free from political influence
The Yukos affair is rightly cited as an example that confirms the lack of adequate constraints 
on the Russian states ability to attack property rights through the selective enforcement of 
laws and the arbitrary use of state power (Frye, 2004, p. 455 fn. 3). Indeed, in none of the 
cases that follow is the state prevented by institutions from applying arbitrary coercion in the 
first instance (if there were no state coercion involved, the takeovers would not qualify as 
cases). However, as the discussion in the previous section suggests and the case studies will 
demonstrate, legal considerations featured heavily in influencing the Russian states 
preference for a negotiated outcome over full-scale coercive seizure. In other words, there are 
 Ledeneva defines telephone justice as "the practice of making an informal command, request, or 
signal in order to influence formal procedures or decision-making". While corruption implies that 
decision-makers are given monetary incentives to act in a particular way; 'telephone justice' uses other 
means of influence, such as threatening to damage the decision-maker's career prospects if they fail to 
act in a particular way. 
 Hendley also portrays Russians as 'savvy consumers' who instinctively understand which kinds of 
legal dispute can be taken to court with the expectation of a fair trial, and conversely which will never 
receive a fair trial because of the powerful interests they would be up against (Hendley, 2009). Hendley 
(2012, p. 169) notes that not only has the Kremlin used the courts to go after its enemies, but it has 
looked the other way when regional leaders have done the same. 
constraints on the states appetite for coercive seizure of assets, and this helps to improve the 
outcome for the existing owner who is targeted for SLCT. The finding that not all of these 
constraints are international in nature supports Hendleys argument that some progress has 
been made towards rule of law in Russia. Chapter 5 will return to this topic and discuss how 
the case studies add to an understanding of where the dividing line runs between rule of law 
and telephone justice in Russia. 
Method 
The two research questions require a method which makes it possible to discern the 
motivations and decision-making processes that prompt state actors to instigate SLCTs, and 
the motivations and institutional constraints which determine the ownership outcomes of those 
takeovers. As a result, they do not lend themselves to quantitative methods, which tend to treat 
as a black box the decision-making processes of individuals and organisations that lie 
between the inputs and outputs of social phenomena (George & McKeown, 1985, p. 41). 
Furthermore, it will become clear from the case studies that attempts to determine the value of 
the dependent variable for a particular takeover can be fraught with difficulty: for example, in 
Chapter Four, extensive investigation is required in order to establish who owned the 
company OMZ after the coercive takeover, and what relationship that owner had to the state. 
The new beneficial owner went to considerable lengths to keep its identity secret. Through 
careful research it is possible to identify this buyer, but it then emerges that the entity in 
question is of a kind that has no owners according to Russian law. It becomes necessary to 
engage in what might be dismissed as Kremlinology in order to choose between the two 
opposing theories in Russias media and expert commentary concerning whether this 
mysterious entity had effectively been privatised in favour of a business actor linked to 
Putin, or was in fact still under the management control of state-owned Gazprom. The 
difficulty in establishing the value of the dependent variable of individual cases poses an 
insurmountable challenge to any researcher attempting to apply quantitative methods to 
answer the research question regarding the ownership outcome.   
Process-tracing offers an approach that enables the researcher to tackle complex reality at a 
granular (rather than abstracted) level, while still aspiring to scientific validity. As George and 
McKeown (1985, p. 24) point out, process-tracing is distinct from quasi-experimental 
methods in that it allows for theory formation as well as theory testing (whereas statistical 
analysis is reserved for the latter). It is therefore an appropriate choice for research questions 
that begin, as this project began, without a clear hypothesis (besides a suspicion that theories 
based on rent-seeking and kleptocracy were inadequate for the purposes of explaining the 
cases). 
Gerring (2006, p. 185) suggests that it may not be appropriate to describe process-tracing as a 
scientific method, because it may be impossible to arrive at a set of standardized 
methodological rules. But he argues that with sufficient documentation, process-tracing 
accounts become verifiable by those intimately familiar with that region, policy area, or 
historical era. Accordingly, the case studies that follow take seriously the need to cite 
evidence for every substantial assertion that is made, and to note any concerns when the 
evidence that has been found is not enough to be entirely confident of the assertion. What kind 
of data sources are used as evidence is discussed in the following section. 
Various scholars (George & McKeown, 1985; Hall, 2003; Van Evera, 1997) have made 
significant contributions towards the formation of an appropriately scientific and standardised 
approach to process-tracing. In addition to the emphasis on documentation, the present author 
has sought to heed the following guidelines aimed at making the process-tracing approach as 
robust as possible:  
 In order to deflect criticism that process-tracing is indistinguishable from historical 
narrative, description must be combined with some making, testing or application of 
a theory (Van Evera, 1997, p. 53). 
 Explicitly stating a causal hypothesis, then systematically checking whether or not the 
case evidence derived from the data sources is consistent with that hypothesis. 
Thereby checking each of the several links in the chain of cause and effect that goes 
to make up the causal explanation. Seeing whether the statements public and private 
made by actors are in line with the image of the world implied by each theory (Hall, 
2003; Van Evera, 1997). 
 Crucially, considering also whether the case evidence fits better with alternative 
hypotheses.  
 Use of counterfactuals to gain explanatory leverage (Fearon, 1991; Gerring, 2006, p. 
 Ensuring that theories derived from process-tracing are simple enough to be easily 
arrow-diagrammed. If this cannot be done, the theory itself is likely to be too 
muddy (Van Evera, 1997). 
Much of the criticism of small-n, case study methods holds true only when those methods are 
used to make inferences that are widely generalizable. As Hall (2003) notes, if we see the 
central enterprise of social science, not as one of finding correlations between an outcome and 
a few independent variables, but as the more central one of devising and testing causal 
theories, small-n comparison and single case-studies constitute viable research designs with 
important roles to play in causal inference. 
 This technique proved particularly useful in developing explanations for the ownership outcomes in 
Chapter Two. 
The task of answering the first research question (the motivations behind the takeovers) is not 
to develop a general theory explaining the causes of SLCT in Russia. Instead, the goal is to 
demonstrate that some SLCTs cannot be explained by reference to rent-seeking and 
kleptocracy (i.e. do not fall inside the intersecting areas of the venn diagram in Figure 1), and 
to test the alternative (sovereign development) hypothesis for these cases. It may be that 
only a handful of relatively high-profile cases are better explained in this way, while a much 
larger number of smaller-scale cases are better explained as reiderstvo
. It would be 
unsurprising if the finite capacities of the state limited its interest in changing ownership at 
particular businesses to those which are of special political or economic significance.  
Gans-Morse (2012, p. 264) focuses instead on a much larger domain of threats posed by state 
actors to ordinary, non-oligarchic firms, and argues that the focus on higher-profile cases 
offers a skewed and unrepresentative portrayal of modern-day Russian business practices. The 
aim of this thesis, however, is not to portray such business practices, but to gain insight into 
the reasons for, and methods of, the Russian states interventions in the economy. The high-
profile cases chosen for examination are of significant inherent interest from this perspective, 
as well as arguing against the use of rent-seeking as the primary analytical framework for 
explaining economic interventions by states. 
With regard to the second research question (the ownership outcomes of SLCTs), the project 
does seek to provide an explanatory theory that accounts for the variance in the ownership 
outcome dependent variable. Accordingly, the within-case approach of process-tracing is 
used here in conjunction with complementary comparative case study methods, namely the 
Mills method of agreement and method of difference (Mill, 1904). Accordingly, cases 
were in part chosen according to the values of the dependent variable, i.e. similar and different 
forms of ownership resulting from the takeovers. The drawbacks of Mills methods for small-
 This is the argument made by Gans-Morse (2012). It may be that further cases of political SLCT 
are found at the sub-national level. 
n studies (including the problem of omitted variable bias) are well documented, and 
arguably they are close to useless on their own. But they can be effective when used in 
conjunction with careful process-tracing (George & McKeown, 1985, p. 153; Hall, 2003, p. 
381). Mills methods can suggest causal relationships between independent and dependent 
variables, while process-tracing can help to confirm or reject those relationships through 
close inspection of causal processes, verifying whether the proposed explanatory variables 
are really affecting the dependent variable in the way that was predicted. 
Data sources 
The project has mainly relied on the following data sources: 
 media reports, primarily from the Russian business press; 
 companies official announcements and disclosures. 
There is a widespread perception that the Russian media lacks professionalism and 
objectivity, in particular because of censorship and self-censorship. While this is true for 
many areas of the media (notably television), it does not hold for the business press, some 
sections of which are an island of professionalism largely untouched by censorship or self-
censorship (except, occasionally, when it ventures into sensitive political terrain). Russian 
business journalists, particularly in the leading papers Vedomosti and Kommersant, and the 
magazines Forbes and (with some qualifications) Ekspert, ask penetrating questions of the 
business owners and managers they interview. Perhaps surprisingly, they often receive 
substantive answers to those questions. It will hopefully become clear from the case studies 
that follow, and the way that articles from the business press are used as evidence, that the 
level of insight and intrusion into the affairs of the countrys companies and business actors 
places Russias business journalism on a level perhaps even higher than its Western 
counterparts. 
Granted, there are also poor-quality news sources in the Russian business press, and a 
discerning approach to those sources is essential to the quality of the overall analysis. The 
author is confident that long years of familiarity with the Russian media give him an 
appropriate sense of which outlets to give a measure of implicit trust, the appropriate limits of 
that trust, and how to spot the tell-tale signs of unprofessional journalism. By surveying the 
bibliography, readers with sufficient expertise of their own can judge for themselves whether 
this confidence is well-placed. 
There are naturally some pitfalls to a reliance on media reports for evidence. For example, two 
different newspapers each citing an unnamed source (as they often do) may in fact have 
spoken to the same individual; the fact that the stories corroborate each other does not 
constitute independent verification. As another example, where a newsworthy event is about 
to happen, it goes heavily reported; but if for some reason the interesting event fails to come 
to pass, then no news outlets deem it sufficiently newsworthy to merit a mention (Pappe, 
2000, p. 20). All the more reason, as Pappe argues, to seek confirmation elsewhere before 
assuming that media reports are accurate. 
Fortunately, disclosure requirements that have been put in place in the past two decades for 
Russian companies in general (but particularly for the open joint-stock companies that make 
up the majority of Russias big businesses) mean that a wealth of detail is often publicly 
available that ranges from the state of company finances, biographical details of its managers 
and directors, ownership structure, credit history, through to timely disclosure of events that 
are set to have a material impact on the companys value
. Many large companies have 
additionally begun publishing accounts to International Accounting Standards (IAS). These 
give a consolidated picture that represents the state of affairs at the group as a whole rather 
 Such information is typically available in the about us or for investors and shareholders sections 
of Russian company websites. Furthermore, certain specialist websites (such as Interfax news agencys 
www.e-disclosure.ru) offer searchable databases of Russian company disclosures, including archived 
copies of disclosure documents that are no longer available from company websites. 
than one specific entity
, and are meant to provide details of beneficial ownership. The value 
of these disclosures as evidence is that they are typically signed off by the companys chief 
executive and chief accountant, placing a legal responsibility on them for the accuracy of the 
information disclosed. In addition, quarterly and annual reports are independently audited, 
though there are of course questions over whether auditors are truly independent in practice in 
some cases.  
Official disclosures therefore make a vital contribution to this project as a way to verify 
information that comes to light in the business press, and as a source of some detail (e.g. the 
precise date of a transaction, the precise amount paid for an asset, and often crucial 
information regarding ownership) that may not have been sufficiently newsworthy to have 
featured in media reports.  
One notable omission from the data sources listed above is that of interviews conducted by the 
author. The people best placed in principle to answer many of the questions posed by the case 
studies are those state actors, company managers and business owners who were directly 
involved in the takeovers. However, there were several serious obstacles that prevented 
interviews with such individuals becoming a significant data source for the case studies. The 
main one was access. Only a small group of individuals were party to information that was 
both crucial to the case studies and above and beyond what was already publicly available. 
Where it was possible to find and approach these individuals, persuading them to talk was a 
major challenge. Western academic researchers access to Russias business and political elite 
has become increasingly restricted since the heady days of the early 1990s. But the challenge 
was also to persuade such individuals, if they were prepared to talk at all, to provide the 
specific points of detail that were required, rather than boilerplate answers. Much of this detail 
 Companies continue to publish entity-specific accounts to Russian Accounting Standards (RAS), 
which are also publicly available via the statistics agency Rosstat, and additionally (for those entities 
which have issued securities) in quarterly reports whose publication is required by the securities 
regulator. 
constituted commercially sensitive information, and there was little upside for potential 
interview subjects to give it away to a doctoral researcher who could offer little or nothing in 
return. 
The quality of coverage provided by Russian business journalists has compensated somewhat 
for the lack of interviews. Russian business journalists have a level of access to the nations 
elite that a foreign doctoral researcher can in most cases only dream of. They also tend to ask 
questions that this researcher would have asked, if he had the same level of access. As a result, 
the project has piggybacked at times on the work of journalists who interviewed the 
principal actors in the case studies, or who have cited sources close to a deal or a company 
that has played a role in those case studies. 
In the final analysis, however, it must be acknowledged that the data sources used in this 
project are less than ideal; this and the relatively small number of cases leaves some room for 
uncertainty regarding the findings. For example, it is possible that hidden patrons among 
state officials were both pulling the strings behind the scenes in some of these takeovers, and 
drawing rents from the businesses afterwards by methods that simply do not register in the 
data sources available for study. It would be surprising, though, if these entirely unseen 
processes were playing a more significant causal role than the ones whose evidence can be 
traced in the sources that were available. A definitive answer has not been provided as to 
whether or not a genuine carrot-and-stick offer was ever made by the state to resolve the 
Yukos affair peacefully. But there are certainly credible grounds for believing that there was 
such an offer. Such uncertainty is inherent in the study of politics, particularly in the 
Byzantine world of Kremlin politics. The best way to deal with it is to do what we can in as 
honest and as scientific a way as we can, rather than simply giving up and going in search of 
phenomena that are more amenable to scientific analysis. 
Structure of the thesis 
This thesis is weighted heavily towards the case studies that form the basis of the three 
substantive chapters that follow. 
Chapter Two examines the Yukos affair and two later cases from the oil industry, involving 
the smaller companies Russneft and Bashneft. In these cases, it was the sovereign side of 
sovereign development that provided the main motivation for the SLCTs. It is argued that 
the perceived threats to sovereignty posed by the existing business owners were the main 
reason for instigating the takeovers. The main goal was depriving the owners of their 
businesses, and what ownership outcome resulted was of secondary importance. In each case, 
a carrot-and-stick offer was made to the existing owner, and a private (potential) buyer 
played a part as intermediary who could facilitate a negotiated solution (Abramovich and 
Sibneft in the case of Yukos, Deripaska and later Yevtushenkov at Russneft, and 
Yevtushenkov at Bashneft). Once the Kremlin had concluded that Khodorkovsky was 
refusing such an offer, full-scale seizure and nationalisation were all but guaranteed. In the 
other two cases, the existing owners were more amenable to a negotiated solution. They sold 
their businesses to the private buyers for amounts approaching their market value, and, in 
stark contrast to Khodorkovsky, they remained at liberty.  
Chapter Three goes back chronologically to 2002, the year before the Yukos affair began. It 
examines how de facto state-controlled Gazprom used state coercion to take back into its 
ownership three companies that had been lost (or were at risk of being lost) under its previous 
management. Taking back one of these companies was important for the strategic objective of 
bringing state ownership of Gazprom up to a direct majority stake, thus turning its ad hoc 
control into consolidated de jure control. This was in turn driven by the importance of 
Gazprom as a tool of domestic economic policy and of foreign policy. Some of the 
motivations behind the decision to take back the other assets (and what was done with those 
assets subsequently) involved using Gazprom as a tool of economic development.  
A state ownership outcome was pre-determined by the states objectives for Gazproms 
SLCTs. But Gazprom used an intermediary figure of its own to negotiate with the targeted 
owners, in the shape of a businessman named Alisher Usmanov who was chief executive of a 
Gazprom subsidiary named Gazprominvestholding. In addition to this role, he was a major 
private businessman in his own right, as well as someone who had worked with the former 
management of Gazprom, with which the existing owners of the targeted assets had had close 
ties. Usmanov actively played on this dual status to help persuade the existing owners to 
accept the carrot-and-stick offer. This reinforces the argument that the state prefers a 
negotiated outcome over full-scale asset seizure, and the suggestion that a state ownership 
outcome is problematic from this perspective. 
Examination of how the takeovers proceeded highlights further the states concerns about 
embarking on full-scale asset seizure. Some of the reasons for this reluctance include domestic 
considerations: Gazprom initiated bankruptcy proceedings, only to discover that it risked 
losing to rival Russian creditors much of the value of the targeted businesses. In a kleptocracy, 
it is unlikely that a state-owned company would face any such dangers when embarking on 
expropriation with the full support of its masters in government. 
The case studies examine why the Gazprom subsidiary Gazprominvestholding acted as buyer 
rather than ownership being taken directly by the parent company. Part of the answer lies with 
Usmanovs role as intermediary, but it also becomes clear that domestic regulations relating to 
corporate governance prevented Gazprom from acting swiftly in response to the developing 
situation of the takeovers. It used its subsidiary to bypass these constraints. Though these 
constraints did not prevent the SLCTs, they clearly shaped Gazproms behaviour in ways that 
reinforce further the argument made by Hendley (2009) that rule of law and telephone 
justice somehow coexist in Russia.   
Chapter Four examines the takeover in 2004 and 2005 of two companies involved in heavy 
engineering for the nuclear industry, namely Atomstroieksport and OMZ. These were 
strategic enterprises that were essential to Russias indigenous capability to build nuclear 
power stations at home and abroad, and had come under the control of private businessman 
Kakha Bendukidze. For reasons of national security, international trade relations and 
technological sovereignty, the state was determined to bring them back into state ownership.  
Although sufficient evidence of state coercion is found to include these takeovers as valid 
cases, they met with little resistance from the existing owner, who was in any case 
contemplating an exit. The focus of the case studies is therefore, firstly, on how institutional 
constraints shaped the specific ownership outcome. The way the Atomstroieksport and OMZ 
acquisitions were executed, and the precise way in which ownership was structured, were 
clearly influenced by regulations which dictated the need to gain approval for acquisitions 
above a certain size from the domestic antitrust regulator. Additionally, legal considerations 
prompted the buyer, Gazprom, to conceal its involvement in the OMZ purchase, and it did so 
using the peculiar legal status of its pension fund, Gazfond, which acted as the buying entity. 
Gazprom effectively bypassed these institutional constraints to achieve what it wanted. It did 
so primarily by finding loopholes in the law, but occasionally it also flouted it. This mixed 
picture reflects the patchy but increasing powers of the antitrust body to sanction non-
compliance with the relevant legislation.   
The story of how the buyers managed their new assets centres around their relationship with 
the government agency, Rosatom, which was prepared to spend billions of dollars on new 
equipment for its planned expansion of nuclear energy capacity. The Gazprom-linked buyers 
were under state control but were not subordinate to this government agency. Both sides 
claimed to be committed to working together to help realise the governments developmental 
plans for the industry, and the evidence shows that this was no empty rhetoric. But they failed 
to cooperate, thereby putting in danger the entire government programme. Part of the 
explanation for this failure lies in a lack of coordination between government agencies, 
leaving them to pursue their own institutional agendas. The account underlines the important 
role played by a coordinating pilot agency in successful state-led development (Johnson, 
1982), and illustrates how corruption need not be central to explaining how government 
developmental strategies can fail in the absence of such a pilot agency.   
Chapter Five concludes by pulling together the evidence in support of the sovereign 
development hypothesis, and returning to the theory of the ownership outcomes in order to 
incorporate the points discussed during the case studies. It summarises what these cases tell us 
about the commitment problem and the literature regarding coercion-constraining 
institutions, given the importance of institutional constraints in the causal explanations of the 
ownership outcomes. The evidence suggests ways in which we can improve our 
understanding of how rule of law and telephone justice coexist in contemporary Russia. 
The main conclusion is that the Russian state under Putin is better understood as a flawed 
developmental state than as a kleptocracy. Its political leadership has an interest in pursuing 
economic development and has sought to achieve it through dirigiste state interventions in the 
economy. But the effectiveness of such efforts has been undermined in two ways. Firstly, the 
pursuit of development has frequently been trumped by an overriding preoccupation with 
countering perceived threats to sovereignty. Secondly, the governments commitment to 
development has not been backed up by an institutional design that would permit a single 
pilot organisation to devise and implement a coherent strategy of state-led economic 
development. 
Chapter 2. Yukos, Russneft and Bashneft 
Introduction 
This chapter provides a comparative study of three companies in the Russian oil sector, 
namely Yukos, Russneft and Bashneft
. In all three cases, the authorities took action against 
the existing owners and sought to bring about a takeover. The outcome of the takeover 
differed across the cases in terms of the new form of ownership (i.e. the value of the 
dependent variable for the second research question): Yukos was effectively nationalised, 
Bashneft was taken over by a private business group named AFK Sistema, while in the case 
of Russneft an attempted takeover by privately-owned company Basic Element was held in 
limbo for many months pending regulatory approval, before it was ultimately unwound and 
the company returned to its original private owner.  
The aim of the study is to shed light on why the state intervened in each case, and why the 
ownership outcomes differed. Tompson (2005, 2008) has explained the Yukos affair and the 
companys de facto nationalisation by identifying causal factors which prompted the Russian 
government to increase the level of state ownership in strategic sectors, of which the oil 
industry is arguably the most important. As noted in the opening chapter, the ownership 
outcomes of the Russneft and Bashneft cases present a puzzle in this context. If there were 
good reasons for bringing the oil industry into state ownership, why was the opportunity not 
seized to ensure Russneft and Bashneft also ended up in state hands? 
 The name Bashneft is here used to refer to a loose grouping of companies in the Russian republic 
of Bashkortostan, of which the oil producing company Bashneft was in fact just one. Other companies 
in the group included four oil refineries and a chain of petrol stations. A more typical Russian label for 
this grouping was Bashkirskii TEK, but for simplicitys sake Bashneft is used here instead. 
In line with the sovereign development hypothesis that was explained in the previous 
chapter, it is argued here that the Russian government was driven by political factors to force 
the existing owners of these three businesses to part with their assets. These were cases where 
the drive for development was trumped by the need to act against perceived threats to 
sovereignty posed by the owners. In the Yukos case the threat was to sovereignty at the 
federal level: its owners were becoming involved in policymaking areas that the government 
considered to be its sole prerogative. At Russneft and Bashneft, the owners were seen as 
threatening the Kremlins ability to project its authority in the Russian republics of Ingushetia 
and Bashkortostan respectively. 
The case studies demonstrate that the ownership outcomes of the takeovers were strikingly 
contingent in nature. There was a credible alternative scenario whereby Yukos might instead 
have been sold to a different private owner, and Russneft and Bashneft might instead have 
been nationalised. The conclusion that is drawn from this is that the state did not have a 
specific ownership outcome in mind when it initiated the takeovers. They were instead aimed 
primarily at depriving the existing owners of their assets in order to neutralise them as a threat 
to sovereignty. 
In some other cases of state-led coercive takeover (SLCT), including those undertaken by 
state-owned Gazprom in Chapter Three, the state does have a particular ownership outcome in 
mind. But when this does not pertain, the takeover as bargaining game model introduced in 
the opening chapter provides a particularly appropriate framework for a causal explanation of 
the varying ownership outcomes. To recap, the state begins by applying a measure of coercion 
aimed at persuading the existing owner to sell. The states preference is for the situation to be 
resolved through the owners acceptance of its carrot-and-stick offer. A full-scale campaign 
to seize the companys assets is the alternative, but is a last resort that is pursued only if the 
existing owner flatly refuses to sell. 
In the Russneft and Bashneft cases, the owners did accept the states offer, and as a result 
their fates differed greatly from that of Khodorkovsky and his allies. It so happens that both of 
these cases resulted in private ownership, whereas Yukos was nationalised. But the correlation 
between the bargaining outcomes (a negotiated settlement or full-scale asset seizure) and 
the ownership outcomes is not as straightforward as this suggests. There is no reason in 
principle why the existing owners in other SLCTs might not accept a carrot-and-stick offer 
to sell to a state-owned company. As Figure 3 illustrates, there is therefore equifinality in the 
state ownership outcome: it can arise either from full-scale coercive seizure or from 
acceptance of the carrot-and-stick offer. By contrast, full-scale asset seizure is very unlikely 
to result in private ownership, for reasons that will be explained in detail below.  
Figure 3. Equifinality in the state ownership outcome 
The above theoretical framework provides an alternative to the more common interpretation 
of these takeovers as essentially cases of reiderstvo, i.e. of illegal takeover for private gain. 
Such interpretations are equivalent to explanations based on rent-seeking, and potentially 
provide answers to both of the research questions of this project: the people who instigate the 
takeovers are motivated by private gain (question one), and (unless something goes wrong) 
Negotiated 
State ownership 
Full-scale asset 
seizure 
Private ownership 
the targeted company will end up under their direct or indirect ownership (question two). In 
line with the process-tracing method, the validity of this hypothesis is given due consideration 
as a rival to the theory presented above. 
Outline case narratives 
Yukos 
The main narrative of the Yukos case has been covered by several scholars in other 
publications (e.g. Goldman, 2004; Gustafson, 2012; Kononczuk, 2006; Sakwa, 2009; 
Sixsmith, 2010; Volkov, 2008a), and need only be recapped in brief here.  
Having transformed itself in the early 2000s into a supposed model of Western-style 
transparency and corporate governance (Markus, 2008, pp. 7980; Tompson, 2005, p. 7), the 
company was enjoying a greatly improved market capitalisation in the first half of 2003
appeared to be on the verge of enacting a merger with a similar private competitor, Sibneft 
(Vinkov & Sivakov, 2003)
, and was in talks with two US majors interested in buying a 
stake (Sixsmith, 2010, pp. 1246). 
The first signal of the authorities attack on the company came on 21 June 2003, when its head 
of security Aleksei Pichugin was arrested (Butrin, Sapozhnikov, Gerasimov, & 
Skorobogatko, 2003) and later charged with organising up to five contract killings (Sakwa, 
2009, p. 93). The arrest was followed on 1 July by the Prosecutor Generals Office (PGO) 
conducting a search of Trust Bank (part of the group of companies headed by Menatep, which 
represented Yukoss core shareholders) in Moscow. The next day saw the arrest of Menateps 
Chairman Platon Lebedev, on charges relating to the privatisation of a fertiliser company back 
in 1993-1994 and alleged tax evasion in Tomsk region (home to Yukos subsidiary Tomskneft 
 This peaked at over $30bn in June 2003 (Semenenko, 2003). 
 Management control of the merged company was to lie with Yukos. 
VNK) (Osetinskaya, Lysova, Bushueva, & Lemeshko, 2003). This was followed by the arrest 
on 25 October 2003 of Yukos CEO, Chairman and main shareholder Mikhail Khodorkovsky 
(Bushueva, Nikolskii, Karpov, & Ivanov, 2003). Five days later came the resignation of 
Aleksandr Voloshin, the head of the Presidential Administration who reportedly opposed 
Khodorkovskys arrest (Bulavinov, 2003; Silaev, 2003; Sixsmith, 2010, pp. 1512). In 
November, the proposed Yukos-Sibneft merger was halted at the initiative of Sibnefts 
management (Tutushkin, Bushueva, & Lysova, 2003). 
At the end of February 2004 Prime Minister Mikhail Kasyanov, who had defended Yukos 
both in public and privately, was dismissed and a new government was formed under Mikhail 
Fradkov (Dugin, 2004). 
In July 2004 the trial of Lebedev and Khodorkovsky began in earnest (Sakwa, 2009, p. 207)
It was also announced that Yukoss main asset, Yuganskneftegaz, was to be put up for sale in 
order to repay the companys debts to the state budget (Sapozhnikov & Skorobogatko, 2004). 
These debts were increasing dramatically as a result of reviews of the companys tax 
payments for previous years, which led to enormous new demands for back taxes and fines for 
non-payment (Sakwa, 2009, pp. 171173). An international arrest warrant was issued against 
a key business associate of Lebedev and Khodorkovsky named Leonid Nevzlin, who had fled 
Russia in the month after Khodorkovskys arrest. Nevzlin was accused of ordering the 
contract killings that were allegedly organised by Pichugin (Nikolskii, 2004). 
In October 2004, the PGO opened a new investigation into allegations that Khodorkovsky and 
Lebedev had illicitly gained and laundered $11bn (Sakwa, 2009, p. 222).  
19 December 2004 saw the promised auction of Yuganskneftegaz, which was acquired by a 
shell company for $9.35bn. State-controlled Gazprom Neft, which also sent representatives to 
 To be more precise, the trial resumed on 11 July 2004 after a preliminary hearing on 16 June 2004 
(Timeline of events, n.d.). 
the auction, declined to bid (Bushueva & Reznik, 2004). The shell company was sold on to 
state-owned Rosneft three days later (Reznik, Derbilova, & Yegorova, 2004). 
The trial of Khodorkovsky and Lebedev on the first set of charges ended on 11 April 2005 
(Zapodinskaya, 2005), and in May they received a sentence of nine years in a general regime 
penal colony, minus the 18 months already served in pre-trial detention (Lepina, 2005). 
Lebedevs sentence was later reduced on appeal by one year (Sakwa, 2009, p. 212 fn. 100). 
Yukos was declared bankrupt by the Moscow Arbitrazh
 Court on 1 August 2006 (Reznik & 
Kornya, 2006). This was not the end of the saga, however: new charges were brought against 
Khodorkovsky and Lebedev in February 2007, focussing on their alleged involvement in 
embezzlement and money-laundering between 1998 and 2003. The amount of money 
allegedly involved was now $30bn (Lokotetskaya, 2007; Sakwa, 2009, pp. 249254). 
Following on from its purchase of Yuganskneftegaz, Rosneft acquired the two other main 
producing assets of Yukos at auction in May 2007. Thus state-controlled Rosneft, of which 
Igor Sechin (deputy chief of the presidential administration and a major player in all three 
cases in this chapter) became Chairman in July 2004, emerged as buyer of the vast majority of 
the Yukos assets that were sold at auction (Rebrov, Grishkovets, Grib, & Paramonova, 2007; 
Surzhenko & Mazneva, 2007). 
Khodorkovsky, Lebedev and other individuals associated with Yukos and Menatep continued 
to languish in prison, long after Yukos ceased to exist as a company and its assets had been 
transferred into the hands of state-controlled Rosneft. In December 2013, Khodorkovsky 
received a pardon from President Vladimir Putin and was released from jail. He left Russia for 
Germany soon afterwards. In January 2014, Lebedev was also released, by order from the 
Russian Supreme Court (Alpert, 2014). Although these events in many ways drew a line under 
 The arbitrazh courts are civil courts tasked with handling all economic disputes involving legal 
entities. For more details, see Chapter 4. 
the Yukos affair, many issues remained unresolved, including tax claims against 
Khodorkovsky and Lebedev, and the arrest warrant for Nevzlin.  
Russneft 
The Russneft case follows on chronologically from the main developments in the Yukos 
case. Russnefts problems with the authorities began in late 2006, three years after the arrest 
of Khodorkovsky and a few months after Yukos had been declared bankrupt.  
Unlike Yukos, Russneft was a relatively minor player in the oil sector. It was founded by 
Mikhail Gutseriev in September 2002. Gutseriev, who had previously been CEO of state-
owned Slavneft until his dismissal in May 2002 (Reznik, 2007c), had created Russneft from 
scratch and built it up by acquiring small assets scattered around the country (Reznik & 
Nikolskii, 2007). By 2006 it was responsible for 3% of Russias overall oil production
On 15 November 2006, the PGO opened criminal cases against the heads of three Russneft 
subsidiaries, which were accused of extracting oil in excess of the quotas granted by their 
licences (Medvedeva, Nikolskii, & Sunkina, 2006)
. In January 2007 the Interior Ministrys 
investigative committee opened a criminal case involving tax evasion at Russneft (Reznik & 
Nikolskii, 2007). In April 2007, the same body conducted searches of Russnefts offices and 
those of four affiliated banks in connection with the tax evasion case (Karacheva, 2007). In 
May it emerged that the Interior Ministry had charged Gutseriev, Russnefts Vice-President 
Sergei Bakhir and the heads of two Russneft subsidiaries with non-payment of taxes and 
illegal entrepreneurial activity (Nikolskii, Reznik, & Rozhkova, 2007; Sergeev, 2007). In the 
following month it was revealed that the Federal Tax Service (FTS) had applied to the 
Moscow Arbitrazh Court to annul certain transactions involving Russneft shares that 
 Russneft produced 14.7m tons of oil and condensate in 2006 (Reznik, 2007a). The figure for total 
Russian production in 2007 was 491m tons, and this was a fall of 2.3% on the previous year (source: 
OAO Russneft, Annual Report for 2007 (Russian), p. 3). The figure for 2006 was therefore 502.5m 
tons, giving Russneft an overall 3% share of total Russian production. 
 The subsidiaries were ZAO Nafta-Ulyanovsk, OAO Ulyanovskneft and OAO 
Aganneftegazgeologiya. 
allegedly had involved tax evasion, invoking article 169 of the Civil Code in a bid to have 
these shares expropriated in favour of the state (Reznik, Simakov, & Kornya, 2007). 
Russnefts shares were frozen by the courts pending a final ruling on the lawsuit (Rebrov & 
Pleshanova, 2007). 
In July 2007, Gutseriev fled abroad, eventually settling in London. At around the same time 
reports emerged that the Kremlin was prepared to let him sell Russneft to Oleg Deripaskas 
company Basic Element (Rebrov, 2007). At the end of the month Gutseriev and Deripaska 
announced that they had agreed on this sale, and Gutseriev received approximately $3bn soon 
afterwards (Fyodorov, Kiseleva, Rebrov, & Orlov, 2007; Grib, 2007; Reznik, 2007c). The 
deal was structured in a way that would allow Deripaska gradually to take over management 
control of the company before taking ownership. The transfer of ownership was conditional 
on the deals receiving approval from the authorities (Rebrov, 2010)
. The Russian 
authorities issued an international arrest warrant for Gutseriev on 24 August 2007 (Mazneva 
& Nikolskii, 2007). Apparently resigning himself to long-term exile, Gutseriev sold his 
stakes in other businesses inside Russia, including Binbank (formally majority-owned not by 
Gutseriev himself but by his nephew Mikhail Shishkhanov) (Kudinov, 2008), coal company 
Russkii Ugol (Usov & Cherkasova, 2007) and chemicals firm Russkaya Sodovaya 
Kompaniya (Ravinskii, 2007). Meanwhile, Basic Element announced on 27 July 2007 that it 
had made a formal application to the Federal Antimonopoly Service (FAS) for approval of the 
Russneft acquisition (Grib & Pleshanova, 2007). However, the approval process was delayed 
repeatedly, first by the FAS and later by a government commission on strategic investments 
that was chaired by Putin (who had become Prime Minister in May 2008). In March 2009 
 The change of management in favour of Deripaska took place as follows. In September 2007 a 
Russneft EGM elected a new board of directors, headed by Aleksandr Korsik (former President of 
independent gas company Itera). The remaining four directors were all Cypriot lawyers who were 
believed to represent the investment banks acting as purchasers on Basic Elements behalf (Grib, 2007). 
February 2008 saw the first major appointment of a Basic Element representative to Russnefts 
executive management. 
reports emerged that Basic Element, which had been left heavily indebted following the global 
financial crisis, was looking to back out of the deal (Mazneva, 2009a).  
The next major development in the Russneft case was the rehabilitation of Gutseriev: at the 
end of October 2009 the Interior Ministry dropped the international arrest warrant against him, 
and soon afterwards it was reported that he might regain his ownership of Russneft 
(Derbilova & Tutushkin, 2009). At around this time it became known that privately-owned 
conglomerate AFK Sistema was interested in buying a stake in the company (Tutushkin & 
Tsukanov, 2009), and the companys head Vladimir Yevtushenkov clarified in December that 
this would be up to 49% (Mazneva, 2009b)
. It later emerged that Yevtushenkov had helped 
persuade senior officials at the Kremlin that Gutseriev should be allowed to return to Russia 
and resume his business activities (Malkova, Berezanskaya, & Igumenov, 2012). 
In January 2010 the Basic Element acquisition was fully unwound and Gutseriev regained his 
100% stake in Russneft (Rebrov, 2010). The company was now heavily in debt
 and with 
this in mind the sale of a 49% stake to AFK Sistema went ahead in April 2010. This time, 
there was no objection from the authorities (A. Levinskii & Sokolova, 2010b). In the same 
month, all remaining criminal charges against Gutseriev were dropped (Rubnikovich, Rebrov, 
& Muradov, 2010), making him only the second major Russian businessman who had 
succeeded in being rehabilitated
. He returned to Russia soon afterwards, becoming 
Russnefts President at the end of June (Muradov, 2010; Vkrattse, 2010). In September 
 AFK Sistemas rationale for limiting its acquisition to a 49% stake was that any further shares in 
Russneft would mean Sistema having to include Russnefts debt in its own accounts (Mazneva, 
2009b). 
 Before unwinding the deal, Basic Element had transferred onto Russnefts balance-sheet the $3bn it 
had borrowed from state-owned Sberbank to make the acquisition, essentially making this acquisition a 
leveraged buyout. The unwinding of the deal did not entail Gutseriev repaying the $3bn he had been 
paid by Basic Element, but the transfer of the debt to Russnefts balance sheet meant that Basic 
Element was no longer out of pocket. The end result was therefore that Russneft had borrowed $3bn 
from Sberbank and handed the money to Gutseriev. 
 Oleg Kiselev, the former head of Renaissance Capital, was accused in 2005 of committing fraud to 
obstruct the acquisition of the Mikhailovskii GOK mineral enrichment plant by Alisher Usmanov and 
his business partner Vasily Anisimov. Kiselev left Russia for London in advance of the issuing of his 
arrest warrant. The criminal case against him was dropped in autumn 2007 (according to Kiselev), amid 
speculation that he had managed to mend fences with Usmanov (Igumenov & Kozyrev, 2009).  
2013, Gutseriev again took sole ownership of Russneft, having bought back AFK Sistemas 
49% and a 2% stake that had been sold to state-owned Sberbank (Yegorov, 2013). 
Bashneft 
The group of companies labelled in this chapter as Bashneft consisted of the largest 
petrochemical and oil refinery complex in Europe, as well as the upstream producer Bashneft 
and a chain of petrol stations. Unlike Yukos and Russneft, the Bashneft group consisted of 
assets that had not undergone privatisation during the 1990s. After the collapse of the Soviet 
Union, the Bashkortostan republic  like its neighbour Tatarstan  had managed to leverage 
declarations of sovereignty into a power-sharing treaty that gave it ownership over the local 
oil industry (Speckhard, 2004, pp. 1703). This remained the case until they were privatised 
under controversial circumstances in April 2003, drawing criticism from the federal Audit 
Chamber (Bushueva, Khrennikov, & Voronina, 2003). They ended up in the hands of the 
family of Murtaza Rakhimov, who had been Bashkortostans President since December 1993. 
Specifically, controlling stakes in all the enterprises came under beneficial ownership of 
Rakhimovs son, Ural (A. Levinskii & Sokolova, 2010b)
In the December 2003 republican presidential elections, elements within the Kremlin backed 
an opposition candidate named Sergei Veremeenko in the first round, but Rakhimov 
succeeded in retaining support from the ruling United Russia party. The Kremlin switched to 
full support of Rakhimov in the second round of the elections (Galperin, 2008; Yartsev & 
Vadimova, 2005). 
 Ownership of the petrochemicals companies had been transferred by the Bashkortostan Property 
Ministry to state-owned holding company Bashneftekhim in 1993. Then in 1999, ownership of these 
assets was transferred to a new company, Bashkirskaya Toplivnaya Kompaniya (BTK), which was also 
given a controlling stake in the oil producer Bashneft. In 2001, Ural Rakhimov became the head of 
BTK. The April 2003 transaction that became the subject of the Audit Chamber investigation involved 
BTK selling its assets to seven limited liability companies, which then passed them on to a single 
company named Bashkirskii Kapital, which was controlled by Ural Rakhimov (Surnacheva, 2010). 
Between late 2005 and early 2006, a subsidiary of AFK Sistema, the same company that 
would later buy a stake in Russneft, bought blocking stakes (25% plus one share) in the 
Bashneft companies for $600m. The seller was Ural Rakhimovs company Bashkirskii 
Kapital (Khannanova, 2005; A. Levinskii & Sokolova, 2010b). 
In October 2006, Rakhimov senior secured a new presidential term under a new system of 
appointments of regional leaders. His nomination by President Vladimir Putin won approval 
from the Bashkortostan parliament (Khannanova & Gainullin, 2006b). 
In 2007, a Moscow court ruled in favour of the Federal Tax Service, which was attempting to 
use Article 169 of the Civil Code to expropriate shares in the Bashneft companies as well as 
in Russneft (see above). The Bashkortostan authorities appealed (Pleshanova & Zanina, 
2009). Rakhimov reportedly met with Putin face to face and was given an ultimatum: if he did 
not sell his stakes in Bashneft to an appropriate buyer, they would be expropriated (A. 
Levinskii & Sokolova, 2010a). 
In 2008, the use of Article 169 in such cases was brought to an end by a ruling of the Supreme 
Arbitrazh Court. Nevertheless, at the end of March 2009, AFK Sistema reached agreement 
with Ural Rakhimov to bring its stakes in all the Bashneft companies to controlling (50% or 
above) (Mordyushenko, Khannanova, & Rebrov, 2009). 
On 15 July 2010, Rakhimov tendered his resignation at a face-to-face meeting with President 
Dmitry Medvedev. The fact that he was able to do so in this fashion was seen as a concession 
from the Kremlin in exchange for his having agreed to go quietly (Kostenko & Tsvetkova, 
2010). Medvedev appointed as Rakhimovs successor Rustem Khamitov, who as the former 
head of the Federal Agency for Water Resources was seen as aloof from the rival political 
factions of the republic (Khannanova, 2010). 
Research question 1: causes of the state-led coercive takeovers 
Ordered from the top 
The cases in this chapter share an important feature: there is ample evidence in each that Putin 
himself either personally ordered the takeovers or took a close interest in them. While some 
have argued that Putin kept his distance from the Yukos affair until after Khodorkovskys 
arrest (Stanislav Belkovsky quoted in Sakwa, 2009, p. 159; Woodruff, 2003), this is contested 
by the Yukos camp (Sixsmith, 2010, pp. 155, 175, 241), and few would question Putins 
involvement after that arrest. As noted above, the crackdown at Russneft reportedly came 
after a meeting at the Kremlin between Ingushetian President Murat Zyazikov and Putin, in 
which the political activities of Gutseriev and his family were blamed for the deteriorating 
security situation in the republic
. And it was Putin who reportedly met with Rakhimov in the 
Kremlin in 2007, telling him he must either agree to sell controlling stakes in the Bashneft 
companies or have them taken from him by court order (A. Levinskii & Sokolova, 2010a). 
Furthermore, the same state officials were involved as the main executors of the crackdowns, 
with Igor Sechin having played a leading role in each case
. He is thought to have 
masterminded the campaign against Yukos and was from July 2004 Chairman of state-
controlled Rosneft, which acquired most of the Yukos assets; he is also thought to have been 
behind the legal efforts of the Federal Tax Service (FTS) to have controlling stakes in 
Russneft and Bashneft expropriated by the state. The same senior lawyers represented the 
FTS in court against both Yukos and Russneft, and went on to work for Sechin in different 
capacities afterwards (Gudkov, 2008; Pleshanova & Gritskova, 2008). 
 This point is discussed in greater detail below. 
 See e.g. Yaroshevskii (2008) for Yukos, Kharatyan (2007) for Russneft. For Bashneft, Galperin 
(2008) claims that Rakhimovs manoeuvring particularly angered Deputy Prime Minister Igor 
Sechins group. Dmitry Medvedev, as Chairman of Gazprom, was more favourably inclined towards 
the Bashkir authorities.  
There are indications that Putin might have changed his attitude to the Yukos and Russneft 
cases over time, possibly under the hard-line influence of Sechin, who was deputy head of the 
presidential administration for most of the period covered
. At Russneft, Gutserievs 
rehabilitation from late 2009 appears to have been thanks not least to the persuasive powers of 
the more liberal Putin ally Dmitry Medvedev (then Russias President). But Putin was making 
the ultimate decisions regarding the fates of the companies and their owners.  
This fact provides some weight for arguing that the takeovers had political considerations as 
their motivation, rather than being merely cases of reiderstvo with underlying rent-seeking 
motivations. Putins involvement is not entirely incompatible with the latter explanation, but it 
raises the stakes when making such an argument. These were not the sort of illegal takeovers 
depicted by Rochlitz (2013), in which the state tolerates predation by regional officials or their 
underlings in exchange for the latters ability to deliver pro-Kremlin votes; neither were they 
cases where a principal-agent problem prevented the Kremlin from reining in the predatory 
inclinations of the bureaucracy (Markus, 2012)
. Instead, Putin was either colluding with 
those who instigated the takeovers, or was instigating them himself. If these were cases 
motivated by rent-seeking, then either Putin was seeking to benefit from them personally, or, 
conceivably, he was enabling one particular faction to benefit as part of the rent management 
system on which his political survival depended (Gaddy & Ickes, 2010). These are the 
explanations that need to be considered as rivals to the sovereign development hypothesis. 
With this in mind, we now turn to the individual cases in search of evidence regarding their 
causes. 
 Sechin was appointed deputy head of Putins presidential administration on 31 December 1999, when 
Putin was still only acting President. In May 2008 he was instead made Deputy Prime Minister with 
responsibility for the oil and energy sectors (Sechin, Igor, n.d.). 
 To be clear, Markus suggests that this mechanism might explain some cases of expropriation in 
Russia, but he does not claim that it explains the Yukos affair or the other cases in this chapter. 
Yukos 
As noted above, there is no serious doubt among analysts regarding Putins personal 
involvement in the Yukos affair. However, there is some debate as to whether he became 
involved at the outset or only some time after the crackdown on Yukos had begun.  
The events prior to October 2003 (including the arrest of Pichugin and Lebedev) are seen by 
some analysts as qualitatively of a different order from what followed (including the arrest of 
Khodorkovsky). Woodruff (2003) has argued that Yukoss early problems prior to October 
2003 were the manifestation of a business dispute between the company and state-owned 
Rosneft, which prompted the latter to lobby the PGO to apply pressure on Yukos. There are 
plenty of other cases of law-enforcement being recruited by one or both sides in a business 
dispute, as Barnes (2006a) has ably documented. According to Woodruff, only in October 
2003 did Putin [throw] his full weight behind the anti-Yukos campaign, and 
Khodorkovskys determination to escalate the business dispute into a political conflict was the 
likely cause. Similarly, Belkovsky has claimed that Putin was kept in the dark about the 
Khodorkovsky arrest until after the fact: it was deliberately timed for the middle of the night 
so that Putin could be presented with a fait accompli. As his interviewer puts it, If [Putin] had 
ordered Khodorkovskys release he would look weak and an instrument in the hands of others, 
but to accept the arrest and all that it entailed brought him into the silovik camp on this issue, 
and set Russia and his presidency on a new path (Sakwa, 2009, p. 158). Khodorkovskys 
statements, which were careful to explicitly absolve Putin of involvement
, might lend 
credence to this view, as might the fact that Putins chief of staff Aleksandr Voloshin told 
Western journalists in July 2003 that Putin did not know about the Yukos campaign until it 
was already underway. 
 Woodruff (2003, p. 5). Khodorkovsky maintained this line at least as late as 2005 (Intervyu: 
Mikhail Khodorkovskii, 2005). 
If Putin was persuaded to get fully behind the Yukos affair only in October 2003, this implies 
an intriguing power-dynamic between the President and his subordinate Sechin, who had 
apparently been coordinating the Yukos affair on his own initiative prior to October. 
However, it seems at least as plausible that Putin was involved in launching the PGOs 
crackdown against Yukos from the outset  and that it was Voloshin, not Putin, who was 
being kept in the dark about the real nature and extent of that crackdown. The fact that many 
of the best analysts believed Putin was only a late convert to the Yukos affair may simply be 
the result of the adroitness with which Putin presented himself as being above the fray (while 
tacitly supporting and overseeing Sechins actions), combined with the fact that 
Khodorkovsky had no choice but to appeal to the highest office in the land (the good tsar) in 
his quest for justice.  
In contrast to Khodorkovskys statements at the time (and for some years afterwards), his 
Menatep allies interviewed in Sixsmith (2010) appear to concur on the following points:  
1) they knew that the company would face serious problems from the state after a meeting of 
business leaders with Putin on 19 February 2003, at which Khodorkovsky accused Rosneft of 
corruption over the acquisition of oil producer Northern Oil (in Russian: Severnaya Neft)
2) very soon after this meeting the PGO was casting far and wide for evidence to build up a 
criminal case against the company and its owners
3) Putin was involved in this from the very beginning
 Viktor Gerashchenko (Chairman of Yukos between 2004 and 2007) claims that Khodorkovsky was 
told after this meeting that he should leave Russia (Yaroshevskii, 2008). Leonid Nevzlin claims that 
Putin instructed Sechin and others to begin gathering evidence against Yukos as a result of the meeting 
(Sakwa, 2009, p. 144). Mikhail Brudno claims that none of it might have happened if Khodorkovsky 
had not said what he said (Sixsmith, 2010, p. 64). 
 The same message was conveyed to the present author in conversation with a public relations 
professional close to the Menatep camp, September 2012. 
 Aleksandr Temerko claims that Putin gave the management of the affair to Sechin and I was trying 
to negotiate with him [] Sechin was Putins weapon [] The Yukos affair was one of the few 
On this last point, it is possible that the Menatep insiders changed tactics over the years, 
initially pointing the finger at Sechin and the siloviki exclusively, but then pinning the 
international blame squarely on Putin once it became clear that he could not be appealed to for 
clemency. It is also possible that the prosecutors search for evidence against Yukos from 
February 2003 was a relatively spontaneous phenomenon aimed at pleasing superiors, rather 
than a response to a direct instruction from above. However, the weight of evidence 
nevertheless seems to be that the Yukos intervention was initiated at the very top. This 
impression is reinforced by the fact that at Russneft and Bashneft also, the pressure on the 
existing owners began with a frenzy of investigative activity from prosecutors, with 
indications that this was triggered by an instruction from the Kremlin. The fact that these early 
stages of the SLCT did not match the full-scale coercive action that was directed at Yukos 
later should not be mistaken for a sign that the case began as a mere business dispute. Rather, 
these early activities formed the coercive basis on which the state then made its carrot-and-
stick offer to the existing owner. 
Sixsmith (2010, pp. 7682) suggests that another trigger besides the February meeting was the 
fact that Yukos was in talks on the planned sale of a blocking stake (and possibly greater) in 
the company to either ExxonMobil or ChevronTexaco. It had not consulted the Kremlin on 
the issue in advance, therefore challenging the governments right to determine its own 
strategy regarding the appropriateness of foreign capital in the oil sector. Sixsmith suggests 
that Putin might have been in favour of the sale of a minority stake to Chevron, but was aghast 
at information that Yukos was also talking to ExxonMobil about the sale of a controlling 
projects that Putin supervised personally (Sixsmith, 2010, p. 155). Bruce Misamore believes Putin was 
directing or personally approving every major action in the destruction of Yukos (Sixsmith, 2010, p. 
175). Mikhail Brudno insisted that It was [Putin], from the beginning to the end. From the very 
beginning to the very end. Nothing that was done was done without his permission. Now, maybe he 
was led to making certain decisions by certain people [] But, however it may have been, he made 
those decisions (Sixsmith, 2010, p. 241). 
stake
. This information came to light at the beginning of October 2003. Thus it is possible to 
argue that the first phase of the Yukos affair was triggered by the February meeting, and the 
second phase (the arrest of Khodorkovsky) by the information about an imminent sale to a US 
company. However, to suggest that this news was the deciding factor in Khodorkovskys 
arrest (rather than altering the timing of what was going to happen in any case) would be to 
underestimate the extent to which he and his company were already in serious trouble. A more 
convincing deciding factor in the escalation of the Yukos affair was the Kremlins realisation 
that Khodorkovsky was not going to be cowed by the pressure that was being placed on him 
and his company into accepting the carrot-and-stick offer. 
Underlying causes 
I could not have imagined that state bureaucrats with the direct connivance of the head of 
state would directly and openly act against the economic interests of Russia  Mikhail 
Khodorkovsky, in Khodorkovsky and Gevorkyan (2012) 
The above discussion has tackled the question of which state actors were responsible for 
instigating the Yukos affair, and what events might have triggered the first coercive pressure 
on the company as well as the later escalation of the crisis with Khodorkovskys arrest in 
October 2003. But it seems important to distinguish between triggers (which explain the 
timing of the attack) and underlying causes (the larger perceived transgressions that really 
drove the SLCT process forward). These larger transgressions cast doubt on the suggestion 
that the Yukos affair might never have happened if Khodorkovsky had not talked out of turn 
at the February 2003 meeting. 
The literature on the Yukos affair provides no shortage of suggestions regarding which of the 
actions taken by Khodorkovsky might have angered the Kremlin or elements within it. The 
 Sixsmith cites Bruce Misamore, former Yukos chief financial officer, as saying that ExxonMobil 
CEO Lee Raymond had bragged about this possibility in a meeting with Putin at the beginning of 
October 2003 (Sixsmith, 2010, pp. 124129). 
literature tends to suffer, however, from an inability to discriminate between these suggestions 
or describe how they might relate to one another. The following political actions of Yukos 
and/or Khodorkovsky have been offered as explanations for the crackdown:  
 the political funding activities of Yukos, Khodorkovsky and others in the run-up to 
the December 2003 elections (e.g. Sakwa (2009, p. 67));  
 Yukoss wider political activity, including its lobbying to block legislation on oil 
taxes (e.g. Sakwa (2009, p. 95));  
 Khodorkovskys advocacy of a parliamentary republic and hints that he might bid to 
be President or Prime Minister (e.g. Sakwa (2009, p. 120), Pappe and Galukhina 
(2009, pp. 2178));  
 the companys perceived intrusion into the realms of foreign policy, befriending 
influential American politicians and holding talks with the Chinese government on the 
construction of an oil pipeline (e.g. Sakwa (2009, p. 136), Pappe and Galukhina 
(2009, p. 207));  
 the activities of Open Russia, a philanthropic organisation founded by Khodorkovsky 
and his colleagues that was similar to George Soross Open Society Foundation. This 
was perceived by the Kremlin as a subversive organisation aimed at spreading anti-
government sentiment particularly among young people (Pappe & Galukhina, 2009, 
p. 217). According to Sakwa (2009, p. 125), Khodorkovsky portrayed his activities 
as representing an epochal transformation of Russia and played up the public relations 
side for all it was worth, which would have annoyed the most benign of 
governments. 
For explanations based purely on rent-seeking, such political factors provided a mere pretext 
for a takeover that targeted Yukos because it was highly successful and lucrative. They are 
also of no causal significance to those who argue that the decision had already been taken to 
nationalise Yukos as the quickest step towards reasserting state control over the entire oil 
industry, or reasserting state power against that of the oligarchs. Conceivably, all of these 
factors came into play: the steps taken by Khodorkovsky gave the state political reasons to 
instigate the SLCT, but this coincided with the rent-seeking motives of the instigators and 
strategic considerations regarding the desire to increase state control in the economy. 
However, unless some effort is made to discriminate between the many proposed causes, the 
overall explanation becomes unwieldy and over-reliant on coincidence.  
Khodorkovsky and Lebedev continued to languish in prison and were even confronted with 
new criminal charges long after Yukoss assets were safely in the hands of Rosneft, and this 
fact argues against the claim that politics was only a pretext for the real aim of enabling the 
takeover of Yukos by greedy officials. In order to still be valid, such an explanation relies on 
the personal animosity felt by Putin and the siloviki towards the people concerned. But it 
would be remarkable if this were all that was driving the coercive process on, given that this 
involved the state continuing to commit significant financial and bureaucratic resources. A 
more plausible explanation is that Khodorkovsky was seen as a political threat, even after he 
was deprived of most of his assets. As will become clear from the discussion later in this 
chapter regarding the precise nature of the carrot-and-stick offer, acceptance of that offer 
entailed renouncing political activity as well as giving up ownership of ones business. The 
state saw the change of ownership as an important part of neutralising the political threat from 
these business owners, but was not confident that this was enough.  
What kind of political threat did Khodorkovsky pose? Pappe and Galukhina (2009, pp. 2168) 
argue that the state felt obliged to act because Khodorkovsky posed a serious challenge to the 
Putin regime, given his intention to enter the political arena and the fact that he had billions of 
dollars in cash at his disposal. But it is in fact questionable whether Khodorkovskys political 
ambitions posed any genuine threat to the incumbency of Putins regime. His chances as a 
presidential candidate were minimal in a country so hostile to oligarchs
. It is also far from 
clear how he could have hoped to run in an election on a level playing-field: it would have 
been easy enough for the incumbent regime to apply administrative resources
, either to 
eliminate him as a candidate altogether (by disqualifying him on a technicality, for example) 
or to discredit him through control over the media and law-enforcement. He would have been 
seriously hampered in his ability to use the vast financial resources at his disposal to boost his 
electoral chances: any media outlet or political organisation perceived to be financed or 
owned by Khodorkovsky and his allies could have been shut down by the state with ease. It 
could still be asserted that the Kremlin, despite holding most of the cards, was not prepared to 
take any risks and was determined to nip Khodorkovskys political challenge in the bud. 
However, if this is the case then the scale, scope and duration of the ensuing Yukos affair look 
like a huge over-reaction.  
In the quotation at the beginning of this section, Khodorkovsky expresses his bewilderment at 
how the state could have acted so directly against its own economic interests by going after 
one of Russias most successful companies. Indeed, Yukos was until 2003 a major contributor 
to Russias economic growth
. But the concept of sovereign development provides a 
possible solution to this apparent conundrum. If the state identified a threat to sovereignty 
from Yukoss behaviour, and prioritised such threats above the objective of economic 
development (in the narrow sense of boosting GDP), then the crackdown in fact fitted 
 In a VTsIOM opinion poll at the end of 2003, 61% of respondents declared Putin to be person of the 
year. Khodorkovsky figured only among the anti-heroes named by respondents, behind Anatoly 
Chubais (29% of respondents), Boris Berezovsky (20%), Vladimir Zhirinovsky (18%), Gennady 
Zyuganov (13%) (Litsa goda, 2003). Khodorkovsky was named by 9% of respondents. While such 
opinion polls are to be treated cautiously, the numbers highlight the uphill struggle a Khodorkovsky 
presidential bid would have faced. 
 The term administrative resources will occur frequently in this thesis and a definition will be 
helpful. It refers to the arbitrary and improper use of state resources by the state itself or by those with 
privileged access, in order to confer advantage over those who do not have such access. For a study of 
the use of administrative resources to influence the outcome of elections in post-Soviet countries, see 
Wilson (2005). In SLCTs, administrative resources are used by the state and state-backed companies 
against the existing owners and those with rival claims to the assets (see Chapter Three).  
 According to Kryshtanovskaya (2003), Yukos was contributing around 5% of Russias GDP before 
Khodorkovskys arrest. 
perfectly well with the states agenda. As well as explaining why state actors interested in 
development might sometimes act in ways that are economically destructive at least in the 
short term, sovereign development allows for the possibility that Yukoss political activities 
were a causal factor despite their posing no threat to the incumbent regime. Of the political 
explanations offered above, the companys undue influence on parliamentary decision-making 
and its negotiations with the Chinese government on a possible export pipeline, are in this 
light identifiable as clear threats to sovereignty and thus the most important underlying causes 
for the SLCT.  
Granted, Yukos was not the only Russian company to have been engaging in such 
sovereignty-threatening activities at the time. Yukos was not the only company that was 
seeking to influence parliamentary decision-making in ways that the Kremlin found 
objectionable (Sakwa, 2009, p. 117), and another privately-owned oil major, Lukoil, was part 
of a consortium which planned to build a privately-financed (and possibly privately-owned) 
export pipeline from Western Siberia to Murmansk (Smirnov, 2003). Gustafson (2012, p. 280) 
argues that Yukos was doing nothing different in kind from the other oil majors, but that it 
was singled out for attack because on every point of contention [...] Yukos was more strident, 
more aggressive, and more radical than the other oil companies. 
Russneft 
Determining the causes of the Russneft takeover is complicated by the fact that this case has 
not been subject to anything like the same scrutiny from journalists and academics as has the 
Yukos affair. While the Yukos insiders were keen to put their version of events across to the 
public in Russia and abroad, the Russneft camp remained largely tight-lipped  presumably 
for fear of endangering what proved to be a relatively benign outcome. 
To the extent that this specific case has been discussed in the academic literature, it has tended 
to be described as a case of reiderstvo, i.e. as an illegal takeover by predatory individuals 
intent on self-enrichment. Hanson (2014), Rochlitz (2013) and Zhuravskaya (2008) all include 
Russneft as a case of reiderstvo. As discussed in the preceding chapter, the literature on 
reiderstvo has not properly addressed the question of whether takeovers where political 
motivations were paramount also count as reiderstvo. Hanson suggests that Russneft may 
well have been a case with an admixture of politics, related in some way to Gutserievs earlier 
political activities, rather than an example of pure asset-grabbing. Similarly, Rochlitz 
includes Yukos as a case of reiderstvo but notes that it is not a typical case but rather a 
personal reckoning between a leading businessman with political ambitions and President 
Putin. The present project, by contrast, considers motivations of self-enrichment to be a 
defining characteristic of reiderstvo: if the state has played the leading role in the takeover and 
it has been enacted for some other purpose besides self-enrichment, then it should be 
categorised as an SLCT but not as reiderstvo. 
When Gutseriev sold Russneft to Deripaska under substantial state pressure, it was typically 
thought (as one would expect from a case of reiderstvo) that the company had been singled 
out by corrupt officials intent on enriching themselves. Deripaska was believed to be merely 
acting as a middleman on behalf of those corrupt officials who had launched the attack. It was 
expected that Russneft would be sold on to state-owned Rosneft forthwith, because 
Rosnefts political patrons (i.e. Igor Sechin in particular) were thought to be responsible for 
the attack
However, the subsequent fate of Russneft calls into question the idea that self-enrichment 
(rather than politics) was the primary motivation behind the attack. The sale to Deripaska was 
blocked by the authorities, and Sechin was at the forefront of these efforts: after this, the idea 
 Former State Duma speaker Gennady Seleznev, a friend of Gutserievs, claimed that this is not a 
fight against Gutseriev, but for his asset [i.e. Russneft]. I would not rule out that today it ends up in the 
hands of Deripaska, but tomorrow  in Rosnefts (Reznik, 2007b). Similarly, Canadian lawyer Robert 
Amsterdam, who worked as counsel for Khodorkovsky, claimed that the Russneft attack differed 
significantly from the Yukos affair: the latter had been caused by Khodorkovskys political threat to the 
regime, while Russneft simply controlled an asset that Rosneft wants to own. Deripaska, he 
insisted, was only the middleman for this takeover by Rosneft (Pitts, 2007).  
of Deripaska as a middleman for Rosneft was no longer credible. Furthermore, the pressure 
on Gutseriev was dropped entirely after he agreed to sell a 49% stake in the company to a 
different private owner, Vladimir Yevtushenkov. Nobody suggests that Yevtushenkov had any 
connection to the original attack on Gutseriev. So the SLCT had a relatively benign outcome 
for Gutseriev even though whoever had instigated it does not appear to have taken ownership 
or otherwise enriched themselves. Furthermore, in both the abortive sale to Deripaska and the 
subsequent sale to Yevtushenkov, Gutseriev received a price for his assets that was not far 
from their market value. Such an outcome is far from typical of cases of reiderstvo. 
As usual in such cases, the ownership outcome does not on its own invalidate the notion that 
the takeover was primarily motivated by the desire for self-enrichment on the part of those 
involved in instigating it. There are ways to explain the outcome that could still fit: perhaps it 
was a case of reiderstvo that went wrong, and the instigators were for some reason foiled in 
their attempts to claim the company for themselves. Or perhaps Yevtushenkov was acting as a 
front for the people who had instigated the takeover, so that they did in the end get the 
material reward they were after (but at a surprisingly high price). But the outcome is certainly 
sufficiently puzzling to merit a closer look at what evidence is available. Putins personal 
involvement in the affair may conceivably point to Russneft as a case of state predation at the 
very highest level. However, it also provides grounds to take seriously an alternative 
explanation that puts politics (understood as something more than venal wealth-maximising 
by state actors) at centre-stage.  
If Russneft was singled out for attack solely on the basis of its being an attractive target for 
rent-seeking, then Russian media reports provide a surprising variety of suggestions as to what 
Gutseriev or Russneft might have done to provoke the anger of the Kremlin
. One of the two 
 Some of the more exotic explanations that have been offered include the suspicion (reported by an 
anonymous high-ranking source in the Interior Ministry) that Gutseriev had angered state-owned 
Gazprom Neft by trying to prevent it buying stakes in Slavneft-owned assets in Belarus (Sergeev, 
explanations most consistently offered by the most reputable media sources is directly 
political in nature. This centres on Gutserievs connections to his home republic of Ingushetia. 
The Gutseriev family was a major player in the politics and economy of this North Caucasian 
republic, and was allied to Ruslan Aushev, who was the republics President from February 
1993 to April 2002. When Aushev was removed under Kremlin pressure, Gutseriev backed 
candidates who were running against Murat Zyazikov, the FSB general who ultimately won 
the election with Kremlin backing. Initially, Gutserievs favoured candidate was his brother 
Khamzat, a former Interior Minister of the republic. Khamzat was denied registration in the 
elections, whereupon Mikhail Gutseriev switched his support to the registered candidate 
Alikhan Amirkhanov (Kiseleva, 2006; Latynina, 2007). 
These events date back to 2002, however, and have been cited more credibly as a proximate 
cause for Gutserievs dismissal as CEO of state-controlled Slavneft in the same year. To cite 
the same events as the cause of the Russneft takeover four years later requires further 
explanation. Zyazikovs presidency proved extremely unpopular locally, and he presided over 
a marked deterioration in the security situation. Latynina (2007) has suggested that the 
authorities blamed the problems on continuing opposition and obstruction from the Gutseriev 
and Aushev clans and their allies in the republic. Thus the authorities decided that something 
needed to be done to reduce Gutserievs political and economic power locally. According to 
Latynina, the trigger was the kidnapping in Ingushetia of one of Zyazikovs relatives in 
Ingushetia: It was necessary somehow to explain how the situation in Ingushetia, headed by 
an FSB General, was different from the chaos in Chechnya [] President Zyazikov arrived at 
the Kremlin and said publicly to president Putin that 80 enterprises and 500,000 square metres 
of accommodation had been built. Its hard to say what he said in private, but the pressure on 
Gutseriev began after that [] Who is guilty of the abduction of Uruskhan Zyazikov? Of 
course, enemies. Gutseriev possesses the undoubted advantage as an enemy that it is easier to 
Grib, Rebrov, & Butrin, 2007), or that he had angered Sechin by refusing to let Russneft sell its oil via 
Gunvor (then Rosnefts favoured trader) instead of Glencore (Vinkov, 2007). 
catch him than to catch the terrorists, and he has more money. Latynina notes as a possible 
final straw the fact Gutseriev was lobbying in 2006 for a Free Economic Zone (FEZ) for the 
neighbouring republic of Chechnya, along the lines of the Ingushetian FEZ that had been the 
focus of his early business activities in the 1990s. This reportedly threatened the business 
interests of Chechen President Ramzan Kadyrov (Chabanenko, 2007). Another North 
Caucasus-related factor is the fact that Gutseriev was rumoured in law-enforcement circles to 
be involved in financing illegal paramilitary groups in the region. An unnamed high-ranking 
government bureaucrat told Forbes magazine that unproven allegations of this nature made 
their way up to Putin, on whom they acted like a red rag [to a bull] (Malkova et al., 2012).  
This explanation based on Ingushetian politics derives additional credibility from the fact that 
the crackdown on Russneft was foretold in this context before there were any outward signs 
that the company was coming under pressure. It is widely accepted that the crackdown began 
in November 2006 with the opening of criminal cases against the heads of three Russneft 
subsidiaries regarding alleged overproduction. But a magazine had noted in passing as early as 
25 September 2006 that the Kremlin was angered by Gutserievs earlier support for the 
wrong candidate in Ingushetias presidential elections, and that the PGO was rumoured to 
have received a quiet instruction to look more attentively at how Mikhail Gutseriev conducts 
his business. Are there, for example, any serious violations in their oil field licences? 
(Kiseleva, 2006)
It should be stressed that Russneft had no local presence in Ingushetia, and in this sense the 
case differs from that of Bashneft, whose companies were strategic enterprises for the 
Bashkortostan republic. As noted in the case narrative above, Gutseriev sold other Russian 
businesses in the wake of the Russneft crackdown, most notably Binbank, which was 
 Thus, as in the Yukos affair, the PGO appears to have been engaged to dig the dirt on the subject 
company once the decision to act against it was already taken. These preliminary investigations then 
formed the basis of the coercive pressure which the state applied when making its carrot-and-stick 
offer to Gutseriev. 
formally majority-owned by his nephew Mikhail Shishkhanov (Chaikina, 2008). But this 
appears to have been in response to the pressure on Russneft, with Gutseriev understandably 
concluding that it was unwise to retain any significant business interests in Russia. The state 
does not appear to have forced these other sales in the same way as at Russneft. The fact that 
Russneft was the sole target lends weight to the view that Gutseriev must also have done 
something to make him no longer welcome in the Russian oil industry in particular. 
This brings us to the second cause most widely cited for the Russneft crackdown. This is not 
directly political and is linked to the Yukos affair. Gutseriev allegedly committed the 
transgression of buying Yukos assets that were by then effectively earmarked for sale to state-
owned companies as part of the bankruptcy process. In November 2004, Russneft bought six 
oil producing companies in Tomsk region that had once belonged to Tomskneftegazgeologiya, 
a company part-owned by Yukos-subsidiary VNK. There was concern that this sale had 
damaged the value of VNK, which was to be sold as part of the Yukos bankruptcy process. 
Additionally, in spring 2005 it emerged that a Cyprus company named Broadwood Trading & 
Investments, which was widely thought to be affiliated with Russneft, had bought from a 
Yukos subsidiary a 34% stake in the small oil producer Geoilbent. In May 2005, Russneft 
bought a 50% stake in Yukoss Zapadno-Malobalykskoe oil field, allegedly purchasing the 
stake directly from Yukos-affiliated investment funds. In February 2006 the company 
undertook to buy Yukoss 49% stake in Slovakian pipeline operator Transpetrol. Another 
relevant acquisition was Yukoss stake in Sakhaneftegaz, bought by Russneft-affiliated 
Binbank in November 2005 (Reznik & Nikolskii, 2007)).  
In July 2007, Russneft issued a press release denying that it had ever bought any assets from 
Yukos. It pointed out that the oil producing companies formerly owned by 
Tomskneftegazgeologiya were bought not from Yukos but from Cyprus-registered companies 
owned by State Duma deputy Maksim Korobov. As for Transpetrol, Russnefts bid came two 
months before the Yukos assets were frozen as part of the bankruptcy process, and had come 
with the approval of the Economy Ministry. Russneft had pulled out of the purchase after 
Aleksandr Ryazanov, former President of state-owned Gazprom-Neft, asked them to stand 
aside in favour of that company (Gorshkova, 2007). As Reznik and Osetinskaya (2007) point 
out, it may well be that Russneft had done nothing wrong from a formal point of view, but 
this did not change the fact that it had bought assets formerly belonging to Yukos when the 
Kremlin had intended them to be sold to someone else
The Yukos factor could perhaps be seen as sufficient on its own to explain the crackdown on 
Russneft, and the timing of the acquisitions fits reasonably neatly with the beginning of that 
crackdown. However, the Ingushetia factor seems to have been at least as important. Not only 
was it presented as the cause of the crackdown before it happened, it appears (as explained 
below) that Zyazikovs removal as leader of Ingushetia played an important part in 
Gutserievs subsequent rehabilitation. Thus it appears most likely that the crackdown at 
Russneft was triggered by a Kremlin meeting with Zyazikov regarding the Ingushetia 
situation, though the companys acquisition of Yukos assets may well have been an 
underlying cause adding to the Kremlins negative view of the company. 
As with the Yukos case, it appears that the Russneft crackdown was caused by political 
factors despite the fact that the companys political activity posed no threat whatsoever to the 
incumbency of the current regime (at least, not at the national level). Gutseriev is described as 
having been a loyal member of the elite with no interest in challenging the political status quo 
(Rubanov, 2007), but he clearly objected to the way his home republic was run after Aushevs 
removal. Once again, the concern was that the federal governments sovereignty (in this case, 
its ability to project its authority in a troubled region) was being frustrated by Gutserievs 
 From a Vedomosti interview with Aleksandr Temerko, Yukoss former deputy CEO: Yukos 
managers did discuss with Gutseriev the possibility of selling to him certain assets, and in particular of 
selling 50% of Tomskneft, [insists Temerko]. When Yukoss problems began, we began to look at 
what assets we could sell. But at that time everyone was very afraid of doing business with us, because 
they understood that they would have trouble from the state, Temerko recalls. But Gutseriev wasnt 
afraid, he received the nod for these talks from certain high-ranking Kremlin officials and thought no-
one would touch him, Temerko explains. He appears to have found himself in a serious clash of 
interests among Kremlin officials (Reznik, 2007c). 
activities. The (unproven) allegation that Gutseriev might have been supporting illegal armed 
groups in the North Caucasus presumably exacerbated the situation, given the ruling elites 
preoccupation with national security. 
Explaining the rehabilitation 
Two factors appear to have been crucial to Gutserievs rehabilitation, which began in late 
2009: the removal of the force that had created the pressure on him in the first place, and 
support from well-connected individuals who were able to plead his case within the Kremlin.  
In October 2008, Zyazikov was replaced as the head of Ingushetia by Yunus-Bek Yevkurov. 
The latter was without doubt more positively disposed towards Gutseriev
. He is said to have 
asked President Dmitry Medvedev to allow Gutseriev to return to the country. Reportedly, this 
request won Medvedevs backing but was opposed by Putin (Nikolskii, Mazneva, & Rakul, 
2009). Although Yevkurov later denied responsibility for Gutserievs subsequent 
rehabilitation, he did comment that as an Ingush I publicly stated my view that this person 
should come to Russia and use his abilities, he would be of assistance to his country and his 
homeland, Ingushetia (Muradov, 2010). 
The New Times claimed that Gutserievs return had been specifically requested by Medvedev 
as part of his drive for a business- and investments-focussed strategy for the Caucasus, 
replacing the previous strategy based on force (Alyakrinskaya & Vardul, 2010)
. However, 
Gutseriev did not play any prominent political role in Ingushetia following his return (though 
he was said to be in frequent contact with Yevkurov). As of January 2013 he had not yet made 
any new investments in the republic (Muradov, 2013). It therefore appears unlikely that his 
 Presumably to ease his transition from power, Zyazikov was given a job as aide to President Dmitry 
Medvedev. He was dismissed from this position in January 2012, and one news site suggested that it 
was because Zyazikov had lost his remaining political authority that Gutseriev was permitted to restore 
his full ownership of Russneft  in 2013 (Yegorov, 2013). 
 The most obvious symbol of this change of strategy was the appointment in January 2010 of 
Aleksandr Khloponin, the former head of Norilsk Nickel, as the presidential representative for the 
North Caucasus. Medvedevs election as President in March 2008 gave him responsibility for regional 
policy. 
rehabilitation was conditional on his playing a role in solving Ingushetias problems. Instead, 
Gutseriev managed after Zyazikovs removal to get the message across to the Kremlin (and 
specifically, to Putin) that he was not a threat.  
Gutseriev flatly denied that Ingushetia had anything to do with his rehabilitation (Reznik, 
2010), but one suspects that this was part of the general caution he exercised when discussing 
matters political after the takeover, the reasons for which will be explored below. By his 
account, the individuals who were key to his rehabilitation were Vladimir Yevtushenkov 
(head of AFK Sistema) and Sberbank CEO German Gref. He said that Yevtushenkovs 
involvement began at the end of 2009, when they met in London to talk about Sistemas 
purchase of Bashneft. The conversation turned to my return, and what would be the correct 
way to communicate to officials that I had been unjustly sentenced. Yevtushenkov decided to 
help me for unselfish reasons. He played a not insignificant role in communicating the truth to 
senior officials. 
Bashneft 
As the outline case narrative showed, the sale of the Bashneft companies to AFK Sistema 
occurred against the wider context of the Kremlins efforts to remove Murtaza Rakhimov as 
President of Bashkortostan. Understanding the states motives for the takeover entails coming 
to some conclusions about how these two processes related to each other.  
Writing in 2004-5 about events surrounding Rakhimovs re-election in 2003, Yenikeyeff 
(2005) focused on the role played by Moscow-based corporate groups in political and 
economic processes in the Russian regions and the collateral effect on centre-periphery 
relations. Yenikeyeff describes the rival presidential bid from Sergei Veremeenko as having 
been an attempt by Moscow-based Mezhprombank (of which Veremeenko was managing 
director) to gain access to the republics oil sector through regime change. He suggests that 
the first round of the election took place amid a massive attack waged by Mezhprombank 
against Rakhimov, and hints that the Audit Chamber investigation into Bashnefts 
privatisation was an example of such pressure (i.e. was ordered by Mezhprombank) 
(Yenikeyeff, 2005, pp. 2456)
. As noted earlier, the Kremlin switched support from 
Veremeenko to Rakhimov in the second round of the elections, ensuring the latters victory. 
Yenikeyeff explains this variously in terms of Putins concern regarding possible instability in 
the republic in the event of regime change, or in terms of a temporary defeat of the [] 
siloviki [] in their political battles with the old family group in the presidential 
administration, or by reference to Putins concern that Veremeenko had become too popular 
in the republic
. He also suggests that the Kremlin may never have taken seriously 
Veremeenkos bid, and was using Mezhprombank as a battering-ram aimed at bringing the 
semi-independent region back under Moscows control. 
By not discriminating between these possible explanations, Yenikeyeff omits to make clear 
who was using whom: was the Kremlin using Mezhprombank to break down regional 
autonomy, or had Mezhprombank captured the states coercive resources in order to attempt 
regime change for its own gain-maximising motives?
 The present case study looks at 
Rakhimovs eventual ouster some years later, with the involvement of a different Moscow-
based corporate group, AFK Sistema. It seeks to understand the states motives in part by 
determining whether it was the state or Sistema that was calling the shots. 
One clear difference from the events of 2003-4 is that AFK Sistema was not behind a rival 
presidential bid in Bashkortostan. Furthermore, although it clearly had designs on Bashneft, it 
 The case of Veremeenkos bid for the Bashkortostan presidency is seen as an example of the 
following more general statement: A federal corporate group may seek gain-maximisation through a 
direct attack on the political, economic and administrative resources of a paternalistic regional regime 
(Yenikeyeff, 2005, p. 202). 
 Yenikeyeff suggests that Mezhprombank, bolstered by its acquisition of Bashneft and with the 
popular Veremeenko at the helm, would have been seen by Putin as a political threat (Yenikeyeff, 
2005, pp. 289290). 
 Similarly, Speckhard (2004) finds a correlation between low levels of assertiveness in a region vis--
vis the federal centre and the presence of national-level businesses in that region. Although he provides 
excellent insight into the motivations driving regional leaders to monopolise their local economies and 
keep them in a state of isolation from the rest of the country, he does not specify whether it is national-
level companies or the Kremlin that are driving efforts to break down such autonomies. 
managed to win the trust of the Rakhimov family that it could help them defend themselves 
against an attack that was coming not from Sistema but from the Kremlin. Selling Bashneft to 
Sistema was acceptable to the Kremlin but did not prevent Rakhimovs subsequent removal 
from office. The political removal of Rakhimov was being sought on the Kremlins initiative, 
not that of Sistema. It is helpful to consider first what was behind this political campaign to 
remove Rakhimov. 
Rakhimovs ouster 
As with Gutseriev, it is quite clear that Rakhimov presented no threat to the incumbency of 
the regime in Moscow. In fact, from that perspective Rakhimov was a positive asset: through 
his control of administrative resources he was able to deliver for the Kremlin an 
overwhelming vote in his republic in favour of the ruling United Russia party and the 
appropriate presidential candidate in nationwide elections (V. Ivanov & Voronina, 2003)
However, Rakhimov had been a consistent opponent of Putins federal reforms - the system of 
federal super-districts, the change in composition of the Federation Council, and the new 
division of powers between the centre and the regions - all of which were aimed at imposing 
the Kremlins authority and breaking down the power and autonomy of regional leaders. 
Although Rakhimov was happy to ensure that his republic voted consistently strongly in 
support of Kremlin-backed candidates in national elections, he expected to rule his republic 
without interference from Moscow. The economy was also seen as largely closed to outsiders, 
which served as an irritant both to the Kremlin and to the major business interests in Moscow 
(Badovskii, 2002). 
There was real anger in Moscow at the way the Bashneft companies were privatised in April 
2003 (Bushueva, Khrennikov, et al., 2003). But rather than causing the Kremlins moves to 
 On the expectation that regional governors will deliver the vote for the Kremlin in national 
elections, see e.g. Sharafutdinova (2010, p. 675). Rochlitz (2013) suggests that regional leaders who 
deliver high pro-Kremlin votes are in exchange allowed by the Kremlin to engage in reiderstvo. If the 
Bashneft takeover also counts as reiderstvo, then it seems particularly odd that Rakhimov should have 
been targeted, given his strong track-record in delivering pro-Kremlin votes. 
replace him, the privatisation happened once those moves were already underway (Butrin, 
Skorobogatko, & Ilkhamov, 2003)
. According to some reports, when the Kremlin switched 
its support to Rakhimov in the second round, it made this conditional on Rakhimov agreeing 
to cede control of Bashneft (Khannanova, 2005; A. Levinskii & Sokolova, 2010b)
Rakhimovs election meant that he could serve out a five-year term that would end in 
December 2008. However, in late 2004 the system of electing regional leaders was replaced 
with what were effectively direct appointments by the federal President, subject only to 
approval by the regional parliament (which has proved to be a mere formality) (Goode, 2007). 
Under the new system, incumbent regional leaders could opt before the expiry of their term to 
raise the question of trust before the President, effectively forcing the latter to either replace 
him or grant him a new five-year term. Rakhimov took advantage of this in September 2006, 
and his candidacy for reappointment was duly presented by Putin to the Bashkortostan 
parliament, who overwhelmingly voted in favour in October 2006 (Khannanova & Gainullin, 
2006b).  
Several reasons were given in the media for the Kremlins decision to reappoint Rakhimov in 
2006. Firstly, it was suggested that he would be more vulnerable as a presidential appointee 
than as an elected republican President, and could now be removed much more easily by the 
Kremlin at the appropriate time. Secondly, his ability to deliver the vote was needed for 
parliamentary elections in December 2007 and presidential elections in March 2008. Thirdly, 
it followed the Rakhimovs sale of blocking stakes in the Bashnefts companies to AFK 
 When it was first announced in August 2002 that the republic would sell stakes in the Bashneft 
companies, analysts assumed that the buyers would be Moscow-based companies that could lobby 
support for Rakhimov in the 2003 elections despite the Kremlins obvious dissatisfaction with the 
republics president (Khannanova & Skorobogatko, 2002). According to Speckhard (2004, p. 139), the 
Kremlin had by 2002 labelled Bashkortostan a problem region because of its refusal to phase out the 
1994 power-sharing treaty. 
 But see above for the alternative explanations proposed by Yenikeyeff. 
Sistema, and it was thought that Rakhimov had finally agreed to hand over control 
(Khannanova, 2006; Vinogradov, 2006)
Sharafutdinova (2010) poses the question of what Putins objectives had been in moving to 
the new system of gubernatorial appointments in 2004. She notes that the justifications offered 
by Putin and Surkov emphasized technocratic goals of manageability, control and policy 
implementation. Putin stated that the reform was with the aim of unifying state power, while 
Surkov claimed that this unity of power is the necessary precondition for the unity of the 
nation. These stated justifications are strikingly similar to the definition of domestic 
sovereignty offered by Krasner (1999). However, Sharafutdinova effectively argues that this 
rationale conceals political goals that were left unstated by Putin and Surkov. She names 
Luzhkov (Moscow), Shaimiev (Tatarstan), Rakhimov (Bashkortostan), and Yakovlev (St 
Petersburg) as being the most powerful and oppositional regional leaders, and describes 
them as the archetypal regional barons, with vast autonomy and discretion from the center, 
against which the reforms were supposedly undertaken, in the first place. Thus, she notes that 
if political consolidation were the key objective, all these regional leaders should have been 
replaced under the appointments system. At the time of her writing, only Yakovlev had been 
replaced. She argued instead, based on data on appointments available at the time, that only 
the weakest regional leaders who were unable to deliver the vote had been replaced. She 
concluded in part that delivering the vote, i.e. ensuring the survival of the existing regime in 
the Kremlin, had been Putins primary consideration all along; but she also suggested that the 
particular failure to replace Rakhimov had in part been down to his having been canny enough 
to pledge loyalty and refrain from criticising Putin, as well as the fear of regional 
destabilization in ethnic republics such as Bashkortostan (as well as Tatarstan and Chechnya).  
 Another suggestion was that Rakhimov had agreed to allow the sale of the local gas processing 
company Salavatnefteorgsintez to Gazprom, and that Dmitry Medvedev (then Gazproms Chairman) 
had in exchange lobbied for his reappointment (Latukhina, 2006). However, given that the pressure 
continued on Rakhimov to sell the Bashneft companies, this seems unlikely to have been the whole 
story. 
Since Sharafutdinovas article was published, all of the named archetypal regional barons 
including Rakhimov have been replaced, suggesting that the sovereignty-based rationale given 
by Putin and Surkov for the 2004 reform was perhaps the genuine reason after all. It seems 
clear from the account given above that there was a desire on the part of the Kremlin to do 
away with Rakhimovs regime at least as early as 2003. However, in line with 
Sharafutdinovas argument, a countervailing concern to ensure that Rakhimov continued to 
deliver the vote in national elections does seem to have helped to keep him in power for a 
time.  
The turning point appears to have come with the March 2008 presidential elections that were 
won by Dmitry Medvedev. It has been suggested that the Kremlin felt Rakhimov was no 
longer valuable in terms of delivering the vote: his advanced age meant that he would almost 
certainly retire before the next important elections (Galperin, 2008). This would seem to fit 
with the idea that Putins primary concern in the question of whether or not to replace 
Rakhimov was maintaining or consolidating the political power of his regime. But 
Rakhimovs ouster was also part of a wider trend: as Blakkisrud (2011) notes, Medvedevs 
presidency saw a substantially higher turnover of incumbent governors than had been the case 
under Putin
If delivering the vote was the key objective, the Kremlin could have made life much easier for 
itself by allowing Rakhimov to appoint his own post-retirement successor, someone from the 
existing republican elite who would be equally well-placed to deliver the pro-Kremlin vote in 
future national elections. Instead, in summer 2008 the Kremlin went on the offensive. 
Negative reports about Rakhimov appeared on federal channels including TV-Centre, REN-
TV and Pervyi Kanal. The media coverage was reportedly coordinated by Surkov, who had 
previously been of the view that Rakhimov was a necessary evil for the Kremlin (Galperin, 
 Blakkisrud interprets this higher turnover as a drive to complete Putins project to curb regional 
autonomies, rather than as a departure from Putins approach. 
2008). Also at this time, Radii Khabirov, Rakhimovs chief of staff, was given a job in 
Medvedevs presidential administration, amid rumours that he was being considered as the 
Kremlins preferred successor. Between October and December the Kremlin brought in 
people from outside the republic to head the local Interior Ministry and division of the FSB, 
replacing Rakhimov allies (Galperin, 2008). A criminal case was opened on suspicion that 
the Rakhimovs security team had illegally possessed weapons and ammunition. 
Reports appeared in the local media in December 2008 that Rakhimov had been persuaded to 
resign by the presidents special representative for the Urals Federal District, Grigory Rapota; 
but that Rakhimov had asked to wait until after his 75
 birthday in February 2009 (Kostenko, 
Glikin, & Shcherbakova, 2009). However, that deadline came and went, and in March 2009 
Rakhimov launched a public attack on the Kremlin for undermining federalism, trying to 
dictate terms to the regions and encroaching on the cultural rights of ethnic groups 
(Shcherbakov & Gorodetskaya, 2009). 
In June 2009, Rakhimov gave an interview with a major newspaper that was even more 
critical, claiming that Russia was a one-party state, was more centralised than in Soviet times, 
and that the State Duma was a disgrace (Rostovskii, 2009). Soon afterwards, Surkov arrived 
in the Bashkortostan capital and secured a statement from Rakhimov that was supportive of 
the Kremlin. Some sources in Moscow claimed that Rakhimov was to keep his post, but 
others argued that this was only temporary pending a decision on who should replace him 
(Kostenko, Glikin, & Kholmogorova, 2009). Rakhimovs resignation finally came in July 
2010. During the intervening period, the Kremlin did consult with Rakhimov on who might be 
an acceptable successor, but this was not the same as allowing him to choose: his preferred 
choice, Prime Minister Rail Sarbaev, was effectively vetoed by the Kremlin (Kostenko, 
Glikin, & Kholmogorova, 2009), and the eventual choice, Rustem Khamitov, was widely seen 
as having no ties to Rakhimov (Khannanova, 2010). 
The coercive takeover 
The above section helps to clarify how the Kremlin went about removing Rakhimov from 
power, and what its underlying objectives were. The next task is to understand how the SLCT 
involving the Bashneft companies relates to that process. Table 1 places key events in the two 
processes side-by-side in a single chronology. 
Developments relating to 
Rakhimovs ouster 
Developments relating to the SLCT  
Early 2003 Veremeenko rival presidential bid  
Apr 2003  Bashneft privatised in favour of Rakhimovs son, Ural 
Jul 2003  Audit Chamber investigation into privatisation 
Dec 2003 
Kremlin supports Veremeenko in 1st 
round of elections 
Early 2004 
Kremlin switches support to 
Rakhimov, who wins 2
 round 
Feb 2005  
Rakhimov accuses Ural of political conspiracy, begins 
campaign to renationalise Bashneft. 
Jun 2005  
Rakhimov drops legal action vs Bashneft after reported 
peace deal. Legal challenge from local prosecutors. 
Late 2005  
With prosecutors appeal pending, Rakhimovs sell blocking 
stakes in Bashneft cos to AFK Sistema. 
Mar 2006  
Criminal case opened re tax evasion at Bashneft parent 
company, Bashkirskii Kapital 
Apr 2006  
Rakhimovs split stakes in Bashneft cos into smaller 
tranches and sell them onto obscure charities, LLCs 
Oct 2006 Kremlin grants Rakhimov new term  
Dec 2006  
Federal Tax Service moves to expropriate Bashneft in 
response to April 2006 transactions 
Putin reportedly tells Rakhimov to cede control of Bashneft 
or face expropriation 
Summer 
Kremlin media campaign vs 
Rakhimov; his allies removed 
Nov 2008  
Sistema subsidiary becomes temporary manager of 
Bashneft cos for 3-year period 
Mar 2009 
Rakhimov public criticism of 
Kremlin 
Rakhimov agrees to cede control of Bashneft to Sistema 
Jun 2009 
Surkov intervenes to stop 
Rakhimovs attack on Kremlin 
May 2010  Audit Chamber closes investigation into privatisation 
Jun 2010  Audit Chamber investigation re-opened 
Jul 2010 Rakhimov resigns  
Sep 2010  
Audit Chamber head promises to establish who bought 
what and for how much in 2003. 
Table 1. Rakhimov's ouster and the Bashneft' takeover
 The table is compiled from sources cited elsewhere in this chapter. Some of the events mentioned in 
the table are described in more detail later in this report. 
The table underlines the fact that Rakhimovs removal was more than simply a part of the 
main objective of bringing about the Bashneft takeover. At the end of 2003 and in October 
2006 there was speculation that the Kremlins decision at the time to support Rakhimovs 
continued reign had been part of an agreement whereby Rakhimov would agree to cede 
control of Bashneft to a more appropriate owner. However, it was not until 2009 that he 
finally did so. Rakhimov resigned after handing over control of Bashneft to AFK Sistema. 
The fact that that sale met no serious obstruction from the authorities indicates that this was an 
outcome that was acceptable to the government
. But it did not mean that Rakhimov was 
permitted to remain in office. 
A more robust argument is that the SLCT was part of the main objective of removing 
Rakhimov from power. In the words of one Kremlin source, removing Rakhimovs control 
over Bashneft was a first step towards a change of leadership in the republic (Kostenko, 
Glikin, & Shcherbakova, 2009)
. But the chronology does not neatly support that argument. 
The two processes were not always co-ordinated as a single campaign of attack by the 
Kremlin. For example, the Kremlin reappointed Rakhimov in October 2006 despite the fact 
that the Rakhimovs had recently carried out dubious transactions involving Bashneft shares 
that threatened to put them beyond the reach of the state (and these transactions had been 
public knowledge since April). Rakhimov continued his public criticism of the Kremlin after 
he had agreed to sell controlling stakes in Bashneft to Sistema.  
 The Audit Chamber investigation into the 2003 privatisation was closed down in May 2010, after 
AFK Sistema had gained control of Bashneft. But it was re-opened just a month later, some time 
before Rakhimovs resignation. And after that resignation, in September 2010, Audit Chamber head 
Sergei Stepashin arrived in Bashkortostan promising to establish who bought what and for how much 
(Amladov, Granik, & Gorodetskaya, 2010). However, it seems reasonable to propose that the Audit 
Chambers investigation had something of a life of its own, independent from the political campaigns to 
remove Rakhimov and force the Bashneft takeover. It stemmed from real concerns regarding the 
legality of the privatisation. The attempt to close it down in May 2010 suggests an unsuccessful 
political intervention, perhaps as part of the states deal with Rakhimov. 
 cf. Barnes (2006a), who argues that rival forces (including the state) compete for commercial assets 
not only as sources of profit, but also as sources of institutional power. 
The most plausible explanation is that the Kremlin was pursuing both the ouster and the 
SLCT, and did not intend to sacrifice one on behalf of the other. The political motivations 
behind the SLCT were not limited to Rakhimovs ouster. They also involved developmental 
concerns and economic sovereignty. Rakhimov had a strong hold over much of the republics 
economy, maintaining it in a high degree of isolation from the rest of the country. Peregudov, 
Lapina and Semenenko (1999, p. 196) described Bashkortostan under Rakhimov as being 
similar to neighbouring Tatarstan, where companies that did not succeed in establishing ties 
with the republican administration were obliged to quit the republic altogether. This posed a 
challenge to Putins efforts to create a single, nationwide economic space
. But the main 
implications were for the oil industry specifically: the Bashneft groups oil refining capacities 
had an important role to play in Putins drive to boost oil product exports as a way of moving 
up the value chain in the world economy
. This would not happen as long as Bashneft was 
being run under Rakhimovs ownership in such a way as to create an independent market 
with its own internal price for oil and oil products (Mordyushenko et al., 2009). Importantly 
for the second research question, nationalisation was not a requirement for solving this 
problem: it could instead be done by transferring Bashnefts ownership to a private business 
that had a federal, rather than a parochial, reach.  
Research question 2: explaining the ownership outcomes 
Factions and rent-seeking 
Much journalistic and expert commentary regarding these takeovers has sought to predict 
and/or explain their outcome by reference to rivalry between self-interested bureaucrats. 
These bureaucrats act as patrons of the various companies who might emerge as the new 
 Widespread assertive regionalism would erode the states ability to [] ensure a uniform legal 
framework and infrastructure for the national market (Speckhard, 2004, p. 58). 
 See the discussion in Gustafson (2012, pp. 369370) of tax changes introduced in 2005 to favour the 
export of refined oil products. 
owners. In each case, the expected owners were Rosneft or Gazprom. At Yukos, state-owned 
Rosnefts political patrons are described as having instigated the takeover (and seen off a 
challenge from their rivals at state-owned Gazprom) for their own power- or wealth-
maximising motives. Rosneft and Gazprom are also seen as having competed to take over 
Russneft and Bashneft. When private companies became involved, they were seen as acting 
on behalf of the real buyers (Rosneft or Gazprom) or of their political patrons. 
As noted above, however, the instigators in all three takeovers were the same, and there is 
considerable evidence of Putins personal involvement. In this light, the fact that the 
ownership outcomes differed can only be explained in factional terms if Putin is acting as an 
arbiter between rival factions, maintaining a balance between them in order to preserve his 
own power. On this reasoning, the siloviki must not be allowed to become so dominant that 
they pose a potential challenge to Putin himself, therefore the liberals are permitted the 
occasional victory (Holmberg, 2008; Mehdi & Yenikeyeff, 2013; Rochlitz, 2010). It could be 
claimed that the siloviki were not permitted to build on their victory at Yukos by taking over 
the (much smaller) Russneft and Bashneft as well. 
There are methodological problems with this type of explanation: there is little hard evidence 
against which to test it (how would we know whether or not Putin is actually balancing the 
interests of rival factions?), there are problems defining and delimiting factions (how do we 
know who is in and who is out of a particular faction?), and the explanation is worryingly 
flexible (it can be used to explain the fact that Rosneft was the main buyer of Yukoss assets, 
but with a few tweaks could equally well have been used to explain an entirely different 
outcome). However, it still needs to be considered for the possibility that it best explains the 
outcomes of the three cases. 
Limitations of state ownership 
The literature provides some theoretical grounding for an explanation of the dependent 
variable that is instead based on the strengths and weaknesses of state ownership versus 
private ownership. As noted in Chapter 1, Hanson (2009, 2011) has explored the possibility 
that Russian state actors use trusted (doverennye) private businessmen as an alternative to 
state ownership. Without coming to any firm conclusions about what motivates state actors to 
carry out SLCTs, he suggests (2009, pp. 2223) that the Yukos affair might have been 
prompted by a decision to establish state control over the oil sector. He argues that to do this it 
was only necessary to explicitly nationalise Yukos itself: this was enough to signal to the 
remaining private actors in the sector that they had to submit to the Kremlins instructions on 
how to behave. In this atmosphere of greater subordination to the Kremlin, it became a viable 
option to let trusted businessmen become the new owners in subsequent SLCTs such as 
Russneft. Hanson states that in the unlikely event state actors were pursuing economic 
development rather than narrow interest-maximisation, they should have learned that state-
controlled companies underperform their private counterparts. If power is instead the main 
motivation, then in the post-Yukos climate trusted businessmen are sufficiently subordinate 
to the Kremlin to be used to undermine the power-base of political adversaries. And if it is 
material self-interest that dominates, state actors should have realised that it is just as easy to 
extract rents from private business (e.g. through hidden ownership or kickbacks) as from 
state-owned companies. Therefore, by any of the possible motivations, control through 
trusted businessmen is an attractive alternative to state ownership from the point of view of 
state actors.  
This would only provide a causal explanation for the varying ownership outcomes in this 
chapters three cases if it were indeed the case that state actors learned since the Yukos affair 
that nationalisation was a bad idea, and accordingly preferred subsequently to allow 
companies to be sold to trusted private businesspeople instead. This would fit with the 
sequencing of the Yukos, Russneft and Bashneft takeovers. But there are weaknesses in the 
argument: firstly, it does not fully explain why nationalisation was a necessary outcome for 
the expropriation of Yukos. Would the warning to other oligarchs not have been just as clear 
if Yukos had instead been expropriated in favour of a politically loyal private businessman? 
Secondly, the demonstration effect of the Yukos case has been questionable given that the 
state has felt the need to intervene in subsequent cases (including Russneft and Bashneft). 
And the Russneft intervention, which has not resulted in nationalisation, took place when the 
Kremlins fondness for state ownership was apparently at its peak
. Thirdly, it would seem 
that state actors have not learned the requisite lesson either, because SLCTs after Yukos have 
had nationalising outcomes, for example the takeover of Bank Moskvy by state-owned VTB 
in April 2011 (Chei Bank Moskvy?, 2011). 
Contingent nature of the outcomes 
The strongest argument against explanations based on Putins acting as arbiter between 
factions, and those based on state actors learning about the weaknesses of state ownership, 
comes from evidence that the outcomes of the three cases were in fact highly contingent in 
nature. 
With respect to the Yukos affair, this point is expressed well by Gustafson (2012, p. 314): 
The simplest versionthat Yukos was expropriated because the leading siloviki saw an 
opportunity to take it over for themselvesis demonstrably false [] the transfer of Yukoss 
resources to Rosneft came about as the result of a fluke, which was not foreseen by the 
ultimate beneficiaries themselves. As will be discussed below, the nature of this fluke was 
that Gazprom, the state-owned company which at some point did become the Kremlins 
intended buyer, was prevented at the last minute from taking ownership of Yukoss main asset 
 Two major new state-owned joint-stock companies, the United Aviation Company (OAK) and the 
United Shipbuilding Company (OSK), were created in November 2006 and March 2007 respectively. 
Vneshekonombank (VEB) became a state corporation in July 2007. The state corporation 
Rostekhnologii was created at the end of 2007. 
by international legal action from Khodorkovskys allies. Rosneft stepped in because, unlike 
Gazprom, its international exposure was at the time close to nil. But it is also argued below 
that before the Kremlin settled on Gazprom as its intended buyer, it had been prepared to 
accept a private buyer for Yukos (in the form of a revised version of the Yukos-Sibneft 
merger which would have given the latter management control). 
It will also be shown below that at Russneft and Bashneft, the new private owners are 
unlikely to have been those the Kremlin had in mind specifically when the takeovers were 
instigated. Deripaska approached Gutseriev with the offer to buy Russneft after receiving the 
nod from the Kremlin, only to have his acquisition blocked by the Kremlin. When this deal 
was unwound, the idea to sell instead to Yevtushenkov arose at a meeting in London with 
Gutseriev, and was apparently in exchange for Yevtushenkovs lobbying senior Kremlin 
officials to get the criminal charges against him dropped. Rakhimov approached 
Yevtushenkov as a defensive move against Kremlin pressure, rather than being instructed by 
the Kremlin to sell to him. Furthermore, in both cases these private ownership outcomes 
followed failed attempts by state actors to expropriate controlling stakes in the companies 
through the courts. 
The takeover as bargaining game 
The contingent nature of the outcomes lends weight to the view that the primary concern of 
the state was to deprive the existing owners of their assets: whether those assets were 
transferred to state or private hands was a matter of secondary importance. In the absence of a 
strong preference for a particular new owner, the differing outcomes instead depended to a 
large degree on the way the takeover played out as a bargaining game between the state and 
the existing owner.  
The previous chapter introduced the notion of the SLCT as bargaining game, and began to 
explore how the outcome of this game affects the ownership outcome. Simply put, each 
takeover begins with state coercion, on the basis of which the state makes a carrot-and-stick 
offer to the existing owner. The reason why this offer is made at all (why the state does not in 
every case opt for the full-scale asset seizure and mass arrests it eventually pursued against 
Yukos) is that such actions are a substantial drain on state resources as well as having 
reputational costs.  
Just how great an administrative burden is entailed by full-scale asset seizure depends on the 
type and nature of the business that is being expropriated. Does its value consist largely of 
physical assets that can be easily seized, or cash that can easily escape seizure, or other 
intangible assets that would not survive seizure (such as dependence on key clients who will 
take their business elsewhere)? Is it a solely domestic company in its ownership, financial 
flows and physical assets, or will the asset seizure have to be waged internationally, including 
through foreign courts which take a dim view of the Russian justice system? As these 
questions show, there are defensive tactics available to business owners to increase the costs 
of asset seizure by the state. For example, owners can build offshore affiliates and financial 
networks to save a greater portion of the businesss value from seizure and increase the 
administrative costs to the state if it chooses to pursue asset seizure. However, as the 
Rakhimov family demonstrated with its sleight-of-hand involving shares in the Bashneft 
companies, this can also be done using purely domestic techniques.    
If the owner rejects the carrot-and-stick offer and the state follows through on its threat to 
pursue full-scale coercive seizure, then the ownership outcome is almost certain to be 
nationalisation. After the states coercive resources have been used on such a scale to force the 
takeover, a private outcome would be controversial. The state would be accused of having 
been captured by this new owner, of having allowed its coercive resources to be used for his 
mercenary ends. It would face a loss of credibility at home, criticism abroad and (if the target 
business has an international dimension) international legal action from the victims. It would 
be unable to argue that the company had been expropriated in the national interest. Only a 
highly authoritarian regime living in a state of international isolation would be willing to go 
down this road. It would also require the consent of the private company that was set to be the 
new owner, which might be less than keen to be associated with the expropriation because of 
the damage to its reputation and (if it has one) its share price, and the likelihood that it would 
be entangled in the ensuing international litigation brought by the victims. It might find the 
doors of Western financial institutions and foreign markets closed to it as a result
Such is the states reluctance to pursue full-scale asset seizure that, if the owner instead agrees 
to sell and accepts certain other conditions (i.e. to refrain from activities deemed to threaten 
state sovereignty), he can expect to receive material compensation that goes at least some way 
towards the market value of the asset. The ownership outcome can, in this case, be either the 
sale to a state-owned company or to a new private owner. As noted in Chapter 1, the outcome 
at this point depends on a variety of political and commercial factors which determine who 
might be genuinely interested buyers (Pappe & Galukhina, 2009, pp. 1615; Radygin & 
Malginov, 2006).  However, the case evidence to which we now turn suggests that the states 
reluctance to pursue full-scale asset seizure favours the private ownership outcome, because 
private buyers can help to bring about the negotiated outcome that the state prefers. 
Relating the cases to the theory 
Yukos 
The carrot-and-stick offer and the possibility of an alternative outcome 
As the quotation from Gustafson noted above, there was in fact nothing predetermined about 
the ownership outcome of the Yukos affair. There is credible evidence that an offer was on the 
table from the Kremlin that could have enabled Yukos to survive under private ownership. 
 Russias annexation of Crimea in 2014 suggested that Putin was now prepared for such international 
isolation. But at the time of the Yukos affair, he was not. As will be shown below, the government both 
cited the national interest as justification and went to considerable lengths to maintain the facade that 
Yukos was bankrupted in a legal and market-based way. 
Furthermore, even after that offer was withdrawn and the Kremlin resolved to pursue 
nationalisation, it was only a highly contingent and extraneous factor that led to Rosnefts 
being chosen over Gazprom as the preferred new owner for Yukoss assets. 
After the merger between Yukos and Sibneft was announced in April 2003, the government 
continued for several months to express its support. In its original form, the merger would 
have amounted to the takeover of Sibneft by Yukos
. The result would have been the largest 
player in the oil sector, with no state ownership (Pappe & Galukhina, 2009, p. 213). Putin 
reportedly gave the nod to the Yukos-Sibneft merger the day after it was announced
, and it 
received approval from the FAS as late as August 2003 (Sapozhnikov, 2003). If the state was 
intending to destroy Yukos from the outset, then the governments apparently benign attitude 
to the Yukos-Sibneft merger must have been some kind of trap laid for Khodorkovsky, as 
indeed some in the Yukos camp have claimed (Sixsmith, 2010, p. 76). A less conspiratorial 
and more likely explanation is that at this time, the government was genuinely in favour of the 
deal. But how to square this with the mounting pressure on Yukos in the months following 
April 2003? Pappe and Galukhina (2009, p. 215) suggest that at this time the Kremlin was 
already set on neutralising Khodorkovsky as a political threat, including by cutting him off 
from ownership of Yukos and the financial flows he derived from it  but that the intention 
was to do so without harming Yukos itself. The Kremlins attitude to Yukos-Sibneft was 
surely one of support for the creation of a national champion for the oil sector (even under 
private ownership), but on the condition that Khodorkovsky and his allies agreed to exit the 
company. In other words, it assumed their acceptance of a carrot-and-stick offer from the 
Kremlin. 
 Sibnefts shareholders would sell 20% of the company to Yukos for $3bn, and exchange a further 
stake of just over 70% for new shares issued by Yukos. Yukos would thus own over 90% of Sibneft. 
55% of the merged company would be owned by Yukoss core shareholders, and 26% by those of 
Sibneft. The merged company was to be headed by Khodorkovsky (Pappe & Galukhina, 2009, p. 213). 
 Putins demonstration of approval came in the form of his meeting the following day with 
Khodorkovsky and Sibneft president Yevgeny Shvidler (Pappe & Galukhina, 2009, p. 213).  
That such an offer was made is indicated by these words from an unnamed oil executive 
quoted in Sixsmith (2010, p. 244): I think Putin, or the Kremlin, would have been prepared 
to pay for the company. So if Khodorkovsky had not taken such an aggressive stance against 
Putin, he might have received a good deal of money and been able to leave the country. I am 
sure a deal like that could have been concluded, but Khodorkovskys attitude made it 
impossible. 
The Kremlin may not have approached Khodorkovsky and spelled out the terms of its 
ultimatum prior to his arrest, but it seems that he and his allies were aware implicitly of what 
was expected of them. Sakwa (2009, p. 156) writes that, before his arrest, Khodorkovsky 
made clear that he refused to take the Berezovsky or Gusinsky path and go into exile, 
despite being strongly urged by Nevzlin and others to do so. Among other things, Nevzlin 
considered that this would be a way of saving the company. Viktor Gerashchenko, the former 
Central Bank governor who became Chairman of Yukos in July 2004, later claimed that with 
Mikhail Khodorkovsky they waited almost to the end of the year [i.e. 2003], they were sure 
that he would understand everything and leave the country, and then it would be possible to 
redistribute Yukos without any fuss (Yaroshevskii, 2008). 
Khodorkovskys arrest in October 2003 naturally upped the stakes, but it did not mean that the 
carrot-and-stick offer was yet off the table
. In fact, an anonymous, knowledgeable 
source cited by Hanson (2007a, p. 880 fn. 24) claimed that Khodorkovsky, when in pre-trial 
detention, was offered a dropping of all charges if he surrendered his assets. 
The Yukos-Sibneft merger also lived on as a possibility after Khodorkovskys arrest, albeit in 
a changed form. In November, Sibneft heads Roman Abramovich and Yevgeny Shvidler met 
 cf. Sixsmith (2010, p. 148): In retrospect there may well have been a window of opportunity for a 
deal to be done in the first days after Khodorkovskys arrest. The price of his freedom, though, may 
have been higher than the Yukos executives expected or were willing to pay at that stage. It would 
almost certainly have meant exile; the loss of all his wealth in Russia; the end of his political ambitions 
both through the Duma and through the social engineering of Open Russia. It also would probably have 
meant Khodorkovskys remaining in gaol until Decembers parliamentary elections  or even the 
following Marchs presidential elections  were safely out of the way. 
with Khodorkovskys Menatep colleagues in Tel Aviv, and proposed that Sibneft rather than 
Yukos take management control of the merged company, which would be chaired by Putins 
former chief of staff Aleksandr Voloshin
. Abramovich presented this as being the only way 
that the Kremlin would approve the merger (Yukos rejects Sibneft demand, 2003). The later 
accounts of various Menatep insiders indicate that Leonid Nevzlin, to whom Khodorkovsky 
had delegated decision-making authority, effectively vetoed the Abramovich proposal. He was 
convinced that the merger had even in its original form been a trap set by Abramovich in 
collusion with Putin (Sixsmith, 2010, pp. 159160). Khodorkovsky, former Yukos Vice-
President Aleksandr Temerko and former Yukos CFO Bruce Misamore all disagreed with 
Nevzlin on this point, believing that Abramovich was acting in good faith (Sixsmith, 2010, 
pp. 159163, 290). 
Once this Sibneft offer had been rejected by Menatep, the Kremlin removed its offer from the 
table and resolved to pursue full-scale asset seizure at Yukos. The following months saw 
Yukos making counter-proposals in an effort to resolve the conflict. Gerashchenko claims 
that, soon after he became Yukos Chairman in July 2004, Khodorkovsky offered to place his 
stake in Yukos (and those of his Menatep allies) in trust, to be sold by the Yukos management 
to pay the companys tax debts. This could have left the state with a controlling stake in the 
company, but the offer was declined by Putins aide Igor Shuvalov, who said that the 
Kremlin had no faith that Khodorkovsky would honour such an agreement (Yaroshevskii, 
2008).  
There is some agreement in the literature that Khodorkovsky bears personal responsibility for 
the fact that no deal was reached with the Kremlin. Although Yukos and its owners employed 
various defensive tactics, these were aimed at persuading the state to yield altogether or, 
failing that, at raising the costs to the state of full-scale asset seizure. They were not aimed at 
improving the terms of a negotiated outcome, because Yukoss owners were (at least until the 
 Voloshin resigned as chief of staff on 30 October 2003. 
beginning of 2004) unprepared to accept such an outcome. Khodorkovskys decision to stand 
his ground and fight for justice came at considerable cost not only to himself, but to a great 
many of Yukoss other shareholders and employees and their families. As the game-tree 
presented in the preceding chapter suggests, the decision to take a stand against the state and 
refuse the negotiated outcome makes little sense in terms of rational, interest-maximising 
actors. It was driven not least by a sense of injustice at the arbitrary state coercion that was 
used against him, his colleagues and the company itself; it became an altruistic (if somewhat 
quixotic) campaign for justice (Khodorkovsky & Gevorkyan, 2012). 
Defensive tactics of the existing owners 
As noted in Chapter 1, Markus (2008) has singled out the enlisting of foreign minority 
shareholders as one of the most important defensive strategies businesses can adopt against 
expropriation by the state. Yukos too had foreign minority shareholders, and it is true that 
the holders of its depositary receipts launched legal action in the United States against the 
Russian state, Rosneft and other defendants (LaCroix, 2007). Furthermore, had Yukos 
succeeded in taking on Exxon or Chevron as a strategic investor, then such a shareholder 
might have been able to use its influence with the US government to help protect Yukos from 
expropriation, as Markus envisages. But other aspects of Yukoss internationalisation proved 
more important in raising the costs to the state of pursuing full-scale asset seizure. 
In financial terms, the destruction of Yukos was in fact highly profitable for the state and for 
state-owned Rosneft. As Sakwa (2009, p. 245) notes, the Putin regime won hands down in 
its struggle with Yukos [] Not only had it managed to squeeze at least $32 billion out of the 
company in back taxes, it had then been able to buy its assets for roughly half their market 
valuation. Rosneft had a market capitalisation of $4bn in 2003, spent $21bn buying up 
Yukos assets, and saw its market capitalisation rise to $90bn in 2007. However, the Yukos 
affair came at considerable cost in terms of the drain it placed on the states limited and 
flawed bureaucratic resources. It required the deployment of large numbers of police, 
prosecutors, lawyers, accountants and tax officials, and the coordination of their activities. 
The complexity of the task was undoubtedly compounded by the fact that Yukos had not only 
foreign minority shareholders, but also foreign assets, directors, and creditors, as well as 
international cash-flows and commodity-flows, and an ownership structure spanning 
numerous offshore jurisdictions
. This provided the basis for further international legal 
action. Furthermore, Sixsmiths interviews with Khodorkovskys associates reveal how they 
scrambled to get as much of their money safely offshore before the Russian government was 
able to seize it (Sixsmith, 2010, pp. 255257)
. Even the companys share register was 
smuggled offshore and beyond the reach of the Russian authorities (Gurova, Rubchenko, & 
Tsunskii, 2004). Because it was intent on seizing as much as possible of Yukoss value (albeit 
under the faade of market-based legitimacy), the Russian state was forced to respond 
internationally as well, and this meant putting its prosecutorial case to foreign judges who did 
not hold any bias in its favour. 
In order to test the proposition that expropriation requires nationalisation, it is possible to 
consider the plausibility of a counterfactual scenario whereby Yukoss assets, having been 
seized by the state, were then acquired by private company Sibneft. This seems unlikely for 
the reasons already stated: the Kremlin would have been widely accused of having been 
captured by Sibneft, and it would not have been able to cite the national interest in its 
justification for the expropriation
. The presence of foreign minority shareholders at Sibneft, 
that companys international ownership structure
 and its exposure to international markets 
would certainly have made Abramovich think twice about such a deal. If Sibneft were buying 
 Including Cyprus, the Isle of Man and Gibraltar (Sakwa, 2009, p. 169; Sixsmith, 2010 ch. The 
British Troika).  
 Kevin Bromley, one of three British men who became directors of Menatep (GML) in 2004, spoke 
openly to Sixsmith about their role in selling off assets without bringing the full wrath of the Russian 
authorities down on our heads [] It was a big programme to salvage as much as possible (Sixsmith, 
2010, p. 256). 
 For an attempt by the government to portray the Yukos affair as having been for the public good, see 
Medetsky (2007), cited in Sakwa (2009, p. 246).  
 Sibnefts then-parent company, Millhouse Capital, was registered in the UK. 
Yukos as a favour to the Kremlin, it may well have considered asking for a substantial 
financial consideration to make the risks more palatable, as Pappe has argued (Gurova et al., 
2004).  
The international dimension of the Yukos affair explains why considerable lengths were gone 
to in order to create the faade of a legal and even market-based process to what was 
essentially seizure of assets with negligible compensation. This faade was sufficient to allow 
Rosneft to conduct a successful IPO in July 2006, raising $10.4bn for a 13% stake, and 
enabled it to work successfully with the international financial community after the IPO. But 
it was not enough to prevent a compensation lawsuit brought by Menatep in The Hague that 
threatened to lead to the seizure of Russian government assets abroad, and those of Russias 
state-owned companies (Sixsmith, 2010, pp. 267270), though it was uncertain whether 
Menatep could convert a favourable ruling into meaningful enforcement. The Russian 
government also expended a great deal of effort, largely without success, to persuade foreign 
courts to extradite former Yukos or Menatep employees for trial in Russia, or prevent Yukos 
assets abroad being sold outside the framework of the Russian bankruptcy process. If the 
authorities had been more blatantly arbitrary in their treatment of Yukos, then these problems 
would have been still more acute.  
Why this new owner? 
Rosnefts management is seen as having been involved in the pressure on Yukos in the  
crucial months leading up to Khodorkovskys arrest and afterwards
. However, even if 
nationalisation was the Kremlins determined end goal for Yukos from the end of 2003, there 
was no guarantee at the time that Rosneft would be the state-owned company to benefit. In 
September 2004 it emerged that the government was preparing a merger deal that would 
effectively have seen Rosneft taken over by Gazprom. According to Gustafson (2012, pp. 
 e.g. Gustafson (2012, p. 336) claims that Rosneft CEO Sergei Bogdanchikov, more and more 
plainly backed by the Kremlin, became one of the principal leaders of the campaign against Mikhail 
Khodorkovsky and Yukos. 
338341), this deal was presented to Putin by Gazprom CEO Aleksei Miller and Prime 
Minister Mikhail Fradkov, effectively sidelining Igor Sechin (Rosnefts Chairman since July 
2004) and Rosneft CEO Sergei Bogdanchikov.  
At the time of the Yuganskneftegaz auction in December 2004, Gazproms takeover of 
Rosneft was still on the cards. It was Gazprom, not Rosneft, that was originally intended to 
be the buyer of this key Yukos asset. Legal action from Yukos in a court in Houston, Texas 
led to the judge issuing a temporary injunction suspending the auction, whereupon the 
international banks that planned to lend money to Gazprom to finance its acquisition got cold 
feet. The auction went ahead nonetheless, and was won by the sole bidder, an obscure 
company named Baikal Finance Group (Skorobogatko, Butrin, & Kovalev, 2004). It was then 
bought by Rosneft a few days later (Reznik et al., 2004). Putin made clear that Baikal 
Finance Group was a transitional purchaser whose role was to shield the ultimate buyer from 
legal action
. Significantly, no Western banks were involved in providing the finance for the 
acquisition
The outcome of the Yuganskneftegaz auction strengthened the hand of Rosnefts leadership, 
who were not keen to have their company absorbed into its larger state-owned sister company. 
But it did not yet mean that a decision had already been made to let Rosneft acquire the 
majority of Yukoss assets, though many observers promptly predicted that this would happen 
(Reznik et al., 2004). In fact, Gazprom still intended to buy Yuganskneftegaz as part of its 
takeover of Rosneft. Resistance from the latter meant that it briefly looked as though 
Rosneft CEO Sergei Bogdanchikov would be permitted to head a standalone 
 Putins words, in an interview with Spanish media on 7 February 2006, were as follows: The future 
owners had to think about how they would work; how it may be that they would have to defend law-
suits which might be issued against them. And when BaikfalFinanceGroup bought the corresponding 
stake, it became the owner. Everything that happened later took place on the secondary market. In this 
way the claims against those who then bought this asset were effectively reduced to nothing (Putin, 
2006).  
 Gustafson (2012, p. 348) writes that the bulk of the cash came from the Chinese oil company CNPC, 
in the form of a prepayment against future oil exports by Rosneft to China [] The prepayment went 
through Russias state-owned bank for foreign trade, Vneshekonombank (VEB). In addition, Rosneft 
received a sizable loan from the other major Russian state-owned bank, Sberbank. 
Yuganskneftegaz, with the rest of Rosneft being taken over by Gazprom (Rosneft soletsya 
s Gazpromom bez Yuganskneftegaza, 2005). The Gazprom-Rosneft merger was abandoned 
at the last minute in May 2005, apparently thanks to lobbying by Sechin and Bogdanchikov 
(Goldman, 2008, pp. 190191; Sakwa, 2009, pp. 3269). But it would be wrong to see 
Rosnefts superior lobbying power as having determined its ultimate victory: the turning-point 
had been Yukoss legal action, which put paid to Gazproms bid for Yukoss main asset. It 
was Rosnefts largely domestic focus at this time, and its corresponding lack of exposure to 
international legal action, that proved decisive. 
Subsequently a political decision must have been taken to ensure that Rosneft emerged as the 
preferred buyer for all the Yukos assets
. As the problems later faced by Russneft illustrate, 
no private company was permitted to bid for any of the assets of bankrupted Yukos, despite 
speculation that cash-rich Surgutneftegaz would be a contender (Sakwa, 2009, p. 187).  
Thus it seems clear that the states intervention at Yukos was not undertaken with a 
nationalising outcome in mind, let alone with the specific outcome of transfer to state-owned 
Rosneft. Therefore it is possible to reject the notion that the Yukos affair was from the outset 
aimed at restoring state control of the oil industry by increasing the role of state-owned oil 
companies. Since the company which ultimately benefited most from the Yukos affair could 
not have known from the outset that that would be the case, it also seems unlikely that the 
SLCT was undertaken with rent-seeking as the central motive.  
It may be that when the decision was taken (probably towards the end of 2003) to pursue the 
nationalisation of Yukos through full-scale asset seizure, the Kremlin resolved also that it was 
time to bring the bulk of the oil industry, or even of the wider economy, into state control. 
Certainly, the expansion of state ownership in Putins Russia is typically traced back to the 
Yukos affair, and the fact that Gazprom went on to acquire Sibneft in September 2005 could 
 One of the few exceptions was a 50% stake in Tomskneft, which Gazprom subsequently bought 
from Rosneft (Sakwa, 2009, p. 244). 
be seen as a continuation of the nationalising drive that began with Yukos. But it remains 
unclear whether the acquisition of Sibneft was part of what Pappe and Galukhina (2009, pp. 
1615) call a sectoral decision in favour of nationalisation, or was more narrowly driven by 
the political leaderships desire to see Gazprom become a diversified energy company along 
the lines of the Western majors. This had been the rationale behind the Gazprom-Rosneft 
merger, the failure of which left Gazprom still lacking any significant oil production
If there was indeed a sectoral logic behind the governments ultimate decision to nationalise 
Yukos, and behind Sibnefts subsequent sale to state-owned Gazprom, then conceivably the 
later private outcomes of the Russneft and Bashneft takeovers could be explained in terms 
of the Kremlin being satisfied that sufficient state control of the industry had by that time 
already been achieved. However, as will be shown below, those outcomes were also highly 
contingent in nature. 
Russneft and Bashneft 
Before beginning to explain the ownership outcome of the Russneft and Bashneft takeovers, 
it is worth recapping just what that these outcomes were. When Russnefts owner Gutseriev 
agreed in July 2007 to sell to a new private owner (Deripaska), both buyer and seller expected 
that this would satisfy the government and bring the case to a resolution. However, although 
considerable steps were taken towards implementing the deal (including the payment of $3bn 
to Gutseriev), governmental and regulatory approval was repeatedly delayed until apparently 
extraneous factors (a liquidity crunch due to the global financial crisis) prompted Deripaska to 
back out. In January 2010 the company was returned to its original owner, Gutseriev, who had 
by this time been rehabilitated and had returned to live in freedom in Russia. In April 2010 
Gutseriev sold a 49% stake in the company to a different private owner, AFK Sistema, whose 
 As Gustafson (2012, p. 336) notes, From the moment he became President, Putin had encouraged 
Rosneft and Gazprom to work together. That was the trend worldwide. In contrast to oil, gas had long 
remained a regional industry; but that was rapidly changing, as technological advances, chiefly the 
growth of liquefied natural gas (LNG), made gas increasingly global. All the major international 
companies did both oil and gas. 
Chairman Vladimir Yevtushenkov had helped bring about the rehabilitation. This latter sale 
proceeded without any objections from the government. 
In March 2009, i.e. prior to its purchase of a stake in Russneft, AFK Sistema reached 
agreement to become the new controlling shareholder of the Bashneft companies. This sale 
met no serious resistance from the Kremlin. 
The possibility of a nationalising outcome 
Since the current study primarily seeks to explain outcomes in terms of a state vs. private 
dichotomy, it is most helpful to develop a causal explanation for the Russneft and Bashneft 
outcomes in terms of a contrast space (Garfinkel, 1981) of nationalisation. Were the 
interventions undertaken with a state ownership outcome in mind, and if so, what went 
wrong? 
The Russneft intervention, which began at the end of 2006, coincided with the creation of 
Russias major new state-owned companies and state corporations
. Its private ownership 
outcome (through the sale to Deripaska in 2007) therefore happened at the very time when the 
state ownership expansion drive was at its peak. Thus it cannot be argued that the 
governments appetite for nationalisation across the economy was waning by this point. 
However, an explanation specific to the oil industry remains possible for the private outcome 
at Russneft. As mentioned earlier, it was responsible for only 3% of Russias total oil 
production, and thus a private ownership outcome may have been acceptable to the Kremlin 
because the sector was by this time already dominated by state-owned players. Only TNK-BP, 
Lukoil and Surgutneftegaz remained as big private players, and only the first of these was 
considered relatively independent of government influence. 
 Of the new state-owned joint-stock companies, the United Aviation Company (OAK) was created in 
November 2006; the United Shipbuilding Company (OSK) was created in March 2007. VEB became a 
state corporation in July 2007. Rostekhnologii was created at the end of 2007. 
Applying the same logic to the Bashneft outcome is more problematic: the Bashneft group 
of companies included significant refining capabilities that the state-owned companies, 
Rosneft and Gazprom-Neft, particularly lacked. This gave the government a sectoral 
reason for wanting a state ownership outcome for Bashneft, and provided the state-owned 
companies themselves with a commercial reason to be interested in acquiring it (Derbilova, 
2005; Tutushkin, 2006). 
While Bashnefts refining capacities made it a commercially interesting acquisition for both 
private and state-owned Russian companies, not all analysts agreed that Russneft was an 
attractive target: one investment bank analyst pointed out that production at its oil fields was a 
technologically complex task, and claimed that the companys profitability was low. For this 
reason, he suggested that the prospect of expropriating Russneft was no more than a 
pleasant accompanying bonus to the main task of settling scores with Gutseriev (Rebrov & 
Pleshanova, 2007). The company itself was claiming before the attack that it expected to post 
a profit for 2006 of $1bn (Oil and gas company RussNeft plans $1bln net profit for 2006 - 
Companys President, 2006), but it managed only RUB 9.9bn ($380m) (Grib, Akhundov, 
Rebrov, & Pleshanova, 2007). Rebrov  (2007) pointed out that if it was not an attractive target 
for state-owned companies, Russneft might still be of interest as a private investment for 
rent-seeking officials (possibly the same officials who acted as patrons to the state-owned oil 
companies). He suggested that such officials might be behind Deripaskas purchase. At the 
time of his writing, it had not yet become clear that that purchase was encountering serious 
resistance. 
Of course, even a relatively unprofitable company might still be an attractive acquisition 
target (for asset-strippers if nobody else) if it is possible to force down the sale price. It has 
been suggested that a state-owned company (most likely Rosneft) made an approach to buy 
Russneft in 2006 for $1bn, and that this approach was swiftly rebuffed by Gutseriev because 
it was far below the companys market value (Nikolskii et al., 2007)
. If this did indeed 
happen, it is unlikely that declining this offer was the root cause of Gutserievs problems: the 
more compelling reasons for the attack on Russneft have been detailed above. The alleged 
offer to buy the company for $1bn is more likely to have been the first carrot-and-stick offer 
that was put to Gutseriev after the takeover had been triggered for those other reasons. 
Gutseriev has claimed that Deripaska was merely one of six potential buyers he considered 
after the problems began. The six included Gazprom, but he rejected this possibility because it 
would have taken the state-owned company too long to arrange the deal, and he needed to get 
it done quickly (Reznik, 2010)
. If his words can be taken at face value, he did not feel under 
pressure to sell to a particular buyer, state-owned or otherwise. 
As noted in the earlier section discussing the causes of the crackdown, even after Deripaska 
emerged as Russnefts buyer, the assumption remained that he would swiftly sell it on to the 
state-owned company (either Rosneft or Gazprom) that was the real intended buyer. This 
assumption was fuelled by the fact that Deripaska had negligible previous involvement in the 
oil industry. But it was confounded by subsequent events: the expected onward sale to a state-
owned company never happened. Either something went wrong with the planned onward sale, 
or it was never the plan. As noted earlier, the idea of Deripaska as transitional buyer on behalf 
of Rosneft can be ruled out, because there is sufficient evidence to indicate that Rosnefts 
Chairman Igor Sechin was behind the campaign to stop the Deripaska acquisition
. That 
leaves the possibility that Deripaska was acting instead for Gazprom, and that the plan was 
sabotaged by Sechin. But there is little evidence that Gazprom was seriously interested in 
 The article cited above stated that an unnamed senior oil company manager was its source for the 
$1bn bid from an unnamed state-owned company; separately it cited a source close to Gutseriev as 
saying the latter had been in talks with officials on selling to Rosneft specifically. 
 For more on the difficulties faced by Gazprom when attempting to move quickly in time-sensitive 
situations, see the following chapter. 
 Furthermore, there is little evidence that Rosneft had any significant appetite to buy Russneft. It 
was widely noted in July-August 2007 that Rosnefts debt burden did not allow it to consider further 
purchases at that time (Polukhin, 2007; Rubanov & Vinkov, 2007), and that Russneft did not provide 
an appropriate fit with Rosnefts assets (Tsymbalov, 2007). 
acquiring Russneft. Granted, it was confirmed in 2009, when Deripaska was attempting to 
restructure Basic Elements debts, that talks had taken place on the possible onward sale of 
Russneft to Gazprom. However, the latters senior management was reportedly unconvinced, 
as it had its eyes on more prestigious international projects and was unwilling to pay the price 
demanded by Deripaska (Mazneva, 2009a). 
In his first public comment on the matter in November 2007, Deripaska insisted that his 
interest in Russneft was strategic (Tutushkin, 2007b). He had in 2005 formed a company 
named United Oil Group
, whose main asset was an oil refinery in Krasnodar region but 
which also included a chain of petrol stations in southern Russia. The continuing obstruction 
by the government and Basic Elements troubled financial position after the global financial 
crisis provide sufficient explanation for his later decision to unwind the deal, and it seems 
credible that he did indeed intend to use the Russneft acquisition to gain a proper foothold in 
the oil industry. In other words, contrary to the assumption at the time, it was never the plan to 
sell the company on to the state. Either his plans were indeed strategic, or he hoped to profit 
from re-selling the company a few years down the line. 
The latter approach is what AFK Sistema consistently said it was taking with Bashneft. 
Sistemas Vice-President Levan Vasadze said in 2005 that the plan was to create a vertically-
integrated holding for resale within eighteen months to two years (Yartsev & Vadimova, 
2005). This timetable was of course delayed by the fact that Sistema did not gain control of 
Bashneft until 2009. The planned restructuring was completed in 2012, with the previously 
disparate group of companies becoming a vertically-integrated holding with a single share 
under the oil producing company Bashneft (Bashneft zavershila perekhod na edinuyu 
aktsiyu, 2012). Clearly this was no mere speculative purchase, and at the time of writing in 
March 2014, Sistema is still the controlling shareholder. It might therefore be a stretch to 
 OOO Obedinennaya Neftyanaya Gruppa. 
describe it as a transitional buyer, but the long-term plan was always to sell the company on 
after adding value through the restructuring.  
The speculation that this onward sale would be to a state-owned company began as early as 
2005 (e.g. Yartsev & Vadimova, 2005), and was understandable given the increasing 
dominance of the sector by state-owned players. In June 2013 it was reported that Rosneft 
was considering buying Bashneft (Dzyadko, Derbilova, Kezik, & Voronova, 2013). But 
before concluding from this recent news that Yevtushenkov was working all along as 
transitional buyer on behalf of Rosneft, it should be remembered that all the bets had 
previously been on him working on behalf of Gazprom
. This was denied by Sistema sources 
who insisted that the ultimate buyer had not yet been determined (Fokina, 2005). But the 
rumours persisted, fuelled by the fact that Yevtushenkov accompanied Dmitry Medvedev 
(then First Deputy Prime Minister and Gazproms Chairman) on a trip to Bashkortostans 
capital Ufa in August 2006 (Gavshina, 2006; Khannanova & Gainullin, 2006a; A. Levinskii & 
Sokolova, 2010a). 
In summary, there is a lack of compelling evidence that either of the state-owned companies, 
Gazprom or Rosneft, was designated as the intended new owner when the SLCTs of 
Russneft and Bashneft were instigated. Neither is there strong evidence that either company 
was determined to buy Russneft or Bashneft in the event that they were put up for sale. But 
in considering the possibility of a nationalising outcome for either case, there is one more 
important factor to be taken into account. In both cases, the Federal Tax Service (FTS) 
attempted to nationalise both companies through the courts, through a direct act of 
expropriation rather than the sale to a state-owned company. Both of these legal challenges 
were based on Article 169 of the Civil Code, a law which dated back to the 1920s and 
envisaged the confiscation of property in favour of the state as punishment for transactions 
 Source close to Sistema management cited in Yartsev and Vadimova (2005). Source close to 
Rakhimov cited in Fokina (2005), predicting the group would end up in Gazprom hands within two 
years. Source close to Bashkortostan leadership cited in Gainullin & Skornyakova (2005). 
carried out for a purpose that is contrary to the fundamentals of public order and morality 
(White, 2008). Beginning around 2003, tax officials had begun using this article for tax cases: 
a perfect example of state actors finding innovative applications for existing laws in contexts 
that were clearly unforeseen and unintended by their original authors (Woodruff, 2013)
The FTS first adopted this approach in December 2006, launching legal action based on 
Article 169 in response to transactions in April 2006 which had seen Bashkirskii Kapital (then 
the main parent company of the Bashneft group of companies, beneficially owned by 
Murtaza Rakhimovs son Ural) break up its stakes in the Bashneft companies into smaller 
tranches and transfer them to obscure charities (Tutushkin, 2007a). Then in April 2007, the 
FTS attacked Russneft in the same way: it brought a series of criminal cases against eleven of 
Russnefts past and present first-level shareholders, challenging deals involving Russneft 
shares that had been carried out in a way that had allegedly allowed the company to evade 
RUB 6bn ($230m) in taxes. As with the Bashneft case, Russneft stakes had been broken 
down into smaller tranches through a long chain of transactions (Rebrov & Zanina, 2008; 
Reznik et al., 2007).  
In the event, neither attempt was successful: the use of Article 169 in civil cases was brought 
to an end in 2008, after an April ruling from the Supreme Arbitrazh Court that it was only to 
be used in certain categories of non-economic criminal cases (Pleshanova, 2008a, 2008b; 
White, 2008)
. This was explained in the media by reference to the fact that the head of the 
court, Anton Ivanov, was an ally of Dmitry Medvedev, who was on the verge of assuming the 
presidency and was promising to introduce changes to the law and judiciary to ease the 
pressure on business.  
 Article 169 was additionally used in an effort to confiscate from accounting firm PwC the money it 
had received from Yukos for its auditing services prior to the crackdown (Pleshanova, Kiseleva, & 
Grib, 2007). 
 The FTS challenged the Supreme Arbitrazh Courts ruling at the Constitutional Court, but the latter 
ruled against the FTS in January 2009 (Pleshanova & Zanina, 2009). 
Advocates of an explanation based on rent-seeking factions can see this as a victory for the 
liberal faction, which sought to block the further expansion of the siloviki into the oil 
business. However, there are some problems with this interpretation. Firstly, it appears that, in 
the event that the expropriation had been successful, the government would have promptly put 
the confiscated shares up for auction
. Granted, it is possible that such an auction would have 
been rigged in favour of a favoured state-owned buyer, but this can only be speculation. 
Secondly, there is no evidence in the public domain that Rosneft used the campaign to make 
an approach to either company to sell at a lower price.  
Furthermore, the expropriation campaign followed (and was at least formally triggered by) 
moves by the existing owners which look very much like defensive tactics aimed at raising the 
costs to the state of full-scale asset seizure, as will be discussed below. It therefore seems 
quite possible that the expropriation effort was aimed at blocking such moves rather than 
nationalising the companies concerned.  
Overall, it appears that the state and state-owned companies were not maximising their efforts 
to bring either company into state ownership, either by acquisition or by expropriation. 
Therefore it is unlikely that the state had nationalisation in mind when it began to apply 
pressure on Gutseriev and Rakhimov to give up control of their companies. As a former 
employee in Rakhimovs administration has claimed with respect to Bashneft, they just 
wanted to take it from the wrong kind of people [u neponyatnykh lyudei] and give it to decent 
guys [normalnym patsanam] for a decent price (A. Levinskii & Sokolova, 2010b). 
The private ownership outcomes therefore should not be seen as successfully thwarted 
attempts to nationalise the two companies. In the Bashneft case, transfer to Sistemas control 
 In an interview with Yevtushenkov regarding his companys acquisition of Bashneft, the journalists 
asked: It is said that back in 2007 Rakhimov senior met with President Putin face to face, and there 
were two options: either by force, returning [Bashneft] to federal property through the courts, and then 
auctioning it, or simply finding a new owner and giving it to him. Why did they choose you? (A. 
Levinskii & Sokolova, 2010b). 
was an acceptable ownership outcome from the states point of view; and, as will be further 
elaborated below, the states objections regarding Deripaskas acquisition of Russneft were 
not based on its preference for that companys nationalisation. 
Defensive tactics of the existing owners 
As in the Yukos case, the coercive takeovers in the Russneft and Bashneft cases were far 
from being a one-sided game where the state held all the cards. In both cases, a new buyer was 
brought in by the existing owner in the hope that they were capable of calling off the states 
attack on the company. In his open letter announcing his departure from the company, 
Gutseriev had written that I am handing over control of the holding to a new owner whose 
appearance, I am sure, will mean that the problems Russneft has encountered will be 
resolved (Gutseriev, 2007).  
In the Bashneft case, discussion of the defensive tactics of the existing owners is 
complicated by an apparent rift that developed between Rakhimov senior (President of the 
republic) and his son Ural (beneficial owner of Bashneft) in late 2004. This came to a head in 
February 2005, when Rakhimov senior accused his son of being behind a conspiracy to 
unseat the republican parliament speaker, and began a legal campaign to return Bashneft to 
state (i.e. republican) property (Khannanova & Gainullin, 2005). But on 9 June 2005, this 
legal campaign was abruptly dropped, following a peace deal between father and son 
(Gainullin, 2005). Contemporary reporting of the rift tended towards the naive assumption 
that Ural Rakhimov was the true beneficial owner of Bashneft, rather than merely the 
nominal owner on behalf of his father (who was prevented by law from owning the companies 
himself). Some opposition politicians argued instead that the rift, the allegations regarding 
Urals political conspiracy, and Rakhimov seniors efforts to renationalise Bashneft were 
all exaggerated or invented as defensive moves against Kremlin pressure (Khannanova & 
Gainullin, 2005; Ot redaktsii: Bash na bash, 2005).  
According to a former Bashkortostan official, it was Rakhimov senior who first approached 
AFK Sistema later in 2005 with the proposal to sell stakes in Bashneft. This is significant for 
its indication of who was the real owner at Bashneft, but also because it shows Sistema was 
not imposed on Rakhimov by the Kremlin. The official claimed that the sale of the blocking 
stakes was (like the subsequent shenanigans involving the remaining shares) a response to the 
Kremlins coercion: beset by criminal investigations relating to his sons activities, Rakhimov 
had decided to bring in as a strategic investor a Moscow-based company who he hoped could 
protect Bashneft from whoever was behind the investigations (A. Levinskii & Sokolova, 
2010b)
. This tactic is similar to the one described by Markus (2008), with the important 
difference that the new minority shareholders are Russian rather than foreign, and it is hoped 
that they can lobby the Kremlin directly through their own contacts, rather than through 
diplomatic representation. 
The defensive tactics of the existing owners did not stop at bringing in a new owner who 
might be acceptable to the Kremlin. The other tactics suggested in the literature, i.e. relying on 
support from business associations (Markus, 2007) or the provision of public goods to 
increase the reputational cost of expropriation (Frye, 2006), do not appear to have played a 
significant role. Instead, the owners focused on increasing the costs to the state if it decided on 
a path of full-scale asset seizure, and putting as much as possible of the companies value 
beyond the states reach. Some of the transactions involving Russneft shares that were 
challenged by the FTS under Article 169 pre-dated the beginning of the states crackdown and 
may have been aimed solely at avoiding tax. However, others occurred after the crackdown 
and may have been a response to it (Reznik et al., 2007). The sale of Russneft to Basic 
Element was also a highly complex transaction. It took place exclusively at the level of the 
offshore beneficiary companies behind Russnefts first-level shareholders on one hand, and 
 In 2010, Yevtushenkov was asked why Rakhimov had chosen to work with him specifically: 
[interviewers] Maybe people in Bashkortostan believed that you have some kind of 
[Yevtushenkov] Resource? Yes, probably they did believe that, given that it all worked out as it did 
(A. Levinskii & Sokolova, 2010a).  
offshore entities controlled by Jersey-registered Basic Element on the other
. While the 
offshore nature of the transaction was no doubt aimed in part at minimising tax liabilities and 
ensuring that the agreement was governed by a more reliable non-Russian legal system, it was 
also intended to protect the sale and the money involved from intervention by the Russian 
state. Specifically, it thwarted efforts on the part of the Interior Ministry Investigative 
Committee to freeze shares in Russneft (Skorlygina & Rebrov, 2007). 
In March 2006 a criminal case was opened on suspicion of tax evasion that could have led to 
the bankruptcy of Bashkirskii Kapital, which held the controlling stakes in the Bashneft 
companies. In response, the Rakhimovs moved in April 2006 to break up their shares in those 
companies into smaller stakes of 13-16.5% each. These smaller stakes were then donated free 
of charge to four charities which had been newly founded by obscure individuals. Bashkirskii 
Kapital itself was placed into liquidation. The charities each promptly founded a limited-
liability company, to which the stakes in the Bashneft companies were transferred 
(Pleshanova & Gainullin, 2006).  
In response, a large team of federal law-enforcement officers arrived in Bashkortostans 
capital in May 2006 (Khannanova, 2006), and the FTS campaign to expropriate a controlling 
stake in the Bashneft companies was undertaken in December. In February 2007 the Moscow 
Arbitrazh Court placed a freezing order on the shares. In November 2008 the Rakhimovs 
settled on a way to bypass the court-imposed share freeze, by reaching agreement with a 
Sistema subsidiary to take over management of the Bashneft companies for a three-year 
period (Khannanova, 2008).  
There is an offshore dimension also to the Rakhimovs defensive tactics: there is reason to 
believe the infrastructure was put in place for the rapid exit of the Rakhimovs money in the 
event of expropriation. Ural had been living in Vienna for many years, and while his father 
 This provided formal grounds on which the FAS and the government commission later refused to 
approve the sale, as explained below. 
was still President, his Prime Minister Rail Sarbaev is known to have made several trips to 
the Austrian capital, returning with money (for social projects and to pay teachers and 
doctors) in cash that was drawn from Urals charities (Allenova, 2012). Although the $2bn 
proceeds from the sale of Bashneft were said to be residing in accounts in banks in 
Bashkortostan, the previous arrangement suggested that it would be relatively easy to 
facilitate this moneys rapid exit offshore in the event that the state made renewed claims on 
Why these new owners? 
Besides the question of why these two companies were not nationalised, there is the 
supplementary question of why the assets were transferred to these particular new private 
owners. The private buyers must have felt confident that they could persuade the Kremlin to 
halt its pressure on the companies: otherwise they would not have risked their investment and 
their own political standing by getting involved in a sector that was so politically charged after 
the Yukos affair. Presumably their confidence was based on their status as what Hanson 
(2009) calls trusted businessmen, i.e. their immaculate personal connections in the Kremlin 
had heretofore ensured a peaceful political environment for their other business activities. But 
personal ties and trust played an important role also in the existing owners selection of (or 
agreement to work with) new buyers: to some extent, the owners were putting their fates in 
the buyers hands. Gutseriev and Deripaska had jointly held in trust shares in Slavneft, the 
state-controlled company Gutseriev headed from 2000 to 2002. They also both had the 
commodities trader Glencore as a major business partner: it was a co-owner of Deripaskas 
company Russian Aluminium and was Russnefts largest creditor (Reznik & Osetinskaya, 
2007). Russneft had bought oil industry assets from AFK Sistema in 2003 (Nikolskii et al., 
2007). No such long-standing ties existed between Sistema and the Rakhimovs, and 
Yevtushenkov has said that it took time to build up the latters trust, before they were 
prepared to contemplate giving up control of Bashneft: The sellers of this asset are complex 
people from the point of their mentality and experience. Probably it was important for them to 
realise that they were not dealing with raiders, with people for whom nothing is sacred (A. 
Levinskii & Sokolova, 2010a). 
There are some indications that Deripaska received approval from Putin personally before 
making his original bid approach
. Additional evidence of early support from the highest 
level comes from the fact that Deripaska borrowed $3bn from state-owned Sberbank to 
finance the deal (using a controlling stake in his automobile manufacturer GAZ as collateral): 
the expert commentary at the time was that approval would have been needed from the 
Presidential Administration for Sberbank to grant such a substantial loan at short notice (Grib, 
2007). 
Clearly Deripaska was mistaken in thinking that the Kremlin would wave through his 
acquisition. Technical reasons were given for the failure to approve the deal, but the evidence 
suggests that these concealed what was really a politically-motivated decision. The FAS 
initially explained its delay by claiming that the required documents had not been received 
from the applicant outlining the full details of the transaction. Later it claimed that the details 
of the transaction were not only highly complex but also frequently changing. In February 
2008, the FAS announced that it would not consider the deal until the outcome of the Article 
169 cases was known (Rebrov & Zanina, 2008). 
The prospects for Basic Elements purchase appeared to brighten in the course of 2008 as 
Article 169 court cases were dropped by the Federal Tax Service. However, a new obstacle 
then appeared. The law was changed in April 2008 requiring an additional level of approval 
for acquisitions by foreign companies of assets included on the governments list of strategic 
assets, which included one of Russnefts oil fields (Rebrov, 2008). The FAS was obliged to 
refer such matters to a government commission which was headed by Prime Minister 
 Information from a source close to Basic Element cited in Grib (2007). See also Rebrov and Zanina 
(2008), citing major Russian businessmen and investment bankers who were familiar with the deal. 
Vladimir Putin and included Deputy Prime Minister Igor Sechin. The fact that Basic Element 
was registered in Jersey qualified it as a foreign buyer. There is no suggestion that this policy 
decision was aimed specifically at frustrating Basic Elements acquisition. But what happened 
next left no doubt that there was high-level opposition to the deal. Over the course of 2009, 
the Putin-led commission three times omitted to examine the case at its sessions. Incomplete 
documentation was the reason initially given (Malkova, Reznik, & Fedorinova, 2009), but 
then Sechin claimed that the problem was the offshore nature of what was an essentially 
Russian-Russian transaction (Rebrov, 2009). A source in the government claimed that Putin 
himself was against the deals offshore structure (Kto zhe protiv?, 2009). But this had not 
stopped Cyprus-registered Nafta-Moskva (representing the Russian businessman Suleiman 
Kerimov) gaining approval to buy the Russian gold mining company Polyus Zoloto at the 
commissions June session (Mazneva & Chechel, 2009). 
Precisely what the real political objection was to the deal is not clear, but Sechin is rumoured 
to have been particularly opposed as well as having a personal grudge against Deripaska
has been suggested that Deripaska was not welcome in a sector where Kremlin bureaucrats 
of the highest rank, particularly Igor Sechin, are used to ruling unchallenged (Kharatian, 
2007). It was later claimed that Sechin was angry that Deripaska had effectively gone over his 
head by approaching Putin directly for approval, despite Sechins formal responsibility for the 
oil sector (A. Levinskii & Sokolova, 2010b). 
But before concluding that Deripaskas acquisition failed to gain approval because of hostility 
from rival factional/bureaucratic interests, it should be remembered that Putin did not remain 
above the fray here: he was personally involved in holding up the deal at the government 
commission level. It therefore appears that Putin, having initially been in favour of Deripaska 
 Confirmed in authors interviews with two leading Moscow-based financial journalists, one English 
and one Russian. Cf. also Belkovskys claim in 2007 that the continuing pressure on Gutseriev was 
down to a fight between Sechin and Deripaska over who would take over Russneft (Pochemu 
prodolzhaetsya pressing Gutserieva?, 2007). 
buying Russneft, was subsequently persuaded against the idea by Sechin. It is possible (as an 
alternative or supplementary explanation) that what turned Putin against the Deripaska 
acquisition was the open letter that Gutseriev wrote and published in the Russneft corporate 
journal soon after the agreement with Deripaska had been reached. Subsequently reprinted by 
Vedomosti, the letter explained Gutserievs decision to sell in terms of the unprecedented 
pressure placed on him and his company by the authorities (Gutseriev, 2007). Conceivably, 
Putins objection was not to Deripaska becoming a player in the oil industry, but to Gutseriev 
being able to leave the country with his freedom and his cash, if at the same time he was going 
to complain in public about his treatment by the authorities
Significantly, Gutseriev swiftly backpedalled after the letters publication: it promptly 
disappeared from the Russneft website, and two days later he told Interfax that the decision to 
sell the company had been taken by the shareholders without any pressure [] the political 
aspect which journalists are writing about does not exist (Tsymbalov, 2007)
. Gutseriev 
was careful in his choice of words in subsequent interviews, as illustrated by the way he 
parried a question in 2010 regarding whether Sechin had been responsible for what had 
happened to him: I have heard this theory many times, but I have no evidence that the 
command came from him. I cannot say that its true [ya ne mogu etogo utverzhdat]. I dont 
think that he was behind Russnefts problems or will do this in the future (Reznik, 2010). 
As noted above, it was Rakhimov who first approached AFK Sistema in 2005, rather than 
Sistema being imposed on Rakhimov by the Kremlin. Furthermore, Sistema helped the 
Rakhimovs to bypass the court-imposed freeze on Bashnefts shares. This reinforces the 
notion that Sistema and the Rakhimov family were allies, now united against a common 
enemy in the shape of the FTS. 
 Latynina suggested in August 2007 that this might be the explanation for the arrest order that had 
just been issued against Gutseriev (Yuliya Latynina: Gutseriev otdal Russneft ne tem, kto za nim 
okhotilsya, 2007). 
 Cf. Kakha Bendukidzes insistence (Chapter Four) that he sold his stakes in Atomstroieksport and 
OMZ entirely of his own volition and without government pressure. 
AFK Sistemas head Yevtushenkov can be assumed to have had better relations with the 
Kremlin as a whole, given that the company encountered no serious resistance to its 
acquisition of Bashneft and was able to help secure Gutserievs rehabilitation. But Deripaska 
(and Abramovich in the Yukos case) had planned to play the same role, offering to solve the 
existing owners problems by taking the asset off their hands and solving problems with the 
authorities. Although for Deripaska it did not work out, both Deripaska and Yevtushenkov 
expected to be both a defensive tactic by the existing owners against state coercion, and 
buyers who were acceptable to the Kremlin. How one might explain this paradox is discussed 
further in the concluding section of this chapter. 
Contrasting fates of the existing owners 
One of the arguments against considering Russneft and Bashneft to be cases of reiderstvo is 
the fact that both existing owners survived the situation relatively unscathed. Firestone (2008) 
distinguishes reiderstvo from racketeering by stating that the reider is more ambitious, 
seeking to take over an entire company rather than just a share of the profits. But the ideal-
typical reider surely seeks to take over a business without handing over much money (if any) 
to the existing owner. When the existing owner walks away with an amount of cash that 
comes close to the market value of his business, this goes against the spirit of reiderstvo. 
Gutseriev received $3bn in cash from Deripaska in a deal which valued Russneft at $6.5bn 
overall (the remainder of the total went on the assumption of Russnefts debt). This must have 
softened the blow of being forced to leave the country and being subject to a Russian arrest 
warrant while living in the UK. Thanks to the later intervention of Yevtushenkov and others, 
he subsequently returned to Russia with all charges against him dropped and bought back full 
ownership of Russneft.  
The Rakhimov family received $2bn from Sistema in exchange for ceding control of the 
Bashneft companies. This appears to have been part of a deal that was attractive even by the 
standards of the Russneft case. Rather than being cast into exile, Rakhimov was permitted to 
continue to operate at least for a time as a parallel centre of power in the republic, 
undermining his successor Rustem Khamitovs efforts to establish his own authority. He 
benefited from a law passed by the republican parliament granting immunity from prosecution 
(Kamyshev, 2010), worked for a time as an official adviser to Khamitov (Allenova, 2012) and 
was given a seat on the board of Bashneft (Derbilova, Kostenko, & Simakov, 2010)
The amount of money received was particularly remarkable given the Audit Chambers claims 
that the family had originally taken ownership of Bashneft by illegal means. Back in July 
2003, one of its auditors had described the privatisation as the most unprecedented case of 
theft of assets from state property (Amladov, Granik, & Gorodetskaya, 2010). Restrictions 
were put in place to prevent the Rakhimovs using this money at their own discretion. It was 
paid to the charities which owned Bashneft and whose beneficiary was widely held to have 
been Murtaza Rakhimov's son, Ural. In November 2010 these charities were merged into a 
single body named the Ural Foundation (with Murtaza Rakhimov as Chairman). An unusual 
compromise was reached, with the Ural Foundation committing to invest the annual interest in 
social projects in the region supposedly under the supervision of the republican authorities 
(Rustem Khamitov: v Bashkortostane preodolen krizis upravleniya dengami ot prodazhi 
TEK, 2010)
Rakhimovs political influence in Bashkortostan, his ability to deliver pro-Kremlin votes, 
and the Kremlins concerns about stability and separatist sentiments in the republic, no doubt 
 In May 2012 Bashneft announced that by mutual agreement, Rakhimov would not be reappointed 
to the board of directors. This followed Khamitovs criticism of Bashneft for a wave of redundancies 
that he said threatened social stability in the republic (Glava Bashkirii Rustem Khamitov predupredil 
ob ugroze sotsialnogo vzryva, 2012). A source close to the republican government claimed that 
Khamitov was angered by Bashnefts close ties to Rakhimov (Dzyadko, 2012).  
 It is clear from subsequent events that the republican authorities did not secure any meaningful 
control over the charity. In October 2011, Khamitov gave an interview in which he criticised the Ural 
fund for failing to invest the principal amount by building factories, supporting agriculture, 
strengthening infrastructure rather than leaving it in bank accounts (Stepovoi, 2011). He made it clear 
that the fund was under Rakhimovs control. Rakhimov responded with sharp criticism of Khamitov 
and a threat to end the funds cooperation with the republican government (Murtaza Rakhimov: I ne 
takie trudnosti preodolevali, n.d., Zayavlenie Soveta Blagotvoritelnogo fonda Ural po materialam 
intervyu R.Z. Khamitova gazeta Novye Izvestiya ot 5 oktyabrya 2011 g., 2011). 
played a significant role in strengthening his bargaining position. But the Kremlin may also 
have been concerned that full-scale asset seizure would not have captured a large proportion 
of Bashnefts value, because of the defensive tactics used by the Rakhimovs. 
In any case, the fates of both Gutseriev and Rakhimov were in stark contrast to that of 
Khodorkovsky and Lebedev, who spent ten years in Russian prisons, and of the many other 
Yukos-affiliated individuals who were caught up in the states massive campaign of coercion. 
These contrasting fates serve to underline that the states preference for a negotiated solution 
is so great that it is prepared to buy this solution with a relatively attractive offer to the 
existing owner. 
Conclusion  
The above comparative case study provides a great deal of information that helps to confirm 
and illustrate the arguments made in Chapter 1. But it also suggests the need to make 
additional refinements to the theoretical framework outlined in that chapter. The task now is 
to summarise the theoretical lessons from the case studies.  
Explaining the causes of the takeovers 
All three takeovers were ordered from the very top of the Russian political system, either by 
Putin personally or at least with his knowledge and participation in how they subsequently 
progressed. This fact lends weight to the possibility that the takeovers were driven by political 
considerations rather than rent-seeking. It does not on its own negate the rent-seeking 
hypothesis, but raises the stakes considerably. Either Putin was personally engaging in the 
rent-seeking, or he was helping a group of his associates to do so. 
Another key finding from the case studies is that the outcomes were contingent rather than 
pre-determined. There was a credible prospect in each case that the outcome would have been 
quite different: Yukos could possibly been resolved through handing ownership to a new 
private owner (i.e. Sibneft). It was also a fluke that Rosneft ended up as the state-owned 
company which acquired most of Yukoss assets. Both Russneft and Bashneft were the 
subject of legal campaigns aimed at bringing them into state ownership.  
The contingent nature of the outcomes provides a further argument against rent-seeking: if 
Putin was acting as an arbiter between rival rent-seeking factions, then why was it a matter of 
chance who ended up as the new owners of the assets? There are additional points from the 
cases that cast doubt on the rent-seeking explanation. Why were Khodorkovsky and Lebedev 
still in jail many years after the Yukos assets were largely safely in the hands of the alleged 
rent-seekers? Why did Gutseriev and Rakhimov receive so much money in exchange for 
handing over their assets, if these were cases of predatory reiderstvo?  
For all these reasons, political motivations should be taken seriously when explaining the 
takeovers. The contingent nature of the outcomes suggests that the goal was to deprive the 
existing owners of their assets for political reasons; precisely who would be the new owners 
was of secondary importance. But at the same time, the political threat to the regime posed by 
Khodorkovsky has been substantially exaggerated, Gutseriev posed no threat whatsoever to 
the Kremlin, and Rakhimov was a positive asset in terms of his ability to deliver pro-Kremlin 
votes at federal elections. Hence the conclusion that the political threat posed by the existing 
owners related specifically to sovereignty rather than regime incumbency. The undue 
influence Yukos had gained over the parliamentary decision-making process and its direct 
negotiations with foreign powers (bypassing the Kremlin) on matters affecting Russias 
international relations were seen as clear challenges to sovereignty. The Kremlin saw 
Gutserievs involvement in Ingushetian politics, and the political and economic autonomy 
from the Kremlin that Rakhimov enjoyed, as threats to its ability to project its authority 
throughout the country. 
As noted in the previous chapter, sovereign development entails two separate vectors that 
sometimes can be pulling in opposite directions. It would appear that these were cases in 
which the objective of tackling perceived threats to sovereignty trumped developmental 
considerations. There was a possible developmental motive behind forcing the change of 
ownership at Bashneft, and opening up its petrochemicals complex so that it played a role in 
the economy beyond Bashkortostan (perhaps in order to help realise Putins objective of 
boosting exports of refined products). But the economic impact of all three takeovers was 
bound to be negative in the short term (through the impact on operations at the companies, 
and on investor sentiment nationally), with little prospect of long-term upside for economic 
output in the long-term.  
Explaining the ownership outcomes 
Even if rent-seeking is rejected as an explanation for the takeovers, it may still in principle 
play a causal role in determining their outcome. If the question of who would be the new 
owner of these assets was of secondary importance to the Kremlin, then perhaps the outcome 
depended on struggles between rival rent-seeking factions who were keen to get their hands 
on the spoils. Putins involvement in all three cases makes such explanations problematic: 
rather than remaining aloof, he was without question involved in obstructing the acquisition of 
Russneft by Deripaska, and he is rumoured to have been involved in encouraging Rakhimov 
to sell to Yevtushenkov. He was almost certainly party to the struggle between Rosneft and 
Gazprom over their merger and the related issue of who would emerge as the main buyer of 
Yukoss assets. On the face of it, this undermines the argument that the outcome was of 
secondary importance to the Kremlin. Putin did show a preference for one new owner over 
another, and this preference apparently changed over time in the case of Russneft (anti-
Gutseriev and pro-Deripaska at first, then anti-Deripaska, then pro-Gutseriev and pro-
Yevtushenkov). At times he reacted to events to shape the ownership outcomes of the 
takeovers, but the key point is that those outcomes cannot have reflected an initial intention 
when the SLCTs were instigated. 
The other suggestion that can be found in the existing literature to explain the private 
outcomes of the Russneft and Bashneft cases is that the factors that had heretofore been 
driving state ownership no longer applied. The sale of Russneft to Deripaska happened at a 
time when the trend of expanding state ownership was at its peak. It could still be the case that 
sufficient control had been achieved over the oil industry specifically so that the Kremlin saw 
no particular imperative to nationalise a company contributing only 3% of overall oil 
production. But the contingent nature of the outcomes makes this explanation also 
problematic: why, if there was not much Kremlin interest in bringing Russneft and Bashneft 
into state ownership, was there an (albeit unsuccessful) effort to nationalise both companies 
through the courts? 
The takeover as bargaining game 
In Chapter 1, the theory was introduced that the outcomes of SLCTs might be influenced by 
how they proceed as bargaining games. If, as argued above, the SLCTs in the present chapter 
were undertaken without a specific ownership outcome in mind, then one would expect to see 
the bargaining game play a particularly strong causal role in determining their outcomes, 
assuming the proposed theory has any validity. 
A key building block in that theory is the argument that the state prefers to see a negotiated 
outcome to the takeovers rather than having to pursue the kind of full-scale asset seizure seen 
in the Yukos case. The existing owners in this chapter met sharply contrasting fates: 
Khodorkovsky imprisoned for 10 years and receiving no compensation for his assets (the 
money raised from their sale instead went to pay off Yukoss deliberately inflated tax debts); 
Gutseriev receiving $3bn in cash for his assets and able to live in peace in London, before 
being rehabilitated, returning to Russia and reclaiming his company; Rakhimov receiving 
$2bn and being permitted to live on in Bashkortostan, even continuing to play a political role 
to the exasperation of his successor. These contrasting fates provide a strong argument in 
favour of the states preference for a negotiated solution: this preference is so strong that it is 
prepared to let existing owners who opt for that solution walk away with a level of 
compensation very different to what we would expect in cases of reiderstvo. 
The cases also provide clues as to precisely what the states carrot-and-stick offer entails. It 
is clear that the existing owner is asked to do more than simply part with his asset. He must 
also refrain from the kinds of sovereignty-undermining political activities he was suspected of 
engaging in. In the case of Khodorkovsky and Gutseriev, it seems clear that emigration was 
also part of the deal
. The bitterness of this pill is, however, sweetened by the prospect of 
receiving an amount of money that approximately reflects the value of the asset. 
To say that Khodorkovsky refused his offer while the other two owners accepted would be an 
over-simplification: Gutseriev apparently refused unceremoniously an earlier offer from a 
state-owned company to sell his business for a heavily discounted price, while it took many 
years of coercion and careful bargaining before the Kremlin was able to persuade the 
Rakhimovs to cede control of Bashneft. But there is a significant distinction to be made 
between Khodorkovskys refusal on principle to play the gamehis willingness to take a very 
public stand against state coercionand the way the other two owners responded to the 
situation. 
Defensive tactics and constraints on coercion 
The Yukos case drives home the point made by Markus (2012, p. 254) that business is likely 
to lose in a head-to-head confrontation with the central executive. But the Yukos affair 
provides clues to explain why the Kremlin prefers a negotiated outcome, rather than effecting 
 That Rakhimov was not required to leave the country may be thanks to the extra bargaining power 
available to him through his local electoral support and ties to the local political and business elite, as 
well as Kremlin fears over potential instability in the republic. His cooperation was required in ensuring 
a (relatively) smooth transition for his successor. 
every SLCT through full-scale asset seizure. The crackdown on Yukos meant recruiting the 
states coercive resources on a massive scale, and coordinating this effort across state 
agencies. The Russian state probably lacks the administrative resources to wage such a 
campaign against several companies at once. This fact by itself amounts to a (limited) 
constraint on the states appetite for coercive takeover. Furthermore, the existing owners of 
companies targeted by the state have tactics at their disposal that make full-scale asset seizure 
a less attractive option. The internationalisation of the business is one such defensive tactic: it 
means that the pursuit of assets by the state must also be international in nature, and it must 
press its case in foreign courts that cannot be so easily leant on to provide a favourable ruling. 
The use of offshores can also facilitate moving assets abroad and getting them to a place 
where they cannot be found or seized by the Russian state. In the Yukos case, there is little 
evidence that any domestic institutions offered any significant constraints on the states 
behaviour. Although considerable effort was expended to give the bankruptcy auctions a 
semblance of market-based legitimacy, this was probably determined by the international 
factor (in terms of reputation, investor sentiment, and legal claims) rather than by domestic 
institutions. International legal risk also proved decisive in the decision to allow Rosneft, 
rather than Gazprom, to buy Yukoss main asset, Yuganskneftegaz. 
But as the Bashneft case shows in particular, there are also some domestic constraints which 
qualify as coercion-constraining institutions (Frye, 2004) inside Russias jurisdiction. The 
transactions that were aimed at protecting against expropriation, by breaking up shares in the 
individual companies and moving them on to Russian charities and limited-liability 
companies, would have been meaningless if the state were not constrained by domestic 
institutions from simply seizing the assets. In the chapters that follow, more evidence will be 
provided that domestic institutions play a significant (albeit still an inadequate) role in 
constraining coercion in Russia. 
Relating bargaining outcomes to ownership outcomes 
In the introductory section of this chapter, a simple explanation was provided for how the 
bargaining outcomes of the takeovers affected their ownership outcomes: the negotiated 
outcome can lead to either state or private ownership, but full-scale asset seizure will 
ordinarily lead to nationalisation. Why full-scale asset seizure leads to nationalisation (except 
perhaps in countries that are particularly kleptocratic and already isolated internationally) is 
explained above in the context of Yukos: transfer to a new private owner would be highly 
controversial after full-scale asset seizure involving the states coercive resources; it would be 
difficult to find a private buyer who was prepared to play this role, because of the associated 
legal and reputational risks; there would be no national interest justification for the 
takeover; it would have negative consequences in terms of the legitimacy of the ruling group, 
and internationally in terms of legal risks stemming from the seizure. 
In its present form, the theory says the following about the ownership outcome that results 
from the negotiated bargaining outcome. The company may still be nationalised in pursuit 
of a political strategy for the sector, or as a one-off intervention to address a market failure. If 
there is no such political factor, then the ownership outcome will be determined by the 
apolitical issue of which private or public companies happen to have the greatest commercial 
appetite to acquire the company. However, as the following section explains, the evidence 
from the cases suggests a further refinement to this element of the theory.  
Private buyers as intermediaries 
How can AFK Sistema have been simultaneously a defensive play by Rakhimov against 
Kremlin coercion, and the Kremlins preferred buyer? The answer to this apparent puzzle lies 
in viewing private buyers as intermediaries who facilitate the negotiated outcome that the 
state prefers. An obstacle to this outcome is the level of animosity created when the state 
applies coercion and makes clear that  either through agreement or force  the existing owner 
must part with their business. The animosity makes it psychologically more difficult for the 
existing owner to accept that he must sell to the same people who are applying the coercion. A 
third-party buyer, who has no affiliations to the state but is acceptable to the Kremlin, is 
therefore a mutually preferred solution. In the case studies, we saw some indication that 
Gutseriev may have rejected an approach from Rosneft to take the company off his hands for 
$1bn. Although he later denied that Rosnefts Chairman Igor Sechin was involved in the 
Russneft takeover, we can speculate that this was privately what he believed, and that his flat 
refusal of Rosnefts offer was prompted not only by the price but also by the offer having 
come from the same people responsible for the coercion. Similarly, there is little doubt that 
Khodorkovskys refusal to accept any kind of offer was driven by his sense of injustice at the 
coercion being used against him (Khodorkovsky & Gevorkyan, 2012). This almost certainly 
ruled out a voluntary sale to Rosneft, and the alternative of a sale to Sibneft might have been 
possible if Yukoss owners had been more convinced that Sibnefts owner Roman 
Abramovich was really acting independently of the state officials responsible for the coercion. 
Both Deripaska and Yevtushenkov were favoured by the existing owners precisely because 
they were seen as third parties who could nevertheless help persuade the Kremlin to call off 
the attack. 
Thus it remains the case that the negotiated bargaining outcome can lead to either a private 
or state ownership outcome. But the states preference for a negotiated outcome makes a 
private ownership more likely. The following chapter provides additional evidence for this 
process, and in a surprising context. In all of the takeovers in the next chapter, the state has in 
mind a specific ownership outcome (state ownership through acquisition by de facto state
controlled Gazprom). Yet once again, it makes use of an intermediary buyer who can 
facilitate the negotiated outcome.  
Finally, there is one small piece of evidence from the Russneft case that anticipates an issue 
which looms large in the next chapter. Gutseriev mentioned in passing that, when the state 
began to apply coercion on him, he considered Gazprom as one of six possible buyers for 
Russneft. However, he felt that Gazprom would not be able to move fast enough  and time 
was of the essence, presumably because the carrot-and-stick offer was conditional on him 
parting with Russneft within a certain time-frame. The precise obstacles which prevented 
Gazprom from moving fast, and how it sought to bypass those obstacles, will become clear in 
the following chapter.  
Chapter 3. Gazproms campaign to re-take 
lost assets 
Introduction 
This chapter examines developments at Gazprom, arguably Russias most strategically-
important state-owned company, in the first years of Vladimir Putins presidency. Putin 
assumed the presidency in May 2000, and from the outset paid close attention to what was 
happening at Gazprom
. A substantial change in the companys management soon followed. 
In June 2000, Viktor Chernomyrdin, the former USSR Gas Minister who created Gazprom, 
stood down as Chairman of its board of directors. His replacement was Dmitry Medvedev, 
then deputy head of Putins administration (Panyushkin & Zygar, 2008, p. 104). On 30 May 
2001, Rem Vyakhirev, who had been Gazproms chief executive since 1992, was dismissed 
on Putins orders (Butrin, 2001)
. His replacement, Aleksei Miller, had very little experience 
of the gas industry, but shared with Putin a professional background in St Petersburg
. Miller 
moved to replace the majority of the Vyakhirev-era management team, primarily with people 
with similar backgrounds to his own (Panyushkin & Zygar, 2008, pp. 113115).  
One of the salient features of the new management teams first years at Gazprom was a 
campaign to recover assets over which the company had lost control under the previous 
management, either through sales based on a suspiciously low valuation or through other 
means such as share dilutions. According to one assessment, these lost assets included gas 
 Panyushkin and Zygar (2008, p. 107) cite unconfirmed rumours that as early as the end of 1999, 
when Putin was Prime Minister, he ordered his close associates to study the company with a view to 
replacing its management and consolidating the states control. It was even suggested by some analysts 
that the new Gazprom CEO, Aleksei Miller, took few strategic decisions without first consulting Putin 
(Kozyrev, 2011).  
 Vyakhirev was made Chairman of Gazprom and stayed on in that role for approximately one more 
year. The decline in his political power is said to have begun soon after Viktor Chernomyrdin was fired 
as Prime Minister in 1998 (Rem Vyakhirev, 2013). 
 Between 1991 and 1996, Miller worked under Putin at the Committee for External Ties of the St 
Petersburg mayors office. His only professional experience of the gas industry prior to heading 
Gazprom was his time as Deputy Energy Minister between 2000 and 2001 (Aleksei Borisovich 
Miller, n.d.). 
fields which amounted to nearly 10% of Gazproms hydrocarbon reserves, and were 
equivalent to the total reserves of US oil major ExxonMobil (Kleiner, 2008, p. 89). This 
campaign to recover lost assets is the focus of this chapter. Three companies, which were the 
subject of takeover by Gazprom in 2002, are examined as case studies. These are the 
construction contractor Stroitransgaz, petrochemicals firm Sibur, and the company 
Zapsibgazprom, which held the licence for a substantial gas field named South Russkoe. In 
each case, Gazprom had lost control of the company itself or of its most important assets, or 
was at imminent risk of doing so. The cases have been selected firstly because they were 
undertaken at approximately the same time, meaning that the circumstances surrounding the 
takeovers (including the composition of the Gazprom management) were similar across cases. 
Secondly, all three cases involved Gazproms use of state coercion in the takeover process 
(while in other cases Gazprom was able to take over assets without resorting to such 
methods). 
As in the previous chapter, the case studies aim to answer two research questions: firstly, what 
were the motives behind these SLCTs, and secondly, what explains their ownership outcome. 
For the present chapter, answering the first question entails understanding the motivations of 
the Gazprom management and its government patrons in undertaking to bring the lost assets 
back under Gazproms control.   
Gazproms privatisation in the 1990s left the majority of its shares under the control of its own 
management, and thus when Putin became President in 2000, it was not a formally state-
controlled company. The states direct stake stood at just 38.4%, there was no golden share 
arrangement granting it additional voting privileges besides this stake, and it had no majority 
on the board of directors. An important motivation behind these SLCTs was the political 
leaderships desire to turn its precarious ad hoc control over this strategic company into 
formal control on the basis of majority ownership. This desire was in turn driven by the 
importance of Gazprom to the state as a tool of domestic economic policy and of foreign 
policy. However, establishing majority ownership over Gazprom cannot explain the decision 
to take back all the lost assets in question, some of which had no involvement in Gazproms 
ownership. Gazproms management at times sought to explain the re-gathering of its lost 
assets by reference to the exclusively commercial goal of boosting market capitalisation 
(Reznik, 2002a), but some of the assets involved were both outside of Gazproms core 
business
 of gas production, distribution and sales, and there was apparently no other 
commercial imperative for Gazprom to return them to its control. The principal objectives 
behind the campaign were instead political, and included wider developmental considerations. 
Turning to the second research question, because the SLCTs in this chapter were aimed at 
bringing assets back into the ownership of de facto state-controlled Gazprom, their ownership 
outcome was pre-determined as state ownership (but not formal state control until the state 
subsequently formalised its majority control over Gazprom itself, as will be discussed below). 
In each case, the takeover involved the existing owners acceptance of the states carrot-and-
stick offer, though in the Sibur case this happened only after the owner was placed under a 
high degree of coercion (his agreement to sell the company was signed while he was in pre-
trial detention). The cases therefore provide confirmation that SLCTs can result in state 
ownership not only through full-scale asset seizure (as with the Yukos case), but also when 
the existing owner accepts the states carrot-and-stick offer.  
However, Gazprom used a wholly-owned subsidiary named Gazprominvestholding in all 
three SLCTs, as buyer of some or all of the shares and/or as negotiator on behalf of Gazprom. 
Gazprominvestholdings chief executive, Alisher Usmanov, was a major private businessman 
in his own right, as well as someone who had worked with the former management of 
Gazprom, with which the existing owners of the targeted assets had close ties. Usmanov 
 A companys non-core assets and business lines are those deemed by the management not to be 
central to the main value proposition of the business. Precisely what constitutes core and non-
core, and a companys appetite for diversifying into non-core business areas, shifts as strategy changes 
and as the profitability of certain business lines changes over time. 
actively played on this dual status to help persuade the existing owners to accept the carrot-
and-stick offer. Thus, while a private buyer was ruled out in these cases because of the need to 
restore Gazproms control, Gazprom still found a way to capture some of the advantages (seen 
in the Russneft and Bashneft cases in the previous chapter) of using a private buyer as 
intermediary who could facilitate a negotiated outcome to the takeover. 
The use of Gazprominvestholding as a buyer did not change the overall state ownership 
outcome of the cases. However, in explaining the causal factors that determined the specific 
ownership outcomes, the case studies will highlight the extent to which Gazprom was forced 
to work within legal and other constraints. Some of these constraints were common to all 
Russian joint-stock companies. However, as Gutserievs comment at the end of the previous 
chapter suggested, Gazproms status as a state-owned company and one that dominated its 
market placed significant additional restrictions on its freedom of manoeuvre. The political 
motivations behind Gazproms takeovers highlighted its privileged position as a channel of 
government policy. But despite this privileged position and its superior access to 
administrative resources, Gazprom was forced to find innovative solutions to bypass legal 
obstacles that stemmed in part from its own state-ness. These legal obstacles were largely 
domestic in nature, providing further evidence that (contrary to what one would expect in an 
ideal-type kleptocracy) some domestic institutions in Russia are working as constraints on 
coercion even by the most privileged of companies. 
Research question 1: causes of the state-led coercive takeovers  
Examining the motivations behind Gazproms campaign to recover lost assets highlights a 
contradiction that is common to commercialised state-owned companies in market economies, 
particularly when (as was the case at Gazprom) those companies include private minority 
shareholders. As noted above, Gazproms management at times attempted to present the 
campaign as being motivated by exclusively commercial considerations, namely boosting the 
companys market capitalisation. But there was a clear political dimension to the campaign 
which was sometimes at odds with Gazproms internal commercial logic.  
It has been suggested that Aleksei Miller, the Putin appointee who took Gazproms helm at 
the end of May 2001, was tasked from the outset with regaining Gazproms lost assets
reality, however, the months that followed his appointment were characterised by indecision 
and internal debate among the companys directors, including the states representatives on 
the board (Denisov, 2001b). This indecision centred on how to proceed with taking back the 
lost gas producer Purgaz, and whether and how to prevent the threatened loss of 
petrochemicals company Sibur. While media reports tended to blame this indecision on the 
incompetence and inexperience of the new management team, in both cases there were real 
reasons to question whether re-taking the assets in the proposed way, or even re-taking them 
at all, was commercially desirable. 
Purgaz is not treated as a case in this chapter because it was taken over by Gazprom without 
recourse to coercion. However, the debates within Gazproms management regarding how to 
proceed at Purgaz highlight the doubts over the commercial rationale for the campaign to re-
take lost assets. As will be shown below, these doubts persisted until a clear political signal 
was given to proceed with a large-scale campaign of takeovers. Purgaz was a producing 
company with the licence to develop the Gubkinskoe gas field, with substantial proven 
reserves of 400bcm. This was the first case in which Gazprom had handed control of one of its 
own gas fields to a third party. It had been founded in 1998 as a joint venture between 
Gazprom (51%) and the independent producer Itera (49%)
. In the following year, Gazprom 
sold Itera a further 32% stake, leaving it with just 19%. The sale price had been just $1200 
(sic), equivalent to the nominal value of the shares. Gubkinskoe swiftly became Iteras main 
producing asset: it was already producing 3.8bcm of gas in 1999 and 14bcm in 2000. This 
 e.g. Drankina & Tatevosova (2002); Henderson (2010, p. 59). 
 Gazproms stake was via its subsidiary Noyabrskgazdobycha and Iteras via ZAO Itera-Rus. 
looked like an extremely generous gift to a competitor: the hedge fund Hermitage Capital 
Management, which was an activist minority shareholder in Gazprom, claimed that the market 
value of the 32% stake was $566m (Kleiner, 2002). 
At the beginning of 2001 (i.e. before Millers arrival at Gazprom), two separate investigations 
had been launched into Gazproms dealings with Itera, whose business was at the time 
primarily based on re-selling gas produced either in Turkmenistan or by Gazprom in Russia. 
One investigation was commissioned by the government and was conducted by the Audit 
Chamber (whose role is to monitor the use of federal budget money); the other was 
commissioned by Gazproms board of directors and was conducted by the accounting and 
auditing firm PwC. One of the findings of the PwC investigation, which reported to 
Gazproms board at the end of July 2001, was that Gazprom still had an option available to 
buy back its 32% stake in Purgaz at the same nominal price for which it had been sold, 
provided that it did so before 1 January 2002 (Bushueva, 2001f; Reznik, 2001b). It ought to 
have been clear how Gazprom should proceed: it had handed over an asset apparently worth 
$566m for next to nothing, and now had the option of buying it back for the same token 
amount. Nevertheless, Gazproms board was riven by debate for some six months before it 
finally resolved in December 2001 to exercise the option (Reznik & Khrennikov, 2001). 
What gave the Gazprom board pause were the following considerations. At a board meeting in 
August 2001, the State Property Minister (one of the states five representatives on the board) 
voiced the concern that, if Gazprom went ahead and deprived Itera of its main producing 
asset, Itera might have trouble paying debts for which Gazprom was acting as guarantor 
(Bushueva, 2001f). Furthermore, by regaining its controlling stake in Purgaz, Gazprom would 
be taking on responsibility for the latters debts to Itera: the latter had provided between 
$250m and $300m in short-term loans to Purgaz between 1998 and 2000, in order to get 
production up and running. It emerged that the terms of the option agreement meant Gazprom 
would have to pay Itera $194m in compensation for these investments (Reznik & Bushueva, 
2001). Furthermore, the Gubkinskoe fields location meant that its gas could only be sold 
domestically. While under Iteras control, Purgaz could sell its gas at a price set by the 
market, though it was dependent on Gazproms pipeline network to find a market outside the 
immediate vicinity
. If Gazprom regained control, the gas could only be sold at the tariff set 
by the government. It was therefore uncertain whether Gazprom could profitably exploit the 
asset. If it opted instead to retain the status quo, Gazprom could continue to collect transit 
revenues from Itera in exchange for taking the gas to market. These were substantial, 
amounting to $215m in 2001 (Bushueva, 2001b; Davydova & Reznik, 2001). Thus the reality 
was distinctly more complex than Hermitage had claimed: if their valuation was correct and 
the 32% stake in Purgaz was indeed worth $566m, then it is doubtful whether it was worth 
this amount to Gazprom, subject as it was to regulated prices.  
The case of petrochemicals company Sibur provides further evidence that Gazprom and its 
political masters did not yet have a coherent strategy for its lost assets until some time after 
Miller became chief executive. In July 2001, Gazprom found that it had failed to convert a 
newly-gained majority stake in Sibur into a board majority. It was also being asked to buy into 
a new Sibur share issue which Gazprom First Deputy CEO Petr Rodionov believed was based 
on an exaggerated share price (its stake would be drastically diluted if it did not subscribe). At 
the end of September, Rodionov demanded the resignation of Siburs CEO Yakov Goldovsky. 
But he found himself reprimanded by Gazproms then Deputy Chairman Dmitry Medvedev, 
on the grounds that he had exceeded his authority. Rodionov submitted his resignation soon 
afterwards (Bushueva & Reznik, 2001b). But only a few months later, in January 2002, 
Goldovsky was arrested and effectively accused of trying to steal the company from Gazprom. 
By the time of Goldovskys arrest the Gazprom management had finally arrived at a strategy 
for its lost assets that was straightforward in its approach even if unclear in its motivations. In 
 Non-Gazprom producers had since 1998 been released from any obligation to sell their gas at 
regulated prices (Ahrend & Tompson, 2005, p. 804). 
the same month, Gazprom Deputy CEO Aleksandr Ananenkov said that everything which by 
rights belongs to Gazprom must be returned, as part of a new company strategy aimed at 
increasing the capitalisation of the company (Reznik, 2002a). While the reference to 
increasing capitalisation implied that this was a commercially-motivated strategy, the 
assertion that the campaign extended to all assets which by rights belong to Gazprom 
suggested otherwise. The commercial rationale was doubtful not just with respect to Purgaz, 
but also regarding some of the assets that are the subject of the case studies below.  
It appears that an intervention by President Vladimir Putin was the prompt for Gazproms new 
strategy. On 20 November 2001, he publicly reprimanded Miller for deficiencies in his work 
to date, and passed judgement on Sibur using wording that implied the same lesson was to be 
applied to other lost or threatened Gazprom assets: "You must pay close attention to the 
ownership issue. If you sit with your mouth open, you will lose not only Sibur, but other 
companies too before you have time to look around" (Gorelov, 2001; Isachenkov, 2002; 
Tsitata nedeli, 2001). 
Barnes (2006a, 2006b) provides a good starting-point for understanding the political 
objectives behind the decision to recover the lost assets that by rights belong to Gazprom. 
He states that commercial property is prized by competing interests (including the state) not 
just for its financial value but as a source of power in an economic environment characterised 
by a high degree of uncertainty. Additionally, he suggests that Putins views on economic 
development include a Gerschenkronian stress on the need for the state to play an active role, 
particularly in late developing countries, and an adoption of Baldwins notion that control 
over natural resources can be used to gain international influence (Baldwin, 1985; 
Gerschenkron, 1962). Gustafson (2012, pp. 247250) notes that once Putin had moved from 
St Petersburg to the national stage in 1999, he increasingly [stressed] the importance of state 
power and control. State power is the precondition for stability and economic growth, and 
control of natural resources is the precondition for state power. This is the reason for the 
close personal interest that Putin took in Gazprom, and explains why it became a major 
priority to transform the states somewhat precarious de facto control over Gazprom into solid 
de jure control by achieving a direct majority stake.  
Gazprom had begun its existence as the direct successor to the USSR Gas Industry Ministry. 
In August 1989, Viktor Chernomyrdin, who headed the Ministry, persuaded the USSR 
Cabinet of Ministers to transform it into a Union-wide state-owned kontsern (Panyushkin & 
Zygar, 2008, pp. 1619)
. Gazproms managers tried unsuccessfully to exclude the 
company from the wider privatisation programme led by Anatoly Chubais. However, they did 
succeed in winning concessions that allowed them to control the privatisation process. They 
emerged with control over a substantial Gazprom stake and considerable autonomy of 
action
Pappe and Galukhina (2009, p. 170) question whether the state ever lost its de facto control 
over Gazprom: they argue that the management always obeyed clearly expressed directions 
from officials at the level of deputy prime minister and above. Furthermore, they claim that 
from the formal point of view, the state in the early 2000s enjoyed a majority vote at Gazprom 
because it could rely on the management and other shareholders whose loyalty was 
guaranteed. By contrast, journalistic accounts give the impression that this situation was more 
precarious: the state was able to cobble together a majority vote at shareholder meetings by 
reaching ad hoc agreements with other shareholders (Petrovsky, 2002; Reznik, 2001a). In any 
case, it is clear that the political leadership did not find the situation satisfactory, and felt that 
it could not rely on being able to exploit Gazproms resources effectively until state control 
was formalised. There was also a perceived risk, possibly exaggerated in the minds of political 
 Gazprom was the first kontsern and entirely replaced the USSR Gas Ministry. Although entirely 
state-owned, this and subsequent kontserny gave enterprise managers some autonomy from government 
for the first time (Gustafson, 2012, p. 72; Sim, 2008, p. 18) 
 For details of the privatisation process and subsequent developments affecting the states control 
over Gazprom in the 1990s, see Ivanova (2001). 
actors who were arguably unusually preoccupied with national security, that the lack of formal 
control might mean Gazprom falling into the hands of Russias enemies.  
As will be discussed below, formal state control over Gazprom was achieved in summer 2005, 
when a state-owned company named Rosneftegaz bought a 10.7% stake in Gazprom from its 
subsidiaries. But this final transaction was made possible by Gazproms earlier work to buy 
back Gazprom shares that had been sold to third parties under the previous management. Most 
notably, this included a 4.83% Gazprom stake that had been sold to Stroitransgaz in 1994-
1995. In Gazproms SLCT of Stroitransgaz, which is examined below, it was the Gazprom 
stake that was the main prize and not Stroitransgaz itself. 
Restoring state control over Gazprom cannot, however, have been the sole objective behind 
the campaign to recover its lost assets. Otherwise, the campaign could have been restricted to 
pressuring Stroitransgaz and other companies to hand over their Gazprom shares. The fact that 
it extended to many other lost Gazprom assets can largely be explained by the wish to boost 
Gazproms asset base as far as possible. Doubts over the commercial rationale of taking back 
some of these assets were ultimately rejected in favour of an apparently indiscriminate 
campaign, proving that this was not, as Ananenkov claimed, essentially a policy aimed at 
boosting Gazproms market capitalisation
. The more important motivation appears to have 
been to maximise Gazproms effectiveness as a tool of the state.  
Heinrich (2008) has examined Gazproms use by the Putin administration as a means to boost 
Russias influence abroad, while pointing out that it has also been used to bolster state power 
within Russias borders. Gazprom also serves as an example to support the claim made by 
Chaudhry (1993) that in developing countries state ownership is often a response to the 
administrative weakness of a state and to the difficulties encountered by late developers in 
 Pappe and Galukhina (2009, p. 171) express doubts also regarding the wisdom of this bloating 
(razbukhanie) of Gazprom, which included the acquisition of vast new assets as well as re-taking ones 
that had previously been lost. They argue that the scale and diversification of the Gazprom business 
would inevitably lead to problems of manageability.  
constructing effective national legal and regulatory institutions
. Gazprom fulfils official 
regulatory functions on behalf of the government as well as being a supposedly commercially-
motivated joint-stock company. Ahrend and Tompson (2005, pp. 8134) argue that Gazprom 
needs to transfer its regulatory functions to state bodies, but the fact that this has not been 
done to date most likely points to the governments awareness that it is unable to provide 
effective regulation. It has also been argued (though not uncontroversially) that by fixing 
Gazproms domestic prices at below-market rates, the government has used it to provide a 
subsidy to the wider economy (Henderson, 2011, p. 8)
The evidence from the three cases, to which we now turn, shows that the state went on to try 
to use Gazproms restored ownership of some of these assets to solve certain micro-economic 
problems, despite indications that these efforts made no commercial sense for Gazprom itself. 
Therefore the political objectives for the campaign included (or came to include through a 
form of mission creep) wider considerations of state-led economic development.  
Sibur 
Sibur was created in 1995 through a government decree which transferred to it numerous gas 
processing plants which had previously been the property of state-owned Rosneft. The plants 
took as inputs the associated gas which is a by-product of oil production; they separated it into 
pipeline-quality natural gas on the one hand, and natural gas liquids which could be used in 
petrochemicals production on the other. By 2001, Sibur had expanded to become Russias 
largest petrochemicals company, with a 47% share of the countrys production of rubber, 43% 
of its tires, 25% of its liquid gases and 23% of its synthetic fibres (Bushueva, Reznik, 
Novolodskaya, & Chertkov, 2002). As will be discussed below, this was an asset that had not 
 In cases where the government becomes the primary employer and producer and assumes the role 
of setting prices, its task is simplified to monitoring the activities of corporations and agencies that it 
owns and manages (Chaudhry, 1993, p. 252). By contrast, Evans (1995, pp. 6971) suggests that 
excessive expansion of state ownership can undermine developmental goals by placing an intense 
strain on state capacity. 
 Woodruff (1999) challenges this notion by problematizing the concept of below-market. 
yet been strictly lost by Gazprom, but was in imminent danger: Gazprom had secured 
majority ownership for the first time in summer 2001, only to find soon afterwards that its 
stake risked being diluted to the point where it had no influence over the company.  
The petrochemicals industry was beyond Gazproms core business of gas production and 
supply. But by controlling Sibur, Gazprom (which already had some gas processing plants) 
could establish itself as a monopsony buyer of the associated gas produced by oil companies. 
Heinrich (2008) describes this as one of the administrative resources which Gazprom (after 
retaking Sibur) used against oil producers with ambitions to become significant gas producers, 
in order to stop them competing with Gazprom on a level playing field. In addition to 
Gazproms monopsony position, the oil producers had since 1998 been forced to sell their 
associated gas at a price fixed by the regulator in order to preserve Siburs commercial 
viability. They had responded by increasingly electing to simply flare this gas on-site. 
When Putin made his remarks in November 2001 about the danger of losing control of Sibur, 
he commented at the same time on the need to preserve and revive Russias petrochemicals 
industry. Siburs creation had helped to bring about a partial revival of the industry, but it was 
feared that without its affiliations with Gazprom, and the stable demand this brought for the 
pipeline-quality natural gas produced at the gas processing plants, Sibur would be an unviable 
business (Drankina & Tatevosova, 2002)
In an April 2002 interview, Gazprom Deputy CEO Aleksandr Krasnenkov conceded that 
Sibur was strictly speaking a non-core asset for Gazprom, but noted that the Sibur production 
cycle lengthens the chain of gas processing and allows [us] to export not just raw materials but 
processed products. This can be seen as an exclusively commercial explanation for 
 For the sake of clarity, two monopsonies were involved in Gazproms relationship with Sibur: 1) 
with Sibur under its ownership, Gazprom stood to own all of the countrys gas processing plants, giving 
it monopsony status as buyer of associated gas from oil companies; 2) Gazprom was also the only 
company in a position to buy the pipeline-quality natural gas produced at Siburs plants. This 
dependence on a single buyer would have imperilled the profitability of this side of Siburs business, if 
Sibur were no longer under Gazproms ownership. 
Gazproms interest in Sibur, but it is also notably similar to the developmental interest taken 
by Putin in moving oil exports up the value chain by boosting the exports of refined 
products (Gustafson, 2012, pp. 369370)
. It also recalls Wengles (2012, p. 101) 
description of the Russian governments interest in promoting electricity exports from 
Russias Far East as part of a strategy aimed at moving away from exporting raw materials, 
toward value-added production.  
Stroitransgaz 
Stroitransgaz was another company that could hardly be described as a core asset for 
Gazprom: it built pipelines and provided other construction services relating to the 
development of oil and gas fields. Like Sibur, the company itself was not lost by Gazprom 
under Vyakhirev  it had never been controlled by Gazprom. But what was deemed to have 
been lost to Stroitransgaz was a 6.2% stake in Gazprom itself. Gazprom had transferred the 
bulk of these shares (4.83%) to Stroitransgaz in 1994-5 as payment for construction services. 
The exchange was based on a substantially under-valued price for Gazproms shares
Stroitransgaz had bought the remaining Gazprom shares on the open market in subsequent 
years.  
If the state could gain control of the Gazprom stake that was held by Stroitransgaz, it would be 
well on the way to its ultimate goal of securing a direct majority stake in Gazprom. The 
government considered this a pre-condition for eliminating the ring-fence bar on foreign 
shareholders owning Gazproms domestically-issued shares (Grivach, 2003). Removing the 
 Putin aimed to achieve this increase in refined oil products exports through a reduction in export tax; 
as noted in Chapter Two, such motivations may have contributed to the decision to force 
Bashkortostans petrochemicals industry to open itself up to the national economy. 
 STGs CEO Arngold Bekker claimed in a 2000 interview that Gazprom had the option of taking 
back the 4.83% stake by repaying its debt in cash within three years, but had not elected to do so 
(Bushueva, 2000c). An investigation by the Russian Federal Securities Commission in 2001 found that 
the Gazprom shares had been priced at just their nominal value for this 1994-5 transaction, i.e. the 
4.83% stake was in payment for a debt of $2.5m. The market value of the stake at the time was said to 
be at least $70m. However, this had been legal and in line with other deals that year involving Gazprom 
shares (Prezhentsev & Reznik, 2001; Yakubova, 2001). 
ring-fence would boost Gazproms capitalisation, a strategic aim of Gazproms management 
which would also delight the companys existing minority shareholders. No doubt a large 
number of Gazprom insiders and Russian officials who were also Gazprom shareholders also 
stood to benefit from the removal of the ring-fence
. But as noted earlier, these commercial 
motivations were less important than the governments wish to establish full control of 
Gazprom because of its power as a political and economic tool both domestically and 
internationally. At the same time this meant removing the risk that the company might instead 
fall under the control of domestic or foreign enemies. 
Stroitransgaz presented an additional hindrance to the states efforts to exert de facto control 
over Gazprom. Its CEO Aleksandr Bekker had been voted onto the Gazprom board of 
directors in 1999 (Davydov, 1999). While Vyakhirevs management had been in control of 
Gazprom, Bekkers loyalty had not been in question. But after Vyakhirevs removal as 
Gazprom CEO in May 2001 there was concern that Bekker would vote independently or 
against the new managements initiatives. 
It will become clear later in this chapter that Gazprom could have confined its efforts vis--vis 
Stroitransgaz to taking control of the Gazprom shares on its balance sheet and pressuring 
Bekker to withdraw from the Gazprom board. But it elected additionally to purchase a 
blocking stake in Stroitransgaz itself. The rationale for this latter decision was commercial. 
The intention was to optimise Gazproms dealings with an important counterparty by bringing 
it under Gazproms ownership. Stroitransgaz had historically been its main general contractor 
for pipeline construction work
. In the absence of a meaningfully competitive market for 
these services, Stroitransgaz was close to being a monopolist provider, and there was 
 For reasons that cannot be dwelt on here, there were also many companies and individuals who 
benefited financially from the distortions created by the ring-fence. 
 In 2000 Stroitransgaz had received RUB 31bn out of the total RUB 97bn which Gazprom invested in 
construction (Rybalchenko, 2001). 
particular concern regarding its inflated costs
. Furthermore, as general contractor 
Stroitransgaz only supervised projects and sub-contracted the work out to other companies, 
and these included many of Gazproms own construction subsidiaries; yet most of the profit 
from the work was retained by Stroitransgaz (Reznik, 2002d). Consequently, Gazprom 
considered the alternative strategy of replacing Stroitransgaz with a Gazprom subsidiary 
offering the same services. In fact, as will be seen below, Gazprom tried for a time to do both 
at once, with the project to create a new rival subsidiary acting as a useful bargaining tool 
when negotiating with Stroitransgazs existing owners. 
Zapsibgazprom and South Russkoe 
While it is debatable whether Siburs petrochemicals business or Stroitransgazs gas field 
construction business rightly belonged within the Gazprom group of companies, there was a 
clear case for Gazprom to recover control of the South Russkoe gas field. Located in central 
Yamal, this field had proven reserves of 600bcm (Reznik, 2001c). Given Gazproms total 
proven reserves of 28tcm at the end of 2001 (OAO Gazprom, 2002a, p. 14), this was of 
sufficient size to be significant if not momentous for Gazproms future. Production began in 
2007, by which time German firm BASF had become a minority shareholder in the fields 
operating company. It was scheduled to increase from 10bcm in 2008 to 25bcm (equivalent to 
4.5% of Gazproms overall production) in 2009. But the field was to have additional strategic 
significance for Gazprom and the Russian state: it became the main resource base for the Nord 
Stream gas pipeline, which runs under the Baltic Sea from Russia to Germany and came 
onstream in 2011-12 (Mazneva, 2007; Paszyc, 2012). This pipeline is of considerable 
 As Usmanov explained in December 2002, Gazprom needs a blocking stake [in Stroitransgaz] in 
order to have strategic influence over a company connected with [its] business. The blocking stake will 
allow Stroitransgaz to take part in tenders on equal terms with other bidders, and Gazprom will be able 
to exercise real control over the cost of work done by this company (Reznik, 2002h). A government 
bureaucrat close to the Gazprom board of directors said in 2004 that he and others had been against the 
purchase of a blocking stake, believing that Gazprom should be using competitive tenders to buy its 
equipment. But Gazprom persuaded us that it was important for it to be able to monitor 
[kontrolirovat] the finances of its contractor (Reznik, 2004a). 
geopolitical value to Russia, as it allows Gazprom to deliver stable supplies of gas to western 
Europe without risk of disruption from transit countries (Heln, 2010).  
As will be explained below, the licence to develop South Russkoe was until 1998 held by 
Gazproms subsidiary Zapsibgazprom, one of the largest industrial enterprises in Tyumen 
region, which owned various companies involved in laying new gas infrastructure for Russian 
regions (Bushueva, 2001a). The gas field licence was then transferred to a subsidiary of 
Zapsibgazprom named Severneftegazprom, though this fact was not confirmed in public until 
2001. No-one within Gazproms management disputed the need to regain control of the gas 
field, but there was some debate as to whether the company needed the infrastructure business 
of Zapsibgazprom itself
. There were concerns about the commercial viability of the latter, 
and these concerns would later prove to be well-founded. Nevertheless, the decision was made 
to recover Zapsibgazprom in its entirety. It may be that this decision simply reflected an 
indiscriminate, essentially political strategy to take back everything that by rights belonged to 
Gazprom
. But if that were the case, one would expect the companys ailing infrastructure 
business to have been quietly forgotten after the takeover
. Instead, the intention was that 
Gazprom would revive the business by sending new orders its way, especially by making it 
general contractor for development of the South Russkoe field (Mokrousova, 2003b; Morgun, 
2002a). Vladimir Zavyalov, a former deputy of Tyumen regions parliament, was made head 
of a new managing company created on 20 April 2002 that was tasked with reviving 
Zapsibgazproms fortunes. It appears that the regions governor Sergei Sobyanin had a hand 
 In July 2001, when it was becoming clear that Zapsibgazprom no longer had the licence to the gas 
field, an unnamed Gazprom senior manager was cited as saying I dont understand at all why we need 
this acquisition. Zapsibgazprom is on its own a non-core enterprise, and its only value was in the 
licence (Bushueva, 2001e). Gazprom Deputy CEO Aleksandr Krasnenkov was more positive about the 
remaining Zapsibgazprom business in April 2002, saying that the company was without exaggeration 
a second Gazprom within Gazprom, and is involved in literally everything. There are many non-core 
and core assets there (Butrin, 2002b). 
 A Gazprom representative said in February 2002 that the attempt to take back Zapsibgazprom was 
part of company policy to take back illegally stolen assets, and in this we are prepared to go to the end, 
be that with Sibur or with Zapsibgazprom (Reznik & Lysova, 2002). 
 There was talk of using the Zapsibgazprom stake as part-payment for Gazproms contribution to a 
new share issue at Sibur (Bushueva, 2001g), but this did not come to pass. 
in this appointment
. Zavyalov said in an interview that he reported to Gazprom Deputy 
CEO Aleksandr Ryazanov, who was responsible for Zapsibgazprom within Gazproms senior 
management. Zavyalov made clear his determination not to let Zapsibgazprom go the way of 
the regions other oil and gas enterprises, which had been liquidated before my very eyes 
(Morgun, 2002b)
Summary 
It is clear from the case studies that Gazproms decision to take back these assets was not 
motivated by exclusively commercial considerations. The stated objective of boosting market 
capitalisation fits perfectly with the acquisition of the South Russkoe gas field (which 
previously belonged to Zapsibgazprom). Re-taking Stroitransgazs Gazprom stake also 
promised to boost Gazproms capitalisation through the removal of the ring-fence, but the 
political objective of consolidating state control over Gazprom was more important. The 
objective of boosting Gazproms power as a political and economic resource applies to the 
South Russkoe acquisition given its later strategic importance as source of gas for the Nord 
Stream pipeline. But the decision to keep Zapsibgazproms ailing gas infrastructure business 
alive with new orders, and some of the justifications given for including Sibur in the 
campaign, indicate that both the government and Gazproms managers felt that Gazprom had 
a responsibility to act as a tool of industrial policy. Gazprom was seen as having a 
responsibility to play an altruistic role in solving problems associated with Zapsibgazprom 
and Sibur, even if this worked against Gazproms institutional self-interest
 Sobyanin was governor of Tyumens from January 2001 to November 2005, when he was made 
Putins chief of staff. In October 2010 he became mayor of Moscow. 
 Despite the good intentions, Gazprom failed to turn Zapsibgazprom around. It took another three 
years for work to begin to develop South Russkoe, during which time Zapsibgazproms financial 
condition had worsened. Gazprom decided instead to bring in German investors to help develop the 
field. In December 2012, the now heavily-indebted company was sold to financial firm IFK Metropol 
(Metropol pokupaet Zapsibgazprom, 2012). 
 The fear of the social impact on Tyumen region in the event of Zapsibgazproms collapse appears 
to have prompted Gazproms efforts to keep it alive through new orders. Stable orders from Gazprom 
The decision to buy at least a blocking stake in Stroitransgaz can be seen as motivated by 
Gazproms commercial self-interest, but not in the sense of directly boosting Gazproms 
market capitalisation. Instead, the aim was to use ownership to control the costs involved in 
Gazproms relationship with a key supplier. Ownership was also key to helping Sibur and 
Zapsibgazprom through the provision of a steady stream of orders. What stood in the way of 
achieving the same objectives without the use of ownership were the costs associated with 
transacting with the same companies across the market. As well as the uncertainty this would 
bring to prices, it would severely complicate the task of ensuring that contracts were honoured 
reliably. The work of Williamson (1981) on the use of vertical integration in response to high 
transaction costs provides valuable theoretical insight into these problems and their attempted 
solution. The prevalence of monopsony and monopoly relationships relates to his discussion 
of asset-specificity, which complicates the task of finding alternative buyers and sellers and 
thus raises the spectre of hold-up problems. Williamson sees uncertainty as another critical 
dimension for describing transactions and determining whether they are better carried out 
across the market or within a vertically-integrated company. Adachi (2010, pp. 3738) 
employs Williamsons theory as part of her explanation for what prompted Russian business 
to reconstruct the production chain through vertical integration. She argues that the lack of 
market-supporting institutions in Russia, the high costs of contract enforcement due to its 
weak legal system, and undeveloped markets for products, labour and finance all added to 
uncertainty and made vertical integration a more attractive option. However, as dissenting 
voices within the company told the media at the time, many of the assets being brought into 
the Gazprom fold were in fact unrelated to the chain of production in Gazproms core activity 
of gas production and transportation. This fact serves to underline that the objectives behind 
the campaign were essentially political and developmental, rather than being based on 
Gazproms internal commercial logic.  
were important to Siburs viability, which in turn had been identified by Putin as being of importance to 
the petrochemicals sector as a whole. 
Research question 2: explaining the ownership outcomes 
The remainder of this chapter seeks to explain what determined the outcomes of these 
takeovers. Although state ownership was the outcome in each case, the aim is to understand 
the specific ways in which Gazprom structured its ownership. The outcomes are once again 
explained by reference to how the SLCTs progressed as bargaining games between state and 
existing owner. In order to understand the nature of the bargaining games, we first examine 
the nature of Gazproms predicament on the eve of the takeover. This means understanding 
whether it had already lost control over the target company or was merely at imminent risk of 
doing so. However, Gazproms predicament was compounded by the fact that, thanks to 
defensive tactics employed by the existing owners, the target companies and the assets which 
Gazprom prized were not always one and the same. 
Ownership status on the eve of takeover 
Sibur 
From its creation in 1995 until 1998, Sibur was state-owned and had no affiliation with 
Gazprom. It was then privatised, and the obscure companies that emerged as the buyers also 
had no formal connection to Gazprom. But they were linked to Yakov Goldovsky, an oil 
trader whom Gazprom had hired to be head of its subsidiary Gazsibkontrakt
. Goldovsky 
maintained later that he and certain unspecified private business partners had been the real 
buyers in the Sibur privatisation (despite the fact that it was financed by a loan from 
Gazproms then-subsidiary Gazprombank, with Gazprom acting as guarantor), but that he had 
always encouraged Gazprom to buy in to the business at a later stage (Novolodskaya, 2003). 
This claim runs counter to the account provided by journalists from Russian Forbes, who 
 The two main stages of the privatisation involved the sale of a 20.22% stake to a company named 
OOO Bonus-Invest, which was owned by four obscure individuals, and the sale of a second tranche of 
50% minus 1 share to a company named Gazoneftekhimicheskaya Kompaniya (GNK). The latter was 
owned by companies which were based in Liechtenstein but had Goldovsky as their Chairman 
(Makarkin, 2002). 
stated that Gazprom had hired Goldovsky with the specific aim of buying Sibur in 
circumvention of restrictions preventing it from participating in the privatisation auction 
directly (Lysova & Nogina, 1999). The fact that Siburs board was dominated by Gazprom 
representatives as early as 1999 lends some additional weight to the Forbes account (Lysova 
& Nogina, 1999; Makarkin, 2002). 
The Forbes journalists did not elaborate on why they believed Gazprom did not have the right 
to take part in the privatisation directly. The Law on Privatisation at the time only prevented 
companies in which the state had a direct stake of above 25% from participating in 
privatisation auctions (Neimysheva & Reznik, 2003). Therefore, to get around this legal 
obstacle, Gazprom could simply have used one of its own subsidiaries to buy Sibur. 
Admittedly, to have done so would have been politically controversial: at the time, the notion 
of state-owned companies acting as buyers in privatisation auctions still struck many as 
defeating the object of privatisation
. But the specific obstacle to Gazproms participation in 
the Sibur privatisation process may well have come instead from the antitrust regulator
mentioned above, Gazprom stood to become a monopsony buyer of associated gas as a result 
of the Sibur purchase. It would therefore have needed to gain prior approval from this 
regulator before it or any affiliated company (as defined by the extant antitrust legislation) 
 A few years later, state-owned Rosneft did attempt to participate in the privatisation of Slavneft, 
using two affiliates including a subsidiary of a Rosneft subsidiary. This was blocked by the State 
Property Fund, which was apparently aware that it was on shaky ground legally but insisted that 
allowing these indirectly state-owned companies to participate would have defeated the object of the 
privatisation (Neimysheva & Reznik, 2003). The State Property Funds head was subsequently fined by 
a Dagestan court for having incorrectly applied the Privatisation Law. In recent years, the involvement 
of state-owned companies as buyers in Russian privatisation has become almost the norm, as evidenced 
by the emergence of state-owned Gazprom and Inter RAO as major owners of electricity generating 
companies. 
 The regulator was named the State Antimonopoly Committee from March 1997 until September 
1998, when it was renamed the Ministry for Antimonopoly Policy and Support for Entrepeneurship. 
Today it is named the Federal Antimonopoly Service. As shown in Tazhetdinov (1996), antitrust 
legislation, including the legal concepts of affiliated entity and group of entities, was already well 
developed by the time of the Sibur privatisation. 
could bid in the privatisation auction. This may have made it impossible in practice for 
Gazprom to have made a timely privatisation bid
Using various companies to which he was linked, Goldovsky bought stakes not only in Sibur 
itself but in various associated petrochemicals enterprises. He placed Siburs assets at one 
remove from the company itself by making it managing company of the petrochemicals 
enterprises but not their parent company: the ownership ties between them were either highly 
complex or non-existent
. According to Goldovsky, he and Gazprom had planned all along 
that this relationship would be restructured and simplified when Gazprom bought into the 
company: the enterprises Sibur managed would become its formal subsidiaries, and Gazprom 
would acquire a controlling stake in the main Sibur entity by subscribing to a new share issue 
(Novolodskaya, 2003).  
Goldovsky had worked with members of Gazproms management in devising the plan for 
Sibur (Lysova & Nogina, 1999), but as early as August 1999 the Kremlin was putting pressure 
on Gazprom to think again. On the day before a Gazprom extraordinary general shareholders 
meeting (EGM), the offices of Sibur and Gazsibkontrakt were searched by police and 
documents were confiscated relating to their dealings with Gazprom (N. Ivanov, 1999). At the 
beginning of June 2000, Vyakhirev said he was not yet sure whether Gazprom would increase 
its stake in Sibur from the current 18% to controlling. However, in December the 
Antimonopoly Ministry approved Gazproms application to do just that through subscribing to 
a new share issue (Bushueva, 2000d; Novolodskaya, 2000). Before this acquisition was 
implemented, Siburs board in May 2001 approved another share issue, which would oblige 
Gazprom to subscribe again (at a cost of $700m) in order to retain control (Novolodskaya, 
 Approval from antitrust body was later required when Gazprom formalised its controlling stake in 
Sibur in summer 2001 (see below). The role of the antitrust regulator in constraining the behaviour of 
large companies including Gazprom is a major theme of the following chapter. 
 In spring 2001, Russias oil companies were to discover that Sibur owned very little in the way of 
assets. This fact came to light when the companies conducted due diligence on Sibur after they were 
invited to buy a blocking stake. The invitation arose from a condition imposed by the antitrust regulator 
when it approved Gazproms purchase of a controlling stake in Sibur (Novolodskaya, 2001b). 
2001a). Little attention was paid at the time to the fact that Sibur was planning to issue both 
ordinary voting shares (to which Gazprom was encouraged to subscribe) and preference 
shares to which it was not eligible to subscribe. Gazproms senior management realised only 
later that these preference shares posed a serious threat to their investment in Sibur. 
Perhaps because Gazproms new management was still getting to grips with company 
business following the change of command with Millers appointment as CEO at the end of 
May 2001, the company failed to convert its majority stake into a board majority at the Sibur 
AGM in July 2001
. Only five out of sixteen Sibur board seats were occupied by Gazprom 
representatives. Other seats were filled by representatives from foreign companies who were 
helping Sibur expand into Eastern Europe, but also by a representative of a foreign company 
which was thought to be planning to subscribe to one of the new share issues. Somehow this 
company had made its way onto the board before the share issue had taken place 
(Transnatsionalnyi Sibur, 2001). 
As noted above, one member of Gazproms senior management took it upon himself to act 
against Goldovsky in September 2001. Angered by the loss of Gazproms board majority at 
Sibur and believing its assets to be substantially over-valued for the purposes of the new share 
issue, Gazprom First Deputy CEO Petr Rodionov demanded Goldovskys resignation. 
Goldovsky refused and instead wrote to Miller, explaining that I do not consider it possible 
to agree with the proposal to dismiss me, as I believe that this would lead to serious 
consequences for Sibur and to the winding up of the programme to create on its basis a 
powerful vertically-integrated company. Reportedly the letter also contained an offer from 
certain Sibur shareholders to finance the repayment of Siburs debts to Gazprom, and to halt 
the controversial new share issue, on the condition that Goldovsky remain as CEO (Lysova & 
Novolodskaya, 2001).  
 Similarly, management disarray at Gazprom is likely to explain why Gazprom suffered two serious 
setbacks in May 2001 that put control of the South Russkoe gas field beyond its reach; this will be 
explained below.  
A few days prior to this board meeting it had come to light that the preference shares which 
Sibur was planning to issue, and to which Gazprom was not eligible to subscribe, would be 
convertible into ordinary shares within three years. This meant that, even if it paid the 
required $700m investment to buy enough voting shares to retain control, Gazprom might still 
find itself a mere minority shareholder in Sibur (Fedorin & Denisov, 2001)
On 5 November 2001, Aleksei Miller announced the appointment of Aleksandr Ryazanov as 
Gazprom Deputy CEO. Ryazanov was made responsible for Gazproms relations with Sibur 
and Itera
. This was an ill omen for Goldovsky given Ryazanovs past: he had in 1998 been 
director of the state-owned Surgut gas processing plant when Goldovsky, as head of the 
Gazprom subsidiary Gazsibkontrakt, was working to bring such plants under Gazproms 
control. Ryazanov had refused to accept a share-swap proposed by Goldovsky, and had been 
arrested at Surguts airport, accused of attempting to leave town with stolen money. He claims 
that Goldovsky visited him in person in his detention cell and made clear he would be released 
if he agreed to the share-swap (Bushueva, Osetinskaya, & Shcherbakova, 2001; Drankina & 
Tatevosova, 2002; Malkova, 2011)
Gazprom would go on to use very similar tactics against Goldovsky. But despite Ryazanovs 
appointment and Putins warning to Miller in the same month to stop further assets being lost, 
the decision to recruit the states coercive resources to establish secure control over Sibur had 
not yet been taken. This was apparently due in part to a concern that, if it went on the 
offensive against Goldovsky, this would trigger a bankruptcy process at Sibur, which was in 
debt to numerous creditors including Gazprom itself. It was feared that the bankruptcy process 
 Reportedly, it had been clear throughout to anyone who read the Sibur company charter that its 
preference shares were convertible in this way into voting shares, suggesting that Gazproms lawyers 
had been somewhat negligent in not realising this earlier (Bushueva & Reznik, 2001a). 
 At the time the Gazprom press office stated merely that Ryazanov would be responsible for the 
whole range of production issues (Bushueva, Osetinskaya, & Shcherbakova, 2001), but his more 
specific responsibilities soon became clear. 
 Reportedly Ryazanov held out and was in any case released. He resigned from his post soon 
afterwards, however. 
would lead to Sibur being broken off, with some of the assets going to Gazproms rival 
creditors. In order to prevent this scenario developing, Gazprom stepped in at the beginning of 
December 2001 to lend Sibur RUB 2.2bn (then worth around $73m) so that it could avoid 
defaulting on bonds it had issued in the summer (Epshtein & Reznik, 2001).  
In December 2001, Gazprom reached a gentlemans agreement with Siburs managers that 
the new share issue would be delayed. In the meantime, certain gas processing plants that 
were to be transferred to Siburs ownership through that share issue would instead be sold to 
oil companies, and the money used to help repay Siburs debt to Gazprom (Drankina & 
Tatevosova, 2002; Novolodskaya, 2001b)
. One sale went ahead as planned: the Surgut gas 
processing plant was bought by the privately-owned oil major Surgutneftegaz in late 
December (Novolodskaya & Tutushkin, 2001). 
On 29 December 2001 Gazprom received an extract from Siburs share register which showed 
that Goldovskys company Gazoneftekhimicheskaya Kompaniya had bought newly-issued 
shares and left Gazproms stake reduced to 32%. The money from the sale of the Surgut gas 
processing plant had reportedly financed this acquisition, rather than going to Gazprom 
(Drankina & Tatevosova, 2002). Reportedly, Gazprom went straight to the Prosecutor 
Generals Office when it received this information, and from this point on Gazproms 
campaign to re-take Sibur became explicitly coercive (Reznik, 2009). 
Figure 4 shows the ownership situation at Sibur at the point when Gazprom launched its 
coercive takeover. The assets of value and interest to Gazprom - the gas processing plants - 
were controlled not by Sibur but by its management, which had also just won back control of 
Sibur itself through the latest share issue. Gazprom had only a non-controlling stake in Sibur. 
 As noted above, Goldovsky had reportedly offered in his September letter to Miller to have Sibur 
shareholders help repay Siburs debts to Gazprom. Since the same management-linked offshore 
companies which owned Sibur also owned the gas processing plants (see Figure 4), this enabled the 
money raised from selling the plants to be used to repay Siburs debt to Gazprom. 
As a major creditor, it also had a claim over the company and its assets, but other creditors 
also had rival claims. 
Figure 4. Sibur ownership before takeover 
Stroitransgaz 
Stroitransgaz was founded as a joint-stock company in 1990 and brought together enterprises 
that previously belonged to the Soviet Oil and Gas Construction Ministry. Its founder and 
president, Arngold Bekker, had worked in the Ministry for the previous twenty years and was 
closely acquainted with Viktor Chernomyrdin, then general director of Gazprom
. Details of 
the companys initial ownership structure are scarce, but reportedly there was cross-ownership 
from the outset, with its construction enterprise subsidiaries acting also as its shareholders. As 
the company grew in the mid-1990s, its share structure changed: its managers bought shares 
and Bekker and his family achieved control. Also appearing among its shareholders were the 
children of Chernomyrdin and of his successor as head of Gazprom, Vyakhirev
. In the 
 As noted above, Gazprom was founded as a kontsern in 1989. 
 Reportedly Chernomyrdins sons Andrei and Vitaly each gained 14%, while Vyakhirevs daughter 
Tatyana Dedikova gained 6%. 
Controlling stake 
Non-controlling stake 
Creditor claim 
meantime, Gazprom-affiliated companies reportedly only held shares equivalent to a few 
percentage points (Govorun, 2008). 
In November 2001, i.e. a few months after Millers arrival at Gazprom, Stroitransgaz 
disclosed some details of its ownership as part of an apparent strategy to deflect criticism 
regarding its non-transparent nature. Bekker, who was both President and Chairman, was the 
largest single shareholder with 19.6%. The management collectively controlled 51%. Bekker 
admitted that his children held shares in the company, as did Vyakhirevs daughter. 
Gazproms stake was less than 1% (Chelnok, 2001). 
Of the three cases, this was the most straightforward from Gazproms perspective, as 
illustrated in Figure 5 below. The primary objective was retaking control of the Gazprom 
shares on the Stroitransgaz balance sheet. Through purchases on the secondary market, the 
company had increased its stake in Gazprom from the original 4.83% to 6.2% (Chelnok, 2001; 
Sapozhnikov, 2002). While Stroitransgaz  remained under the control of its managers, there 
was a risk that the companys Gazprom shares might be sold on to third parties; but the 
managers preference was instead to hold on to them as valuable collateral enabling the 
company to borrow on financial markets (Bushueva, 2000c). 
Figure 5. Stroitransgaz ownership before takeover 
Controlling stake 
Non-controlling stake 
Zapsibgazprom and South Russkoe 
The licence to develop South Russkoe was awarded to Zapsibgazprom as far back as 1993. 
Zapsibgazprom was at the time a newly-created company, having previously been a Soviet-
era production unit named Zapsibgazpromstroi (Rybalchenko & Mokrousova, 2002; 
Zapsibgazprom, n.d.). It was made a subsidiary of Gazprom but was also privatised in 1993-
4 (Analiticheskii otdel RIA Rosbizneskonsalting, n.d.). This explains why, by the late 
1990s, Gazprom only owned 51%; the other shareholders were linked to the companys 
management (Yambaeva, 2002). 
The key moment when Gazprom lost control of the company came in summer 2000, when it 
failed to subscribe to a new share issue and was left with only 37% (Bushueva, 2000b). It 
would have cost Gazprom just RUB 51.3m (then worth $1.85m) to subscribe to the share 
issue and retain its 51% controlling stake. It is not clear whether Gazproms management 
made a conscious decision to cede control, or simply let slip the opportunity to subscribe to 
the share issue. Either way, the management came under severe criticism from the states 
representatives on the Gazprom board of directors (Bushueva, 2001a).  
Once Zapsibgazproms managers had achieved majority ownership over the company, they 
completed their project to move the South Russkoe licence beyond Gazproms reach. This had 
begun as far back as 1998, when Zapsibgazprom created a wholly-owned subsidiary named 
Severneftegazprom and transferred the licence to it (Bushueva, 2001e)
. In February 1999, 
Severneftegazprom issued new shares and thereby reduced Zapsibgazproms stake to 51%. 
 At the time, such licence transfers were perfectly legal, with the only restriction being that a 
company could transfer a licence only to another company in which it has a controlling stake. Nothing 
was said in the legislation regarding what happened subsequently to the ownership of that receiving 
company. Information from an employee of the Natural Resources Ministry licensing department cited 
in Reznik (2001c). 
The buyers of the new shares were companies linked to Itera, though Itera did not rush to 
acknowledge this fact
Gazproms first efforts to regain control of Zapsibgazprom began while Vyakhirev was still at 
the helm: in October 2000 he announced that Gazprom would increase its stake to 86.8% by 
buying an additional 49.8% through another new share issue (Bushueva, 2001a). This 
initiative was blocked by Zapsibgazproms other shareholders at an EGM in May 2001 
(Bushueva, 2001c). In the same month, Gazproms control over the South Russkoe licence 
was truly severed: Severneftegazprom conducted a new share issue which left Zapsibgazprom 
(now only 37%-owned by Gazprom) with just an 11% stake.  
It emerged only later that companies linked to Itera had by this time gained a controlling stake 
(51%) in Severneftegazprom, and hence controlled the South Russkoe licence (Kak 
prodavalsya Severneftegazprom, 2001). In the meantime, if Gazproms management was 
aware of Zapsibgazproms loss of control of the licence, it was not telling even some of its 
own board members. After a Gazprom board meeting on 31 July 2001, independent board 
member and minority shareholder Boris Fyodorov told the press that he had repeatedly asked 
Gazproms managers whether Zapsibgazprom still owned the licence; he had not received an 
answer. The board had nevertheless approved the proposal to buy a 49.8% stake in 
Zapsibgazprom (this time in a direct purchase from its management-linked shareholders, 
rather than through the new share issue earlier proposed by Vyakhirev). Two of the states 
representatives had abstained from the vote, as had Fyodorov and one other minority 
shareholder representative (Bushueva, 2001f; Reznik, 2001b). On 7 August 2001, 
Zapsibgazproms CEO admitted that the company no longer held the licence. He said that 
Gazprom must have known about the licence transfer that took place in 1998, and there 
 A year later, Iteras CEO Igor Makarov said in an interview we do not plan to buy Zapsibgazprom, 
but we have created a joint venture, OOO Severneftegazprom, which is 10% owned by Itera-Rus and 
90% by Zapsibgazprom. As we invest in the South Russkoe field, Iteras stake in the joint venture will 
increase (Bushueva, 2000a). 
should be no sensation made of this (Denisov, 2001a). At the end of August, it was 
confirmed that Zapsibgazprom only held an 11% stake in the licence-holding company, 
Severneftegazprom (Bushueva, 2001g). 
Figure 6 summarises the ownership situation on the eve of Gazproms takeover. As at Sibur, 
Gazproms claim to the main asset which it prized (in this case, the South Russkoe licence) 
had become decidedly tenuous. 
Figure 6. Zapsibgazprom and South Russkoe ownership before takeover 
Summary 
The above discussion highlights the fact that each case differed in terms of the nature and 
scale of the challenge Gazprom faced in trying to secure control of its assets. Gazproms 
control at each of the targeted companies was either precarious or already lost when the 
company began its SLCT. But this problem was compounded by the fact that the existing 
owners had managed to place many of Gazproms prized assets at one remove from the 
companies themselves. 
In the previous chapter, we saw how the state was concerned that full-scale asset seizure 
might not capture all of the value of the assets, because of various defensive tactics available 
Controlling stake 
Non-controlling stake 
Creditor claim 
to their existing owners. Further examples of such defensive tactics are the share dilutions and 
other methods used by the existing owners to separate Gazprom from its prized assets. The 
situation was relatively straightforward at Stroitransgaz, where the Gazprom shares (the main 
asset of interest to Gazprom) were held on the companys balance sheet. But at Sibur the 
management had taken direct control of the prized assets (the petrochemicals companies), 
while at Zapsibgazprom it had gone further by selling the South Russkoe gas field on to a 
third party
This made the SLCTs fraught with risk: if the existing owners were to sever the remaining ties 
between the target company and the prized assets, Gazprom might find itself the new 
controlling owner of a company that no longer possessed the assets it actually wanted, and 
might lose those assets permanently. As will be discussed in detail below, this played a 
substantial role in strengthening the bargaining position of the existing owners, because it 
increased the states incentives to seek a negotiated solution to the takeovers. 
The coercive takeovers 
The three cases studied in this chapter have been chosen from the wider sample of Gazprom 
takeovers partly because of their timing, but also on the basis that they involved state coercion 
while others did not. This choice needs to be justified by explaining precisely what is meant 
by state coercion.  
Table 2 below shows the various tactics used by Gazprom in the three core cases examined 
here (shaded cells), and in its takeovers of other lost assets that have not been selected for 
detailed case study. The columns show the tactics used by Gazprom, and are arranged left to 
right in ascending order in terms of their coercive nature. 
 Siburs management had done the same with the sale of one of the gas processing plants to 
Surgutneftegaz. 
SLCT Date of 
completion 
Negotiate 
and/or 
purchase 
controlling 
stake 
Economic 
embargo  
Non-law 
enforcement 
investigation 
(tax, 
regulatory) 
Civil court 
cases e.g. 
bankruptcy, 
revoking 
licence 
Searches by 
enforce-
Criminal 
cases, 
arrests 
Purgaz Dec 2001  X X X X X 
Sibur Feb & 
July 2002 
 X X    
Stroitransgaz May-Sep 
    X X 
South Russkoe  May 2002  X X    
Nortgaz Sep 2005   X  X X 
Tambeineftegaz 
Yamal SPG 
Nov 2006  X X  X  
Sibneftegaz Dec 2006   X X X X 
The tactics shown in italics are those that are taken to involve state coercion for the purposes 
of this project. Least problematic is the inclusion of tactics involving the states coercive 
apparatus (e.g. searches by prosecutors, arrests). But two other columns are also accepted as 
forms of state coercion, namely civil court cases and investigations by organisations that are 
not part of the states coercive apparatus (e.g. the tax authorities and regulatory bodies).  
 For the first four cases, the table is compiled from the evidence presented elsewhere in this chapter. 
For Nortgaz, see: Heinrich & Kusznir (2005, pp. 256); Stern (2005, p. 27); Levinskii (2005); Reznik 
& Mazneva (2005); Grib & Butrin (2005). For Tambeineftegaz and Yamal SPG, see: Batishchev & 
Voronin (2006); Tutushkin & Reznik (2006); Grib (2006). For Sibneftegaz, see: Grib (2005); 
Medvedeva (2007a); Heinrich (2008, pp. 154950). 
Table 2. Gazprom takeover tactics
In his examination of the tactics used by companies to protect against expropriation, Gans-
Morse (2011, p. 7) notes that all reliance on law is backed up by the implicit threat of coercion 
legitimized by formal rules and regulated by the state. But for the purposes of the present 
project, a takeover is deemed to involve state coercion only if state institutions appear to have 
been used in a selective and arbitrary way to apply pressure on the existing owner. The case of 
Purgaz, which was mentioned earlier, clearly involved no state coercion: Gazprom regained 
control merely by exercising an option that was available to it contractually. Elsewhere 
Gazproms use of the law bore the hallmarks of what Gans-Morse labels corrupt force: 
rather than playing by formal rules, it was recruiting the help of state bodies which are 
assumed to have held some bias in its favour
Such acts are also examples of what Heinrich terms Gazproms use of administrative 
resources (2008, pp. 15491553). But Heinrich breaks down administrative resources into 
Gazproms innate resources and its recruitment of the states resources. The present project 
would only include the latter as state coercion. The case of Sibneftegaz is accordingly 
included by Heinrich (2008, pp. 15491550) as a case of Gazproms use of administrative 
resources, but it does not meet the present projects definition of state coercion. Sibneftegaz 
was the licence-holder to the Beregovoe gas field, located next to South Russkoe. After losing 
control of the field to Itera, Gazprom refused the project access to its pipeline network, 
thereby rendering it commercially unviable (Grib, 2005). There is a case for arguing that this 
was in breach of Gazproms legal obligation to provide such access, and that it could not have 
happened without at least tacit support from the government. Granted, it was the state that had 
given Gazprom the power to accept or deny gas from third parties into its pipeline 
 It should be acknowledged that the definition of coercion used here (and indeed the definition of 
corrupt force used by Gans-Morse and administrative resources by Heinrich) is fraught with the 
same difficulty noted in the previous chapter with respect to reiderstvo. In a country whose legal 
system is characterised to a significant extent by telephone justice and corruption, there is no clear 
way to discern whether institutions including the law have been used in an inappropriate way in a 
particular case. But there are some telltale signs: for example, if an investigation is launched into a 
company and then promptly dropped once the desired takeover has been achieved. 
infrastructure (subject to controls that oblige it, at least in theory, to grant access fairly). But 
essentially this was an example of Gazprom making use of its own resources and inherent 
advantages to bring about a takeover, and no state bodies were actively involved.  
In Heinrichs depiction of Gazproms relationship to independent producers, including some 
of the targets for its campaign to re-gather assets, Gazprom would appear to hold all the cards 
because of its access to administrative resources. Yet the takeovers in the three cases below 
reveal that Gazprom was acting under significant constraints that limited its ability and 
willingness to launch a full-scale seizure of the assets concerned. These included, but were not 
restricted to, the aforementioned fear that it might lose forever its claim to the assets it 
actually wanted, which had been placed at some distance from the companies it had to first 
target for takeover. 
Sibur 
On 8 January 2002, Siburs President Yakov Goldovsky was arrested while waiting in the 
reception of Aleksei Millers office at Gazproms headquarters. He had a meeting scheduled 
with Miller to discuss a Sibur shareholder meeting that was scheduled for the following day. 
His deputy Yevgeny Koshits was also arrested, as was Vyacheslav Sheremet, a Gazprom 
Deputy CEO who was also Siburs Chairman. The three individuals were the subject of a 
criminal case that was based on a civil compensation claim from Gazprom stemming from 
Siburs most recent share issue. Prosecutors accused the three individuals of stealing Sibur 
assets that rightfully belonged to Gazprom (Novolodskaya & Chertkov, 2002). Sheremet was 
released three days later, having signed a pledge to remain in the country. Vyakhirev (who 
was at the time still Gazprom Chairman) was rumoured to have intervened on his behalf 
(Chelovek nedeli: odin za vsekh, 2002)
. On 18 January 2002, Goldovsky and Koshits 
were charged with abuse of office, and on 31 January they were additionally charged with 
 Sheremet had been Gazprom Deputy CEO under Vyakhirev and had, until this point, survived the 
change of management at the company. Although he avoided prosecution, he was dismissed in July 
2002. 
theft of assets worth RUB 2.6bn ($83m) and forgery of documents (Berres, 2002; Bushueva & 
Osetinskaya, 2002). 
The Sibur takeover was to resemble an earlier case in which Gazprom had taken ownership of 
the media business of Vladimir Gusinsky. In June 2000, Gusinsky was arrested on charges of 
embezzlement during the acquisition of a St Petersburg television company. He was 
subsequently released after agreeing to sell to Gazprom a controlling his stake in his company 
Media-Most. Gusinsky then left the country and reneged on the agreement, claiming it had 
been signed under the barrel of a gun. The state then set about seizing control of Media-
Most through bankruptcy proceedings, based on its substantial debts to Gazprom (Belin, 
2002). Goldovsky was similarly persuaded to sign away his rights to Sibur in exchange for 
his release from pre-trial detention. As noted in the previous chapter, there are indications that 
the same choice was later offered to, but declined by, Mikhail Khodorkovsky. Such heavy-
handed tactics could easily be mistaken for the full-scale seizure of Siburs assets, and this 
perception is reinforced by the paltry sum of $96m which Goldovsky received from Gazprom 
in exchange for his interest in Sibur and the assets it managed (Terenteva, 2011). This 
amount was clearly well below market value
 and in stark contrast to the amounts received 
by Gutseriev and Rakhimov in the previous chapter. However, unlike the coercive asset 
seizures that took place in the Yukos case, Gazprom obtained Sibur and its petrochemicals 
enterprises through an agreement with Goldovsky. Both Goldovsky and Khodorkovsky were 
given the stark choice of signing over their assets or remaining in detention to face criminal 
charges, but only Goldovsky opted for liberty.  
Goldovsky had had considerable defensive measures in place to protect his business from 
asset seizure: he reportedly felt that he was in a strong bargaining position vis--vis Gazprom 
 In 2008, Gazprombank valued the Sibur business at $5.5bn, and this was considered an 
underestimate by analysts (Malkova, 2011). See below for an explanation of the apparent discrepancy 
between the $96m and the much larger amount that Gazprom claimed in an official disclosure to have 
paid for Sibur and its petrochemicals assets. 
because only he understood the network of offshore companies through which he controlled 
Sibur and its major assets (Drankina & Tatevosova, 2002). A senior Gazprom manager told 
one newspaper that the company preferred to reach an agreement with Goldovsky so it did not 
have to go to court to return the assets (Chertkov, Osetinskaya, & Bushueva, 2002). The main 
deterrent was that, because of the offshore nature of the ownership ties, some of this legal 
action would be outside Russia, where a favourable ruling was far from guaranteed. 
Goldovskys other main advantage was that, as mentioned above, he had arranged for Sibur 
only to manage, rather than own, many of its key assets, in which he himself owned 
significant stakes. Without Goldovskys co-operation, Gazproms task of restoring control 
over both Sibur and these key assets would have entailed much more complexity and risk. 
If Goldovsky had evaded arrest through a timely departure from Russia, the bargaining would 
almost certainly have gone very differently. But as it was, he agreed while in pre-trial 
detention that in exchange for his liberty he would transfer to Gazprom the right to vote his 
14.6% Sibur stake at a Sibur extraordinary shareholder meeting (EGM) that had been called 
by Gazprom for 25 March 2002
. This enabled Gazprom to win Sibur shareholder approval 
to cancel the share issue that had deprived it of its controlling stake, to gain a majority on the 
board, and to appoint its Deputy CEO Aleksandr Ryazanov as Siburs new President 
(Bushueva & Novolodskaya, 2002; Butrin, 2002a). On 1 July 2002 it emerged that Goldovsky 
(who was still in pre-trial detention) had additionally agreed to sell to Gazprom his stakes in 
Sibur-managed assets, including at least 10 petrochemicals companies (Chertkov et al., 2002). 
Gazprom disclosed in 2003 that it had in exchange agreed to pay Goldovsky RUB 19.49bn 
(then worth $615m), using promissory notes that would mature in 2005
. But in the event, 
Goldovsky only received $96m (Terenteva, 2011). His undoing was the fact that he had been 
compelled to hand over control of the petrochemicals assets (thereby losing his main 
 This stake was held by the Goldovsky-controlled company Gazoneftekhimicheskaya Kompaniya. 
 The disclosure came in Gazproms consolidated financial report for 2002 (Gazprom, 2003, p. 63). 
bargaining chip) before he was released from detention
. In exchange, he was meant to 
receive the promissory notes by November 2002, but this did not happen. Gazprom claimed 
that the promissory notes were ready to be handed over as soon as Goldovskys company 
GNK sent a representative to receive them (Reznik, Lemeshko, & Golubovich, 2003), but it 
appears to have taken advantage of the fact that Goldovsky had no way of compelling it to 
hold up its side of the deal. GNKs CEO hinted in August 2003 that the company might take 
legal action, though it had been warned against this by people who pointed out that there is a 
state interest in this matter and administrative resources will be activated in order to protect 
[that interest] (Lemeshko, 2003a). In January 2004, it emerged that Goldovsky had decided 
against legal action (although he had left Russia, he reportedly had not forgotten his time in a 
Russian prison, and this had persuaded him against another confrontation with Gazprom). He 
had, however, finally received payment: he had agreed on the much lower amount of $96m, 
but had at least received the money in cash (Bushueva, Reznik, & Lemeshko, 2004).  
However, all did not go entirely smoothly for Gazprom either. Because it could not be sure 
from the outset of Goldovskys cooperation, it had put in place a plan B. Accordingly, it had 
initiated bankruptcy proceedings against Sibur on 11 February, based on the fact that Sibur 
owed Gazprom $1bn (out of a total Sibur debt of $1.6bn) (Reznik, Osetinskaya, & 
Novolodskaya, 2002). In the event that it failed to restore majority control, it hoped to use its 
status as Siburs main creditor to force the takeover. The bankruptcy proceedings would allow 
Gazprom to challenge deals done in the previous year by the former Sibur management
doubt they served also as an additional argument to persuade Goldovsky that resistance was 
futile.  
 As discussed in the section below dedicated to the ownership outcome, Gazprom was in a hurry to 
gain control of these assets before it dropped its civil case against Goldovsky (the first step in dropping 
the related criminal charges). 
 For example, Gazprom believed that when Sibur increased its stake in the Kemerovo-based firm 
Azot from 7.8% to 73.94%, it had done so based on a drastic over-valuation of the latter company 
(Reznik, Osetinskaya, & Novolodskaya, 2002). For the ability to challenge deals done by the 
management up to a year previously under bankruptcy, see Mikhailov (2002). 
Once Gazprom had restored majority control over Sibur and was on its way to purchasing the 
Sibur-managed assets from Goldovsky, the bankruptcy proceedings became a liability: they 
put Sibur and the assets under threat from claims by Siburs other creditors. Gazproms 
management had previously said that bankruptcy was the only way to regain control of all of 
Siburs assets
, but Siburs new President now said that they were not in possession of all the 
facts when they came to that view (Gubenko, 2002). They were now set on pursuing an out-
of-court settlement with Siburs creditors that would bring the company out of bankruptcy  
(Reznik & Novolodskaya, 2002).  
Siburs other debts included $190m owing to various banks
. Although this was a small 
portion of its total debt, it was the most dangerous. A specialist from one of the banks in 
question was quoted as saying Gazprom risked losing the Sibur-managed assets forever, 
because the banks would go to court to get their money back and would seize those assets 
which had been pledged as collateral for the bank loans: Gazprom would end up with a 
company which was being torn to pieces (Reznik & Novolodskaya, 2002). Privately-owned 
Alfa Bank in particular was to pose a threat out of all proportion to the amount of money it 
was owed ($78m): it had adopted a tough position from the beginning of the bankruptcy 
process, had seized Sibur assets and was the only bank to vote against an agreement that was 
signed with Siburs creditors in September 2002. Although it failed in its efforts to challenge 
that agreement in court, it did manage to persuade Gazprom to restructure its debt on 
exclusive terms, despite Gazproms pledge that all creditors would be treated equally 
(Bushueva, 2002; Novolodskaya & Bushueva, 2002; Novolodskaya, 2002; Ot redaktsii: 
Miller i dengi, 2002). 
 Both CEO Aleksei Miller and deputy CEO Aleksandr Ryazanov had made this claim (Reznik & 
Novolodskaya, 2002; Reznik, Osetinskaya, & Novolodskaya, 2002). 
 These included state-owned VTB, privately-owned Alfa-Bank and Austrias Raiffeisenbank 
(Reznik, Osetinskaya, & Novolodskaya, 2002). 
Stroitransgaz 
Of the three core cases examined here, that of Stroitransgaz involved the least use of the 
states coercive resources. To recap, Gazproms primary objective was to obtain on behalf of 
the state the Gazprom shares that were on the balance sheet of Stroitransgaz. But it also 
sought to buy at least a blocking stake in the company itself. The takeover therefore proceeded 
on these two fronts.  
The coercive tactics related to the original sale of the Gazprom shares to Stroitransgaz back in 
1994-1995. This was subject to an investigation by the Federal Security Commission which 
was initiated in October 2000 (Butrin, 2000). The investigation was still on-going in June 
2001, and it was suggested that it was in part aimed at pressuring Bekker to give up his seat on 
the Gazprom board of directors (Prezhentsev & Reznik, 2001). At the Gazprom AGM on 29 
June Bekker duly withdrew his candidacy for re-election to the board, and was replaced by a 
state representative
. This helped the state secure a majority of six out of eleven seats on the 
Gazprom board (Reznik, 2001a)
The Federal Security Commission published its findings at the end of August, stating that it 
had found nothing illegal (Bushueva, 2001h). Bekker made another concession to Gazprom in 
September, stating that he was planning to sign over to Miller the right to vote Stroitransgazs 
6.2% Gazprom stake at the next Gazprom AGM (Bushueva, 2001h). But he was not prepared 
to sell the stake, because it provided excellent collateral that enabled his company to borrow 
from financial markets. Stroitransgaz even said at a November 2001 press-conference that it 
intended to increase its Gazprom stake (Aglamishyan, 2001).  
 Aleksandra Levitskaya, first deputy head of the governments administration (apparat 
pravitelstva). 
 Bekker claimed later that he had done this simply because his excessive workload from 
Stroitransgaz prevented him fulfilling his duties to the Gazprom board (Bushueva, 2001h); however, 
one newspaper claimed Vyakhirev had warned him not to stand for re-election even though he had a 
good chance of gaining the necessary votes (Shiryaev, 2001). 
At around this time, Gazprom was negotiating with Bekker and other Stroitransgaz managers, 
and separately with the families of Chernomyrdin and Vyakhirev, to buy shares in 
Stroitransgaz. At an early stage in these negotiations, Gazprom was reportedly seeking to buy 
from the Stroitransgaz management a controlling stake in the company; in exchange, 
Gazprom would pledge to retain it as its preferred general contractor. But Bekker had been 
prepared to sell only 10% and the talks foundered
. Gazprom had more success in 
negotiating with the Chernomyrdin and Vyakhirev families. They had reportedly been keen to 
sell for some time, but had first offered their shares to Bekker, who was a personal friend. He 
had rejected their offer, believing it to be over-priced. They then offered their shares to 
Gazprom (though not directly, as will be explained below). In November 2001 Stroitransgaz 
announced that it would be issuing new shares, and journalists established that this would 
dilute the stakes belonging to the Vyakhirev and Chernomyrdin families (Aglamishyan, 
2001). It later emerged that this was Bekkers retaliatory response on learning that they were 
in talks with Gazprom
Aside from successfully driving a wedge between Bekker and the families, Gazproms other 
main tactic was an economic embargo through an implicit threat to withdraw business from 
Stroitransgaz. With this in mind, Gazprom proposed at the beginning of March 2002 to create 
a new rival general contractor called Gazpromstroiinzhiniring. While this initiative was 
pending approval, Gazprom was using another subsidiary, named Spetszagotovtrans, to deal 
with the same subcontractors that were used by Stroitransgaz (Reznik, 2002c). The new 
initiative did not receive board approval in April 2002 and was described by a Gazprom 
employee as a still-born idea (Ot redaktsii: otsy i dochki, 2002; Reznik, 2002d). 
Nevertheless, the effect was to focus the minds of Stroitransgazs existing shareholders on the 
 Source close to Gazproms management cited in Reznik (2002c). 
 Information from a source close to the deal, cited in Reznik (2002g). Vyakhirev said many years 
later: Tatyana had Stroitransgaz shares. But Bekker carried out several share issues and fleeced us 
(Malkova & Igumenov, 2012). 
fact that the value of their shares depended significantly on Gazproms future business, which 
no longer looked guaranteed.  
Bekker stood down as company president on 12 April 2002. There are indications that he left 
Russia for Germany soon afterwards: although no physically coercive measures were taken 
against him or Stroitransgaz, he was presumably keen to avoid Goldovskys fate
. It was 
revealed later that Bekker sold his personal 20% stake in Stroitransgaz at around this time. But 
Gazprom was not the buyer: instead, he had sold the shares to companies close to his 
successor and former deputy, Viktor Lorents (Reznik, 2004b). As will be shown below, 
however, Gazprom continued after this sale to negotiate with Bekker on returning 
Stroitransgazs Gazprom shares. This suggests that Bekker remained in de facto control of 
those Gazprom shares, and possibly also of Stroitransgaz itself. 
In May 2002, Gazprom secured a legal victory in its campaign to take control of the Gazprom 
stake held by Stroitransgaz. The Moscow Arbitrazh Court ruled that Stroitransgaz must hand 
back the 4.83% it had received from Gazprom in 1995 (Butrin, 2002c). Stroitransgaz appealed 
this decision on 5 June (Sudebnaya praktika, 2002). But on 27 June the two sides reached an 
out-of-court settlement which saw Stroitransgaz selling the 4.83% stake back to Gazprom 
(Igumenov & Malkova, 2012; Reznik, 2002g, 2002h). It later emerged that the agreed price 
for the stake was RUB 4.6bn ($148m), as opposed to its market value of RUB 29bn ($935m) 
on the day of the agreement (Grivach, 2003). As will be discussed below, the buyer was in 
fact Gazprominvestholding, which went on to buy the remaining Gazprom shares that were 
held by Stroitransgaz. 
 Goldovsky was at this time still in detention after his arrest in January 2002. As will be discussed 
below, Usmanov subsequently claimed that he flew to Germany to negotiate with Bekker at around this 
time. 
By August 2002 Gazprom had also achieved its blocking stake in Stroitransgaz itself. It had 
bought shares primarily from the Chernomyrdin and Vyakhirev families, with a significant 
number of additional shares purchased on the secondary market (Reznik, 2002g, 2002h).  
Zapsibgazprom and South Russkoe 
The SLCT involving Zapsibgazprom was arguably the most complex from Gazproms 
perspective: as discussed earlier, the main asset of interest had been separated from 
Zapsibgazprom but then additionally sold on to third parties.  
To recall, it was confirmed in August 2001 that Zapsibgazprom no longer controlled the 
licence to the South Russkoe field. But Gazproms management nevertheless resolved to take 
back control of Zapsibgazprom itself in addition to the new licence-holding entity, 
Severneftegazprom. Here Gazproms takeover was coercive to a significant extent, if less so 
than at Sibur. At the beginning of January 2002, prosecutors paid a visit to Zapsibgazproms 
offices. This was apparently in connection with other cases, and no criminal case was opened 
with respect to the company or its management as part of the takeover process (Reznik, 
Osetinskaya, & Nikolskii, 2002). But after the takeover, in January 2003, some of its 
managers (with the exception of its CEO Vladimir Nikiforov) became the subject of criminal 
cases in relation to illegal attempts to bankrupt Zapsibgazprom subsidiaries. It also emerged at 
this time that the authorities had tried on several occasions to open a criminal case against 
Nikiforov (Mokrousova, 2003a). He checked himself into hospital in December 2001 before 
being dismissed in March 2002, quite possibly because he feared arrest (Reznik, 2002b). 
As with Sibur, Gazprom employed bankruptcy against Zapsibgazprom as a strategy to regain 
control of its assets, based on Zapsibgazproms RUB 2.9bn debt to Gazprom (then worth 
$93m) (Reznik, Osetinskaya, & Nikolskii, 2002)
. In February 2002 it secured a court order 
placing Zapsibgazprom in bankruptcy administration, with a former employee of the FSBs 
 Zapsibgazproms total debt was in excess of RUB 6bn, or $192m. 
economic security department appointed as temporary bankruptcy manager (Reznik & 
Lysova, 2002; Reznik, Osetinskaya, & Nikolskii, 2002). Gazprom hoped to use the 
bankruptcy process to annul the share dilution that had seen Zapsibgazprom lose control of its 
subsidiary Severneftegazprom
.  If successful, this would return the South Russkoe licence 
to Zapsibgazprom. 
However, Gazprom was again concerned that it might not be able to control the bankruptcy 
proceedings it had initiated. Firstly, as noted above, it appears that Zapsibgazproms managers 
took advantage of the companys bankruptcy to initiate additional bankruptcy proceedings 
against its subsidiaries - presumably in order to remove some of Zapsibgazproms assets from 
the reach of its largest creditor. Secondly, another significant Zapsibgazprom creditor was 
Yukos, which was seeking also to establish a controlling ownership stake and was a potential 
threat to Gazproms claim on South Russkoe (Reznik & Lysova, 2002).  
Gazprom accordingly sought to achieve its objectives by other means. In April 2002, it 
obtained a court ruling which annulled the August 2000 share issue that had seen the dilution 
of its controlling stake in Zapsibgazprom (Reznik, 2002e)
. Having regained majority 
ownership, it began the process of bringing the companys bankruptcy to a close by seeking 
agreement with the other creditors. It also called a Zapsibgazprom extraordinary shareholder 
meeting for 25 May 2002, at which it secured a board majority and effectively gained 
management control of the company. 
Instead of pursuing bankruptcy to achieve the return of the South Russkoe licence to 
Zapsibgazprom, Gazprom chose to negotiate with the new owners of the licencing-holding 
entity, Severneftegazprom. As noted earlier, Itera had gained majority ownership of the latter 
company in May 2001 through a share issue that had seen Zapsibgazproms stake reduced to 
 As noted above, creditors were able to challenge deals concluded by the bankrupt company within 
the previous 12 months. 
 The court case was initiated not by Gazprom, but by another minority shareholder in Zapsibgazprom 
which was (formally) unaffiliated with Gazprom. 
11%. But Gazprom began with the minority shareholders: on 29 April 2002 it announced that 
it had been able to acquire a 49% stake in Severneftegazprom through quite difficult talks 
(Butrin, 2002b). It had reportedly done this by buying Zapsibgazproms 11% stake and an 
additional 38% held by companies linked to Zapsibgazproms management; according to a 
source linked to Itera, Gazprom had paid only the nominal value of the shares, a total of 
$3200 (Reznik, 2002f). A Gazprom senior manager
 also said that now talks are underway 
 and I mean talks, without any court proceedings  to buy all the remaining shares. At the 
very least, we intend to increase our stake in Severneftegazprom to controlling. However, 
Itera was at this time already in the process of attempting a defensive share dilution aimed at 
cutting Gazproms newly-acquired 49% stake in Severneftegazprom back down to 20% 
(Reznik, 2002f). Gazprom was forced to resort to legal action after all: at some point in the 
following two months, it succeeded in getting this share issue cancelled by the securities 
regulator (OAO Gazprom, 2002b, p. 31). 
Gazproms CEO Aleksei Miller must have been holding talks with his Itera counterpart Igor 
Makarov either strikingly soon after this attempt at share dilution, or even before it, because 
agreement was reached between them as early as late June 2002 on resolving the conflict 
through an asset-swap. This saw Itera handing over its 51% stake in Severneftegazprom in 
exchange for Gazproms minority stakes in other Itera-dominated projects, Sibneftegaz (10%) 
and Tarkosaleneftegaz (7.78%) (Lysova & Reznik, 2002)
Meanwhile Gazprom had been working to increase further its newly-gained controlling stake 
at Zapsibgazprom. It was reported in late March 2002 that it had persuaded Zapsibgazproms 
three other shareholder companies (all of which were suspected of being linked to the 
 Deputy CEO Aleksandr Krasnenkov. 
 Prior to this, Gazprom had reportedly suggested to Itera that it sell just 2% of Severneftegazprom 
(thus staying on as a minority shareholder with 49% and receiving a proportionate share of the gas 
produced). But according to an Itera source, without a controlling stake we are no longer so interested 
in South Russkoe (Lysova & Reznik, 2002). As noted earlier, the shares in Sibneftegaz proved to be of 
little value to Itera, because of Gazproms refusal to allow into its pipeline network the gas produced at 
the Beregovoe field. 
management) to halt the sale of their 39% stake to companies affiliated with Yukos (Reznik, 
2002b). But evidently this was only partially successful, because Yukos did succeed in 
acquiring a 25.2% stake. In July, Gazprom recovered these shares by means of another asset-
swap agreement, handing Yukos a 12% stake in gas producer Artikgaz in exchange
Yukos had also been a major creditor of Zapsibgazprom, this helped to pave the way for the 
agreement to end the bankruptcy process, which was reached in October 2002. Thus both 
Yukos and Itera had caused Gazprom considerable difficulty at Zapsibgazprom and 
Severneftegazprom respectively, and yet Gazprom reached an amicable share-swap agreement 
with both within a relatively short space of time. 
Summary 
Some of the methods used by the existing owners in the case studies above (in particular, 
share dilutions, the initiation of bankruptcy proceedings and the use of offshore companies) 
have been described by Adachi (2010) as informal corporate governance practices (ICGPs). 
Her central argument is that such practices are not always destructive: they were used in the 
1990s to build viable businesses out of collections of atomised enterprises. However, she 
notes that similar tactics were used at Norilsk Nickel in order to protect the owners from 
deprivatisation. The case studies above highlight the fact that these are versatile methods 
that serve a range of purposes, including attacks on property rights as well as defensive 
measures against such attacks. Bankruptcy was used as a defensive tactic by Zapsibgazproms 
managers, but also as an (aborted) offensive tactic by Gazprom against Sibur and 
Zapsibgazprom
 Artikgaz was sold in 2007 as part of the Yukos bankruptcy process. Unusually for Yukoss assets, it 
was bought not by Rosneft or Gazprom but by Italian company ENI. The latter had been permitted to 
buy as part of an agreement which allowed Gazprom access to Italys retail market for gas (Sakwa, 
2009, p. 243).  
 Indeed, precisely who is attacking and who defending in such cases depends on where ones 
sympathies lie. If one accepts Gazproms argument that many of these assets rightly belonged to it, then 
one might see its moves to regain them as a defence of its own property rights. 
As noted in the cases of Yukos and Russneft in the previous chapter, offshore ownership 
brings an international dimension which hinders attempts by the state to seize assets. But the 
share dilutions and other tactics used in the cases above are primarily domestic in nature, as 
was the case with many of the tactics used by Bashnefts owners in the previous chapter. It 
bears repeating that these domestic tactics only work against attacks on property rights by the 
state because they make use of domestic institutional constraints on coercion. In other words, 
in an ideal-typical kleptocratic state they would be meaningless in the face of the states 
limitless ability to seize assets within its own borders. 
The cases all ended relatively well for Gazprom, despite the defensive tactics used against it. 
But it was forced to think carefully about the real risk of assets being lost to new buyers or 
rival creditors. This reinforced the companys preference for a negotiated outcome over full-
scale asset seizure. In the Sibur case this outcome was obtained in exchange for the existing 
owners liberty, somewhat stretching the definition of negotiated. But in the other cases, 
Gazprom used more subtle methods to make the existing owners more amenable to sell. These 
methods provide part of the explanation for the ownership outcomes, as the following section 
explains. 
The ownership outcome: the role of Gazprominvestholding 
In this chapter, explaining the ownership outcome goes further than simply confirming that 
state ownership is a possible outcome when the state reaches agreement with the existing 
owner. Although each outcome was state ownership in the sense that indirect state control 
was asserted via Gazprom, in each case a wholly-owned subsidiary named 
Gazprominvestholding played a role either as buyer, or negotiator, or both. This company had 
been headed since 1998 by Alisher Usmanov, who was better known as a successful private 
businessman with diverse business interests including in metallurgy, internet and media 
companies
. The task is to understand what Gazprom sought to achieve by using this 
subsidiary rather than buying and negotiating directly.  
In fact, each takeover saw Gazprom and its subsidiary divide roles according to Table 3, 
below. Thus, when trying to pinpoint why Gazprominvestholding was used in certain 
situations, it is possible to compare these situations with those where Gazprom chose instead 
to play a direct role. 
 Russian Forbes in April 2013 estimated Usmanovs personal wealth at $17.6bn, and ranked him as 
Russias richest individual (Usmanov vozglavil reiting samykh bogatykh rossiyan po versii Forbes, 
2013). 
Target Negotiator Buyer 
Gazprom Gazprominvestholding 
Sibur Gazprom management Controlling stake 
restored by court 
order 
Became a beneficiary through 
its purchase of shares in Sibur-
managed enterprises that were 
also Sibur shareholders. 
Sibur-managed 
enterprises 
Gazprom management n/a Shares purchased through 
agreement with existing owner 
(Goldovsky) 
Stroitransgaz Usmanov n/a Blocking stake purchased 
through agreement with 
existing owners plus on 
secondary market 
Stroitransgazs 
Gazprom stake 
Usmanov n/a Purchased from Stroitransgaz 
Zapsibgazprom Gazprom management 
Gazprominvestholding 
Controlling stake 
restored by court 
order; increased 
by subsequent 
share-swaps 
Controlling stake transferred to 
its trust management on eve of 
Severneftegazprom 
(South Russkoe 
licence) 
Gazprominvestholding 51% obtained by 
share-swap 
49% accumulated by 
agreements with minority 
shareholders 
Table 3. Division of takeover roles between Gazprom and Gazprominvestholding
 Data compiled from the case evidence that is discussed below. 
The following sections shed light on precisely why Gazprominvestholding came to play such 
a significant role in the takeovers.  
Official explanations 
One of Gazprominvestholdings official responsibilities within the Gazprom group was to 
handle the buying and selling of its non-core assets (Novolodskaya, 2003; Reznik, 2003). But 
this is not enough to explain away its role in the cases. For example, it was involved as buyer 
when Gazprom regained control of South Russkoe, which was unequivocally a core Gazprom 
asset. When this point was raised by a journalist, Gazprominvestholding Deputy CEO Oleg 
Skorik said that we carry out Gazproms instructions in undertaking a whole series of core 
projects, including trust management and direct ownership of assets (Intervyu s Olegom 
Skorikom, 2002).  
In a 2003 interview, Usmanov explained the companys role as primarily carrying out 
securities transactions and portfolio investments to provide financial support for Gazproms 
core activity. These official explanations leave open a role for the company in almost any 
Gazprom takeover, and are therefore largely unhelpful in establishing precisely why Gazprom 
used it in particular situations.  
Technical obstacles to Gazproms direct ownership 
Panyushkin and Zygar (2008, p. 120) write that Usmanov carried out deals for Gazprom in 
which the monopoly for various reasons did not want or was not able to be directly involved. 
This downplays the fact that, in most such deals, Usmanov was acting through the Gazprom 
subsidiary Gazprominvestholding rather than in a personal capacity
. However, a 
satisfactory explanation for the companys involvement in these cases is indeed found by 
identifying reasons why the main Gazprom entity (i.e. OAO Gazprom) could not or would 
not play a direct role. 
 Though, as will be discussed below, there was at least one occasion where Usmanov did act as buyer 
in his personal capacity in the first instance, before selling on to Gazprominvestholding. 
Securities trading licence 
Gazprominvestholding held the relevant licences which authorised it to carry out transactions 
on the securities market, while Gazprom did not
. Gazprom was nevertheless able to make 
direct purchases of shares in other organisations, but unlike its subsidiary it could not buy or 
sell shares traded through exchanges. This gets us closer to a satisfactory explanation, but the 
cases show Gazprominvestholding acting as buyer both on the securities market
 and in 
direct transactions. 
Deal confidentiality 
Usmanov has said that Gazprominvestholding was able to preserve the confidentiality of a 
deal until the moment of its completion, something which gave it an advantage over banks 
(Reznik, 2003). Russian banks are obliged to make detailed disclosures regarding their 
finances to the Central Bank, and these disclosures are publicly available. The main bank that 
could have acted instead of Gazprominvestholding at the time was Gazproms subsidiary 
Gazprombank, which as an issuer of securities was further obliged to issue detailed quarterly 
reports containing more qualitative disclosures regarding its operations
. As a limited-
liability company, Gazprominvestholding was not obliged to make such disclosures. In that 
regard it also had an advantage over parent company Gazprom, which in addition to its 
various disclosure requirements was less able to maintain confidentiality due to the presence 
on its board of independent directors.  
As will be discussed below, the Gazprom management needed prior approval from the board 
before making acquisitions. Independent director Boris Fyodorov in particular gave frequent 
commentary to the press, which meant that Gazprom board decisions (and even some details 
of how they were arrived at) came under particular public scrutiny. However, Gazproms need 
 http://www.gazprominvestholding.ru/licenses. On the subject of whether Gazproms lack of such 
licences prevented it from buying shares, see Petrova and Reznik (2002). 
 Usmanov has said that some of the shares Gazprominvestholding accumulated in Stroitransgaz were 
acquired on the secondary market (Reznik, 2002h). 
 This obligation stems from the Federal Law On the Securities Market, chapter 7, article 30. 
to secure prior board approval for acquisitions presented other problems besides 
confidentiality, and these are likely to have been more important in determining its decision to 
use Gazprominvestholding as buyer on its behalf. 
Bypassing board approval and the government directive 
Gazproms management was obliged to work within three different types of institutional 
constraint, which had the combined effect of substantially reducing its freedom of movement 
and (most importantly) its ability to respond quickly to developing situations. Firstly, in 
common with all Russian joint-stock companies, it was obliged to gain approval for deals over 
a certain size from the board of directors or (for particularly large deals) by a shareholder 
vote. The second constraint came from additional restrictions which were imposed by the 
board of directors on the company specifically in May 2001, and which were aimed at 
preventing further assets going astray. But the third and most important constraint stemmed 
from its status as a state-owned company. This meant that voting by the board of directors was 
subject to the directive system: before state representatives on the board could vote, they had 
to obtain written instructions on how to vote that were duly signed off by various interested 
government departments. As Tompson (2008, p. 12) notes, the directive system is a serious 
obstacle to the efficiency of state-owned companies in Russia. The system is cumbersome 
and frequently ensures that decisions simply have to be put off. Although this problem was 
common to all state-owned joint-stock companies, it was particularly acute for Gazprom after 
the extra restrictions imposed in May 2001, which meant that even relatively small deals had 
to go through board approval and the directive system. 
The use of Gazprominvestholding was the Gazprom managers response to these constraints. 
Rather than simply ignore them or override them as a state-owned company might be 
expected to do in a truly kleptocratic state, they instead found innovative ways to work 
within them. Realising that they did not apply to subsidiaries (or subsidiaries of subsidiaries) 
of state-owned joint-stock companies, they were able to free themselves from legal constraints 
in a way that was entirely compliant with the letter of the law. In the process, however, they 
also circumvented the governments own efforts to keep tighter control over the companys 
assets. 
The relevant constraints on joint-stock companies stemmed from articles 79 and 83 of the 
Federal Law On Joint-stock Companies. These dictated that companies needed to gain 
approval from the board of directors before carrying out major deals or deals involving 
interested parties. Major deals were defined as those involving assets equivalent to 25% of the 
balance-sheet value of the acquiring company; if the assets involved were equivalent to over 
50% of the balance-sheet value of the acquiring company, the deals required approval instead 
by a shareholder vote
The additional controls that were specific to Gazprom were first announced in October 2000 
(Butrin, 2000; Manvelov, 2000; Sovet direktorov Gazproma, 2000) and were originally 
aimed at making all deals involving Gazprom assets subject to board approval. However, it 
was clear that this would mean an excessive addition to the workload of the Gazprom board of 
directors, and some kind of practicable solution needed to be found (Pravosudov, 2001). The 
new rules, which came into force in May 2001, were laid out in an internal company 
document named the Statute [reglament] for the approval of transactions involving Gazprom 
assets. This was not made publicly available, and thus the precise rules that were put in place 
can only be divined using circumstantial evidence. The best such evidence comes from a 2004 
Audit Chamber report on Gazprom, one section of which is dedicated to an audit of 
Gazproms management of its subsidiaries and affiliates (Schetnaya Palata RF, 2004, pp. 55
71). This report states that the Statute was in force between 17 May 2001 and 27 September 
2002, and therefore covers most of the period when Gazprominvestholding was making share 
purchases in the three cases. The Statute was then replaced by the Procedure for Completing 
 The text of the two articles can be found at http://www.zakonrf.info/zakon-ob-ao/79/ and 
http://www.zakonrf.info/zakon-ob-ao/83/. Accessed on 3 July 2013.  
Transactions (Poryadok soversheniya sdelok). The Audit Chamber report cites some examples 
of Gazprom board approvals given while the Statute was in force, for acquisitions and 
disposals made by Gazprom subsidiaries of shares in other companies (Schetnaya Palata RF, 
2004, p. 63). All four of the examples of acquisitions show that they would result in Gazprom 
group gaining a majority stake in the target organisation
. It therefore seems likely that, 
while the Statute was in force, approval from the Gazprom board of directors was required 
when Gazprom subsidiaries bought shares in other companies only when this resulted in 
Gazprom group gaining a controlling stake
. Such was the solution that was found so that 
Gazproms board did not have to approve every acquisition made by a Gazprom subsidiary of 
shares in other companies. Crucially, it left room for Gazprominvestholding to proceed 
without approval from the Gazprom board of directors when making share acquisitions that 
did not bring Gazprom groups overall stake in the target company up to controlling, or when 
buying additional shares in companies already controlled by Gazprom.  
On its own, the need for prior approval from the board of directors was a restriction on 
Gazproms ability to move quickly in situations that were often time-sensitive, because the 
board typically met just once a month (Pravosudov, 2001). In most cases, the Gazprom board 
would not be prepared to vote on a particular transaction without first receiving 
documentation prepared by the company which outlined the business case for the transaction. 
But as Tompson notes, it was the directive system which acted as a particular encumbrance. 
For most of the period covered by these case studies, the directive was issued by the State 
Property Ministry. Reportedly, officials from that Ministry consulted with the Prime 
Ministers office before giving approval for major deals. Additionally, in July 2001 the 
 For three out of the four examples, this is made explicit in the text of the report. In the fourth, the 
purchase of a 32% stake in Purgaz by Gazprom subsidiary Noyabrskgazdobycha, the result was to 
increase Gazproms stake back to controlling by adding to its existing 19% stake (Davydova & Reznik, 
2001). 
 Further circumstantial evidence in support of this view is provided by the fact that no contemporary 
reports have been found where Gazproms board gave approval for a subsidiarys purchase that did not 
result in a controlling Gazprom stake. 
Property Ministry agreed to consult with the Energy Ministry and reach a consensus before it 
issued directives for board and shareholder votes at state-owned energy companies including 
Gazprom. If consensus could not be reached, the decision would be postponed until a future 
board or shareholder meeting (Bushueva, 2001d). Then in January 2003 Prime Minister 
Mikhail Kasyanov introduced tighter rules for Gazprom and 17 other strategic state-owned 
companies: thereafter, the directive needed to be personally signed off by the Prime Minister 
or one of his deputies (Nikolskii & Bekker, 2003). Kasyanovs new regulations applied only 
to purchases by the state-controlled companies, not by their subsidiaries. Such companies 
accordingly began using subsidiaries to bypass the new regulations, because it was taking too 
long to get the appropriate sign-off; the government moved to close the loophole only in 2013 
(Tovkailo, 2013). Given that Gazproms management was obliged to submit a particularly 
high proportion of deals for board approval via the directive system, it is unsurprising that it 
was enthusiastic in embracing the use of subsidiaries. 
As the sections dedicated to the specific cases will show below, much of 
Gazprominvestholdings involvement as buyer can be explained by this need to bypass the 
requirement for Gazprom board approval in time-sensitive situations. 
Importance as intermediary  
The technical factors described above which dictated the role of Gazprominvestholding as 
buyer leave unexplained why (as Table 3 indicates) the company and its chief executive 
Alisher Usmanov additionally played a significant role as negotiator with the existing owners 
in the cases of Stroitransgaz and South Russkoe
. There was no obvious reason why the 
buyer also needed to be the one to negotiate with the seller: indeed, at Sibur, it was Gazproms 
management that negotiated with Goldovsky, but Gazprominvestholding that acted as buyer.  
 Usmanov claimed that he was not personally involved in the negotiations over Sibur (see below). 
At least one account has hinted that Usmanovs value as negotiator lay in his ability to get the 
agreement of the existing owners not through compromise but through coercion
. However, 
this is difficult to reconcile with the fact that both Usmanov and Vyakhirev (whose family was 
among the selling shareholders in the Stroitransgaz case) have subsequently spoken about 
each other in only respectful terms
. Besides, it is unclear why Gazprom would need such 
assistance in providing coercion when it has been shown to have had good access to the 
coercive resources of the state. 
There is significant evidence to indicate that Usmanov was valuable to Gazprom as a 
negotiator in a similar way to the private buyers in the Russneft and Bashneft cases in 
Chapter Two. To recap, Deripaska was a trusted associate of Gutseriev and Yevtushenkov had 
gained the trust of the Rakhimovs, but at the same time both were believed (wrongly, as it 
turned out for Deripaska) to have the Kremlins backing as new owners. It was suggested in 
the previous chapter that they were valuable to the state as intermediaries who could facilitate 
a negotiated outcome to the bargaining process. The existing owners would have been more 
recalcitrant if they had been presented instead with the sole option of selling to the same 
people who were responsible for the coercion being used against them. 
Usmanov was first and foremost acting in his capacity as a hired manager of a Gazprom 
subsidiary. In that sense, he could hardly be considered a private buyer. But the blurred line 
between his role at Gazprominvestholding and his private business, and the fact that he had 
worked under Vyakhirev
, helped to make him more of an independent intermediary, and 
 e.g. Panyushkin and Zygar (2008, p. 121) wrote It is not known what Usmanov said to Bekker, 
what arguments he used or what he used to blackmail [him], but Bekker received 190 million dollars 
for the 4.83% stake in Gazprom, which today is worth around 13 billion dollars. 
 e.g. in one of his last interviews, Vyakhirev described Usmanov as A good guy, he calls some 
times, always sends a present on birthdays. Vyakhirev also spoke bitterly about his family having been 
fleeced by Aleksandr Bekker in the Stroitransgaz share dilution, after which they decided to sell their 
stake to Alisher (Igumenov & Malkova, 2012). In his 2003 interview Usmanov described himself as 
a Vyakhirev person, referring positively to Vyakhirevs qualities as an individual as well as a 
Gazprom manager (Reznik, 2003).   
 Usmanov joined Gazprominvestholding as First Deputy CEO in 1997, becoming CEO in 2000. Thus 
he was ultimately subordinate to Gazprom CEO Rem Vyakhirev for up to four years, from 1997 until 
less of a Gazprom representative, when it came to the negotiations for Stroitransgaz and South 
Russkoe.  
A former Gazprom employee said in a 2012 press article that when the new management took 
over at Gazprom in 2001, they had their doubts about whether to keep Usmanov on at 
Gazprominvestholding. They had ultimately been persuaded to do so not least by the fact that 
Vyakhirev and his allies refused to talk to anyone else about selling their assets back to 
Gazprom. Usmanov confirmed this impression by claiming that the old team needed a new 
person who could guarantee to them all the payments. I said to them Dont worry, I am 
buying from you, I will buy (Igumenov & Malkova, 2012). As will be explained below, he 
revealed that this was literally true in one case: he bought the shares in a private capacity 
before selling them on to Gazprominvestholding. But in the other cases also, his link to the 
old Gazprom regime seems to have been crucial in winning the existing owners confidence 
that Gazproms new management would not renege on their side of any deal.  
Thus the explanation for Gazprominvestholdings role in the ownership outcomes centres on 
the legal advantages which made it a better buyer in certain situations from Gazproms point 
of view, and on Usmanovs value as an intermediary who could bargain most effectively with 
the existing owners. The next task is to establish how far these two factors fit with the specific 
evidence from the cases. 
Sibur 
As noted above, Gazprom restored its controlling stake in Sibur in February 2002, when that 
companys shareholders (with Goldovskys support) agreed to cancel the most recent share 
issue. This newly-restored controlling stake was directly owned by Gazprom. But 
Gazprominvestholding then purchased Goldovskys shares in the Sibur-managed enterprises. 
Some of these enterprises were also shareholders in Sibur itself, and thus 
Vyakhirevs dismissal in May 2001. Additionally, Usmanov was a consultant to Vyakhirev between 
2000 and 2001 (Usmanov Alisher, n.d.). 
Gazprominvestholding became a beneficial owner of Sibur through these acquisitions. To 
complicate matters further, the purchases were in fact carried out not by 
Gazprominvestholding itself but by five of its subsidiaries (Bushueva et al., 2002). By January 
2003, Gazproms combined direct and indirect stake in Sibur had reached approximately 75% 
(Reznik, 2003).  
In a January 2003 interview, Usmanov said that he was not personally involved in the talks 
with Goldovsky, but that Gazprominvestholding had been given the technical task of 
assessing the value of his stakes in the Sibur-managed enterprises (Reznik, 2003). An 
interview given by Goldovsky in March 2003 would appear to confirm that 
Gazprominvestholding did not act as negotiator in the Sibur takeover: he said that the relevant 
agreements were prepared by Gazproms lawyers and he first saw them when he was released 
from detention (Novolodskaya, 2003)
. In that interview, Goldovsky was also asked why 
Gazprominvestholding, rather than Gazprom, had bought his stakes in the Sibur-managed 
enterprises. He answered only that it was the job of Gazprominvestholding to handle 
Gazproms non-core assets (Novolodskaya, 2003).  
As noted earlier, Gazprom had promised Goldovsky his liberty provided that he agreed to sell 
his stakes in the Sibur-managed enterprises. In order to fulfil its side of the bargain, Gazprom 
would drop its civil compensation claim against Goldovsky and his deputy; this would signal 
to the Prosecutor Generals Office that it should no longer pursue the criminal case against 
them. The first hearing of the criminal case was scheduled for 31 July 2002 (Bushueva et al., 
2002; Novolodskaya & Chertkov, 2002). Perhaps mindful of how the media baron Vladimir 
Gusinsky had earlier reneged on a similar agreement, Gazprom was reportedly determined to 
 Similarly, when Gazprom sold its stake in National Reserve Bank in exchange for the banks 0.2% 
stake in Gazprom, the banks President Aleksandr Lebedev claimed he was not consulted on the fact 
that the buyer of the Gazprom shares was Gazprominvestholding; the sale agreement had been a 
Memorandum signed by Lebedev and Gazprom CEO Aleksei Miller. I signed the documents, but I 
respect the right of Gazprom to structure the deal [as they see fit]. If they change something I will re-
sign the documents, as long as this is legal and doesnt create tax-related or reputational problems for 
us (Petrova & Reznik, 2002).  
ensure that it had successfully taken ownership of all of Goldovskys shares before the 
criminal case against him was dropped. Using Gazprominvestholding subsidiaries as the 
buyers almost certainly bypassed the need for Gazprom board approval, and hence for any 
government directives. It thus expedited the many transactions required, which involved 
shares in more than 10 petrochemicals companies
Stroitransgaz  
It was Gazprominvestholding that bought back all of Stroitransgazs Gazprom shares (Reznik, 
2002h). After reaching agreement with Bekker, it bought the 4.83% stake which Stroitransgaz 
had acquired from Gazprom back in 1995. This left the additional 1.1-1.2% stake which 
Stroitransgaz had since purchased on the secondary market. It emerged in March 2003 that 
these were also bought by Gazprominvestholding, though once again it had used various 
subsidiaries. They had borrowed money from Gazprombank (another Gazprom subsidiary) to 
make the purchases. The bank then took ownership of this entire 1.1-1.2% Gazprom stake as 
repayment of the loan. It was thought that the deal had been structured this way because the 
banks reserve requirements prevented it buying directly (Bushueva & Berezanskaya, 
2003)
Gazprominvestholding was also the buyer for the blocking stake in Stroitransgaz itself. By 
August 2003, it had accumulated 26.1% of the companys ordinary shares and a further 
15.54% of its non-voting preference shares (Reznik & Yegorova, 2004). 
Legal considerations dictated the use of Gazprominvestholding as buyer of the Gazprom 
stake, but these considerations differed from those in the Sibur case. If the shares had been 
 Whatever the precise regulations regarding the need for Gazprom board approval for purchases by 
Gazprom subsidiaries, they almost certainly did not extend to purchases by subsidiaries of Gazprom 
subsidiaries. 
 Usmanov said in January 2003 that Gazprominvestholding now held a 6% stake in Gazprom 
(Reznik, 2003), confirming that it had bought the remaining shares held by Stroitransgaz. It was 
originally thought that only half of the 1.1% stake had then been passed on to Gazprombank (Bushueva 
& Berezanskaya, 2003). But in June 2005, when Gazprominvestholding and other Gazprom 
subsidiaries sold their combined 10.4% Gazprom stake, Gazprominvestholdings contribution was only 
4.83%. Gazprombank contributed 1.25% (Butrin, 2005).  
bought by Gazprom itself, they would have been treated legally as treasury shares which 
could not be voted by any party at Gazprom shareholder meetings. Company shares that were 
on the balance-sheets of company subsidiaries were not treated as treasury shares and could be 
voted according to the wishes of the company management. For the same reason, 
Gazprominvestholding in June 2002 bought a 0.2% Gazprom stake from National Reserve 
Bank (Petrova & Reznik, 2002).  
These acquisitions were part of a wider campaign by the state to gain control of wayward 
Gazprom shares by placing them on the balance-sheets of Gazprominvestholding and other 
subsidiaries including Gazprombank. In June 2005, these subsidiaries sold a combined 10.4% 
stake to state-owned Rosneftegaz (which at the time owned 100% of the Rosneft oil 
company), thereby enabling the state to formalise its direct majority control over Gazprom. 
By using subsidiaries, Gazprom was able to buy back its own shares and retain the ability to 
vote those shares. But this explanation requires some clarification: if the state wanted these 
Gazprom shares for itself, why did it not buy them directly rather than through Gazprom 
subsidiaries? Pappe and Galukhina (2009, pp. 1667, 170) pose precisely this question, while 
at the same time noting that the Russian state had expanded its ownership role in the economy 
without making a single direct purchase (preferring instead to use existing state-owned 
companies as the acquisition vehicles). Regarding Gazprom, they suggest that the state could 
have bought the required shares directly, or achieved its controlling stake by having Gazprom 
transfer the shares held by its subsidiaries on to its own balance sheet, and then cancelling 
those shares. This latter method would not have been sufficient on its own: the state would 
have needed to buy some additional shares on the open market in order to achieve its 
controlling stake. The authors offer two explanations for the governments decision not to 
choose one of these options, and more generally for its tendency to avoid direct purchases to 
achieve expanded state ownership. Firstly, direct purchases of shares by the state need 
parliament to give prior approval for the required money to be allocated from the state budget: 
even given Russias parliament, which was by this time almost entirely subordinate to the 
executive, such budgetary approval was difficult to secure. Secondly (and in their view more 
importantly), in our view the political leadership does not have too much trust in bureaucrats 
and is very cautious in its approach to broadening the functions of state bodies. 
In the present authors view, the first explanation was in fact more important. Buying up 
shares on the open market implies a process that is both time-sensitive and fraught with 
uncertainty over price. Even if the states vehicle for direct ownership (the Federal Agency for 
State Property Management, or Rosimushchestvo) were licensed to buy exchange-traded 
shares (which is doubtful), it would have been difficult to achieve this with a fixed amount of 
money set aside long in advance by the state budget. The amount of money allocated would 
have been public knowledge, which would have played into the hands of the selling 
shareholders. In other words, the institutional barriers to direct state purchases were similar to 
those preventing Gazprom itself buying up shares in price- and time-sensitive situations. But 
even outside such situations, the process of allocating money from the state budget was 
eschewed in favour of more market-based solutions. Tellingly, when Gazproms subsidiaries 
sold their shares on to state-owned Rosneftegaz in June 2005, this too was done in a way that 
bypassed the need for budget money. Instead, Rosneftegaz took a bridging loan (probably 
from state-owned Vneshekonombank) while it waited to secure a syndicated loan from 
Western banks (Skorobogatko, Kiseleva, & Skornyakova, 2005). The Western bank loan was 
eventually repaid from money raised through Rosnefts IPO in July 2006. While state-owned 
joint-stock companies were legally authorised to borrow from banks, Rosimushchestvo was 
(as Pappe and Galukhina note) obliged to seek financing from the state budget
 Once Rosneftegaz had repaid its loan from Western banks, it was meant to be liquidated and its 
Gazprom stake transferred to Rosimushchestvo. This did not happen, and Rosneftegaz instead went on 
to acquire further important assets on behalf of the state (and to withhold from the state budget 
dividends it earned on its shares in those assets). This is typically explained by reference to the self-
enriching or self-aggrandising motivations of Igor Sechin, who effectively controlled Rosneftegaz. 
However, Vernon (1984, p. 48) provides an alternative explanation: there are major advantages in 
distinguishing the income and expenditures of [] state-owned enterprises from those of the 
So far, the explanation for the ownership outcome of Stroitransgazs Gazprom shares applies 
to any Gazprom subsidiary. The best available explanation why Gazprominvestholding was 
chosen specifically over other Gazprom subsidiaries in this case probably lies in Usmanovs 
value as negotiator. He said in 2012 that, while Gazprom was fighting through the courts to 
obtain Stroitransgazs Gazprom stake, he met with Bekker (who was now living in Germany) 
to persuade him to sell. Most significantly, Usmanov claimed that Bekker was so mistrustful 
of Gazproms new management that he only agreed to sell the Gazprom stake when Usmanov 
volunteered to buy it in his personal capacity. Usmanov then sold the Gazprom shares on to 
Gazprominvestholding, supposedly at zero mark-up (Igumenov & Malkova, 2012)
In the same 2012 article, a separate source claimed that the Vyakhirev and Chernomyrdin 
families had refused to talk to any of the new Gazprom senior managers on the subject of 
selling their shares in Stroitransgaz. As noted above, their first choice had been to sell their 
shares to Bekker, but when they failed to reach agreement with him they agreed to talk to 
Usmanov. Usmanov claimed that he told the old team that he would be the buyer of the 
Stroitransgaz shares. Although there are no indications that he bought these shares also in a 
private capacity, his remarks do suggest that his personal guarantees helped to make the deal 
possible (Igumenov & Malkova, 2012). 
Usmanovs role as negotiator would not necessarily have ruled out a different Gazprom 
subsidiary acting as the buyer of these shares. But that would have made less credible his 
claim to be an intermediary for the new Gazprom management rather than their direct 
government proper [] [this] helps make managers of such enterprises accountable for their 
performance and helps protect ministers from charges of profligacy; it creates a separate cache of 
resources in some instance, unavailable or unknown to public and parliament, that the government can 
draw on at strategic junctures. 
 No independent confirmation has been found in the public domain that Usmanov first bought this 
Gazprom stake in a personal capacity. It is hard to imagine why Usmanov would have invented such a 
detail, however, and it seems unlikely that Forbes would have opened itself up to legal difficulties by 
misquoting Usmanov. 
representative (that he was buying rather than Gazprom). It would also have reduced his 
freedom to negotiate terms.  
Zapsibgazprom and South Russkoe 
Gazprominvestholdings involvement in the takeovers of Zapsibgazprom and the South 
Russkoe gas field was as follows. Gazproms controlling stake at Zapsibgazprom was restored 
by a court order in mid-April 2002, and this stake was directly owned by Gazprom. But on the 
eve of a crucial Zapsibgazprom shareholder meeting on 25 May that was called by Gazprom, 
Gazprominvestholding was handed temporary control of the stake (Sostoyalos sobranie 
aktsionerov OAO Zapsibgazprom, 2002; Yambaeva, 2002). It was also involved as buyer 
in Gazproms takeover of Severneftegazprom, the licence-holder for the gas field. Usmanov 
and his deputy at Gazprominvestholding were involved as negotiators both in the 
Severneftegazprom takeover, and in Gazproms buying out Zapsibgazproms minority 
shareholders after its majority stake had been restored by court order.  
The transfer of the Zapsibgazprom stake to Gazprominvestholding was not a sale (which 
would have required approval from the Gazprom board of directors) but was almost certainly 
trust management, which in Russian law approximates to granting power of attorney
. The 
Zapsibgazprom shareholder meeting elected a new board of directors which was now 
dominated by Gazprom representatives, and appointed Oleg Skorik, Usmanovs deputy at 
Gazprominvestholding, as the new chief executive
. The company was still in bankruptcy 
administration at the time, and thus Skorik was subordinate to the court-appointed 
 This explanation of trust management (doveritelnoe upravlenie) was provided by a partner in the 
Moscow office of a major law firm. In a brief newspaper interview soon after the EGM, 
Zapsibgazproms new CEO and Gazprominvestholding First Deputy CEO Oleg Skorik mentioned 
trust management and direct ownership of assets as one of the functions Gazprominvestholding 
fulfilled on behalf of Gazprom, and then cited as an example its leadership of the project to return 
Severneftegazprom to Gazproms control (Intervyu s Olegom Skorikom, 2002). 
 Skorik had joined Gazprominvestholding from Usmanovs private business Interfin; he left 
Gazprom group in 2004 to work for the Swiss division of Coalco (another privately-owned business 
linked to Usmanov) (OAO Regiongazkholding, 2003, pp. 1213). This provides another indication 
that the boundaries between Usmanovs private business and his role as a Gazprom employee were 
somewhat blurred. 
administrator, who continued to be the highest-ranking executive at the company. Precisely 
how long Skorik remained as CEO is not clear, but a new CEO was appointed soon after 
agreement was reached with Zapsibgazproms creditors in October 2002 to bring it out of 
bankruptcy. 
A disclosure document published by Severneftegazprom in early 2003 (OAO 
Severneftegazprom, 2003) provides all the evidence necessary to divine how ownership 
roles were divided in Gazproms takeover of that company. Gazprominvestholding bought 
Zapsibgazproms remaining 11% stake in the company and the other 38% that was held by 
Zapsibgazproms managers. When Gazprom subsequently acquired an additional 49% stake 
in Severneftegazprom via a share-swap with Itera, it took ownership of this latter stake 
directly
. There is no sign that the Gazprominvestholding purchases received prior approval 
from the Gazprom board; by contrast, the share-swap that gave Gazprom its additional 49% 
stake did receive such approval on 20 August 2002 (Vchera, 2002). This is consistent with 
the interpretation given above of the rules that applied at the time: namely, that Gazproms 
board needed to pre-approve purchases of shares in other companies (even those made by its 
subsidiaries) if they resulted in Gazprom group gaining a controlling interest
Gazprominvestholding was involved in the negotiations with Itera that led to the agreement 
between Miller and Makarov to bring Gazproms stake in Severneftegazprom up to 100% 
(Lysova & Reznik, 2002). Indeed, as noted above, Gazprominvestholding claimed to be in 
charge of the whole project of returning South Russkoe to Gazproms control (Intervyu s 
Olegom Skorikom, 2002). Usmanov said in 2012 that he had gone to court to get control of 
 The disclosure document shows that at the end of 2002, Gazprominvestholding held 49% and 
Gazprom 49%. Gazprominvestholding acquired its stake on 8 April 2002, and Gazprom on 9 December 
2002. 
 The wording of the press-release from the relevant board meeting was that approval had been given 
for Gazprom to become the sole owner of Severneftegazprom by increasing its stake from 49% to 
100%. Thus the approval actually covered two transactions: the share-swap and Gazproms 
subsequently taking ownership of the remaining shares in the company. This it did on 31 January 2003 
(OAO Severneftegazprom, 2007, p. 11). 
the gas field from Itera (Igumenov & Malkova, 2012). Presumably he was referring to the 
legal action which blocked Iteras attempt to dilute the Gazprominvestholding stake in 
Severneftegazprom from 49% back down to 20%. In a 2003 interview, Usmanov had referred 
to this case as an example where his company had been used to maintain confidentiality 
pending completion of the deal. Regarding Zapsibgazprom, he added that we learned that 
there were attempts to initiate the bankruptcy of this company, but we were able to reverse the 
process and return the company to Gazproms control (Reznik, 2003)
It is not apparent why, as Usmanov claimed, there was a particular need for confidentiality in 
the acquisition of shares in Severneftegazprom. The precise reason for Gazprom transferring 
its Zapsibgazprom stake to trust management by Gazprominvestholding also remains 
something of a mystery. Because this took place on the eve of the shareholder meeting, it 
seems highly likely that the transfer was needed for the purposes of that meeting, which was 
aimed at consolidating Gazproms newly-regained control over the company. There is nothing 
in the list of decisions that were made at the meeting that would have prevented Gazprom 
voting its own stake
. The meeting was held under controversial circumstances, amid 
tensions with the remaining Zapsibgazprom shareholders. It took place on a Saturday and 
inside Gazproms Moscow headquarters (rather than at the Zapsibgazprom headquarters in 
Tyumen), in a transparent effort to exclude those remaining shareholders. Gazprom claimed 
to have duly notified all shareholders in advance of the meeting, but this claim was contested. 
The meeting was only just quorate (with only the owners of 51.6% taking part), which 
effectively means that few or no other shareholders were present (Yambaeva, 2002). 
Gazprominvestholding was most likely brought in as part of Gazproms efforts to exclude 
 Given that it was Gazprom itself that initiated Zapsibgazproms bankruptcy, this seems to first 
glance to be an odd comment to have made. However, in December 2001, i.e. prior to Gazproms 14 
January 2002 application to bankrupt Zapsibgazprom, a different creditor (namely the bankruptcy 
administrator of Inkombank) had made its own application (OAO Zapsibgazprom, 2002; Reznik, 
Osetinskaya, & Nikolskii, 2002). Usmanov may well have been referring to his companys role in 
ensuring that this earlier application was disregarded. 
 The list of decisions was published in a Gazprom press-release (Sostoyalos sobranie aktsionerov 
OAO Zapsibgazprom, 2002). 
minority shareholders from the meeting, though it is not clear precisely how it contributed to 
those efforts.  
Conclusion   
The first section of this chapter looked at what prompted Gazprom to undertake its campaign 
to take back assets. It took some time for this campaign to take shape after Putins appointee 
Aleksei Miller had taken over as Gazproms new CEO: his first months at the company saw 
considerable debate over whether it was commercially prudent to take over some of the assets 
lost to Gazprom under the previous management. It seems clear that an intervention by Putin 
put an end to these debates, and set Gazproms managers on an essentially indiscriminate 
campaign to take back all of the assets that rightfully belonged to the company. Although 
the commercial objective of boosting market capitalisation was cited in justification, it is clear 
that other considerations influenced what was essentially a political decision.  
The conclusion from the case studies was that the twin political objectives of consolidating 
state control over Gazprom and boosting its power as a political and economic resource 
played an important role in the campaign. Consolidating state control over Gazprom was the 
reason for taking back the Gazprom stake held by Stroitransgaz. Taking back the South 
Russkoe gas field was strategically important given its future role as supplier to the Nord 
Stream pipeline. Gazprom was intended to be used as a tool of economic development 
through its ownership of Sibur and Zapsibgazprom: ownership would allow Gazprom to 
provide a steady stream of orders to these companies. Siburs fortunes were important to the 
petrochemicals industry (prioritised as part of a developmental drive to move exports up the 
value chain from primary natural resources), while Zapsibgazprom was an ailing company 
which the government was apparently unwilling to allow to fail. Gazprom also sought to take 
an ownership stake in Stroitransgaz in order to solve the strictly commercial problem of its 
relationship with a key supplier. In the decisions to take ownership of Sibur, Zapsibgazprom 
and Stroitransgaz, the aim was to bring under common ownership transactions that had 
previously taken place across the market. Williamson (1981) provides the key to 
understanding why such vertical integration can under certain circumstances be preferable to 
relying on the market to provide the best outcomes
Thus there is in fact a wide range of explanations required to account for all the decisions 
involved in Gazproms campaign, and for how the newly-acquired assets were subsequently 
managed. This suggests that a form of mission creep was at work. Vernon (1984, p. 51) 
argues that state-owned companies around the world are often vulnerable to this problem, 
because they are accountable not to one but to several state agencies: the enterprise operates 
according to multiple objectives, some originating from inside the firm, some from without; 
the influence of the various objectives on the behaviour of the state-owned enterprise varies 
with time; and the environment in which the enterprise operates usually contains substantial 
elements of instability. 
As a final observation before turning to the ownership outcomes, one of Gazproms 
justifications for undertaking these SLCTs, and its wider campaign of re-taking lost assets, 
was simply that these assets rightfully belonged to it. They had been lost due to the 
inadequate controls exercised by the state over the former Gazprom management. In the 
literature on the commitment problem, the state is seen both as having a responsibility to 
protect the property rights of private economic actors, and as a major potential threat to those 
property rights. But in the cases in this chapter, it is far from clear which side was attacking 
property rights and which was defending. Gazproms private minority shareholders agreed 
with the new management that the companys campaign was justified as an effort to remedy 
past attacks on its own property rights. 
 A further example of the state attempting to foster the development of industry through vertical 
integration is provided in the following chapter focussing on engineering company OMZ. 
The cases studied in this chapter provide further evidence that SLCTs can be a two-way 
bargaining game rather than straightforward expropriation by the state. There was 
considerable acrimony between Gazprom and existing owner in all three cases. The fact that 
the assets Gazprom particularly wanted were not the same as the companies that were the 
takeover targets, and in two out of three cases had been placed at one remove from those 
target companies, made the situation particularly precarious for Gazprom. Care needed to be 
taken to ensure that the prized assets were not sold on to third parties, or claimed by rival 
creditors. Attempting to pursue full-scale asset seizure against a hostile existing owner would 
have heightened the risk that the prized assets would be lost forever, and this made securing a 
negotiated outcome particularly preferable.  
The defensive tactics employed by the existing owners go a long way towards explaining why 
the prized assets were in such danger of being lost. Siburs owner (as in the Yukos and 
Russneft cases) had had the foresight to structure his ownership through offshore companies, 
and Gazprom showed a reluctance to take action against them in international courts. But his 
fate shows that such tactics are of little value if the owner is then arrested and not (as with 
Khodorkovsky) prepared to face a lengthy prison sentence. At Stroitransgaz, the owner had 
the foresight to evade arrest by leaving the country (as had Gutseriev in the Russneft case). 
But these case studies add to the impression gained from the Bashneft case that constraints on 
the executive do not simply begin where Russias jurisdiction ends. The existing owners also 
used a variety of defensive tactics, such as share dilutions and bankruptcy, that had no 
international dimension. These tactics were only effective because Gazprom was obliged by 
domestic institutional constraints to accept their results, despite its privileged access to the 
states coercive resources and other administrative resources. 
Gazproms preference for a negotiated outcome helps to explain why it made considerable use 
of its subsidiary Gazprominvestholding in these takeovers. The case studies show that 
Usmanovs ambiguous status (as a private businessman as well as a hired manager of state-
controlled Gazprom, and as a Vyakhirev man as well as a loyal subordinate to the new 
Gazprom management) enabled him to facilitate agreement with the existing owners. 
Similarly, in the cases of Russneft and Bashneft, the private buyers had played an important 
role in facilitating agreement between the existing owners and the state. Thus, Gazprom found 
in Gazprominvestholding a way to finesse the issue of its own state-ness in order to improve 
its ability to negotiate with the same people against whom it was employing the states 
coercive resources. 
Gazprominvestholdings other role was technical and legal in nature. By going deeper into the 
state ownership outcome of these cases to understand why it was used as owner on behalf of 
Gazprom, it has been possible to identify significant domestic legal constraints within which 
Gazprom was forced to operate. Some of these constraints were common to all joint-stock 
companies. But Gazprom was under additional controls stemming from its status as a state-
owned company, which had been tightened further in response to the loss of assets under the 
former management. The directive system at Russias state-owned companies made 
governance of these companies a cumbersome process. The involvement of various state 
agencies in the sign-off of directives heightened the problem noted by Vernon of state-owned 
companies being subject to state interference in multiple and sometimes opposing directions, 
which may explain why Gazproms takeover campaign served a multitude of potentially 
contradictory political and commercial purposes. But the assets lost by the previous 
management show that the directive was not a meaningless piece of red-tape: this and the 
additional controls placed on Gazprom were aimed at ensuring the company would no longer 
be asset-stripped by a management that was not subject to sufficient shareholder control. 
Gazproms management felt the need to bypass the institutional controls on its actions not so 
much because it resented meddling from multiple interested state agencies, but because the 
controls substantially reduced its ability to respond in an agile and flexible manner in tense 
and time-sensitive situations. The more acrimonious the takeovers of the lost assets, the more 
tense and time-sensitive they were likely to be. With the existing owners strategizing to place 
assets offshore or otherwise hamper Gazproms ability to seize them, the Gazprom 
management could not afford to wait for months for appropriate sign-off for particular 
acquisitions. 
By using Gazprominvestholding (and subsidiaries thereof) as buyers, the Gazprom 
management was able to bypass these constraints while remaining compliant. Compliant, that 
is, with the letter of the relevant laws and regulations, but hardly with their spirit. Woodruff 
(2013) points out that rule of law requires not just a well-defined, open and stable legal 
framework and its adequate enforcement, but also a sensitivity to how the law is manipulated 
by those to whom the law allocates authority, and a preparedness to re-calibrate the law in 
response. The ownership structures used by Gazprom in these takeovers were examples of 
such manipulation: without breaking any rules, they largely undermined the effectiveness of 
the controls that the state had placed on the company for apparently good reasons
It is perhaps surprising that the loyal management of a state-owned company found ways to 
bypass controls that were imposed by the state, but less surprising that they did so in a way 
that was legally compliant. Presumably the states representatives on the Gazprom board were 
aware of how Gazprominvestholding was being used, but did not object because they 
understood the more pressing imperative of making sure the takeovers proceeded as planned. 
It would have been less easy for them to look the other way if the company was directly 
infringing (rather than bypassing) the controls put in place by the state. 
More significant is the fact that Gazprom was subject to other types of coercion-constraining 
institutions. Gazprom was a state-owned company which had full state backing for its project 
to take back lost assets, and was able to employ administrative resources to help bring it 
about. But it was not above the law: its concern about losing control of bankruptcy was real, 
 Similarly, in the OMZ case studied in the next chapter, Gazfond was used as buyer in a way that 
undermined the antitrust regulators efforts to maintain a competitive market. 
and when tactics such as share dilution were used in order to undermine Gazproms control of 
a company, those tactics had a tangible effect (even if Gazprom was in some cases able to 
reverse them later through the courts). These considerations contributed to Gazproms 
preference for a negotiated solution to the takeovers, and this was particularly theoretically 
significant where the constraints on coercion were exclusively domestic, rather than 
international, in nature. That such things mattered at all shows that Russia was some way from 
being an ideal-type kleptocracy. 
Chapter 4: OMZ and Atomstroieksport 
Introduction 
This study centres on a state-led coercive takeover (SLCT) in Russias heavy engineering 
industry, which took place in November 2005 and involved a company named OMZ
. The 
company specialises in manufacturing heavy equipment for the mining, metallurgy, oil and 
gas, and nuclear energy industries. The main focus of this case study is its work for the 
nuclear energy industry, which is based at the Izhorskie Zavody plant in St Petersburg. 
However, it will occasionally touch on OMZs other main asset, the giant Yekaterinburg-
based factory complex Uralmashzavod, which was in Soviet times called the factory of 
factories because most of the metallurgical and mining plants in the country were built with 
equipment made there (Colton, 2008, p. 54).  
OMZ was founded in 1998 by Kakha Bendukidze. An ethnic Georgian who had moved to 
Moscow in 1977 at the age of 21, he had trained and worked as a biologist until 1987, when 
he first went into business (European Stability Initiative, 2010). In 1993, companies he 
controlled participated in the privatisation of Uralmashzavod, acquiring sufficient shares to 
gain control over what was a highly dispersed set of other shareholders. Bendukidze boasted 
that he had bought Uralmashzavod for one thousandth of its real worth (Freeland, 1995). By 
his account, he and his partners had been the only serious contenders to appear at the 
privatisation auction. 
In 1998, Uralmashzavod acquired Izhorskie Zavody through a share-swap (Thornhill, 1998). 
Bendukidze noted that Izhorskie Zavodys technology was more advanced, but that its market 
capitalisation was only half that of Uralmashzavod because it had been less open to investors.  
 Obedinennye Mashinostroitelnye Zavody, which the company renders in English as United 
Heavy Machinery. 
OMZ was created in the same year as parent company to these two major enterprises. It was 
an early convert to the idea of attracting Western finance. By late 2001 it had listed American 
Depositary Receipts (ADRs) on the New York Stock Exchange, had become the first 
engineering company in Russia to publish GAAP accounts, and was described by one 
investment bank analyst as one of the most open companies on the Russian market (Clark, 
2001). 
In November 2003, OMZ gained control over Atomstroieksport, Russias general contractor 
for the construction of nuclear power stations abroad, which had until that point been state-
owned since its creation in 1998. This event, which is the starting-point for the present case 
study, triggered the coercive campaign to bring Atomstroieksport back into state ownership. 
However, as will be shown below, some analysts believe it was additionally what persuaded 
the state to go further and bring OMZ itself under state control. In both of these state-led 
takeovers, the buyers were closely related, if not the same. Furthermore, the way they 
designed the particular ownership outcome of the Atomstroieksport takeover holds the key to 
explaining the outcome in their later acquisition of OMZ. For all of these reasons, the 
takeover of Atomstroieksport is included as a complementary case study in this chapter.  
As in chapters 2 and 3, the case studies here have two objectives: firstly, to provide causal 
explanations for the takeovers which assess the motivations of the buyers and of the state, and 
secondly, to explain the outcome of those takeovers in terms of their new ownership status. 
Before explaining the motivations of the buyers, it is necessary to understand precisely who 
these buyers were and to what extent their actions reflected the will of the state (or of a 
particular group within the political leadership). The research outlined below established the 
identity of the buyers and found that they were effectively the same in both cases. But arriving 
at this conclusion was not a straightforward task for either case. Both acquisitions were 
carried out in a non-transparent way, with the buyers admitting to their involvement only 
some time after the transaction had taken place. Gazprombank, which was at the time a direct 
subsidiary of de facto state-controlled Gazprom, declared itself to be the new controlling 
shareholder of Atomstroieksport in November 2004, but there are indications that it did not 
make the purchase directly. In this regard, the OMZ takeover is more extreme: precisely who 
was behind the entities which bought the controlling stake in November 2005 was never 
disclosed
. But there is sufficient evidence in the public domain to come to a confident 
conclusion about who the new beneficial owners were, to glean a significant amount about 
how they structured the acquisition, and to understand why it was done in this way.  
Because the identity of the buyers is not self-evident, the present chapter departs from the 
structure of its two predecessors by tackling this question before examining the motivations 
behind the takeovers. The ownership outcome at OMZ is particularly difficult to categorise on 
a scale ranging from state ownership to private ownership. It involved a non-state 
pension fund that was (despite this potentially misleading term) affiliated to state-controlled 
Gazprom. Managing OMZ on behalf of the pension fund was a group of senior managers of 
Gazprombank, which was at the time still a subsidiary of Gazprom. But both the pension fund 
and the bank would soon cease to be part of Gazprom group and hence to be subject to any 
formal (but indirect) state control. Furthermore, there are indications that this process was 
already underway at the time of the OMZ acquisition. As will be explained below, some 
analysts see the pension fund and its assets as having been privatised in favour of a group of 
businessmen who have strong informal ties to President Vladimir Putin. However, in the 
present chapter it is argued that the pension fund and its assets (including OMZ) remained 
under the control of the Gazprom group. Hence, both Atomstroieksport and OMZ had been 
placed under a form of state control following the takeover, albeit this control was tenuous 
from a formal perspective in the case of OMZ. 
The next section seeks to understand the motivations of the buyers in the two takeovers, and 
how this related to the governments own plans for the sector. In Chapter 2, it was argued that 
 Correct as of this writing. 
the state instigated the three coercive takeovers in the oil industry without a specific 
ownership outcome in mind: either state ownership or transfer to a new private owner was 
acceptable, provided that the existing owners were deprived of their assets, thereby removing 
the political threat that they posed. In Chapter 3, however, the states goal was clearly to 
restore Gazproms control over its lost assets. Similarly in the cases of Atomstroieksport and 
OMZ, there is evidence that the state actors who instigated the takeovers intended the 
Gazprom group to be the new controlling beneficiary, at least for an interim period. 
Consequently, understanding the motivations of the buyers (and their backers in government) 
plays an important role in answering both why the takeovers happened and their particular 
ownership outcome. The objective is to understand whether the buyers were seeking to profit 
from an opportunity created by the states intervention, whether they had arranged that 
intervention to increase company profits (or the personal wealth of company insiders), or 
whether they were instructed by the state to take ownership of the asset for primarily political 
(rather than commercial) reasons.  
The takeover of OMZ came just before the announcement of a massive programme to boost 
Russias nuclear energy production. OMZ stood to benefit substantially from government 
orders from this programme because Izhorskie Zavody was the only Russian plant capable of 
producing nuclear reactors.  Thus at first glance it seems that the OMZ acquisition was 
motivated primarily by profit: the buyers may well have been acting on insider information 
regarding the nuclear expansion and the role OMZ was set to play in it. However, decisions 
were taken subsequently by the new owners that suggest their pursuit of profit was sometimes 
at odds with the expectation that they play a role as tools of government policy. Most notably, 
when the promised turnaround in OMZs fortunes did not happen and doubts set in regarding 
its ability to continue as a going concern, OMZs buyers continued to provide financial 
support. It appears that the government, intent on retaining this important part of Russias 
remaining heavy engineering capability, put pressure on OMZs owners (who were also its 
main creditors) not to pull the plug on its operations. 
At the same time, however, OMZ failed to cooperate productively with the Federal Agency 
for Nuclear Energy (Rosatom), the government body responsible for the nuclear expansion 
programme and the gatekeeper for all government orders stemming from that programme. Not 
only was this failure a significant contributor to OMZs financial problems, it also undermined 
the implementation of the governments nuclear energy strategy. Thus we see the same 
business actors on the one hand keeping ailing industrial enterprises alive on behalf of the 
government and at the expense of their own profits, yet on the other hand letting their 
corporate self-interest undermine an important facet of government industrial policy. This 
puzzle demands an explanation both from the perspective of the motivations of OMZs 
buyers, and from that of the state, which failed to use its influence to ensure OMZ and 
Rosatom cooperated effectively. 
As in the previous chapter, questions also arise from the precise way in which the acquisitions 
were structured, and (in the case of OMZ in particular) why this was done in an atmosphere of 
secrecy. Once again, legal considerations prove to have played the main role in determining 
these specific ownership structures and the secrecy surrounding them. In the previous chapter 
the buyers found innovative ways around the need for prior approval from the Gazprom board 
of directors (and hence also for the government directive) before the takeover could proceed. 
But in the takeovers of the present chapter, which took place slightly later, the main obstacle 
was the need to gain prior approval from a newly-empowered and somewhat hostile antitrust 
regulator. Thus once again, evidence is provided that powerful state-backed corporate players, 
who are able to benefit from various types of administrative resource including state 
coercion in support of takeovers and influence over the outcomes of court cases, are at the 
same time paying attention to mundane laws relating to the establishment of a market 
economy. At the same time, however, there were occasions where Gazprom simply ignored 
the same institutions that were supposed to be constraining their behaviour. The chapter ends 
with a discussion of whether the sanctions that were available to the antitrust body, and its 
willingness to use them against Gazprom group, are sufficient to explain Gazproms partial 
compliance with the relevant law. 
Government strategy and nuclear engineering 
As noted above, the focus of this case study is on OMZs engineering operations for the 
nuclear energy industry, based at Izhorskie Zavody in St Petersburg. As Russias general 
contractor in the construction of nuclear power stations abroad, Atomstroieksport was the 
gateway for all OMZs export orders in this area. Before turning to what triggered the 
coercive takeovers at Atomstroieksport and OMZ, it is necessary to understand the Russian 
governments strategic thinking at the time regarding heavy engineering and nuclear energy. 
Government strategy for heavy engineering was not given published documentary form until 
2010, when the Ministry for Industry and Trade approved the Strategy for the Development 
of Heavy Engineering for the period to 2020 (Minpromtorga Rossii, 2010)
. Izhorskie 
Zavody was discussed in the document, but its main focus was on the non-nuclear side of 
Russias heavy engineering industry, which was the main focus of OMZs other main 
enterprise, Uralmashzavod. The document noted that although this industry provided just 
1.2% of GDP in 2009, its clients (the oil and gas, mining and metals industries) provided over 
80% of budget revenues, and were responsible for 81% of exports. Around two-thirds of the 
costs in these industries were from the purchase, servicing and use of heavy equipment. There 
were very few heavy engineering companies on the world market, as well as on the Russian 
market, and the government feared that the complete degradation of Russian heavy 
 This document was approved several years after the main events discussed in this chapter, and 
government strategy may have changed somewhat in the intervening period. However, it retains some 
value in providing an indication of the governments preoccupations at the time of the takeovers. 
engineering would lead to an increase of tens of percentage points in the costs of acquiring 
and servicing fixed assets for the raw materials industries (Minpromtorga Rossii, 2010, p. 3). 
These remarks highlight the governments preoccupation with technological sovereignty 
and industrial self-sufficiency, and provide some rationale for it. They illustrate the 
governments particular interest in preventing the total collapse of the heavy engineering 
industry, which helps to explain why it was not prepared to maintain a laissez faire attitude 
when it came to the fate of OMZ.  
Of more direct relevance to the coercive takeover at OMZ was a government strategy that was 
announced in January 2006 by Rosatom head Sergei Kirienko. This was a dramatic scaling up 
of existing plans to increase the countrys nuclear energy production, so that 40 new 
generating units would be built over the next 25 years at an estimated cost of $60bn. 
Additionally, and of direct relevance to Atomstroieksport, Kirienko said that he anticipated 
Russia building another 40-60 generating units abroad (Nikolskii, 2006)
. Kirienkos 
announcement was followed by the approval in October 2006 of the Federal Target Plan 
(FTP) named Development of the nuclear energy industrial complex of Russia for 2007-2010 
and towards 2015 (Federalnaya tselevaya programma Razvitie atomnogo 
energopromyshlennogo kompleksa Rossii na 2007-2010 gody i na perspektivu do 2015 
goda, 2006). This plan envisaged beginning the construction of two new nuclear generating 
units per year (with construction taking five years). Ten new units would be completed by 
2015, and by 2020 32 units would either be completed or under construction (Kto investiruet, 
tot i vyigryvaet, 2009)
 Each generating unit was based around a nuclear reactor, and there was typically more than one unit 
at a given nuclear power station. At the time of Kirienkos announcement there were 31 generating 
units operating at Russias 10 nuclear power stations.  On average, each generating unit had capacity of 
0.75 GW (Alekseev, 2006). 
 The scale of the expansion under the FTP was reduced in June 2010 owing to the financial crisis 
(Pravitelstvo RF utverdilo korrektirovku Generalnoi skhemy razmeshcheniya obektov 
elektroenergetiki do 2020 goda s perspektivoi do 2030 goda, 2010). However, it remained the case (as 
A key reason given by the FTP document for the nuclear expansion was to bolster the 
countrys energy security by improving the diversity of fuel sources. The document cited 
years of underinvestment in nuclear energy and rising energy demand in Russia and globally, 
thus raising concerns regarding the possibility of a large-scale energy crisis, which would be 
systemic in nature. High world oil prices threatened to inflate domestic gas prices and 
undermine plans to meet Russias energy demand through the construction of new gas-fired 
power stations. Furthermore, increasing the share of nuclear energy in Russias energy 
balance would help it meet its carbon emission commitments under the Kyoto Protocol. But in 
addition to increasing the share of nuclear energy production inside Russia, the FTPs goals 
included promoting exports of Russian companies involved in the nuclear energy cycle, and 
the construction of nuclear power stations abroad. 
The FTP made no mention of the need to use Russian equipment as far as possible in the 
construction of the new generating capacity, but it is clear from what followed that there was a 
determination to source the equipment for the new nuclear reactors domestically, rather than 
from abroad
. The governments preoccupation with saving Russias heavy engineering 
from collapse helps to explain why, on the contrary, it was hoped that the state-funded nuclear 
expansion would provide a stable flow of orders to Russias heavy engineering enterprises, 
which could borrow against these future orders to finance their own modernisation 
(Pushkarskaya & Kornysheva, 2006; Yemelyanenkov, 2006). Another consideration was 
energy security: as OMZs CEO Igor Sorochan put it in 2010, How could the state plan a 
large-scale programme for development of nuclear energy if the creation of new reactors 
didnt depend on domestic production but instead depended on foreign supplies? What kind of 
energy security could we talk about then? (Osin, 2010). There were also technical problems 
of this writing) that there would be considerable new nuclear generating capacity built in the next two 
decades, and the determination remained to use domestic engineering capacities as far as possible. 
 As will be discussed later, when Rosatom encountered problems in its dealings with Izhorskie 
Zavody, it went to great lengths to find an alternative supplier of reactors inside the country. The 
possibility of overcoming Izhorskie Zavodys monopoly by sourcing reactors abroad was apparently 
never seriously considered. 
involved in trying to introduce imported components in the construction of new reactors, 
according to Izhorskie Zavodys CEO (Imamutdinov, 2006).   
This determination to rely on Russias domestic industry in the nuclear expansion programme 
placed OMZs St Petersburg plant Izhorskie Zavody at centre stage, because (as noted above) 
it was the only Russian factory capable at the time of producing nuclear reactors and certain 
other equipment for the new generating units. It was therefore essential to the fulfilment of the 
FTP, giving the government a key reason to be interested in its fate. 
Triggers for the takeovers 
OMZs takeover of Atomstroieksport 
In November 2003, OMZ gained sufficient shares to wield control over Atomstroieksport, and 
Bendukidze took over as its CEO (Lemeshko, 2003b)
. As noted above, this event served as 
the first main trigger of the state-led coercive takeovers which followed. The company had 
until that point been majority-owned by state-owned companies subordinate to what was then 
the Ministry for Atomic Energy (Minatom)
. As Russias sole general contractor for the 
construction of nuclear power stations abroad, it was the exclusive gateway to international 
orders not just for Izhorskie Zavody but for other Russian companies involved in nuclear 
engineering -  in particular Silovye Mashiny, a heavy engineering company owned by the 
Interros group. The economist Yakov Pappe later commented that When Kakha bought 
Atomstroieksport, I said: thats the end. No-one is going to allow Bendukidze to manage the 
 Atomstroieksport had had been founded in 1998 by two state-controlled entities, one a joint-stock 
company named Atomenergoeksport (49%) and the other a state unitary enterprise named 
Zarubezhatomenergostroi (51%). OMZ acquired a 19.9% stake in Atomenergoeksport, whose 
remaining shares were widely dispersed among its managers and employees. Thus OMZs small stake 
was sufficient for control over Atomenergoeksport, and hence gave it control of the 49% stake in 
Atomstroieksport. Subsequently Atomenergoeksport gained a small number of additional shares in 
Atomstroieksport, making it the controlling shareholder (Lemeshko, 2003b). 
 In March 2004, Minatom was deprived of its ministerial status and supervision of the nuclear 
industry was handed to the Federal Agency for Nuclear Energy (Rosatom). The Minister in charge at 
Minatom, Aleksandr Rumyantsev, continued as head of Rosatom until his replacement in November 
2005 (see below).  
nuclear industry (Kozyrev, 2008). There was understandable concern that Atomstroieksport 
would now favour OMZs bids for its contracts over those from its competitors (Lemeshko, 
2003a). But Minatom was also concerned that Atomstroieksports export contracts, which 
involved Russian state guarantees, would be threatened by the companys new privately-
owned status (Rybalchenko & Kornysheva, 2003). It later emerged that the Chinese 
government had demanded an explanation as to why the Russian state was acting as guarantor 
for the construction of a nuclear power station at Tianwan, when the general contractor for the 
work was now privately-owned. This question was raised at the highest diplomatic level 
(Kozyrev, 2008)
OMZ claimed that it was prepared to sell shares in Atomstroieksport back to state-owned 
companies and to Atomstroieksports other key partners. Bendukidze agreed that some kind of 
state involvement in the companys management was necessary in order to simplify its work 
on international markets. But at the same time he criticised what he saw as Minatoms two 
diametrically opposing attitudes to ownership in the sector: one allows private capital to take 
part in the management of nuclear energy, and the other opposes it (Rybalchenko & 
Kornysheva, 2003).  
By November 2003 Minatom was reported to be in talks with OMZ on regaining state control 
of Atomstroieksport, but so far without success (Rybalchenko & Kornysheva, 2003). In 
December, it emerged that agreement had been reached in principle on OMZ selling shares in 
Atomstroieksport to one or more unspecified state-owned companies as well as to Silovye 
Mashiny and privately-owned Alfa Bank. The state would be the largest single shareholder, 
but control was expected to be exercised by an alliance of Silovye Mashiny and OMZ. 
Minatom was now sounding conciliatory, saying that our position is not so strict, there is no 
 In an April 2004 interview Yevgeny Yakovlev, then CEO of OMZ, made reference to Chinas 
concerns over the loss of state control over Atomstroieksport (Lemeshko, 2004a). 
serious conflict with OMZ. Ultimately, we both have the same goal: developing the business 
(Lemeshko, 2003c; Yambaeva, 2003).  
On 18 December 2003 it became clear that the sale of Atomstroieksport shares to Silovye 
Mashiny was part of a wider plan: OMZ and Silovye Mashiny had agreed on a merger (Jack, 
2003). This entailed the takeover of Silovye Mashiny by OMZ, with Silovye Mashinys main 
owner Interros taking a 50% stake in OMZ. But executive management of OMZ was to be 
transferred to Interros, with Bendukidze moving from CEO to Chairman. The merger began to 
be implemented long before its completion, with Silovye Mashinys CEO Yevgeny Yakovlev 
taking the helm at OMZ in March 2004 (Dobrov, 2004). 
It appears that Minatoms fears for Atomstroieksport were allayed by the prospect of this 
merger. In an April 2004 interview, OMZs new CEO revealed that his company and Silovye 
Mashiny had reached agreement with the government on the issue of restoring state control 
over Atomstroieksport. The change of government in March 2004 (with Prime Minister 
Mikhail Kasyanov dismissed in part over his stance on the Yukos affair) meant that the 
companies needed to secure fresh agreement on this plan from the incoming government led 
by Mikhail Fradkov. Yakovlev said OMZ was planning to resume the dialogue once the 
situation regarding the composition of the new government had stabilised (Lemeshko, 2004a). 
Bendukidze joins the Georgian government 
On 1 June 2004 it emerged that Bendukidze was resigning his post as Chairman of OMZ and 
joining the government of Mikheil Saakashvili, who had recently been elected President of 
Bendukidzes native Georgia (Russian tycoon to reform Georgia, 2004). 
From a formal point of view, Bendukidze could not influence affairs at OMZ or 
Atomstroieksport while he held his new post: Georgian legislation meant he had to place his 
OMZ shares in trust and give up any management role (Lemeshko, 2004c). This technicality 
might not have done much to allay the Russian governments concerns. However, 
Bendukidzes government appointment cannot have been the trigger for the state-led takeover 
of Atomstroieksport, because efforts to regain state control of that company pre-date the 
appointment. Furthermore, the appointment was a relatively spur-of-the-moment decision 
both on the Georgian governments part and on Bendukidzes, thus ruling out the possibility 
that the Kremlin knew about it when it began taking steps to restore state control of 
Atomstroieksport
The offer to join the Georgian government came while Bendukidze was already contemplating 
an exit from most or all of his Russian business activities. It was being suggested that he 
might return to academia (Dobrov, 2004), and it was later claimed that he had been planning 
to retire to the south of France at this time (Peel, 2007). Therefore it would also be wrong to 
suggest that Bendukidzes decision to quit ownership of Atomstroieksport and OMZ was 
entirely in response to pressure from the Russian political leadership after it learned of his 
appointment to the Georgian government. 
Nevertheless, the Russian government was undoubtedly concerned about the appointment, and 
this was compounded when the OMZ-Silovye Mashiny merger hit the rocks a few weeks 
later: in July 2004 it became clear that it would not proceed (Lemeshko, 2004b)
. The 
mergers unwinding meant that Atomstroieksport was back under the control of Bendukidze 
rather than Interros, even if he was formally prevented from exercising that control. There was 
no longer a plan in place to bring Atomstroieksport back under state control, and these efforts 
 The offer from the Georgian side came from Prime Minster Zurab Zhvania on 29 May 2004 at a 
Russian-Georgian business forum in Tbilisi. Bendukidze took only the weekend to make up his mind. 
Putin was informed after the fact, in a telephone call from Saakashvili which was apparently made at 
Bendukidzes insistence. According to Saakashvili, Putin was somewhat caught off guard by the news 
but did not raise any objections (Bekker, Nikolskii, & Ivanov, 2004; Bekker, 2004; Borozdina, 
Sharipova, Biyanova, & Davydova, 2004; Korop & Ratiani, 2004). 
 The most credible explanation for the failure of the merger is that Bendukidze was not happy with 
the fact Silovye Mashinys owners Interros had been holding separate talks on selling the merged 
company to German firm Siemens. The specific bone of contention was Interross insistence that the 
OMZ company charter be changed to allow it to sell a stake to Siemens without offering it first to 
OMZs other shareholders (Ponomarev, 2004). The Siemens deal later also foundered, because of 
Russian government concerns over a foreign company gaining control of enterprises that formed part of 
the countrys military-industrial complex (Borisov, 2005; Siemens zavershil prodazhu blokpaketa 
Silovykh mashin A. Mordashovu, 2011). 
needed to begin again from scratch. According to one of the participants in the talks which led 
to the sale of Atomstroieksport to Gazprombank, these talks began immediately following the 
collapse of the OMZ-Silovye Mashiny merger (Lemeshko & Petrova, 2004). Within less than 
four months, state control had been restored: in October 2004, OMZ sold its stake in 
Atomstroieksport to de facto state-controlled Gazprombank (Lemeshko & Petrova, 2004).  
If the states only goal had been to restore state control over Atomstroieksport, there would 
have been no need for the subsequent takeover of OMZ. Pappe and Galukhina claim, 
however, that Bendukidzes takeover of Atomstroieksport made up the minds of the 
government to bring not only the core, but also the periphery of the nuclear energy complex 
back under state control (Pappe & Galukhina, 2009, p. 174). Whether or not that is correct, the 
failure of the OMZ-Silovye Mashiny merger and Bendukidzes joining the Georgian 
government no doubt provided additional reasons for the Russian state to pursue the takeover 
of OMZ, given its importance to the heavy engineering industry. Not only was it now in 
foreign hands, it was in poor shape as a stand-alone business after the failure of the merger 
with Silovye Mashiny. It had narrowly avoided defaulting on its debts in 2004 (Vinkov, 
2006), and in advance of the merger Bendukidze had sold off many of its non-nuclear assets 
including its most profitable shipbuilding enterprises (Kudryashov, 2005). 
Takeover tactics: the use of state coercion 
Bendukidze has claimed that both companies were sold on his own initiative, in response to 
what he perceived to be a generally negative business climate in Russia rather than any 
specific actions that the state might have taken against him or his business. He was also 
claiming to be quite content with the amount of money he received for OMZ
. If this were 
 Written communication from Bendukidze to the author, May 2012. See also Kotin (2005), in which 
Bendukidze claims that he decided to sell OMZ because he was tired of being engaged in the same line 
of business for ten years, and had always intended to sell the business on at a profit; and Yegorova et al 
(2005), in which the political analyst Stanislav Belkovsky claims that Bendukidze had been wanting for 
the whole story, then neither Atomstroieksport nor OMZ would constitute bona fide cases for 
the current project because they would not constitute coercive takeovers. However, there is 
sufficient evidence that the state used various coercive tactics in order to encourage the 
takeovers to happen. These tactics continued after Atomstroieksport was safely returned to 
state control; the last form of pressure was dropped only after Bendukidze had sold OMZ. 
In chapter 3, the concept of the state-led coercive takeover was broken down into various 
tactics used by the state that are more or less clearly coercive in nature. These are (in 
ascending order in terms of their coercive nature): negotiations and/or purchase of stake to 
regain control; economic embargo; non-law enforcement investigations; civil court cases 
(including bankruptcy); searches by prosecutors; and criminal cases. Using these categories as 
a framework, the coercive tactics used by the state around the Atomstroieksport and OMZ 
takeovers were as follows: 
 Economic embargo: soon after OMZs takeover of Atomstroieksport in November 
2003, sources at Minatom were discussing the possibility of an economic embargo of 
the company. The company operated under contracts signed by Ministerial decrees, 
and in principle Minatom could have issued new decrees handing these contracts to 
other parties. This was unlikely in practice because it would have entailed altering 
inter-governmental agreements  a lengthy process which would have damaged 
Russias international reputation (Silin, 2003). 
 Non-law enforcement investigations: in May 2004 (i.e. while the OMZ-Silovye 
Mashiny merger was still thought to be in process but while OMZ was still seeking to 
reach agreement with the new government on returning state control of 
Atomstroieksport) the Control and Intelligence Agency of Russias Presidential 
Administration reportedly carried out an investigation of Atomstroieksport and found 
a long time to quit his business interests in Russia to concentrate on his business activities in Georgia, 
where he intended to become Prime Minister. 
numerous violations. These formed the basis for investigations by the Audit Chamber 
which continued after the restoration of state control. The Audit Chamber 
investigation was based on allegations that the companys managers were responsible 
for financial violations worth RUB 665m (around $22m) in relation to its fulfilment 
of the programme to build Irans Bushehr nuclear power station (Latynina, 2005; 
Perekrest & Spirin, 2005). In January 2006, i.e. two months after Bendukidze had sold 
OMZ, the Audit Chamber announced that this matter was closed (Granik, 2006). 
 Searches by prosecutors: According to Kozyrev (2008), OMZs head office was 
searched by unspecified law-enforcement officers after the inspection of 
Atomstroieksport by the Control and Intelligence Agency
 Criminal cases: in December 2003, the Sverdlovsk regional division of the FSB 
opened a criminal case relating to suspicions that commercial secrets were being sold 
by an employee at Uralmashzavod. This was announced on the same day as the news 
that OMZ was to merge with Silovye Mashiny. A spokesman said that normally the 
FSB would not get involved in such matters, but we have found indications of 
espionage activity at the factory (FSB nashla shpionov na Uralmashe, 2003). 
According to Kozyrev (2008), there was also a criminal case opened on the basis of 
the alleged financial violations at Atomstroieksport
Bendukidzes claim to have sold the two companies voluntarily is in fact contradicted by 
some other statements he has made. In a 2008 interview, he denied that he had been forced to 
sell OMZ at a below-market price, but he also commented on his decision to sell that there is 
no point spitting against the wind. Apparently in the context of the states negative reaction 
 This claim could not be corroborated elsewhere. In a written communication with the author, 
Bendukidze said that he was unable to confirm or deny the search of OMZs offices, explaining that by 
this time he had no involvement in the companys management so would not necessarily have known 
about such an event. Although he no longer had any formal role, it seems unlikely that the companys 
largest beneficial owner would not have been informed by the management of a police search of the 
head office. 
 Again, Kozyrevs claim has not been corroborated elsewhere. 
to OMZs gaining control of Atomstroieksport, he commented I didnt think about that  it 
was my mistake
 (Kozyrev, 2008). 
Reportedly, Bendukidze received a harsh offer [zhestkoe predlozhenie] of just $10m for 
OMZ (as against its market value at the time of $77m) several months prior to the November 
2005 sale. Such a low amount would suggest that the bidder believed Bendukidze had no 
choice but to sell. Granted, in the intervening period Bendukidze had been able to negotiate 
this upwards, and the final sale price was thought to be somewhere between $50m and $70m, 
which a source in a rival heavy engineering company commented was definitely below 
market price (Kudryashov, 2005; Yambaeva, Grib, & Belikov, 2005)
. The investment 
bank UFG, which acted as organiser and settlement agent for the transaction, said it had been 
organised in a hurry, while stressing that it had been a market transaction (Yambaeva et al., 
2005). There are several possible reasons for this hurry: for example, Bendukidze might have 
needed to raise the cash from the sale for other purposes. But it is quite likely that whoever 
was responsible for the coercive tactics had imposed a deadline on his exit from OMZ.  
Thus there would seem to be sufficient evidence to categorise both Atomstroieksport and 
OMZ as SLCTs. As with all of the cases discussed in the previous chapters save that of the 
Yukos affair, this was a negotiated takeover where the existing owner accepted the carrot-
and-stick offer provided by the state and the buyers. This was a more voluntary takeover 
than those other cases, because here the existing owner was already contemplating an exit. But 
the state was anxious to separate the assets from their existing owner and used a range of 
coercive tactics to ensure that this happened. Presumably because Bendukidze was in any case 
interested in selling, there are fewer indications than in the previous chapters that the existing 
 In Russian, moi nedochet. 
 OMZs buyers were not the only ones to make an offer. Rival bids came from ex-UES manager 
Mikhail Abyzov and Oleg Deripaska. In a written communication with the author, Bendukidze 
commented that the rival bids were far too low. It therefore seems likely that the negotiations swiftly 
focussed on the possible sale to the buyers represented by UFG. 
owner took steps to improve his negotiating position and prevent this becoming a case of full-
scale asset seizure by the state
Assessing the ownership outcome 
Before explaining the outcome of the two takeovers, it is necessary to understand precisely 
who the new buyers were, what their relationship was to the state (i.e. whether the SLCTs 
resulted in state ownership), and how they structured ownership of their new assets. 
Atomstroieksport 
Figures 7 and 8 show the ownership of Atomstroieksport before and after the SLCT. As 
Figure 8 indicates, the October 2004 sale of OMZs 54% stake in Atomstroieksport 
represented the restoration of state control that the government sought: the buyer, 
Gazprombank, was at this time a subsidiary of Gazprom, which was comfortably under the 
states de facto (but not yet de jure) control
 It has been argued that the OMZ merger with Silovye Mashiny was precisely such a step, based on 
the calculation that the superior political standing of the Interros group would protect OMZ from the 
Kremlins anger (Dobrov, 2004; Gotova, 2004; Moroz, 2003); however, this interpretation would 
appear to underestimate the importance of the commercial considerations behind the merger. 
 As discussed in Chapter 3, direct majority ownership of Gazprom was not achieved by the state until 
June 2005. 
Figure 7. Atomstroieksport ownership before SLCT
Controlling stake
. Atomstroieksport ownership before SLCT
Controlling stake 
Non-controlling stake 
. Atomstroieksport ownership before SLCT
. Atomstroieksport ownership before SLCT 
Figure 8. Atomstroieksport ownership after SLCT
Although the state now controlled Atomstroieksport vi
subordinate to Rosatom, 
meaning that that government body still had not restored control over a strategically import
company for the entire nuclear industry. 
Atomstroieksport transferred from Gazprombank to one of its own directly subordinate state
Controlling stake
. Atomstroieksport ownership after SLCT
Although the state now controlled Atomstroieksport vi
subordinate to Rosatom, 
meaning that that government body still had not restored control over a strategically import
company for the entire nuclear industry. 
Atomstroieksport transferred from Gazprombank to one of its own directly subordinate state
Controlling stake 
Non-controlling stake 
. Atomstroieksport ownership after SLCT
Although the state now controlled Atomstroieksport vi
subordinate to Rosatom, the federal agency which had replaced Minatom in March 2004, 
meaning that that government body still had not restored control over a strategically import
company for the entire nuclear industry. 
Atomstroieksport transferred from Gazprombank to one of its own directly subordinate state
. Atomstroieksport ownership after SLCT 
Although the state now controlled Atomstroieksport vi
the federal agency which had replaced Minatom in March 2004, 
meaning that that government body still had not restored control over a strategically import
company for the entire nuclear industry. Rosat
Atomstroieksport transferred from Gazprombank to one of its own directly subordinate state
Although the state now controlled Atomstroieksport via 
the federal agency which had replaced Minatom in March 2004, 
meaning that that government body still had not restored control over a strategically import
Rosatom was therefore keen to have control of 
Atomstroieksport transferred from Gazprombank to one of its own directly subordinate state
a Gazprombank
the federal agency which had replaced Minatom in March 2004, 
meaning that that government body still had not restored control over a strategically import
om was therefore keen to have control of 
Atomstroieksport transferred from Gazprombank to one of its own directly subordinate state
Gazprombank, the bank 
the federal agency which had replaced Minatom in March 2004, 
meaning that that government body still had not restored control over a strategically import
om was therefore keen to have control of 
Atomstroieksport transferred from Gazprombank to one of its own directly subordinate state
, the bank was not 
the federal agency which had replaced Minatom in March 2004, 
meaning that that government body still had not restored control over a strategically important 
om was therefore keen to have control of 
Atomstroieksport transferred from Gazprombank to one of its own directly subordinate state-
owned companies, namely TVEL or Tekhsnabeksport. Tellingly, in February 2006, Rosatom 
head Sergei Kirienko spoke of the need to return Atomstroieksport to state control, despite 
the fact that it was already controlled by the state via Gazprombank (Naumov, 2006). 
Like the subsequent takeover of OMZ, Gazprombanks acquisition of Atomstroieksport was a 
complex transaction that was carried out in an atmosphere of some secrecy. When it was 
completed on 7 October 2004, Gazprombank would not confirm this fact or its involvement: it 
merely acknowledged that it was interested in the asset (Lemeshko & Petrova, 2004). 
Atomstroieksport held an extraordinary general shareholders meeting (EGM) the following 
day so that the new shareholders could vote in a set of new directors (Yambaeva, 2004). The 
sale was confirmed on 15 October 2004 by a government official
, but still no comment was 
forthcoming from either Gazprombank, Gazprom, Atomstroieksport or Rosatom 
(Gazprombank poluchil kontrol nad ZAO Atomstroieksport, 2004). Gazprom groups 
first official acknowledgement came in November 2004, when it disclosed in a financial 
report that the group now held a 54% stake in Atomstroieksport (Makeev & Siluyanova, 
2004)
The object of the sale was a 54% stake in Atomstroieksport. The seller was OMZ-controlled 
Atomenergoeksport. Because of its legal form as a closed joint-stock company, 
Atomstroieksport was not obliged to disclose the precise identity of its new shareholders
The buyers were in fact not solely Gazprombank, but also a number of its subsidiaries 
(Grivach, 2005; Yambaeva, 2004). The reasons for Gazprombanks use of multiple buying 
entities, and for its refusal to acknowledge the transaction until later, will be explained below. 
 The head of the Federal Service for Environmental, Technical and Nuclear Monitoring, Andrei 
Malyshev. 
 OAO Gazprom, IFRS Consolidated Interim Condensed Financial Information (unaudited), 30 June 
2004, p. 20. Available at http://www.gazprom.com/f/posts/20/985450/4-
21ifrs_eng_6m04_151104_last.pdf, accessed 3 February 2014.  
 The Law on Joint-Stock Companies and the Law on the Securities Market place substantial 
disclosure requirements on open joint-stock companies and on those closed joint-stock companies 
which have carried out a public issue of securities (Atomstroieksport has not issued securities). For a 
good overview see Fatikhova (2012). 
Identity of the buyer 
Significantly greater secrecy surrounded the identity of the buyers in the November 2005 
takeover of OMZ. Presumably bound by a confidentiality agreement, Bendukidze 
subsequently maintained that he had no idea who the buyers were (Kozyrev, 2008)
OMZ was an open joint-stock company, which in theory obliged it to disclose details of any 
shareholders with a stake of 5% or greater. However, in its first quarterly report following the 
acquisition, OMZ stated that over 85% of its shares were in the hands of nominal shareholder 
companies. No other single entity held a stake of 5% or greater
. In separate Russian 
regulatory disclosures known as material events (sushchestvennye sobytiya), OMZ reported 
that three companies which jointly held 42.16% had exited as shareholders on 2 November 
. These were almost certainly the entities through which the sellers (Bendukidze and 
his partners) had held their 42.16% stake (Yambaeva et al., 2005)
. No disclosure was made 
of the identity of any new shareholders.  
While Atomstroieksports new owners had held an EGM the day after their acquisition so that 
they could replace the existing directors and take other steps to impose control, OMZs buyers 
omitted to do so, waiting instead for the routine AGM scheduled for June 2006 (Kiryan, 
2006; Vinkov, 2006). This delay was presented in some press articles as an indication that 
OMZs buyers were incompetent and/or unable to make coordinated decisions regarding what 
to do with their new asset. While (as discussed below) there is some corroborating evidence 
that the buyers did not have the required expertise to manage these industrial assets, it is 
almost certain that they chose not to call an EGM specifically because that would have risked 
 Confirmed as still being the case in Bendukidzes written communication with the author, May 
2012. 
 OAO OMZ, quarterly report (Russian) for Q4 2005, p. 100-1. 
 The names of these entities were Lernon Investments Limited (11.32%), Lotterby Limited (10.91%) 
and HKPI Promyshlennye Investory (19.93%). 
 Bendukidzes personal stake in OMZ was 25.93% (Yambaeva, Grib, & Belikov, 2005). 
revealing their identity
. Additionally, the company refused to disclose to its auditors the 
identity of its ultimate controlling party for the purposes of its annual consolidated financial 
statements, despite a requirement to do so for accounts conforming to International 
Accounting Standards (IAS)
A source close to the deal claimed soon after its announcement that it had been preceded by 
several months of talks in a close circle. Four people had taken part. Among them were 
senior managers of Gazprombank (Yambaeva et al., 2005). The press office of the 
Sverdlovsk regional administration (home to the Uralmashzavod factory) declared OMZs 
buyer to be Gazprombank  (Sverdlovskie vlasti vydali pokupatelya OMZ, 2005). This was 
the information that was conveyed to the regions Governor, Eduard Rossel, by the CEO of 
Uralmashzavod. The CEO was then promptly sacked by the new controlling shareholders 
because of the leak (Samedova, Tikhomirova, & Terletsky, 2005; V. Stepanova & Yambaeva, 
2005). Gazprombank insisted that it was not the buyer but was merely representing 
unspecified third-party investors (Vinkov, 2006; Yambaeva et al., 2005; Yegorova & 
Malkova, 2005). Only in February 2006 did it acknowledge that it was working with those 
investors, who had by this time consolidated a 75% stake (Gazprombank khochet sdelat 
OMZ nepublichnoi kompaniei, 2006). OMZs Chairman Aleksei Matveev reiterated in 
October 2006 that Gazprombank was not a shareholder in OMZ, but was a strategic financial 
partner, implying that it was providing long-term credit (Vinkov, 2006). 
 At the very least, the institutional affiliations of any new directors voted on to the board would have 
given a hint as to the identity of the new controlling beneficiaries. 
 IAS 24 Related party disclosures, which first came into force in 1986, states that the reporting entity 
shall disclose the name of its parent and, if different, the ultimate controlling party. See 
http://www.iasplus.com/en/standards/ias/ias24. In OMZs consolidated financial statements for the 
years 2006 through 2008, the auditors PwC noted this requirement, adding that it had not been able to 
establish whether there was an ultimate controlling party. For example, for the 2008 report PwCs 
wording was: The Company has not disclosed the name of its ultimate controlling party, if any [] It 
was impracticable to satisfy ourselves as to whether there was an ultimate controlling party []. The 
statements are available from www.omz.ru/eng/investors/statements/, accessed on 18 November 2013. 
The above naturally presents some difficulty when attempting to understand the ownership 
outcome and the relationship of the buyers to the state. However, with further investigation it 
is possible to determine with some confidence the true identity of the buyer. 
In April 2006, OMZ disclosed that an entity named Forpost-Management now held a 19.93% 
stake. Then in June 2006 Forpost applied to the Federal Antimonopoly Service (FAS) to 
increase its stake to 95%. This did not, however, end the secrecy as to who ultimately 
controlled OMZ. The FAS turned Forposts application down in May 2007 on the grounds 
that the information provided as to the size of its stake in OMZ was inaccurate, and no 
information had been supplied regarding the identity of its ultimate beneficiaries (Aliev, 2007; 
Malkova & Mazneva, 2007; Malkova, 2007a).  
A source close to OMZs shareholders later said that Forpost had informed the FAS in autumn 
2006 that its beneficial owner was an equities fund named Citadel, which had been founded 
by UFG and Gazprombank. The FAS objected to the fact that the identity of Citadels 
investors had not been disclosed; additionally, it had discovered that by December 2006, 
Forpost-Management already controlled a 44% stake in OMZ, which was sufficient to wield 
voting control at the company
. Therefore the information Forpost had provided in its 
application was no longer accurate, and it had proceeded to take control of OMZ without 
waiting for approval from the FAS (Belikov, 2007a). 
The ownership of OMZ as of December 2006 (just over one year after the acquisition from 
Bendukidze et al) is represented in Figure 9. 
 This was because a 12% stake in the company was held by its own subsidiaries. 
Figure 9. OMZ ownership as of December 2006 
(investor) 
(beneficiary) 
44% 31% 25% 
Forpost-
Management 
other investors 
represented by 
Gazprombank 
others incl. 
subsidiaries 
(12%) 
Gazprom 
STATE 
(including 
Rosneftegaz) 
Gazfond pension 
(see text) 
Citadel equities 
Controlling stake 
Non-controlling stake 
The mystery surrounding the identity of the buyers led to different theories being put forward 
in the media. It was suggested that they were individuals whose origins were deep inside the 
security services
; or that Gazprombank was indeed the buyer (despite its denials)
; or that 
the buyers were Gazprombank senior managers acting in an individual capacity
. It was later 
claimed that the purchase might have been made in the interests of the shareholders of St 
Petersburg-based Bank Rossiya, which (as will be discussed below) became the manager of a 
controlling stake in Gazprombank in 2007 (Kozyrev, 2008). 
Forpost-Managements board of directors was dominated by Gazprombank senior 
managers
. Its Chairman from 2007 was Farid Kantserov, a deputy CEO at Gazprombank 
and adviser to its CEO Andrei Akimov
. Another director was Sergei Ivanov, who had 
joined Gazprombank in 2004 initially as an aide to Akimov, and who joined Forposts board 
in 2008
. Ivanov was the son of the politician Sergei Ivanov, who was Deputy Prime 
Minister between 2005 and 2011, during some of which time (as will be explained in detail 
below) he had specific oversight of the heavy engineering and nuclear energy industries
the executive management side was Aleksandr Stepanov, who became an official aide to 
Akimov at Gazprombank in 2004, and retained this post when he also became deputy CEO at 
Forpost in 2006
. Forposts CEO in 2007, Vladimir Yurkov, was the former head of a 
subsidiary of Sibur (Malkova & Mazneva, 2007)
 e.g. Vinkov (2006). A similar claim had been made in Yambaeva (2004) regarding 
Atomstroieksports buyers. 
 e.g. Kiryan (2006); Mitrova & Pappe (2006, p. 83); Yegorova, Simakov & Malkova (2005). 
 e.g. Kornysheva, Yambaeva & Grib (2006); Yegorova & Malkova (2005). 
 Note that in February 2009, Gazprombank took formal ownership of Forpost-Management. If the 
presence of Gazprombank managers on Forposts board had only begun after this date, it would be 
entirely expected. But there is documentary evidence in OMZs disclosures that Gazprombank 
managers were already on Forposts board at least as early as 2007. 
 Source: OAO OMZ, quarterly report (Russian) for Q1 2012, pp. 98-99. 
 Source: OAO OMZ, quarterly report (Russian) for Q3 2009, p. 100. 
 At the time of writing, Sergei Ivanov senior is (since May 2012) head of Vladimir Putins 
presidential administration. 
 Source: OAO Kriogenmash, quarterly report (Russian) for Q2 2008. 
 For Siburs relationship to Gazprom, see Chapter 3. 
Despite this evidence and the fact that OMZs sale had been preceded by talks between 
Bendukidzes representatives and those of Gazprombank, the bank and its parent company 
Gazprom were at pains to stress that they were not affiliated with OMZs buyers (Yegorova & 
Malkova, 2005).  
Prior to the takeover, there was already a Gazprom-affiliated shareholder at OMZ, namely the 
pension fund Gazfond. It had begun buying OMZ shares on the open market at the end of 
2002, and had built up a 15% stake by 2004. This was originally thought to be a short-term 
portfolio investment, but the opinions of investment bank analysts began to diverge on this 
issue as the Gazfond stake increased (Seregin, 2004).  
By examining some later transactions, it is possible to establish with some confidence that 
Gazfond was the beneficial owner behind the OMZ takeover. The first such transaction came 
in April 2007, when Gazfond acquired a controlling stake in Gazprombank (Grib & Chaikina, 
2006; Moiseev, Grib, Chaikina, & Gosteva, 2007). Then in April 2009, Gazprombank became 
the direct owner of Forpost-Management, thereby becoming OMZs controlling beneficiary. 
Gazprombank was still majority-controlled by Gazfond at this time, making Gazfond the 
ultimate controlling owner of OMZ. Crucially, the OMZ board of directors did not change in 
the weeks and months following Gazprombanks purchase of Forpost
. As noted above, new 
owners will normally seek to exert control as soon as possible over their purchase, including 
by electing their own representatives to the board (typically at an EGM called for that 
purpose). That this was not done at OMZ provides a strong indication that beneficial 
ownership of OMZ had not changed in any significant way despite Gazprombanks purchase 
of OMZs controlling shareholder. It follows that Gazfond was already Forposts beneficial 
owner prior to the February 2009 transaction. 
 Source: OMZs quarterly reports (in Russian) for Q4 2008, Q1 2009, Q2 2009 and Q3 2009. 
Similarly, when the OMZ shares which were bought from Bendukidze and his associates were 
transferred from the original buying entities to the balance sheet of Forpost in 2006, it was 
understood that this was a purely technical transaction that made no difference to the ultimate 
beneficial ownership of those OMZ shares (Belikov, 2007a). This impression is reinforced by 
the fact that the FAS had in May 2007 established that Forposts OMZ stake in December 
2006 was 44% (scarcely above the 42% sold by Bendukidze and other OMZ senior managers 
in November 2005) (Malkova, 2007a). In other words, whoever had been behind the original 
buyers from Bendukidze in November 2005 were still the ultimate owners of the OMZ shares 
at the end of 2006, and were most likely still the owners in 2009 (when the sale of OMZ to a 
company owned by Gazfond apparently made no change to OMZs ultimate beneficial 
ownership). Gazfond was, therefore, the ultimate controlling owner from November 2005 
onwards. Precisely how it had structured the initial acquisition in November 2005 is not 
known, but it is possible to deduce that when Forpost Management took over the controlling 
stake in OMZ in June 2006, it was Gazfond that was the investor behind Forposts parent 
entity, the Citadel equities fund. 
A state or private ownership outcome? Gazfonds relationship to the state 
Gazfond was a non-state (negosudarstvennyi) pension fund. This term referred not to its 
being ultimately owned by a private entity, but rather to the fact that it offered pension 
provision outside of the state pension system. In fact, Gazfond was effectively a state-
controlled entity at the time of the OMZ takeover in November 2005. Founded in 1994 by 
Gazprom and various subsidiaries including Gazprombank, its original goal was to provide 
social protection for retired gas industry employees (O fonde, 2014)
As a non-state pension fund, Gazfond was classed as a non-commercial organisation, which 
meant that by law it had no owners (only founders [in Russian: uchrediteli]) (Minfin 
 In 2008 it became an open pension fund which could accept contributions from any individual or 
company (Mazunin, 2008). 
obyazhet negosudarstvennye pensionnye fondy naiti sebe vladeltsev, 2013; Zubova, 2013). 
Former deputy Energy Minister Vladimir Milov in 2004 described it as an entity that was 
affiliated with Gazprom without formally being part of the group (Miledin & Reznik, 2004). 
But Milov was mistaken: Gazfond was until 2007 still being listed by Gazprom (by this time a 
majority state-controlled entity) as part of the latters group of companies, both in its financial 
reports to international accounting standards (IAS)
 and in its obligatory disclosures to the 
Russian financial regulator
However, Gazfond began to move away from Gazproms control soon afterwards. Its 
financial resources had been under trust management by a company named ZAO Lider, which 
was 96%-owned by Gazfond (Rozhkov, Reznik, Baraulina, & Myazina, 2006). But in April 
2006, ZAO Lider was sold to a subsidiary of the St Petersburg-based, privately-owned Bank 
Rossiya, whose owners were reported to be close personal friends of Vladimir Putin (Kozyrev 
& Sokolova, 2008). Gazfonds charter stated that the trust manager (i.e. Lider) had exclusive 
rights over the disposal of the assets invested in the fund: the pension funds founders, i.e. 
Gazprom and its subsidiaries, had no such rights (Kozyrev & Sokolova, 2008). Thus the sale 
of Lider began to cast doubt on whether Gazfonds resources were really under Gazproms 
(and thus the states) control.  
In fact there are indications that Bank Rossiya had already gained considerable influence over 
ZAO Lider by the time of the OMZ purchase. At the beginning of 2003, Bank Rossiyas CEO 
had said that Gazfond was one of its principal clients. Then in the middle of that year, Yury 
Shamalov, the son of one of Bank Rossiyas main shareholders Nikolai Shamalov, became 
 e.g. Gazprom, Financial Report 2005 (in English), p. 76. Gazfond was here listed as a wholly-owned 
subsidiary of Gazprom. Arguably this was an error, given that Gazfond had no legal owners. In 2007, 
Gazprom explained why it had to date included Gazfond as a member of the group: this had been done 
primarily due to the fact that the Group management exhibited control over the financial and 
investment decisions of NPF Gazfund (Gazprom, Financial Report 2007, p. 86). 
 e.g. OAO Gazprom, List of Affiliated Entities (Spisok affilirivannykh lits) as of 31 December 
2005. Gazfond is listed as an affiliated entity of Gazprom on page 32 of this document, on the basis that 
it belongs to the Gazprom group of companies. 
President of Gazfond  (Rozhkov et al., 2006)
. In 2004, Bank Rossiya bought from Gazprom 
a majority stake in the Sogaz insurance company (Miledin, Myazina, & Kudinov, 2004; 
Miledin, Shcherbakova, & Petrova, 2005; Miledin & Reznik, 2004). Sogaz was the entity 
through which Bank Rossiya gained control of ZAO Lider in April 2006. 
In 2007, Gazfond became as Milov had earlier described: an entity that was de jure no longer 
part of the Gazprom group. On 1 February, the law was changed for Gazfond and other non-
state pension funds, which meant that it was no longer appropriate to include them among the 
affiliated entities of their founders. Gazprom decided accordingly not to include Gazfond in its 
future consolidated accounts to IAS
An extremely vexed question is whether the de jure removal of Gazfond from the Gazprom 
group of companies constituted any real loss of control on Gazproms part, and thus whether it 
meant Gazfond and its assets were no longer subject to any formal state control. It has been 
claimed that Gazfond effectively became an extension of the business empire of privately-
owned Bank Rossiya, though it was acknowledged that it was a weak link in that empire 
because Bank Rossiya only owned the company which managed Gazfonds resources under 
contract (Milov, 2012). Gazfond reserved the right in theory to cancel its contract and appoint 
a new trust manager, whereupon Bank Rossiya would lose all access to Gazfonds assets 
including OMZ. This always looked unlikely to happen in practice, because Gazfonds 
President was still Yury Shamalov, the son of one of Bank Rossiyas major shareholders. 
However, an additional indicator that Gazprom would retain controlling influence over 
Gazfond was provided by the appointment of Gazprom CEO Aleksei Miller as Chairman of 
Gazfond in May 2007, at the same time that Gazfonds formal removal from the Gazprom 
group was being announced (Grivach, 2007).  
 Yury Shamalov was also Deputy Chairman of Gazprombank (source: OAO Gazprombank, 
quarterly report (Russian) for Q4 2010). 
 The specific change in legislation was Government Regulation (Postanovlenie) no. 63 dated 1 
February 2007. See Gazprom, Financial Report 2007, p. 86. 
Further indications as to whether it was Bank Rossiya or Gazprom that wielded the main 
controlling influence over Gazfond after 2007 are provided by how its main assets were run 
after that date. One of these assets was Gazprombank itself, which, as mentioned above, 
became majority-owned by Gazfond in April 2007. Prior to this transaction Gazprom signed 
an agreement with Gazprombank which allowed it to continue to have a board majority at the 
bank as if it were still the controlling shareholder (Moiseev et al., 2007). Similarly, Bank 
Rossiya was said to play no role either in the editorial policy or the business affairs of 
Gazprom-Media, which as a subsidiary of Gazprombank might be thought to have been under 
Bank Rossiyas control
. In his January 2012 pre-election article on economic strategy, 
Vladimir Putin called on Gazprom to end its involvement in non-core businesses, including 
the media (Putin, 2012). Either he was unaware that Gazprom no longer had any formal 
affiliation with Gazprom-Media, or he was acknowledging its continuing de facto control over 
the media business
If (as argued above) Gazfond remained a de facto extension of state-controlled Gazprom 
group after its de jure removal in 2007, then its continuing usefulness to the group thereafter 
can be explained as follows: it was now a convenient place for Gazprom to store non-core 
assets (including Gazprombank and OMZ) without having to include them (and, more 
importantly, their associated liabilities) on the consolidated balance-sheet of Gazprom itself 
(Frumkin, 2009). 
Given the presence of Gazprombank senior managers on the board of OMZs parent company 
Forpost-Management, it appears that Gazfond had delegated to Gazprombank the task of 
 Authors interview with media expert Anna Kachkaeva, Higher School of Economics, May 2012.  
 As a final example, when Sibur later came to be owned by Gazprombank, a source close to Siburs 
board of directors said that Bank Rossiyas shareholders had never taken an interest in the business. 
Siburs CEO said that he had never met Bank Rossiyas then-Chairman Yury Kovalchuk (Malkova, 
2011). 
managing its investment in OMZ
. Thus, in the following section aimed at understanding the 
buyers motivations behind both the Atomstroieksport and OMZ takeovers, it makes sense to 
treat those buyers as being essentially the same group of individuals in both cases.  
Research question 1: causes of the state-led coercive takeovers 
Having finally reached some conclusions regarding the identity of the buyers in the two 
takeovers and their connection to the state, we now turn to the first central research question, 
i.e. what prompted the Gazprom group to make these acquisitions and how its motivations 
squared with the states interest in the takeovers.  
As explained in the previous chapter, Gazprom was already under solid de facto state control 
at the time of the Atomstroieksport takeover, and had become de jure state-controlled by the 
time OMZ was sold in November 2005. But it was also a joint-stock company with a diverse 
base of non-state minority shareholders. Thus, like any state-controlled but commercialised 
company, its interest in profit-maximisation was potentially at odds with its susceptibility to 
being used by the state for political purposes. In addition, Tompson (2008) notes that in 
general, Russian state-owned companies are run for the benefit of corporate insiders and their 
patrons in the state administration. There are accordingly three possible explanatory factors 
behind Gazprom groups involvement in the takeovers: either there was some sound 
commercial logic behind it despite these companies being distinctly outside of Gazproms 
core business, or the company was acting under political instructions, or the investment 
decision was dictated by the rent-seeking motivations of a group of individuals within 
Gazprom and their political patrons. Quite possibly, the best explanation lies in some 
combination of these three factors. 
 Indeed, there was a precedent for precisely such an arrangement. In September 2004, Gazprom 
announced that Gazprombank had sold a 15.76% stake in Mosenergo to Gazfond (see below). 
Gazproms press-secretary said that the stake would continue to be managed by Gazprombank on the 
basis of agreements with the buyer [i.e. Gazfond] (Aglamishyan, 2004a). 
Atomstroieksport: gifting control to Rosatom 
Gazprombank remained as the controlling shareholder of Atomstroieksport for only a year and 
a half. In May 2006, it sold a 4% stake to the nuclear fuel producer TVEL, thereby bringing 
its own stake below controlling. TVEL was both state-owned and directly subordinate to 
Rosatom. It now held a 6.2% stake, and another 44% was held by another company controlled 
by the state via Rosatom, named Zarubezhpromstroi (Malkova, 2006).  
Gazprombank had described its acquisition of Atomstroieksport as temporary in its 
quarterly report for Q4 2005
. This did not prove to be strictly accurate: as will be discussed 
below, it stayed on as a minority shareholder after ceding control to Rosatom. But it does 
seem quite clear that Gazprombank had intended from the outset to hand control of 
Atomstroieksport to Rosatom soon after its acquisition. It later disclosed that it had paid 
around $25m for its 54% stake (Malkova, 2006). The amount it received from TVEL for its 
4% stake was not officially disclosed, but a high-ranking Rosatom source claimed on the eve 
of this sale that the bank would only receive the nominal value of the shares (Malkova & 
Yegorova, 2006)
. If correct, this would mean that the amount paid was just RUB 4,000 
(then worth $142)
. Thus it would appear that its services in handing control to Rosatom 
were effectively pro bono. In this narrow sense at least, there was no commercial logic to 
Gazprombanks involvement in Atomstroieksport.  
 OAO Gazprombank, quarterly report (Russian) for Q4 2005, p. 348. Furthermore, a Gazprombank 
source said in February 2006 that, when the bank had bought the company from OMZ, it had been 
planning from the outset to sell it on (Malkova & Yegorova, 2006). 
 Gazprombank disclosed in the second half of 2006 that it had sold 23% to third parties for 
$11.47m (source: Gazprombank Group, Interim Consolidated Financial Statements (unaudited), six 
months ended 30 June 2006, p. 41). This amount does not distinguish between the amount it received 
from Forpost-Management for its 19.9% stake, and the amount received from TVEL for the 4% stake. 
 Atomstroieksports accounts for 2006 show that its share capital was then worth just RUB 100,000. 
The nominal value of a 4% stake was therefore RUB 4,000. In February 2006, $1 was worth 
approximately RUB 28.2 (source: oanda.com). 
In July 2006, Gazprombank disclosed that it planned to sell off its remaining 49% stake 
(Malkova, 2006)
. It later emerged that it had already begun this process, having sold a 
19.9% stake in June. The buyer, which intended also to buy the remaining 30% in due course, 
was none other than Forpost-Management (Aliev, 2007; Malkova, 2007a). As discussed 
above, Forpost was effectively an affiliate of Gazprombank, and thus the bank was in essence 
not exiting Atomstroieksport at all, but staying on as a minority shareholder. Its longer-term 
rationale for its involvement in the company was tied up with its strategy for OMZs Izhorskie 
Zavody, which is explained below. 
OMZ: commercial rationale stemming from government strategy 
When the OMZ acquisition was first announced, analysts appeared to be in agreement that it 
made no commercial sense. As noted earlier, the company had narrowly avoided defaulting on 
its debts in 2004, and entire business lines had been sold off by Bendukidze in order to 
optimise the planned fit with Silovye Mashiny. The speciality steels produced by 
Uralmashzavod and used by the nuclear industry were seen as the only interesting business 
line that remained (Kudryashov, 2005). There was already speculation that nuclear energy was 
on the verge of an international boom (Koksharov, 2005; Vinkov, 2004), and while the 
merger with Silovye Mashiny was still on the cards there was optimism that the merged 
company would be able to capitalise on this. But after that deal was unwound, OMZs future 
looked bleak. Rumours were circulating that Atomstroieksport and OMZ might be included in 
a new mega-corporation under Rosatom (Nikolskii & Yegorova, 2005), but a source inside 
Russias engineering industry dismissed the prospect of OMZ profiting from such a plan, 
noting that its a doomed idea. The nuclear reactor produced by Izhorskie Zavody is obsolete, 
and the new model only exists on paper. And no-one needs our [i.e. Russias] nuclear 
engineering (Yambaeva et al., 2005). 
 The disclosure came in Gazprombank Groups Independent Auditors Report and Consolidated 
Financial Statements, Year Ended 31 December 2005, p. 32. 
These analysts were clearly not aware of plans that were about to be announced that would 
change the potential profitability of OMZs nuclear engineering business (i.e. of Izhorskie 
Zavody). As mentioned earlier, just two months after the takeover of OMZ, in February 2006, 
Rosatom head Sergei Kirienko announced the dramatic scaling up of plans to increase 
Russias nuclear energy generation capacity, in which Izhorskie Zavody was set to play a key 
role as the only available supplier of equipment for the new nuclear reactors. Around one 
quarter of spending on a new generating unit goes on the reactor shell, and it was estimated in 
2006 that Izhorskie Zavody could be guaranteed state orders of up to USD 15bn over the next 
25 years (Borisov, 2006). The FTP also emphasized the need to promote Russian construction 
of nuclear power stations abroad, which (if successful) would both add further to Izhorskie 
Zavodys order book and provide revenue for Atomstroieksport. It seems plausible that 
OMZs buyers were party to information that had not yet reached the public domain regarding 
the governments nuclear expansion plans, and thus saw tremendous potential for profit.  
There were additional reasons why the OMZ investment was of interest to Gazprom group 
specifically, despite its being a long way from Gazproms core business. The nuclear 
expansion plan promised to free up gas exports by reducing the dependence on gas-fired 
power stations. At the time, the export price was substantially higher than Gazprom could sell 
its gas for domestically (Henderson, 2011)
. According to figures provided to one newspaper 
by a former deputy minister at Minatom, each new nuclear generating unit built would free up 
for export by Gazprom an additional 3.2bcm of gas per year which would otherwise have to 
be sold to domestic gas-fired power stations. At 2006 prices, this meant it would receive 
$800m in revenue instead of $128m (Derbilova, Nikolskii, & Yegorova, 2006)
 As Henderson shows, this situation had changed by 2011, because increases in Gazproms regulated 
domestic gas price meant it was now possible to sell gas to domestic industry profitably for the first 
time. 
 The former deputy minister claimed that freeing up gas for exports would also yield a $336m 
increase in annual budget revenues (Derbilova, Nikolskii, & Yegorova, 2006). 
This was a compelling argument, which the government reportedly used to persuade Gazprom 
that it ought to become involved in financing the nuclear expansion. But the argument had one 
flaw: as long as the planned nuclear expansion happened, Gazprom would enjoy the predicted 
financial benefit even if it decided to remain as a free-rider. That Gazprom was nevertheless 
interested in becoming involved stemmed from the decision by its senior management, first 
revealed to the world by CEO Aleksei Miller in April 2004, that the company should become 
a fully diversified energy conglomerate similar to international giants such as E.On 
(Aglamishyan, 2004b; Ostrovsky & Jack, 2004). This was justified in terms of shielding the 
company from the risks of cyclical world gas prices, but also as a way to profit from 
electricity sector reforms that promised substantial increases in regulated prices for consumers 
in the coming years.  
Accordingly, just one week after Kirienkos announcement regarding the nuclear expansion 
(and even as they were denying any involvement in the OMZ acquisition), Gazproms 
managers discussed with the Kremlin how they might be involved in the construction of the 
new nuclear generating capacity. A plan was being considered at this time to offer Gazprom 
ownership of the newly-built nuclear power stations if it agreed to finance their construction 
(Derbilova et al., 2006). This would have required a change in the law, which stipulated that 
all nuclear power stations must be directly owned by the state. In July 2006, Kirienko 
signalled that the idea had been dropped, by announcing that the construction of new nuclear 
generating units would be financed directly from the budget instead. At the same time, 
however, he said that no budget money would be used to finance the required modernisation 
of Russias nuclear engineering capacities (Pushkarskaya & Kornysheva, 2006). This included 
upgrading the obsolete nuclear reactor model at OMZs Izhorskie Zavody, and left the door 
open for Gazprom group to provide the necessary financing.  
Implementing government strategy, or holding it to ransom? 
Around the time of Kirienkos February 2006 announcement, OMZs buyers were saying 
publicly that their actions at the company would be coordinated with Rosatom (Kudryashov, 
2006a). The companys quarterly reports explicitly linked its own strategy to government 
economic programmes including the long-term strategy for Rosatom, Russias energy strategy 
through to 2030, and the timetable for nuclear energy expansion. They also stated that its 
strategy would help to strengthen the technological sovereignty of the Russian Federation in 
the realm of energy- and heavy engineering
However, a source close to OMZs new shareholders, who was quoted in the press in 
February 2006, painted a different picture of their motivations: the construction of new 
nuclear power stations is an attractive field for which a battle is now underway. And OMZs 
majority owners have in their possession a heavy club [tyazhelayoi dubinoi]  their monopoly 
over reactor production. And they are now putting this club into action (Kornysheva, 
Yambaeva, & Grib, 2006).  
These two contrasting interpretations of the buyers plans for OMZ, and how they fit with 
government strategy, go to the heart of a deeper question. Treisman (2007) has suggested that 
since 2000, Russias oligarchy has given way to a new silovarchy: a defining 
characteristic of Putins regime being the takeover of corporate boardrooms by a new 
business elite drawn mostly from the network of security service and law enforcement 
veterans known as the siloviki. Treisman claims (2007, p. 144) that Gazprom clearly 
belongs in the silovarch empire. This is based on the less than compelling evidence that three 
out of 17 members of Gazproms management committee are from the security services and 
another an FSB reservist. But there is better evidence available to link OMZs buyers to the 
silovarch empire. Official disclosures by OMZ-owned companies show that Forpost-
Managements Chairman since 2007, the Gazprombank deputy CEO Farid Kantserov, 
 e.g. OAO OMZ, quarterly report (Russian) for Q3 2010, p. 39. 
graduated from the KGB Higher School with the rank of officer with a higher vocational 
training
. Media reports indicate that his KGB ties went further: he was the former head of 
military counterintelligence in the Republic of Belarus and a career officer of the Soviet 
KGB (Dmitry Medvedev nagradil Farida Kantserova, 2010; Kozyrev, 2008)
. Kantserovs 
superior at Gazprombank, CEO Andrei Akimov, was rumoured to hold the rank of general of 
the active reserve in one of the KGBs successor organisations (Birman, 2005). Deputy Prime 
Minister Sergei Ivanov, whose son was also on the Forpost-Management board of directors, 
made no secret of his past in the KGB and in Russias Foreign Intelligence Service (Parfitt, 
2013). 
Treisman (2007, p. 145) suggests that the silovarchs would indignantly reject comparisons 
to the oligarchs they are displacing. They see their mission as precisely to fix the problems 
the oligarchs created, but the image of the siloviki as selfless crusaders for order, rooting 
out corruption, is getting harder to sell to the Russian public. The consensus, though, appears 
to be that there is little or no substance to their patriotic rhetoric. Hanson (2007b, p. 33) 
suggests that different groups in the leadership may be using rhetoric about sovereignty, 
security and strategic assets to secure their political positions, their personal wealth or 
both. Murtazaev (2006) claims that such rhetoric only comes into play once powerful people 
have taken a mercenary interest in acquiring an asset. They are required to pay lip-service to 
concepts such as sovereignty and security so that the Kremlin will turn a blind eye to their 
predatory acquisitions. 
At first glance, subsequent events at OMZ would favour the view that the buyers patriotic 
rhetoric was merely a fig-leaf for self-interest. As will be explained below, OMZ failed to 
cooperate effectively with Rosatom. And given Izhorskie Zavodys monopoly on reactor 
 OAO Uralmashzavod Ezhekvartalnyi otchet za 2 kv. 2010 g., p. 62.  
 According to the same media sources, Kantserov was one of the first high-ranking KGB generals to 
decide not to serve the current Belarusian authorities. After retiring from all posts in Minsk he moved to 
Moscow and began working in the gas industry. Soon afterwards he was made an advisor to 
Gazprombanks CEO Andrei Akimov, and deputy CEO of the bank. 
production, this threatened to undermine the entire government programme for the nuclear 
industry. But the notion that the buyers were effectively holding government strategy to 
ransom (using the heavy club of Izhorskie Zavodys monopoly on reactor production) is at 
odds with the fact that they effectively gifted control of Atomstroieksport back to Rosatom. In 
fact, the evidence shows that the buyers had a single plan for Atomstroieksport and Izhorskie 
Zavody that relied on successful cooperation with Rosatom. 
On 8 February 2006, Rosatoms head Sergei Kirienko announced that Rosatom planned to 
create a state-controlled holding company that was subordinate to the agency. It would bring 
together the whole chain of production of civilian nuclear energy production, from uranium 
production to dealing with nuclear waste, and including nuclear heavy engineering. The 
holding company would include some firms that were currently privately-owned. Precisely 
how this would work had not yet been clarified, but it was suggested that the private 
companies might only be managed by the state-owned holding, rather than being nationalised 
(Kornysheva et al., 2006). Gazprombank had announced the day before that it was 
representing the  unspecified buyers of OMZ, and at the same time noted that Rosatoms 
reforms of the nuclear energy industry were likely to affect the structure of OMZ and its 
nuclear equipment division (Ermakova, 2006)
. This signalled that OMZs buyers were 
both aware of, and on board with, Rosatoms plans; furthermore, it hinted that OMZ was 
prepared to hand over Izhorskie Zavody to Rosatoms control. In March, Rosatoms press 
officer confirmed the agencys interest in obtaining guarantees of management and control 
over Izhorskie Zavodys reactor production, adding that without these, the fulfilment of the 
nuclear expansion plan would be impossible (Malkova & Simakov, 2006). 
In July 2006, Kirienko announced that Rosatom and Gazprombank had signed a framework 
agreement on strategic cooperation, and a separate agreement on placing Izhorskie Zavody 
 The press-release, dated 7 February 2006, was available via Googles cached version of 
http://www.omz.ru, accessed 4 February 2014. 
under the management of a joint venture that would be 51%-owned by Rosatom, and 49% by 
Gazprombank (Pushkarskaya & Kornysheva, 2006). Two days later, Rosatom issued a press-
release stating that the new joint venture would be the owner (rather than merely the manager) 
of Izhorskie Zavody, and that the deal was expected to be closed by the end of the year 
(Gritskova & Kornysheva, 2006).  
By August 2006 it was clear that OMZs owners were searching for a very similar 
arrangement for the companys other key asset, Uralmashzavod. Talks were underway with 
the privately-owned metals company Metalloinvest, whose main owner was the business 
tycoon Alisher Usmanov (Malkova, Fedorinova, Rozhkova, & Yegorova, 2006). This came to 
fruition in February 2007 with the creation of a 50-50 joint venture called ZAO MK 
Uralmash, with management control given to Metalloinvest. MK Uralmash became parent 
company to Uralmashzavod as well as to the Yuzhuralmashzavod enterprise located in Orsk 
(Orenburg region), which was Metalloinvests contribution to the joint venture (Lander, 
2007). Thus OMZs buyers appear to have been aware that they did not have the professional 
knowledge and experience necessary to manage OMZs key enterprises by themselves. A 
source told one newspaper that Gazprombanks representatives [at OMZ] are not 
industrialists, and they have a weak conception of what to do with industrial assets 
(Kudryashov, 2006b)
Unlike the joint venture for Uralmashzavod, the Izhorskie Zavody tie-up ultimately failed to 
come to pass, for reasons that will be examined below. However, towards the end of 2007 
 Indeed, there are indications that OMZs buyers initially had no other strategy for the company 
beyond the plan for the two joint ventures. Sergei Lipsky, whom they had inherited as OMZs CEO, 
quit in October 2006 apparently in response to a lack of direction from Forpost Management 
(Kudryashov, 2006b). As one press article put it, If earlier there was one person who took the strategic 
decisions at OMZ [i.e. Bendukidze], now they have to be made collectively  no-one wants to take 
personal responsibility for the development of OMZ. At the June shareholders meeting at which the 
new owners had finally installed a new set of directors, the new shareholders did not reveal their 
development strategy for OMZ. The company recommends asking the shareholders (Vinkov, 2006). 
After the new owners arrival the lives of the managers, who were used to relative independence under 
Bendukidze, became seriously more complicated. To decide any question required multiple approvals. 
And what was worse, sometimes it was completely impossible to obtain any kind of answer (Kozyrev, 
2008). 
both sides were still working to achieve it. Kirienko and Atomstroieksport CEO Sergei 
Shmatko visited Izhorskie Zavody on 26 November, accompanied by First Deputy Prime 
Minister Sergei Ivanov and St Petersburg governor Valentina Matvienko. After some 
disagreements between Rosatom and Gazprombank, the two sides were now planning to make 
Atomstroieksport (which was still 51%-owned by Rosatom) the parent company of Izhorskie 
Zavody, and Ivanovs presence at this visit to the factory signalled the governments support 
for this plan (N. Stepanova, 2007). Atomstroieksport would issue new shares worth RUB 
12bn (then worth approximately $460m) to raise finance for an investment programme. Its 
existing shareholders would buy all the new shares, leaving the ownership structure 
unchanged. Rosatom would provide its share of the $460m investment in cash, while Forpost 
Managements contribution would be in the form of shares in Izhorskie Zavody (Malkova, 
2007b). 
OMZs buyers repeatedly replaced its chief executive in the years after the takeover, and in 
each case the need to improve relations with Rosatom was a significant factor. This provides 
further evidence that they were not seeking to hold the government programme to ransom. 
Sergei Lipsky, whom OMZs buyers inherited from Bendukidze as company CEO, resigned in 
October 2006, and it was claimed that the new owners felt the company should be headed by 
someone with sufficiently good contacts to facilitate winning government orders
. This 
theme continued as OMZ underwent two more changes of chief executive within a short space 
of time: Lipskys permanent replacement Valery Chernyshev, who was appointed in June 
2007, was dismissed eight months later over tensions with Rosatom. His replacement, Viktor 
Danilenko, was seen as someone who could improve the relationship (Belikov, 2008a). 
The above provides convincing evidence that OMZs owners had in mind a cooperative 
relationship with Rosatom, rather than seizing Izhorskie Zavodys monopoly status as a way 
to hold Rosatom hostage. If Gazprombank was uncertain of its own abilities to manage 
 Board member Sergei Skatershchikov cited in Yambaeva et al. (2006). 
industrial assets under its ownership, this begs the question as to why it had believed the 
acquisition made commercial sense. As one might expect from a bank, Gazprombank saw its 
primary role as provider of long-term finance for OMZ. In July 2006, it said that it would be 
responsible for providing the credit for Rosatoms wider plans to bring a range of nuclear 
industry enterprises under its ownership over the next three years (Yegorova, Medvedeva, & 
Nikolskii, 2006). It was rumoured in November 2007 to be prepared to invest $1bn in 
modernisation at Izhorskie Zavody (N. Stepanova, 2007). In this light, Gazprom groups 
equity investment in OMZ can be viewed as secondary to its relationship as lender, and as 
having been aimed primarily at providing additional guarantees for those loans. 
Gazprombanks credit life-line 
The history of Gazprombanks lending to the OMZ companies provides compelling evidence 
that Gazprom group was committed to developing OMZ over the long term, even after doubts 
arose regarding its viability as a going concern. This decision made little sense from a purely 
commercial perspective and provides further convincing evidence that the altruistic, patriotic 
rhetoric of the silovarchs at the bank was not in this case a mere smokescreen for venal self-
interest.  
OMZs quarterly report for the third quarter of 2010 shows that it had been borrowing in 
recent years from Gazprombank, with loans totalling RUB 4.8bn ($150m) at the time. The 
company described itself as highly leveraged, and its financial position as unstable
Eighteen months later, the company was using more measured language to describe its plight. 
However, the companys negative net working capital
 (amounting to RUB 1.17bn, or 
approximately $37m) was still noted. The company still owed RUB 4.06bn ($127m) in short-
term debt, with just RUB 89m ($2.8m) in long-term debt
 OAO OMZ, quarterly report (Russian) for Q3 2010, p. 65.  
 A measure of operating liquidity determined as current assets minus current liabilities. 
 OAO OMZ, quarterly report (Russian) for Q1 2012, p. 76. 
The credit rating agency Standard and Poors (S&P) in 2009 gave OMZ a credit rating of B-
(stable). Granted, this was an increase on its previous rating, but S&P cited among other 
factors behind this increase the apparent willingness of Gazprombank OJSC, the groups 
major shareholder, to provide financial support
. The rating was the same in April 2012, 
when S&P described the companys liquidity position as less than adequate (one step up 
from weak) because of its reliance on short-term credit lines that they have historically 
renewed on a routine basis (Standard and Poors, 2012, p. 9). The implication was that 
Gazprombank as controlling shareholder and main creditor would continue to provide the 
necessary support for OMZ, rather than pulling the plug on its credit lines. However, later in 
the year S&P suspended its OMZ rating due to inadequate information from the company, and 
soon afterwards withdrew the rating altogether at the companys request (S&P drops OMZ 
suspended ratings at issuers request, 2012). This suggested that OMZ had for the time being 
abandoned any thought of tapping international credit markets, reinforcing its dependence on 
Gazprombanks continued support for its survival as a going concern. 
The lions share of Gazprombanks lending was to OMZs subsidiary Izhorskie Zavody rather 
than the main company OAO OMZ, because the subsidiary had physical assets that could 
be pledged as collateral. Izhorskie Zavody borrowed from a relatively diverse base, including 
state banks Sberbank and VTB. As of 2010, Izhorskie Zavody had borrowed from 
Gazprombank $175m out of total borrowing of $467m; $135m was still outstanding to 
Gazprombank, out of total outstanding debt of $332m
OMZs 2011 consolidated financial statements (which show figures for the group as a whole, 
not just for OAO OMZ) in fact show relatively modest debt, with short-term loans totalling 
$142.4m and long-term debt of $95.8m. But this reduction had not been achieved by 
improving performance. In August-September 2010, OMZ sold stakes in Izhorskie Zavody 
 http://www.omz.ru/eng/investors/ratings/  
 Source: OAO Izhorskie Zavody, quarterly report (Russian) for Q4 2010, pp. 11-15. 
and the specialist steels division OMZ Spetsstal to Forpost-Management for $152.6m
. This 
deal improved the balance sheet of OMZ, but was effectively a debt-for-equity swap that saw 
Gazprombank (through its subsidiary Forpost) take equity in OMZs subsidiaries, in addition 
to its controlling stake in the parent company.  
The fact that OMZs working capital was exceeded by its short-term loans, as noted above, 
suggests that some of Gazprombanks lending was simply keeping the company afloat. 
However, Gazprombank was also making the kinds of investments envisaged by Kirienko 
aimed at modernising OMZs engineering capacities. At Izhorskie Zavody, the main focus 
was an arc steel smelting furnace which was launched in early 2009 and was financed by 
Gazprombank to the tune of RUB 5bn (approximately $160m) (Kto investiruet, tot i 
vyigryvaet, 2009). 
Why not Rosatom? 
If the buyers in the two state-led coercive takeovers were acting as channels for government 
policy, rather than as opportunists seeking to exploit government strategy for their own 
advantage, then this raises the question as to why Atomstroieksport and OMZ were not 
instead taken over by companies subordinate to Rosatom, the government body charged with 
supervision of the nuclear industry.  
One source at a state-owned company was quoted as saying that Rosatoms companies had 
been deterred from buying Atomstroieksport by its debts of $200m (Yambaeva, 2004). They 
could in principle have approached a bank to borrow the money required to buy 
Atomstroieksport and service its debt, and if there was sufficient political will, then 
presumably one of the state-owned banks would have obliged. However, in what was a time-
sensitive situation owing to the need to bring the company back under state control as soon as 
 Source: OMZ, International Financial Reporting Standards Consolidated Financial Statements and 
Independent Auditors Report, 31 December 2011, p. 52. 
possible, Gazprombank (as a bank itself) was in a better position to quickly raise the funds 
necessary to make the purchase.  
Nevertheless, a source inside Rosatom claimed that it had proposed several options that would 
have seen control of Atomstroieksport transferred to one of its own companies. None of these 
had received approval from the highest levels of government, suggesting that it was ultimately 
a high-level political decision that saw Gazprombank rather than Rosatom take ownership of 
Atomstroieksport
. The talks leading up to that takeover were reportedly conducted by 
Rosatom deputy head Boris Yurlov, who had joined the agency in March 2004 after a year 
spent working as a Deputy CEO of Gazprom. Prior to his work at Gazprom he had worked for 
two years as deputy (and later first deputy) head of the Department of Presidential Affairs 
(Upravdelami)
 in Putins presidential administration (Yambaeva, 2004). 
Yurlov was reportedly an active lobbyist for Gazproms interests within Rosatom (Yambaeva, 
2004) and a competitor to the agencys existing head Aleksandr Rumyantsev (Andrianov, 
2008). Sources close to Rosatom claimed that he had prepared the ground for [Gazprom] to 
gain control of the industrial enterprises [...] that were subordinate to [Rosatom]. He began 
with Atomstroieksport (Yambaeva, 2004)
. The implication here is that Rosatom was being 
undermined from within by a mole working for an acquisitive Gazprom. But the fact that 
Gazprombank subsequently handed Atomstroieksport over to Rosatom, and apparently gained 
nothing from its involvement, does not fit easily with this interpretation. An alternative 
explanation is that Yurlovs appointment to Rosatom was symptomatic of the political 
decision to bring Gazprom in as a partner for Rosatoms future plans.  
 A source in Rosatom described the purchase of Atomstroieksport by Gazprombank as an allocation 
from above [raznaryadkoi sverkhu], adding that Gazprom was not the best outcome but was still 
more acceptable than Bendukidze. He had a very bad reputation in the industry (Yambaeva, 2004).  
 This division of the Presidential Administration is charged with managing its physical assets, 
financial affairs and business interests. 
 Yurlov died suddenly in September 2004, weeks before the Atomstroieksport takeover (Yambaeva, 
2004). 
By contrast to the earlier Atomstroieksport takeover, no Rosatom companies showed any 
serious interest in OMZ. As noted earlier, Gazprombank issued a press release in February 
2006 making clear that OMZs buyers were coordinating their activities with Rosatom, and 
that the reform process in the sector was likely to have an impact on OMZs structure. Since 
this came so soon after the November 2005 takeover, Rosatoms lack of interest in purchasing 
OMZ was most likely because it already had agreement in principle that Gazprombank would 
split OMZ and place Izhorskie Zavody into some kind of joint venture with Rosatom. 
Why did the tie-up with Rosatom fail? 
Although the notion has been discounted above that OMZs buyers were holding the 
government programme to ransom, it remains puzzling why they failed to reach agreement 
with Rosatom, given the importance of such agreement to the governments plans for the 
nuclear industry.  
According to one account, the failure of the joint venture plan was down to self-interested 
rivalry between two political factions: the new owners of OMZ and their political backers on 
the one hand, and the bureaucrats of Rosatom on the other (Kto investiruet, tot i vyigryvaet, 
2009). These two factions were depicted as competitors for the budget money that would be 
spent on the nuclear expansion programme. But it was shown above that OMZs buyers 
apparently sincerely sought a cooperative relationship with Rosatom, and aimed to play a 
constructive part in realising government strategy. This section aims to explain the failure of 
this cooperation, given that both sides were apparently working towards it rather than simply 
fighting over budget money. It also seeks to understand the governments failure to intervene 
successfully to resolve the dispute between the two sides, despite the threat it posed to 
government strategy. 
OMZ and Rosatom were mutually dependent when it came to the provision of nuclear 
reactors. OMZ had no other buyers for its reactors besides Rosatom and Atomstroieksport. 
Rosatom was dependent on Izhorskie Zavody for reactor equipment because it was not 
prepared to source that equipment abroad and Izhorskie Zavody was the only Russian factory 
capable of producing them. This is the lock-in situation which, as Williamson (1981) 
explains, arises from high asset-specificity, i.e. when investments have been made that are 
specialized to a particular transaction. In the present case, the high level of technical 
specialisation (i.e. physical asset-specificity) involved in the production of nuclear reactors 
means that there are always likely to be very few (if any) alternative buyers and suppliers. 
Williamson predicts that under such circumstances, buyer and seller will make special efforts 
to design an exchange that has good continuity prospects. In line with this prediction, 
Rosatom and OMZ negotiated in apparent good faith between 2006 and 2008 in the hope of 
settling on the terms of a joint venture.  
Williamson only predicts that both sides will be interested in resolving the problem, either by 
bringing future transactions within the firm (so that both sides in the transaction are under 
common ownership) or through some partial move towards this such as franchising, joint 
ventures, etc.. However, his reasoning also suggests that the two sides might face problems 
in agreeing on a resolution to the problem: the same transaction costs that would be reduced 
by integration may also create obstacles to an agreement on such integration. The lock-in is 
problematic for both sides because, in the absence of alternative buyers and sellers, the market 
mechanism no longer provides any meaningful price signals. There is no independent 
guidance for either side in the transaction on what might be a fair price for the product being 
transacted. Both sides are inevitably motivated to a significant extent by their own 
institutional profit-maximising self-interest. They are also operating within bounded 
rationality, i.e. as well as the uncertainty over price, they do not fully know or understand the 
motivations of the other side. This complicates reaching an agreement on the price of the 
product being transacted. But that price in turn affects the terms of a joint venture deal that in 
this case both sides saw as the resolution of the problem. Izhorskie Zavodys value for the 
purposes of the joint venture was dependent on the price it could expect to receive for its 
reactor equipment.  
The FTP had laid out Rosatoms expectations for the prices of its equipment purchases, but 
Kirill Komarov, CEO of Rosatoms company Atomenergoprom, claimed that Izhorskie 
Zavody was in 2007 demanding double the expected prices for its equipment. He argued that 
Rosatom was left with no choice but to search for an alternative supplier. OMZ countered that 
it had proposed a bilateral or trilateral commission to formulate a market-based price, and 
had received no response from Rosatom. It also claimed that it could offer lower prices if 
Rosatom were in exchange prepared to offer a guaranteed stream of orders (Vinkov, 2010). 
The disagreements over price meant that Izhorskie Zavody was effectively idle for most of 
2006 and into early 2007 (Kuzin, 2007). It was reported in August 2007 that Rosatom had 
suspended its contract with Izhorskie Zavody for two reactor shells for the Novovoronezh 
nuclear power station (Belikov, 2007b). This was the only order it had received from Rosatom 
since the approval of the FTP in 2006. By the end of May 2008, there were still no confirmed 
orders from Rosatom
. Gazprombank had decided to go out on a limb and provide interim 
financing for construction of the Novovoronezh reactors while it waited for Rosatom to 
unfreeze the contract (Belikov, 2008b). The contract was eventually unfrozen, and a similar 
order was received from Rosatom for two reactors for the Leningrad-2 nuclear power station, 
helping Izhorskie Zavody to post a profit of RUB 144m (then worth $4.6m) in the first half of 
2009 (Bychina, 2009). But Rosatom had proceeded with this purchase with great reluctance, 
and continued to search for a way to break its dependence on Izhorskie Zavody. 
Meanwhile, signs had emerged as early as January 2008 that the planned joint venture 
agreement was in danger. OMZ held an EGM where two Rosatom representatives were 
running for seats on the board, so that the two sides could better coordinate implementation of 
 Meanwhile, Rosatom was pressing ahead with other aspects of the programme, having reached 
agreement to buy turbines and generators worth $1.7bn from Silovye Mashiny. 
the joint venture. But neither of Rosatoms representatives was voted on to the board. 
Gazprombank was now saying that it would subscribe to the new share issue at 
Atomstroieksport in cash, rather than handing over Izhorskie Zavody. A source close to the 
OMZ board commented that the two sides were in disagreement over the value of OMZs 
assets (Sikamova, 2008). When Atomstroieksports new share issue finally took place at the 
beginning of 2009, Gazprombank declined to participate. Izhorskie Zavody thus remained in 
OMZs ownership, and Gazprombanks stake (now held via Forpost Management) was 
diluted to 10.7% (Gazprombank ostalsya s Izhoroi, a Rosatom - s Atomstroieksportom, 
2009; Godlevskaya, 2009). This marked the collapse of the joint venture plan and signalled a 
wider breakdown in relations between OMZs owners and Rosatom.  
In April 2009, Rosatom announced that it was embarking on a project to bring reactor 
construction within the firm. It intended to purchase the Soviet-era Atommash enterprise in 
Volgodonsk, which had been capable of building nuclear reactors until being re-profiled in the 
1990s for different types of production. At the beginning of 2010 it opted instead to buy the 
Petrozavodskmash plant, which had previously been used to make heavy machinery for the 
paper industry, and which Rosatom set about converting to the production of nuclear reactor 
equipment (Belikov, 2011; Vinkov, 2010). 
Rosatoms plans were at odds with the signals coming from the top political leadership. A 
visit by Putin to Izhorskie Zavodys main plant in Kolpino (Leningradskaya region) in June 
2009 suggested that the political leadership had ruled in favour of OMZ. Putin was there to 
inspect the results of Gazprombanks substantial investments in modernisation at the plant, 
which would enable Izhorskie Zavody to produce higher-spec reactors, as well as helping to 
increase from two to four the number of reactor equipment sets it could produce annually 
(Putin osmotrel proizvodstvennye moshchnosti Izhorskikh zavodov, 2009). According to 
one account, the financial crisis, and the consequent scaling down of the nuclear expansion 
programme, had been instrumental in Putins choice, as upgrading Izhorskie Zavodys 
existing facilities was more cost-effective than Rosatoms alternative plans (Kto investiruet, 
tot i vyigryvaet, 2009). 
Nevertheless, Rosatom continued its efforts to develop its own production. In late November 
2010 it placed an order for a reactor unit for the Baltic nuclear power station in Kaliningrad 
not from Izhorskie Zavody but from Petrozavodskmash. Rosatom had used retained earnings 
to make $40m of investments so far (out of a planned total of $80m) in re-profiling the plant 
(Kudiyarov, 2011; Vinkov, 2010). Petrozavodskmash was described in 2012 as pressing 
ahead with what was now described as a $155m investment programme which would allow it 
to deliver its first finished nuclear reactor in 2014 (Prokhorov, 2012). 
The failure of the two sides to cooperate was also a failure on the part of the government, 
which was interested in seeing the nuclear expansion strategy successfully realised. The 
governments failure can be attributed to a lack of coordination between those state 
institutions and actors who were tasked with overseeing the operations of Rosatom and OMZ. 
When the federal agency Rosatom had taken over responsibility for the nuclear sector from 
Minatom in March 2004, it was initially made subordinate to the Ministry for Industry and 
Energy (then headed by Viktor Khristenko), which also had responsibility for heavy 
engineering. However, just a few months later Rosatom was instead made directly subordinate 
to the office of new Prime Minister Mikhail Fradkov (Ukaz Prezidenta Rossiiskoi Federatsii 
ot 20 maya 2004 g. N 649 Voprosy struktury federalnykh organov ispolnitelnoi vlasti, 
2004). Khristenkos responsibility for the energy sector meant that he naturally retained an 
interest in (but no formal supervision over) nuclear energy production (Andrianov, 2008). 
The intention had reportedly been to divide the civilian and military aspects of the nuclear 
industry, giving the civilian operations to Khristenkos Ministry and the military side to the 
Defence Ministry (Minatom RF preobrazuyut v federalnoe agentstvo, 2004). The decision 
instead to leave it directly subordinate to the Prime Minister may have been linked to a 
realisation that implementing such a split was going to be a major task in itself. When 
Kirienko was appointed as Rosatoms new head in November 2005 (coinciding with the OMZ 
takeover), it was with President Vladimir Putins public blessing. Putin stated that Kirienkos 
role was to solve organisational problems in the nuclear energy sector, and a former Atomic 
Energy Minister (who claimed to have spoken to Kirienko) stated that what Putin had in mind 
was splitting the civilian and military sides of the industry (Nikolskii & Yegorova, 2005).  
In the same month, Sergei Ivanov was made Deputy Prime Minister in addition to his existing 
role as Defence Minister. He was given responsibility for overseeing the military-industrial 
complex, a role which entailed some supervision of the military aspects of Rosatoms 
activities (Nikolskii, Mazneva, & Petrachkova, 2005). In February 2007, Ivanov was 
promoted to First Deputy Prime Minister and given additional responsibilities for civilian 
industry, including both nuclear energy and heavy engineering (Grozovsky, 2007)
. In May 
2008, Ivanov was demoted back to Deputy Prime Minister, but although oversight of civilian 
industry (including heavy engineering) was transferred to Deputy Prime Minister Igor 
Sechin, Ivanov retained his oversight of the nuclear energy sector (Nikolaeva, Sterkin, & 
Kazmin, 2008). 
In December 2007 the Rosatom federal agency was transformed into a state corporation
with the same name, which continued to be headed by Kirienko. The laws underlying the 
creation of Rosatom and other state corporations stated that the chief executive reported to a 
Supervisory Council, whose Chairman was appointed by the Russian President (Volkov, 
2008b, pp. 1011). It might have made sense to appoint Ivanov to this position at Rosatom, 
given his role as overseer of the nuclear industry. But instead, the Chairmanship was given to 
 Ivanov said in an April 2007 interview: My main task is the real sector of the economy minus 
energy. I dont get involved in energy apart from the nuclear sector, because the nuclear industry is a 
scientific sector [] I have been given the brief of looking after everything connected with innovation 
and diversification of sectors of the economy (Buckley & Belton, 2007).  
 The state corporation was a specific legal form of Russian company, with a special law passed by 
the President for the creation of each corporation. In each case, the assets contributed by the state to the 
corporation became the property of the corporation itself. See Volkov (2008b). 
another political heavyweight, Sergei Sobyanin, who had been head of Putins Presidential 
Administration since 2005. After Medvedev became Russias President in March 2008 and 
Putin became Prime Minister, Sobyanin was made Deputy Prime Minister (Sobyanin, Sergei: 
mer Moskvy, n.d.). Medvedev re-appointed him as Chairman of Rosatoms Supervisory 
Council in July 2008 (D. Medvedev naznachil chlenami Nablyudatelnogo soveta Rosatoma 
A. Dvorkovicha i Yu. Yakovleva, 2008). 
Thus for most of the period when OMZ and Rosatom were holding talks on the creation of a 
joint-venture, the lines of reporting from the two sides in the talks to their political overseers 
were both complicated and shifting. Writing towards the end of the Yeltsin era, Huskey (1999, 
pp. 98124) examined in detail the conflicting loyalties that arise when governmental 
institutions in Russia have overlapping responsibilities for particular sectors or policy areas. 
For a few months in 2007, Ivanov had authority over both sides in the negotiations. This was 
at a time when he was being groomed by Putin as a possible successor. It is quite possible that 
Ivanov had a particular loyalty to Gazprombank in its bargaining with Rosatom, not least 
because his son (also named Sergei Ivanov) was one of a handful of senior Gazprombank 
managers who were in charge of strategic management at OMZ. Under these circumstances, 
Kirienko did not have sufficient authority to impose conditions on Gazprombank. Since 
Ivanov had numerous other responsibilities and apparently had his sights set on the 
presidency, it may be that his interest in the outcome of the talks between Rosatom and OMZ 
did not extend beyond supporting the bargaining position of the latter at this time. After 
December 2007, the arrival of Sobyanin at Rosatom must have substantially weakened 
Ivanovs personal authority. 
Research question 2: explaining the ownership outcomes 
Turning now to the ownership outcomes of the SLCTs, it is possible to state that 
Atomstroieksport was brought back to state ownership through its controlling interest in 
Gazprombank, the new controlling shareholder. State control was also established over OMZ, 
albeit more tentatively via a pension fund which by definition had no owners. In both cases, 
Gazprom group (loosely defined) can be said to have been the buyer. The reasons for its 
interest in these acquisitions, and for the states own interest in seeing Gazprom group as the 
buyers, have been explained above.  
Following on from the previous chapter, one question that arises is why Gazprom group was 
now selecting Gazprombank to make its purchases (albeit via Gazfond in the case of OMZ), 
rather than using Gazprominvestholding. As another Gazprom subsidiary, Gazprombank was 
as well-placed as Gazprominvestholding to bypass the need for the governments directive in 
deal approvals. It had also provided the finance for some of the Gazprominvestholding 
acquisitions made in the previous chapter. But in those earlier acquisitions (which took place 
largely in 2002), the particular value of Gazprominvestholding over Gazprombank was its 
ability to present itself as being on the side of the existing asset owners. In the more recent 
takeovers made by Gazprombank, the atmosphere was less acrimonious and Usmanov had no 
historical affinities with the existing owner. 
Another factor is that Gazprominvestholding was tasked with returning assets previously 
owned by Gazprom, or on the brink of being lost. Gazprombank, by contrast, was becoming a 
channel for new non-core investments by Gazprom group (Kozyrev & Sokolova, 2008). It 
began to take on this role following the appointment of Andrei Akimov as its new CEO in 
2002, and by some accounts, acquisitions such as Atomstroieksport and OMZ were his 
initiative (Birman, 2005; Milov, 2012). Meanwhile Gazprominvestholdings role reportedly 
shifted towards cracking down on non-payments by Gazproms clients (Igumenov & 
Malkova, 2012). 
The remainder of this section deals with the specific ownership outcomes of the two 
takeovers, i.e. the particular ownership structures that were used by the buyers. As described 
in the earlier section assessing the ownership outcomes, both takeovers involved the use of 
multiple affiliated entities, and the buyers refused to confirm the acquisitions until some time 
after the fact. On the face of it, this would seem to fit with the notion that the takeovers were 
aimed at rent-seeking by insiders: the complex and non-transparent nature of the acquisitions 
was, by this interpretation, designed to maximise the opportunities for insiders to extract value 
from the target companies and/or the buying entities. However, close examination of the 
evidence indicates that the specific ownership outcomes were instead (as in the Gazprom 
takeovers examined in the previous chapter) a response to legal restrictions that stipulated the 
need for prior approval of company acquisitions.  
In the previous chapter, this prior approval needed to come from the board of directors of the 
company making the acquisition; if that company was state-owned as in the case of Gazprom, 
then approval from state representatives on the board first required additional approvals from 
relevant government bodies. Gazprom used subsidiaries, and subsidiaries of subsidiaries, in an 
effort to circumvent these restrictions so that it could respond more flexibly in time-sensitive 
situations. In the present chapter, the buyers designed the acquisitions primarily in reference 
to a different restriction, namely the need for prior approval by the Federal Antimonopoly 
Service (FAS).  
By law, this approval was required if a single group of entities (as defined in antitrust 
legislation
) purchased more than 20% of a company. The threshold had been set in Article 
 Since 2006 the legal definition of a group of entities has been found in Article 9 of the Law on the 
Defence of Competition (Zakon O zashchite konkurentsii), available in its 2006 edition at 
http://www.consultant.ru/document/cons_doc_LAW_61763/. Accessed 23 January 2014. 
18 of the Law On competition and restricting monopolistic activity on commodity markets, 
first passed in 1991
. There was an additional qualification aimed at preventing a flood of 
applications for minor transactions: prior approval was only required if the combined asset 
value of the group of companies making the acquisition and the target company exceeded 30 
million minimum wages. Below this threshold, post factum notification of an acquisition 
was sufficient. The minimum wage was set by the government at RUB 600 at the time of the 
Atomstroieksport acquisition, and had been raised to RUB 800 by the time of the OMZ 
acquisition
, so the combined asset value threshold was RUB 18bn for the former, and RUB 
24bn for the latter. Given that this applied not just to the acquiring company but to the wider 
group, and Gazprom groups total assets were valued at the end of 2004 at RUB 2.51 
trillion
, there was no doubt that Gazprom group companies would require prior FAS 
approval for any new acquisitions. 
Before turning to how this law affected the ownership outcomes at Atomstroieksport and 
OMZ, it is helpful to examine an earlier case in which Gazprom group purchased a 25.1% 
stake in Mosenergo, the Moscow-based electricity company that was then a subsidiary of the 
company United Energy Systems (UES). Gazprombank bought a 15.76% stake in May 2003, 
but no formal acknowledgement was made of this fact until the publication of a Gazprom 
Eurobond prospectus in April 2004 (Reznik & Yegorova, 2004). In July 2004, Gazprombank 
sold the shares to a buyer who was not named in Gazproms accounts. Although the sale was 
described as an exit in those accounts, Gazproms press-secretary revealed that the buyer was 
Gazfond. There followed a buying frenzy for Mosenergo shares on the open market. Gazprom 
refused to comment on the widespread suspicion that it was the buyer, but then on 19 
November 2004 it revealed in its consolidated accounts that the group now owned a 25.1% 
 Zakon O konkurentsii i ogranichenii monopolisticheskoi deyatelnosti na tovarnykh rynkakh, 
available at http://www.consultant.ru/document/cons_doc_LAW_58244/?frame=5. Accessed 23 
January 2014. In 2006, the threshold was raised to 25% by Article 28 of the Law On the defence of 
competition. 
 http://www.consultant.ru/document/cons_doc_law_15189/. Accessed 23 January 2014.  
 Gazprom Financial Report for 2004, pp. 7-8. 
stake, sufficient to block key decisions at the company. Gazprom said that it hoped to 
regularise its purchase with the FAS once the shares, which were distributed among several 
entities, had been transferred to the balance-sheet of a single company (FAS zainteresovalas 
pokupkami Gazproma, 2004; Makeev & Siluyanova, 2004). 
In an earlier section it was pointed out that, despite having no legal owners, Gazfond was 
treated as being part of Gazprom group both in Gazproms financial reports to international 
accounting standards (IAS) and in its Russian regulatory disclosures. In that sense, it held no 
value to Gazprom in terms of circumventing the need for prior approval for its acquisitions 
from the FAS. The decision to involve Gazfond in Gazproms acquisition of Mosenergo has a 
different explanation: crucially, the founders of a non-state pension fund were not obliged to 
include details of the pension funds assets and liabilities in its consolidated accounts. 
Furthermore, there were no obligations on the pension fund itself to disclose its own finances 
in any detail (Grivach, 2005)
. Transferring assets to Gazfond therefore kept those assets 
within Gazprom group
 but concealed them from any form of outside scrutiny, including 
regulatory oversight. 
The attraction of this option in the Mosenergo purchase stemmed from the fact that that 
companys shares were publicly traded. If Gazprom had bought shares directly
, it would 
have been expected to apply for prior approval from the FAS before bringing its stake above 
20%. If instead it planned to delay this application until after the fact, then it could not have 
kept what it was doing hidden: its disclosure requirements would have obliged it to reveal the 
true size of its stake. Either way, its actions would have entered the public domain, signalling 
 Further background on this issue came to light in 2013, when the government proposed turning non-
state pension funds into joint-stock companies in order to increase transparency and regulatory 
supervision (Biyanova & Papchenkova, 2013). 
 As Gazproms press-secretary put it, Gazfond is a pension fund and when shares are transferred to 
it, this is not reflected in the accounts [of Gazprom]. But Gazprom retains its interest in gas-powered 
electricity generation [gazovoi generatsii]. Mosenergos shares have changed owner in a formal sense, 
but in essence, they have remained inside the group (Grib, 2004). 
 Or through Gazprominvestholding, which unlike the parent company held a licence to buy 
exchange-traded shares (see Chapter 3). 
to potential speculative investors that Gazprom was intent on a buying spree at Mosenergo. 
The cost to Gazprom of building up its desired stake would have been substantially higher as a 
result.  
There was also a financial advantage in using Gazfond as a buyer of new assets. Hanson 
(2009, p. 21) has pointed to finite financial resources as a potentially significant factor which 
limits Russias appetite for expanded state ownership: as long as policymakers stop well 
short of isolating Russia from the international business community by acts of outright 
expropriation, the acquisition of assets by state companies has to be paid for, and Rosneft and 
Gazprom cannot increase their borrowing indefinitely to finance a rapid rate of acquisition. 
Gazfond gave Gazprom access to additional funds in the form of pension reserves, which 
could prove useful if the Gazprom group was experiencing problems relating to liquidity or 
indebtedness. This money could be spent without affecting the financial position of the group 
itself
. It was also suggested that selling shares to Gazfond (rather than leaving them on its 
own balance sheet) enabled Gazprombank to remain within the capital adequacy requirements 
set by the Russian Central Bank (Grib, 2004)
Atomstroieksport 
As at Mosenergo, Gazprom group most likely made use of Gazfond in its acquisition of 
Atomstroieksport, and for similar reasons. Once again, the way in which the acquisition was 
structured was clearly influenced by the requirement to gain prior approval from the FAS.  
As noted earlier, when the Atomstroieksport takeover was first reported on 8 October 2004, 
the buyers were described as Gazprombank and several of its subsidiaries (Yambaeva, 
2004). Gazprombank refused to confirm the transaction even after it had been announced by a 
 Though it is not clear how much Gazprom group paid to accumulate the Mosenergo stake, some idea 
of the cost can be gleaned from the fact that Gazfond paid RUB 11.7bn (then worth $400m) to 
Gazprombank for the 15.76% stake in September 2004 (Grib, 2004). 
 Although these were relatively liquid assets because they were listed shares, they would have added 
to the banks total risk-weighted assets, against which it was obliged to make sufficient capital 
provision. 
government official on 15 October (Gazprombank poluchil kontrol nad ZAO 
Atomstroieksport, 2004). The first formal confirmation came at the end of November 2004, 
when Gazprom revealed in a consolidated financial report that the group now controlled 
53.85% of the company (FAS zainteresovalas pokupkami Gazproma, 2004). It did not 
apply to the FAS for permission for this purchase until December. The applicant was a 
wholly-owned subsidiary of Gazprombank named OOO Finkom, which was now the owner of 
the entire 53.85% stake. In other words, in the weeks after the 7 October transaction, the 
original buying entities had transferred their Atomstroieksport shares to Finkom. 
This use of multiple entities to buy the controlling stake in Atomstroieksport was almost 
certainly a repeat of the methods used in the Mosenergo case. Again, it was done in order to 
delay the moment when application was made to the FAS. It is likely that the buyers again 
included Gazfond or affiliates thereof, which for the reasons outlined above would have 
helped conceal the real size of the Gazprom group stake. Unlike Mosenergo, Atomstroieksport 
was not a listed entity, so the motive here was not to deter speculative investors. Instead, it 
was most likely the time-sensitive nature of the deal that prompted Gazprombank to use these 
methods again. To recap, the government headed by Mikhail Kasyanov had an agreement 
with OMZ-Silovye Mashiny on restoring Atomstroieksport to state control. Then in March 
2004, a new government headed by Mikhail Fradkov was put in place, and OMZ-Silovye 
Mashiny was obliged to wait and see whether the new government would honour the existing 
agreement. Shortly afterwards, the OMZ-Silovye Mashiny merger unwound and Bendukidze 
(who resumed control of Atomstroieksport as a result) joined the government of a foreign 
country. Although technically this meant placing his shares in OMZ (through which he 
controlled Atomstroieksport) in blind trust, the new Russian government no doubt resolved at 
this point that Atomstroieksport needed to be restored to state control as quickly as possible. 
Under the circumstances, Gazprombank presumably judged that it was worth cutting corners 
on the FAS approval for the sake of expediting the takeover.  
When the bank subsequently sold a 4% stake in Atomstroieksport to TVEL, it then sought to 
sell its remaining 49% to Forpost-Management, and once again the FAS regulations shaped 
how this was done. It first sold Forpost a 19.9% stake (i.e. just below the threshold requiring 
FAS approval) in June 2006, and then in the same month it applied to increase this stake to 
49%. Thus the aim was to sell as many shares as possible before having to wait for FAS 
permission. Presumably, this was motivated by Gazprombanks capital adequacy 
requirements, i.e. its wish to offload as much of this relatively illiquid asset as possible 
without having to wait for approval from the FAS. 
In the earlier section which assessed OMZs ownership outcome, it was determined that 
Gazfond must have been the companys hidden controlling beneficiary from November 2005 
onwards. Using Gazfond as the buyer helped Gazprom to deny its involvement in the same 
way as it had for a time at Mosenergo. Initially, OMZs buyers faced a similar predicament: 
like Mosenergo, OMZ was a listed company, and the application to FAS would signal to 
speculative investors that Forpost intended to build up a substantial stake
In terms of secrecy, however, the OMZ takeover in November 2005 was a more extreme 
version of the earlier Mosenergo and Atomstroieksport cases. In those earlier acquisitions, 
Gazprom group had been prepared to admit its involvement once it had obtained the desired 
number of shares in the target company. But at OMZ, the identity of the ultimate controlling 
beneficiaries between November 2005 and February 2009 was never revealed. Something 
made Gazprom want to keep its involvement secret long after it had gained control over the 
asset. 
 In February 2006, when Gazprombank announced that it was representing OMZs buyers, who had 
gained a 75% stake, it also said it was considering de-listing the company and changing its legal form 
from open to closed joint-stock company. This may have been the intention at the time, but the delisting 
and change in legal form never happened, and there was speculation that the announcement was 
designed at least in part to dampen investor appetite for OMZ shares (Povestka dnya: OMZ stanet 
ZAO, 2006). 
Vedomosti newspaper cited a source close to the negotiations leading up to the OMZ takeover, 
who said that it became clear during the talks that Gazprom and its affiliates would not be able 
to buy the company. This was because it included two engineering companies in the Czech 
Republic named Skoda JS and Skoda Steel, and this meant prior approval would need to be 
sought from the European antitrust body, i.e. the European Commission  (Yegorova & 
Malkova, 2005). These Czech companies had been acquired by OMZ-Silovye Mashiny in 
April 2004 (Lemeshko, 2004a; OMZ-Silovye Mashiny prishli v Chekhiyu, 2004). The 
source noted that relations between Gazprom and the European Commission were not good, 
implying that permission for the deal was not expected to be forthcoming (Yegorova & 
Malkova, 2005)
Clearly, a simpler way for Gazprom to avoid problems with the European Commission would 
have been to cut these Czech assets out of the OMZ purchase. But there are indications that 
the buyers saw them as an important part of the OMZ business. Sergei Lipsky, who took over 
as OMZs CEO after the company bought the Czech assets (and who therefore might have 
had reason to point to his predecessors mistakes), said in a December 2004 interview that 
those new assets were a logical addition to OMZs existing businesses. Thanks to these 
assets the company has gained access to European markets [] We would have needed at 
least five years to gain access to those markets ourselves. He also noted that there would be 
considerable technology transfer from the Czech plants to OMZs existing Russian plants 
(Lemeshko, 2004c). 
The European Commission hypothesis comes from just this one source cited in a single (albeit 
highly reputable) Russian newspaper. Efforts to find corroborating evidence elsewhere proved 
fruitless. It is, however, consistent with the fact that the mystery surrounding OMZs 
controlling beneficiaries ended in February 2009, when Gazprombank acquired OMZs parent 
 It is indeed the case that there have historically been tensions between Gazprom and the European 
Commission, albeit the main focus of those tensions has been Gazproms allegedly anti-competitive 
practices in its European gas sales (Riley, 2012). 
company Forpost-Management (Gazprombank stal sobstvennikom 85% aktsii ZAO 
Forpost-Menedzhment, kontroliruyushchego OMZ, 2009). As explained earlier, 
Gazprombank had ceased legally to be part of Gazprom group in 2007. Therefore the 
European Commission no longer had any legal grounds to cite difficulties with Gazprom as an 
objection to Gazprombanks ownership of OMZ
Using Gazfond as buyer did not in itself pre-empt possible objections from the European 
Commission, since (as explained above) the pension fund was at the time still being treated by 
Gazprom as a member of its group of companies. But because neither Gazprom nor Gazfond 
needed to disclose details of the assets held by the pension company, channelling ownership 
through Gazfond was crucial in maintaining the secrecy surrounding OMZs controlling 
beneficiaries. It allowed Gazprom and Gazprombank to deny publicly that they had any 
affiliation to OMZs buyers, secure in the knowledge that this could not be proved otherwise. 
However, the OMZ acquisition was again structured in a complex way, rather than simply 
involving Gazfond as the buyer. When it was first announced in November 2005, the 
investment bank UFG, which acted as settlor and organiser, claimed that the buyers were 
several entities who were not affiliated with each other, and that accordingly the deal did not 
require antitrust approval (Yambaeva et al., 2005). The fact that UFG felt the need to make 
the latter point explicit indicates that the deal may well have been deliberately structured in 
order to bypass the need to seek prior approval from the FAS. As at Mosenergo and 
Atomstroieksport, the multiple entities which made the initial acquisition then transferred their 
shares to a single company (in this case, Forpost-Management). Once again, this single 
company duly applied to the FAS for permission at a time that the buyers deemed most 
appropriate for them. In June 2006, Forpost applied to the FAS both to increase its 
 At the time of Gazprombanks purchase of Forpost-Management in February 2009, OMZ still had 
its Czech assets. It subsequently sold one of these assets in July 2010, but was still in possession of 
Skoda JS at the time of writing. 
Atomstroieksport stake from 19.9% to 49%, and to increase its OMZ stake (which it claimed 
was 19.93%) to 95% (Aliev, 2007; Malkova & Mazneva, 2007; Malkova, 2007a). 
Once again, Gazfond (whose pension reserves stood at RUB 244.8bn ($8.6bn) as of the end of 
2005 (Pensionnye rezervy, n.d.)) provided a useful alternative source of funds at a time 
when Gazprom groups financial situation was strained. In the two months preceding 
Gazfonds acquisition of OMZ, Gazprom had acquired a 75.68% stake in oil company 
Sibneft (Gazprom, 2006, p. 7). This was financed via a $13bn bridging loan from a 
consortium of Western banks (Ostrovsky, 2005), and left Gazprom highly leveraged, with net 
debt of just under $30bn as of the end of 2005 (Fitch upgrades Gazprom, 2006). Granted, 
the OMZ purchase price (believed to have been between $50m and $70m) was trivial to a 
company of Gazproms scale. However, in making the acquisition Gazprom was also 
assuming OMZs debt, which stood at $221m at the end of 2005 (Finansovye rezultaty za 
2005 god po MSFO svidetelstvuyut ob uspekhakh programmy optimizatsii kommercheskikh 
i administrativnykh zatrat, 2006)
Response of the FAS to Gazproms actions 
The interactions described above between Gazprom group and the FAS provide a mixed 
picture of partial compliance with the relevant law and some direct contraventions. In this 
respect, the picture differs from the account in the previous chapter of Gazproms relationship 
to constraints relating to corporate governance. In that previous chapter, Gazprom was seen to 
be frequently distorting the spirit of the relevant laws and regulations, but no evidence was 
found of any direct contraventions. Gazproms more cavalier attitude can doubtless be 
explained to a significant extent by the fact it could rely on only a limited response from the 
FAS, and the following account shows that Gazprom did indeed largely escape sanction for its 
violations.  
 By structuring the acquisition via the pension fund, Gazprom was only assuming OMZs debt in the 
loosest sense. It was not required to reflect OMZs liabilities in its own consolidated accounts, because 
it had no legal ownership over OMZ. 
The FAS reacted to the official acknowledgement that Gazprombank had gained control of 
Atomstroieksport by writing to Gazprom in December 2004 requesting information regarding 
the acquisition, something Gazprom was required by law to provide in a timely fashion (FAS 
zainteresovalas pokupkami Gazproma, 2004). In January 2005 the FAS said that the 
information had not been provided within the required time-frame, and that it would soon be 
deciding on what action to take in response to this administrative violation (Grivach, 2005). 
But in March the FAS granted post-factum permission for the Atomstroieksport acquisition, 
saying that it had found no violations either from the point of view of market dominance or 
from the point of view of the legal requirements to apply in advance of concluding the deal 
(FAS odobrila pokupku Gazpromom kontrolnogo paketa Atomstroieksporta, 2005).  
The main action taken by the FAS with respect to the two acquisitions followed the June 2006 
application by Forpost-Management to increase its stake in Atomstroieksport to 49%, and its 
stake in OMZ to 95%. At the time, Forpost held a 19.9% stake (just below the threshold 
requiring approval) in both companies. The FAS delayed its decision on this application until 
May 2007. Unusually, its decision was to deny approval
. Contemporary press reports 
suggested that this decision reflected the FASs hostility towards Gazprom. But the FAS cited 
two apparently objective reasons for its rejection: firstly, Forpost had failed to provide the 
information requested on the identity of its ultimate beneficiaries, making it impossible to 
determine the impact the deals would have on competitiveness in the heavy engineering 
sector; secondly, Forpost had by the end of 2006 increased its stake in OMZ without waiting 
for a decision from the FAS. This second point meant that the information in Forposts 
application, on which the FAS was being asked to opine, was no longer accurate (Aliev, 2007; 
Belikov, 2007a; Malkova & Mazneva, 2007; Malkova, 2007a). For a year, Gazprombank 
abided by this ruling and held on to the 30% Atomstroieksport stake it had intended to sell to 
Forpost. But in June 2008, it went ahead and sold the stake in direct contravention of the FAS 
 In 2006, the FAS declined only 2.2% of the 6000 applications it received (Belikov, 2007a).  
ruling, and notified the FAS of this after the fact. The FAS said that it was studying this 
notification to determine whether the transaction had been legal (Denisova, 2008). There is no 
record of the FAS having taken any legal action against Forpost
The FAS said that it intended to fine Forpost for its failure to gain prior approval to increase 
its OMZ stake, but the amount of the fine was a mere RUB 500,000 (approximately $1,600). 
The antitrust body refused to be drawn on whether it intended to challenge the transaction in 
court (Belikov, 2007a). The evidence suggests that it elected not do so
. Forpost retained its 
OMZ stake at approximately the same level, rather than proceed as it had done at 
Atomstroieksport by increasing its stake despite the FAS ruling
Growing  but limited  authority of the FAS 
The above account shows that Gazproms partial compliance with the law requiring prior FAS 
approval for deals was matched by an only partial willingness on the part of the FAS to 
sanction non-compliance. Although growing in independent authority, the regulatory body 
was still relatively powerless against the might of Gazprom and in any case had only limited 
sanctioning powers available. 
Created in March 2004 as the successor to the Ministry for Antimonopoly Policy, the FAS 
was headed by Igor Artemyev, under whose leadership it began to fight anti-competitive 
practices much more actively than in the previous 10 years (Panov, 2005). This helps to 
explain why the FAS had played a less significant role in determining ownership outcomes in 
the 2002 takeovers of the previous chapter. Much of the work of the FAS focused on other 
anti-competitive practices (such as price-fixing or cartelisation) for which it was authorised to 
apply relatively severe penalties. Against companies that failed to comply with the law 
 Based on searches of press archives and the centralised database of arbitrazh court cases, which is  
maintained by the Supreme Arbitrazh Court and available at http://kad.arbitr.ru   
 See fn. 280. 
 As of the end of 2011, Forposts stake in OMZ was 46.31%. This was down from 49.9% the year 
before, but was still enough to exercise voting control. Source: OMZ Consolidated Financial 
Statements, 31 December 2011, p. 28. 
requiring prior approval for transactions, its powers were meagre. It could unilaterally impose 
a fine on such companies, but this was a token amount not exceeding RUB 500,000 (around 
$1600) (Grivach, 2005; Malkova, 2008; Medvedeva, 2007c). In principle, it could apply to an 
arbitrazh court to have the transaction annulled. But in order to be successful, it needed to 
prove that the acquisition had been anti-competitive (Malkova & Mazneva, 2007). In a 
February 2007 interview, Artemyev claimed that the agency was successful in 80% of the 
cases it brought to court (Corcoran, 2007). But the vast majority of these cases related to other 
types of anti-competitive activity. 
In the same interview, Artemyev made clear that the agency had a negative attitude to 
Gazproms growing monopolism. The two sides had just emerged from a bitter legal battle, 
which had begun two months before the OMZ acquisition, in September 2005. The FAS had 
approved Gazproms acquisition of the gas producing company Nortgaz, but had imposed a 
highly significant condition on this approval: Gazprom group would not be permitted to buy 
any further controlling stakes in gas-producing companies in Russia. If it did so, the FAS 
would go to court to invalidate the transaction (FAS razreshila vernut Nortgaz pod 
kontrol Gazproma, 2005). Gazprom successfully challenged this condition in court, and by 
January 2007 the FAS had dropped its condition (Surzhenko, 2007). Artemyev noted in the 
aforementioned interview that the FAS was successful against Gazprom in only 30% of cases 
(as opposed to an 80% overall success rate). But although he implied that the courts were 
biased in Gazproms favour, he also claimed that we normally launch about 20 suits against 
Gazprom a year and there have never been any complaints from the government or the 
Kremlin. 
It appears that the FAS rarely exercised its right to take companies to court specifically for 
having failed to gain prior approval for a deal. Unsurprisingly, therefore, there have been 
occasions when Gazprom and Gazprombank have chosen to proceed without prior approval, if 
time was pressing. In the later acquisition of Sibneftegaz by Gazprombank, a source at the 
bank made the calculation explicit by saying that, because the FAS fine was so small, it will 
be easier to pay the fine now, rather than get together all the necessary documents and wait for 
the FAS decision on approval. All this bureaucracy takes a long time, which on this occasion 
we didnt have (Podobedova, 2007). 
The FAS found two ways to make the most of the limited powers available to it. The 
conditional approval, as with the Nortgaz acquisition, was one tactic: failure to comply with 
the conditions imposed by the FAS gave the latter a sounder basis for challenging the original 
deal in court (Medvedeva, 2007c). The second tactic was to delay reaching a decision on an 
application, thus creating an aura of legal risk around the acquired asset because of the 
theoretical possibility that the transaction might be annulled in court. Delaying tactics were 
used when the independent gas producer Novatek announced in September 2004 that it would 
sell a blocking stake to French company Total. The FAS made it clear there would be no 
decision on approval until Novatek had carried out a planned IPO. Novateks owners then 
got the message, doing virtually everything in their power to squirm out of the deal with 
Total without losing face (Heinrich & Kusznir, 2005, p. 24). On that occasion, Novatek no 
doubt understood that the stance taken by the FAS reflected a wider political opposition to the 
deal, which was in turn based on concern over a Western company taking a major stake in 
Russias second largest gas producer. Where that wider political opposition was absent, 
delaying tactics from the FAS were less likely to deter a state-backed company such as 
Gazprom. In his 2007 interview, Artemyev said that the FAS had ultimately succeeded only in 
delaying Gazproms acquisitions of Nortgaz and Mosenergo
, implying that to him such an 
outcome was better than nothing when the FAS had objections to a deal but did not have the 
power to block it. 
 In 2007, Gazprom sought FAS approval to bring its stake in Mosenergo up to controlling 
(Medvedeva, 2007b).  
Conclusion 
The evidence from the cases offers little support for the notion that the SLCTs had predatory 
motives. The decision to bring Atomstroieksport back into state hands was motivated by 
international pressure from its clients, who otherwise questioned the value of the Russian state 
guarantees underlying their orders, and by the belief that only a state-owned company would 
refrain from abusing its monopoly position as the gateway for exports of equipment for 
nuclear power stations. The state may, as Pappe and Galukhina (2009, p. 174) suggest, have 
been prompted by Bendukidzes takeover of Atomstroieksport to push out private capital at all 
nuclear-related enterprises including OMZ. But the particular importance of Izhorskie Zavody 
to the governments strategy for the nuclear industry, and concerns over Bendukidzes having 
joined the Georgian government, probably best explain why the state was demanding OMZs 
return to state control.  
There is also sufficient evidence to state with some confidence that the buyers decision to 
become involved in these takeovers was not motivated only by naked self-interest. Granted, 
Gazproms decision to buy OMZ was almost certainly influenced by the prospect of 
considerable profits from the supply of government orders for new reactors as part of the 
nuclear expansion programme. The successful realisation of this programme also promised 
additional revenues for Gazprom (and for the government) because it would free up more gas 
for export. Thus commercial incentives dovetailed with the wish to help implement 
government strategy. This is not the same as saying that they were simply opportunists 
battling with Rosatom for a share of the spoils from the nuclear expansion programme. They 
duly transferred Atomstroieksport to Rosatoms control, and apparently received no 
meaningful compensation for providing this service. At OMZ they backed up their talk of the 
need to preserve Russias technological sovereignty with genuine efforts to revive this 
important part of the heavy engineering industry. Rather than being deliberately obstructive in 
order to maximise their profits from sales of reactors to Rosatom, they went through a number 
of changes of senior management, in search of people who could mend fences with the 
government agency. Crucially, they also decided to keep OMZ alive with new credits after the 
hoped-for flood of orders from Rosatom failed to materialise and doubts arose as to whether it 
could otherwise survive as a going concern. This decision makes little sense from a purely 
commercial perspective and provides convincing evidence that the altruistic, patriotic rhetoric 
of the silovarchs at Forpost and Gazprombank was not in this case a mere smokescreen for 
venal self-interest, as we would expect based on the remarks made by Murtazaev (2006) and 
Hanson (2007b, p. 33).  
Nevertheless, the institutional self-interest of the buyers is an important part of the explanation 
for their subsequent failure to cooperate effectively with Rosatom, thereby endangering the 
same government programme they claimed to be intent on helping to fulfil. Williamson 
(1981) proved helpful in explaining why two sets of institutions which seem to have been 
genuinely interested in helping the government realise its strategy ended up undermining it. 
As a result, the distinctly mixed results of Gazprom groups involvement in Russias nuclear 
engineering industry are explained in a way that is more nuanced and convincing than typical 
accounts based on rivalry between two sets of interest-maximising bureaucratic factions. From 
the states perspective, the failure to bring about the cooperation between the two sides can be 
attributed to a lack of coordination between the various state actors and institutions that had 
oversight of the nuclear and heavy engineering industries, and to overlapping responsibilities 
between them. This recalls the emphasis placed by Johnson (1982, p. 319) on the importance 
of a pilot organisation in successful state-led development. Indeed, the story of Rosatoms 
and OMZs failure to cooperate provides an illustration of just how state-led developmental 
projects can founder in ways that do not require any of the state agents involved to be 
harbouring corrupt or predatory motives.  
The examination of the way the Atomstroieksport and OMZ acquisitions were executed, and 
the precise way in which ownership was structured, has highlighted the extent to which these 
were shaped by both domestic and international institutional constraints on the buyers. The 
use of multiple entities including Gazfond helped the buyers to delay the moment when they 
turned to the antitrust regulator for approval for the deals, so that they could expedite the deals 
in time-sensitive circumstances and avoid signalling their intentions to speculative investors 
who would drive up the price of the takeover. The peculiar legal status of Gazfond enabled the 
buyers to keep their identity secret and avoid problems with the European Unions antitrust 
body. Gazfond also provided a fresh source of off-the-books funds for a group that was 
reaching the limits of its indebtedness.  
That Gazproms actions were shaped by institutional constraints at all is significant in itself, 
because in an ideal-typical kleptocracy one would expect a state-owned company to operate 
without regard to such constraints, especially when it is engaging in a takeover that has the 
governments full support. But in these two SLCTs, the state-backed buyers did not simply 
respond with meek compliance to the institutional constraints stemming from the FAS. 
Instead, their response was a mixture of compliance, gaming of the rules, and direct breach, 
as follows:  
1) using multiple entities including Gazfond, they delayed the moment when application was 
made for prior FAS approval for the acquisitions. They maximised the stakes that could be 
built up without the need for such approval (compliance, but with some gaming of the rules 
and possible breach through concealment of the amount of shares held by Gazfond);  
2) they duly applied for FAS approval (compliance), but at OMZ did not wait for this 
approval before building up the stake further (breach); 
3) after the FAS declined the application, they halted the planned sale of the remaining 30% 
stake in Atomstroieksport to Forpost-Management, and abandoned the idea of increasing 
further Forposts stake in OMZ (compliance); 
4) but after a year, they proceeded with the Atomstroieksport sale in direct contravention of 
the FAS ruling (breach). 
How to explain this particular mixture? North (1990, p. 4) writes that an essential part of the 
functioning of institutions is the costliness of ascertaining violations and the severity of 
punishment. The extent to which Gazproms actions were shaped by institutional constraints 
can no doubt largely be explained in terms of the possibility and severity of sanctions for non-
compliance. As discussed above, the FAS was gaining real independent authority under its 
new leadership, and had begun taking companies including Gazprom to the arbitrazh courts. 
The FAS had a significantly below-average success rate in court cases it brought against 
Gazprom, and limited powers available to it without recourse to the courts. It may be that it 
chose not to pursue court action against the buyers of Atomstroiekport and OMZ (even when 
they directly contravened a FAS ruling) because it did not believe in the possibility of a fair 
trial against this powerful state-owned and state-backed company. But it is also possible that it 
decided that it could not prove either acquisition was anti-competitive, the only legal basis on 
which it could secure a court ruling to annul a transaction. The FAS may have realised that 
legal action would only prompt OMZ buyers to take defensive action by selling OMZ shares 
on to offshore companies and making it all but impossible to prove that those companies were 
part of a single group
Significantly, in these and other cases involving Gazprom, the FAS made substantial use of 
the powers available to it without going to court (delaying approval and/or making it subject 
to certain conditions). Its head, Igor Artemyev, appeared to view successfully delaying deals 
of which the FAS did not approve as a worthy goal when blocking them was not practically 
possible. Thus, even when considerable doubts remain regarding the independence of the 
 This possibility was suggested by a lawyer cited in Belikov (2007a). 
courts from the executive, institutions can still cause difficulties for state-backed companies, 
raising the costs of non-compliance with existing legislation
The buyers were apparently confident enough of their privileged position vis--vis the courts 
to ultimately go against a direct ruling from the FAS  and their confidence proved well-
founded. But it is also significant that their behaviour showed an interest in complying with 
the relevant legislation: they did apply for FAS approval, even if this was after the fact; if the 
20% threshold demanding prior FAS approval was an irrelevance to them, they would not 
have built up their stakes in Atomstroieksport and OMZ to 19.9% before applying for that 
approval; and the FAS ruling against the sale of the remaining 30% stake in Atomstroieksport 
made them pause for a year before proceeding nevertheless with the transaction. This limited 
interest in compliance might be explicable solely in terms of the distinctly inadequate (but 
greater than zero) capacity of the FAS to sanction non-compliance. But Gans-Morse (2011) 
may be right to suggest that another force was at work in moving Russian companies away 
from force to law: because of its exposure to external creditors and shareholders, 
Gazprom group was on balance interested in avoiding controversy and complying with the 
legislation. This limited effect was, however, only sufficient to constrain Gazproms actions 
when there was no overriding priority to expedite its takeovers. 
 Gazprombanks sale of its remaining 30% stake in Atomstroieksport to Forpost-Management was 
aimed at helping the bank meet its capital adequacy requirements. By ruling against the transaction, the 
FAS at least delayed this sale for a few months, and thereby imposed a material penalty of sorts on the 
bank. 
Chapter 5. State-led coercive takeovers, 
kleptocracy and the developmental state 
Since Vladimir Putin first became Russias President in 2000, the state has played an 
increasingly active and interventionist role in the economy, and one important manifestation 
of this trend has been its involvement in a large number of coercive takeovers of privately-
owned businesses. The best known case is the Yukos affair which began in 2003, but there 
have been many other, less prominent takeovers. It is no exaggeration to say that threats to 
property rights are an everyday concern for Russias private business actors, and that the state 
is now perceived as the greatest source of such threats (Gans-Morse, 2012; Rochlitz, 2013; 
Volkov, 2004).  
Because coercive takeovers involving the state have become such a prominent feature of the 
political economy of modern Russia, it is important that they be correctly understood. While 
many analyses of the Yukos affair specifically have emphasized its political motivations, it is 
also explained as having been essentially an illegal act of predatory takeover by corrupt state 
officials who were motivated by the desire to enrich themselves or increase their power. 
Studies of the wider phenomenon of coercive takeovers involving the state, including the 
works cited above, have emphasized the latter interpretation by seeing them as cases of 
reiderstvo (defining features of which are the illegality of the takeover and the venal motives 
of those involved in bringing it about). Such analysis contributes to the perception that Russia 
under Putin is essentially a kleptocracy, with the state (or individual state actors) given free 
rein to engage in economically-destructive attacks on property rights. 
This thesis is a study of a number of cases of state-led coercive takeover, including the Yukos 
affair. As the venn diagram in Figure 1 (Chapter 1) illustrated, it proceeds from a belief that 
some cases (perhaps a small fraction of the overall set, but including some takeovers of 
disproportionate political significance, including the Yukos affair) may be motivated by 
considerations other than material gain. The cases were chosen for study in part because they 
appeared not to be explicable as examples of reiderstvo. The first central research question of 
the thesis therefore asked precisely what was motivating the state actors who were involved in 
instigating these takeovers.  
The Yukos affair saw the company broken up and its assets effectively nationalised: the 
government sold them off at auction and controlled the process in a way that ensured that 
almost all of the assets were bought by state-owned Rosneft. Yukoss fate has understandably 
been seen as part of (or as the beginning of) a broader trend of significant expansion of state 
ownership in Putins Russia, not only in the oil sector, but in the economy as a whole. Various 
explanations have been offered for this trend, which generally fall under the same categories 
as those offered for the Yukos affair specifically: it has been seen as driven by the rent-
seeking appetites of state officials, or as a response to their fear of the political threat posed by 
the oligarchs, or as an attempt at a state-led solution to developmental challenges. However, 
there is a puzzling feature to the state-led coercive takeovers studied in this thesis: some of 
them (i.e. the cases of Russneft and Bashneft) resulted in the asset being sold to new private 
owners rather than being nationalised.  
These differing ownership outcomes present a problem when attempting to explain the 
motivations behind the takeovers: if companies are forcibly nationalised so that venal state 
officials can enrich themselves, then what explains those coercive takeovers that do not result 
in nationalisation? If there were other good reasons for wanting to increase the amount of state 
ownership (as part of a state-led developmental push, or as a way to counter the growing 
political power of the oligarchs), then why did the state not take the opportunity to 
nationalise all the targets of its coercive takeovers? The solution to this problem started with a 
recognition that state-led coercive takeover and expanding state ownership are two distinct 
phenomena from an analytical perspective: not only did some of the takeovers fail to have a 
nationalising outcome, but a significant proportion of the expansion of state ownership has 
been the result of voluntary acquisitions by state-owned companies rather than coercive 
takeover. The factors driving the expansion of state ownership might well be part of the 
explanation for the phenomenon of state-led coercive takeover, but they cannot account for 
the different forms of ownership that resulted, ranging from state to private. In order to 
gain an adequate understanding of state-led coercive takeovers, it was therefore necessary to 
address the latter point as a second central research question: what are the causal factors 
which determine the varying ownership outcomes of state-led coercive takeover? 
Causes of the takeovers: sovereign development 
To reiterate, this thesis does not set out to challenge the established notion that state-led 
coercive takeovers in Russia can be a form of reiderstvo, i.e. can be the work of state actors 
who are motivated by self-enrichment or self-aggrandisement. Instead it argues that this 
explanation does not hold for certain cases, including some that are highly significant. The 
same techniques that are used successfully by predatory state actors can be, and have been, 
used by the state to achieve political objectives. 
The thesis has coined the term sovereign development in an attempt to encapsulate the 
sometimes conflicting political objectives that underlie the takeovers studied here. Contrary to 
the notion that Putins Russia is a kleptocracy, it has followed Barnes (2006a, 2006b) and 
Wengle (2012) in arguing that the regime pursued economic development and subscribed to 
the view that the state needed to play an activist role in achieving it.  
However, economic development as a strategic goal occasionally conflicted with higher 
priorities. For reasons stemming from the way post-Soviet Russia had come into being in 
1991, and the way market-based institutions including privatisation were introduced in the 
1990s, Putin began his first presidency in 2000 facing threats to the supremacy of central state 
power. In other words, the concentrated political and economic power of certain oligarchs 
and the refusal of certain regional leaders to accept the Kremlins authority on their territory 
challenged what Krasner (1999) terms domestic sovereignty. While economic development 
was in many ways helpful in consolidating state power, it also threatened to strengthen further 
the political power of the forces that were believed to be posing a threat to sovereignty. Thus 
sovereign development involves two vectors (the pursuit of development and the pursuit of 
increased sovereignty) which in Putins Russia sometimes pointed in the same direction, but 
sometimes opposed each other. When they opposed each other, the perceived need to counter 
threats to sovereignty took precedence. 
The oil industry takeovers examined in Chapter 2 are best understood as cases where concerns 
over sovereignty trumped developmental considerations. The existing owners of all three 
targeted companies were involved in political activity that the government identified as a 
threat. The political leadership undertook to neutralise that threat through forcing the business 
owners to give up their assets. Aside from the possibility that the takeover of Bashneft was in 
part driven by the wish to see its petrochemicals assets opened up to the national and global 
economy, these were primarily politically-motivated takeovers that were undertaken despite 
the significant short-term economic damage they caused as demonstrative attacks on property 
rights. The primary objective in all three cases appears to have been to deprive the existing 
owners of their key assets as a way to neutralise them politically: precisely what form of 
ownership resulted and what happened to the assets subsequently was of secondary 
importance. 
At the same time, it would be wrong to suggest that the owners of the targeted businesses 
posed a credible danger to the incumbency of the Putin regime: only Khodorkovsky could be 
viewed as having had any ambitions to overthrow the government, and his chances of success 
in such an undertaking have been vastly exaggerated. The political danger that Putin and his 
allies identified in these business owners lay instead exclusively in their perceived 
undermining of the states sovereignty: Yukos and its owners were seen as exercising undue 
influence over the workings of parliament and becoming involved in matters of foreign policy 
that were the governments prerogative; the owners of Russneft and Bashneft were blamed 
for the Kremlins inability to exercise its authority over the Russian regions of Ingushetia and 
Bashkortostan, respectively.  
In Chapters 3 and 4 the takeovers had different motivations. Underlying them was a decision 
that the assets involved should be taken into state ownership: the lost assets of de facto state-
owned Gazprom should be returned to it; Atomstroieksport belonged in state hands because of 
the state guarantees to foreign buyers that formed the basis of its operations; OMZs Izhorskie 
Zavody in particular needed to be re-nationalised so that it did not hold the nuclear expansion 
programme to ransom by exploiting its monopoly on Russian reactor production. In each case, 
developmental considerations loomed larger than in Chapter 2. State control of Gazprom was 
to be consolidated and the company itself built up as a tool of domestic and foreign policy. 
Restoring ownership of some of these lost assets was intended to solve economic problems 
such as supporting the petrochemicals industry which was seen as one step up the value chain 
from mere natural gas production (Sibur), or keeping alive an ailing infrastructure services 
company that for social reasons could not be allowed to fail (Zapsibgazprom). As Russias 
last surviving enterprise that was capable of producing nuclear reactors, Izhorskie Zavody was 
particularly important to the ambitious developmental programme to expand the share of 
nuclear power in the countrys overall energy mix.  
However, in Chapters 3 and 4 there were related concerns over sovereignty and national 
security. The political leadership was undoubtedly concerned that it had only tentative control 
over Gazprom, its most strategically-important company, and that the company might fall into 
the hands of foreign or domestic enemies. Even if state control could be consolidated by 
obtaining direct control over a majority of the companys voting shares, the fear remained that 
important Gazprom-owned assets might continue to go astray, thereby eroding the companys 
strategic value. There was similar alarm at the prospect of other strategic companies such as 
Atomstroieksport (the sole gateway for construction of nuclear power plants abroad) and 
OMZs Izhorskie Zavody becoming controlled not just by potentially uncooperative private 
business, but by hostile foreign powers. When OMZs owner Kakha Bendukidze joined the 
government of Georgia, it looked as though these fears were being realised. 
Causes of the takeovers: rival rent-seeking explanations 
How do alternative explanations based on rent-seeking fare as rivals to the above sovereign 
development hypothesis? If in fact these takeovers were motivated by rent-seeking, then all 
the talk of sovereignty, national security and development was a mere fig-leaf aimed at 
justifying what was essentially predatory reiderstvo. The oil industry cases in Chapter 2 
provide the most fertile ground for such an interpretation: they were lucrative takeover targets 
and (unlike in Chapters 3 and 4) there was no compelling or relatively self-evident reason for 
the state to want them to change ownership. The main challenge to the rent-seeking 
explanation for these cases lies in the contingent nature of their ownership outcomes. 
Rosnefts political patrons (who are widely held to be responsible for instigating the Yukos 
takeover) cannot have known from the outset that their company would emerge as the owner 
of the majority of Yukoss assets, because, as Gustafson (2012, p. 314) puts it, that outcome 
was effectively a fluke. If they had embarked on the takeover in the hope of enriching 
themselves as the new owners of Yukos, they were therefore taking a surpringly large risk that 
they might lose out to another set of state officials altogether (i.e. the patrons of whichever 
other company might have emerged instead as the new owner). Similarly, the private 
businessmen who took ownership of Russneft and Bashneft do not appear to have been 
involved in instigating the takeovers: rather, they were chosen by the existing owners as 
people who could protect them from attack. If the Russneft and Bashneft takeovers had been 
instigated by state officials with rent-seeking motives, then they were botched attempts at 
reiderstvo. It is possible to construct elaborate theories involving rent-seeking ties between the 
buyers of these companies and whoever was behind the original takeovers. Alternatively, it 
can be argued that eventually those buyers will sell the companies on to their intended owners, 
at which point everything will fall into place. But years have passed and (as of this writing) 
the Russneft takeover has been fully aborted with full ownership restored to its original 
owner. Meanwhile, Bashneft has still not been sold to Rosneft or Gazprom. As a result, 
attempts to explain these takeovers and their ownership outcomes through elaborate theories 
involving rent-seeking state officials have become increasingly difficult to sustain. By 
contrast, if the three oil industry takeovers were primarily aimed at neutralising the existing 
owners as a political threat by depriving them of their key assets, then it is no longer puzzling 
that their ownership outcomes were largely a matter of historical accident. 
In Gazproms campaign to re-gather its lost assets, which was the subject of Chapter 3, there 
were questions around how the existing owners came to control the assets. Accordingly it is 
not so easy to claim that they were the innocent parties attempting to defend their property 
rights from reiderstvo staged by venal state officials. There is undoubtedly widespread 
corruption at Gazprom, and therefore any attempt by the company to increase the size of its 
assets can be seen as increasing the theoretical potential for rent-seeking. However, the way 
that the company managed its newly-regained assets is particularly difficult to square with the 
claim that it took them back so that certain state officials could enrich themselves further. For 
example, the decision to take ownership of Stroitransgaz seems to have been a genuine 
attempt to control the inflated costs of its relationship with that supplier (and it is precisely the 
inflated costs of such relationships that are the most fertile ground for rent-seeking). The 
attempt to save Zapsibgazprom from collapse might not have been commercially prudent, but 
it is not the behaviour one would expect from rent-seekers faced with an unprofitable 
business.  
In Chapter 4, the timing of the OMZ takeover shortly before the announcement of the 
governments nuclear expansion programme certainly gave rise to a suspicion that this was a 
rent-seeking acquisition by people acting on insider information. There looked to be 
significant potential for OMZs new owners to extract rents from Izhorskie Zavodys 
monopoly on reactor production. Additionally, the failure of cooperation between Izhorskie 
Zavody and Rosatom was explained in the Russian press as the result of a factional struggle 
over the windfall of state budget money that was to be spent on financing the nuclear 
expansion. However, close examination of the way OMZ was managed under its new owners 
found evidence that was difficult to square with the idea that they were essentially rent-
seeking opportunists. Rather than using Izhorskie Zavodys monopoly to hold Rosatom to 
ransom, they repeatedly sacked the chief executives of OMZ as they searched for someone 
who could improve relations with Rosatom. And as the company got into increasing financial 
difficulty (not least because of its dispute with Rosatom), they continued to lend it money to 
keep it afloat, apparently far beyond the point where this was commercially prudent. This 
practice of throwing good money after bad (as at Zapsibgazprom) is more commonly 
associated with state-owned companies operating under political pressure. It is not the 
expected behaviour of opportunistic rent-seekers, who when faced with such a situation would 
normally engage instead in predatory asset-stripping.  
In summary, the hypothesis that these state-led coercive takeovers were driven by the political 
leaderships pursuit of sovereign development provides a significantly better fit for the case 
evidence than do rival explanations based on rent-seeking. Even if the patriotic declarations of 
state actors regarding sovereignty and national security are dismissed as mere cover for their 
true, venal, motives, rent-seeking explanations still founder on the evidence from Chapters 3 
and 4 regarding how the assets were subsequently managed by their new owners, and on the 
contingent nature of the ownership outcomes of Chapter 2.  
Explaining the varying ownership outcomes 
In cases of reiderstvo involving state officials, one expects the targeted business to be 
acquired by whichever company (state-owned or private) acts as the vehicle for rent-seeking 
by the state officials responsible. But if, as argued above, the state-led coercive takeovers 
studied in this thesis were undertaken in pursuit of sovereign development rather than rent-
seeking, then the ownership outcomes of those takeovers are likely to have been determined 
by other factors.  
Pappe and Galukhina (2009, pp. 1615) and Radygin and Malginov (2006) have provided a 
set of factors that might determine whether or not a particular takeover results in 
nationalisation. These can be summarised by saying that nationalisation can be the result for 
political reasons: as part of a plan to increase state ownership in the sector, or in order to save 
the company (and/or a wider set of companies on which it depends) from collapse. But it can 
also be the outcome when, for exclusively commercial reasons, a state-owned company 
happens to be best positioned among potential buyers, i.e. it has both the resources available 
to buy the targeted business and a compelling business case for doing so. 
The above framework was intended to be applied when understanding the ownership outcome 
of any takeover. The evidence from the cases has indicated that for state-led coercive 
takeovers that are not cases of reiderstvo, the path to the ownership outcomes is altered 
substantially by the use of state coercion. Firstly, each takeover involved a two-way 
bargaining game between state and existing owner. In each case, the state applied a measure 
of coercion before presenting to the existing owner a carrot-and-stick offer, which, if 
accepted, would see the situation resolved peacefully. The evidence from the cases suggested 
that the offer typically entailed agreeing to sell the targeted business, but also undertaking to 
refrain from the activities that the state considered to be a threat. In some of the cases it also 
involved agreeing to leave the country. The owner could take some comfort from the fact that 
he could expect to receive a substantial sum of money in exchange for the business  perhaps 
even approaching its market value.  
Despite the use of coercion, the evidence from the cases indicated that the state prefers a 
negotiated outcome to the takeover, where the owner accepts the carrot-and-stick offer. 
Such was the bargaining outcome of all but one of the cases studied, the exception being the 
Yukos affair. The reason for the states preferencewhat prevented it from simply pursuing 
forcible seizure of the assets in every casewas that the latter was expensive in terms of the 
administrative resources required to undertake it effectively. Furthermore, there were 
defensive tactics available to the existing owners that could help increase this expense  for 
example, by structuring ownership offshore and otherwise internationalising the business.   
Chapter 1 noted that the process-tracing method adopted in this thesis should aim to provide 
causal explanations that are simple enough to be represented in an arrow-diagram  if this is 
not possible, then it is likely that the explanation itself is too muddy (Van Evera, 1997). 
Figure 10 builds on the game tree provided in Figure 2 (Chapter 1), by summarising how the 
bargaining outcomes of the takeovers (either the negotiated outcome involving the 
owners acceptance of the states carrot-and-stick offer, or full-scale asset seizure by the 
state) translate into their ownership outcomes. 
Figure 10. From bargaining outcomes to ownership outcomes
If the bargaining between state and existing owner fails 
state embarks on the full
happened in the Yukos case. The substantial deployment of state resources that is required to 
do this effectively makes a state ow
the justification that the takeover, and the use of the states resources, was in the public 
interest. It helps to protect the new owner from the reputational and (more importantly) legal 
fallout that ensues from the states arbitrary actions, the effect of which is felt particularly 
acutely abroad.
In the event that the bargaining phase does have a negotiated outcome, either state or private 
ownership is possible. 
and Radygin must play a causal role at this stage: has a political decision been taken to 
. From bargaining outcomes to ownership outcomes
If the bargaining between state and existing owner fails 
state embarks on the full
happened in the Yukos case. The substantial deployment of state resources that is required to 
do this effectively makes a state ow
the justification that the takeover, and the use of the states resources, was in the public 
interest. It helps to protect the new owner from the reputational and (more importantly) legal 
that ensues from the states arbitrary actions, the effect of which is felt particularly 
acutely abroad. 
In the event that the bargaining phase does have a negotiated outcome, either state or private 
ownership is possible. 
and Radygin must play a causal role at this stage: has a political decision been taken to 
full-scale 
asset 
seizure 
negotiated 
. From bargaining outcomes to ownership outcomes
If the bargaining between state and existing owner fails 
state embarks on the full-scale coercive seizure of the assets of the targeted business, as 
happened in the Yukos case. The substantial deployment of state resources that is required to 
do this effectively makes a state ow
the justification that the takeover, and the use of the states resources, was in the public 
interest. It helps to protect the new owner from the reputational and (more importantly) legal 
that ensues from the states arbitrary actions, the effect of which is felt particularly 
In the event that the bargaining phase does have a negotiated outcome, either state or private 
ownership is possible. The aforementioned factors provid
and Radygin must play a causal role at this stage: has a political decision been taken to 
mediating role 
of private 
buyer, or lack 
of interest in 
nationalisation
State 
ownership 
(Yukos) 
decision to 
nationalise 
(e.g. sectoral); 
or commercial 
choice of SOE
. From bargaining outcomes to ownership outcomes
If the bargaining between state and existing owner fails 
scale coercive seizure of the assets of the targeted business, as 
happened in the Yukos case. The substantial deployment of state resources that is required to 
do this effectively makes a state ownership outcome 
the justification that the takeover, and the use of the states resources, was in the public 
interest. It helps to protect the new owner from the reputational and (more importantly) legal 
that ensues from the states arbitrary actions, the effect of which is felt particularly 
In the event that the bargaining phase does have a negotiated outcome, either state or private 
The aforementioned factors provid
and Radygin must play a causal role at this stage: has a political decision been taken to 
mediating role 
of private 
buyer, or lack 
of interest in 
nationalisation 
ownership 
political 
decision to 
nationalise 
(e.g. sectoral); 
or commercial 
choice of SOE 
. From bargaining outcomes to ownership outcomes 
If the bargaining between state and existing owner fails 
scale coercive seizure of the assets of the targeted business, as 
happened in the Yukos case. The substantial deployment of state resources that is required to 
nership outcome most likely
the justification that the takeover, and the use of the states resources, was in the public 
interest. It helps to protect the new owner from the reputational and (more importantly) legal 
that ensues from the states arbitrary actions, the effect of which is felt particularly 
In the event that the bargaining phase does have a negotiated outcome, either state or private 
The aforementioned factors provided by Pappe, Galukhina, Malginov 
and Radygin must play a causal role at this stage: has a political decision been taken to 
(new) Private 
ownership 
(Russneft, 
Bashneft
inst. constraints 
on direct state 
ownership,and/or  
mediating role of 
quasi-state buyer
no inst. 
constraints or 
mediation
If the bargaining between state and existing owner fails to have a negotiated outcome, the 
scale coercive seizure of the assets of the targeted business, as 
happened in the Yukos case. The substantial deployment of state resources that is required to 
ost likely. Nationalisation strengthens 
the justification that the takeover, and the use of the states resources, was in the public 
interest. It helps to protect the new owner from the reputational and (more importantly) legal 
that ensues from the states arbitrary actions, the effect of which is felt particularly 
In the event that the bargaining phase does have a negotiated outcome, either state or private 
ed by Pappe, Galukhina, Malginov 
and Radygin must play a causal role at this stage: has a political decision been taken to 
(new) Private 
ownership 
Russneft, 
Bashneft) 
inst. constraints 
on direct state 
ownership,and/or  
mediating role of 
state buyer 
no inst. 
constraints or 
mediation 
to have a negotiated outcome, the 
scale coercive seizure of the assets of the targeted business, as 
happened in the Yukos case. The substantial deployment of state resources that is required to 
. Nationalisation strengthens 
the justification that the takeover, and the use of the states resources, was in the public 
interest. It helps to protect the new owner from the reputational and (more importantly) legal 
that ensues from the states arbitrary actions, the effect of which is felt particularly 
In the event that the bargaining phase does have a negotiated outcome, either state or private 
ed by Pappe, Galukhina, Malginov 
and Radygin must play a causal role at this stage: has a political decision been taken to 
Direct state 
ownership 
(Atomstroieksport, 
some Gazprom 
assets) 
Fudged state 
ownership (OMZ, 
some Gazprom 
assets) 
to have a negotiated outcome, the 
scale coercive seizure of the assets of the targeted business, as 
happened in the Yukos case. The substantial deployment of state resources that is required to 
. Nationalisation strengthens 
the justification that the takeover, and the use of the states resources, was in the public 
interest. It helps to protect the new owner from the reputational and (more importantly) legal 
that ensues from the states arbitrary actions, the effect of which is felt particularly 
In the event that the bargaining phase does have a negotiated outcome, either state or private 
ed by Pappe, Galukhina, Malginov 
and Radygin must play a causal role at this stage: has a political decision been taken to 
Direct state 
Atomstroieksport, 
some Gazprom 
Fudged state 
some Gazprom 
nationalise the company, and what kind of company (state-owned or private) is best-placed 
from a commercial perspective to emerge as the buyer? However, the evidence from the cases 
has indicated that the use of state coercion increases the odds in favour of this negotiated 
bargaining outcome resulting in a private or quasi-state ownership outcome. This is because 
the state frequently uses an intermediary who promises to facilitate the negotiated outcome it 
prefers. In order to qualify as intermediary, the buyer needs to be at some remove from the 
forces identified by the existing owner as responsible for the coercion being used against him. 
The private business owners who emerged as buyers in the Russneft and Bashneft cases 
(Chapter 2) played such a role: they were not foisted by the state on the existing owners, but 
were approached and/or chosen by those owners as people who promised to be able to call off 
the Kremlins pressure. Similarly, in the Gazprom cases of Chapter Three, Usmanov was 
valuable to Gazprom as an intermediary because of his past dealings with its former 
management, with whom the existing owners had good relations, and because he was a private 
businessman in his own right as well as the hired manager of a de facto state-owned company 
(Gazprominvestholding). Remarks made by both the successful intermediaries (Usmanov and 
Yevtushenkov) and by some of the existing owners confirmed how resistant the latter were to 
the idea of being forced to sell to the same people who were responsible for the coercion 
being used against them. That these intermediaries would be involved in the ownership 
outcome as well as the negotiations is not entirely self-evident but also not surprising. It seems 
likely that Yevtushenkov helped Gutseriev on the condition (or at least on the understanding) 
that he would subsequently receive a 49% stake in Russneft. Usmanovs role as negotiator 
did not automatically translate into the selection of his company Gazprominvestholding as 
the buyer, but it did favour that selection, because it increased his credibility as a negotiator 
independent from Gazprom and presumably gave him greater freedom to negotiate terms. 
As the arrow-diagram indicates, once the decision has been made to take a company into state 
ownership, a final choice is made between a direct purchase by a state-owned company and an 
indirect purchase via one of its subsidiaries or affiliates. The Gazprom cases suggest that this 
decision can be driven in part by whether or not the indirect route promises to facilitate a 
negotiated outcome. But what became abundantly clear from Chapters 3 and 4 was that 
Gazprom also faced institutional constraints on its taking direct ownership of new 
acquisitions. These constraints largely consisted of controls aimed at ensuring that the 
management of a state-owned company cannot make decisions on the buying and selling of 
major assets without appropriate sign-off from the state, and that any large company obtain 
prior approval from the antitrust regulator before making acquisitions that had the potential to 
undermine competition in the market. The problem was less that the relevant approvals might 
not be forthcoming (though Gazprom was driven to conceal its involvement in the OMZ 
acquisition because of fears it would be blocked by a European body, and its quasi-affiliate 
Forpost-Management had its application to the Federal Antimonopoly Service turned down), 
and more that they took time to obtain, thereby reducing the ability of the state-owned 
company to respond in a flexible and agile manner in time-sensitive situations. The coercive 
takeovers were particularly time-sensitive: either the existing owners were strategizing to 
place their assets offshore or otherwise hamper the states ability to seize them, or (in the case 
of Atomstroieksport and OMZ) the same sovereignty-related reasons why the companies 
needed to be taken over also dictated that this be done as quickly as possible. Under the 
circumstances, the buyers felt they could not afford to wait for months for the appropriate 
sign-off from government and regulator. They discovered that by structuring the acquisitions 
via subsidiaries and other affiliates (or more specifically, via a pension fund whose legal 
status as an affiliate was usefully ambiguous), they were able to bypass these institutional 
constraints. 
Kleptocracy and coercion-constraining institutions 
The two key arguments summarised above, which form the answers to the projects central 
research questions, present a challenge to the notion that Russia is a kleptocracy. The term 
implies (in the words of the Bill Browder epigraph to the thesis) a ruling elite that is interested 
only in stealing money rather than the execution of public service. The evidence from the 
cases indicates that the state actors involved did in fact have a significant interest in public 
service, though that service was arguably more to the state (as they conceived it) than to the 
public. But kleptocracy also requires an environment that offers no meaningful constraints on 
the thieving ways of the ruling elite. Granted, all of the cases involved the use of state 
coercion in ways that would not be possible in a country where property rights are adequately 
protected from attack by the state. Indeed, if they did not involve such coercion, they would 
not have qualified as cases. But constraints on this coercion were important in shaping the 
takeovers in a number of key ways: 
 they meant that a negotiated outcome was favoured over full-scale asset seizure, 
therefore favouring private or quasi-state buyers and increasing the chances that the 
existing owner would walk away with substantial compensation for his assets;  
 they gave the existing owners real options in terms of tactics they could use to 
improve their bargaining position or rescue some of their assets from seizure; 
 they prompted state-owned companies to find indirect forms of ownership when 
acting as buyers in time-sensitive takeovers.  
In an ideal-type kleptocracy, the takeovers would have proceeded quite differently. There 
would have been no bargaining, no chance for the owners to salvage any of their assets, and 
no need for innovative new ownership structures. 
The cases have shed some light on the question of precisely what institutions act as constraints 
on the states use of coercion to attack property rights. As noted in Chapter 1, Frye (2004) 
wrote that our understanding of this question was limited, but suggested that the key to 
tackling the commitment problem is a legal system and judiciary that is independent of the 
executive. Meanwhile, some scholars have argued that Russias legal system is best 
characterised by telephone justice, i.e. the ability of the executive to interfere arbitrarily in 
the workings of the courts, including by dictating verdicts (Ledeneva, 2008, 2011; Varese, 
2005). Telephone justice is the antithesis of what Frye suggests is crucial to constraining 
state coercion. Since the states actions are nevertheless being constrained somehow, we can 
conclude that either telephone justice does not extend to the whole of Russias legal system, 
or that the constraints come from outside that system. 
One constraint on state coercion that does indeed come from outside Russias legal system 
stems from the fact that the Russian state and Russian business do not exist in isolation from 
the rest of the world. International exposure means occasionally being subject to legal 
constraints from outside Russias jurisdiction. An excellent example is the US legal action 
brought by Yukos which forced Gazprom to abandon its plans to buy Yuganskneftegaz at 
auction. Rosneft, whose international exposure at the time was minimal, was able to step into 
the breach. Similarly, Russia encountered difficulties securing the extradition of Yukos 
associates who had fled the country and were the subject of criminal cases
, and persuading 
Western courts to freeze Yukos assets earmarked for the Russian bankruptcy proceedings. In 
other cases, Gazprom was reportedly reluctant to pursue full-scale asset seizure against Sibur 
because this would entail a large-scale legal campaign in various countries, thanks to the 
complex offshore ownership structure Goldovsky had put in place. Gazprom was apparently 
 Here telephone justice at home worked actively against Russias purposes. Judges in Western 
countries turned down extradition requests on the grounds that there was no guarantee the individuals 
would receive a fair trial in Russia. 
compelled to hide its beneficial ownership of OMZ because of fears the European 
Commission would not allow it to control OMZs Czech assets.  
However, it is also clear that the state and state-owned companies faced additional constraints 
that had no international dimension. For example, in Chapter 3 the existing owners of 
Gazproms lost assets used share dilutions to weaken Gazproms ownership claims. At 
Zapsibgazprom, Gazprom was eventually able to have the share dilution annulled through the 
courts, but in the intervening period Zapsibgazprom had lost control of the South Russkoe oil 
field (the main asset of interest to Gazprom) through further share dilutions. At Sibur and 
Zapsibgazprom, Gazprom regretted its decision to begin bankruptcy proceedings because of a 
real danger that the assets could be lost to rival creditors. For all its access to administrative 
resources, it was not able to ensure the bankruptcy proceedings went exactly as it wanted. 
The existence of meaningful domestic constraints on state coercion, even in cases which had a 
clear political significance, lends weight to Hendleys (2006, 2009) view that telephone 
justice is only part of the story in Russias legal system. In her view, it is better seen as 
dualistic and as an equilibrium that somehow balances rule by law and rule of law. 
She sees the commercial arbitrazh courts as an area where particular progress has been made 
towards professionalism in recent years (Hendley, 2007). These courts are tasked with 
handling all economic disputes involving legal entities, and would have been the forum for 
legal action brought against the state-backed companies in chapters 3 and 4 if they had failed 
to comply with the antitrust and corporate governance laws. It is significant in this context that 
there has been a marked increase in firms willingness to take their disputes with state 
authorities to the arbitrazh courts (Gans-Morse, 2011, p. 40; Hendley, 2006, p. 367). 
However, as Hendley (2006, p. 361, 2007, p. 248 fn. 8) has pointed out, the arbitrazh courts 
have themselves been susceptible at times to telephone justice. They were complicit in the 
legal travesty of the Yukos affair: the grossly inflated claims for back taxes, which formed the 
basis for the seizure of Yukoss assets under the guise of bankruptcy, were given legal force 
by rulings from arbitrazh judges. Hendleys conclusion is that telephone justice interferes in 
the normal workings of the arbitrazh courts when the Kremlin takes a particular interest in the 
outcome of certain cases, while routine cases are resolved in accordance with the law. 
It might be possible to conclude from this that the limited domestic institutional constraints on 
state coercion that we have observed in the case studies stem from the fact that rule of law 
operates outside of particular court cases in which the Kremlin takes a close interest. 
However, the Kremlin did take a close interest in all of the takeovers examined as case studies 
in the preceding chapters. Why did this interest not translate into complete freedom from 
domestic institutional constraints?  
The answer lies in the fact that each state-led coercive takeover involved a great deal more 
than a single court verdict. It could involve multiple court cases brought by state and existing 
owner, as well as claims by third parties such as rival creditors. As Chapter 4 demonstrated, 
constraints could also come from regulatory institutions (in this case, the FAS) that had 
limited powers to sanction companies or hinder their actions without having to turn to the 
courts, for example by delaying approval for deals or imposing certain conditions on that 
approval
The number and complexity of interactions with the law and regulatory institutions is 
significant if the scope of telephone justice is limited by the Kremlins lack of 
administrative resources to micro-manage outcomes on a wider scale. As Hendley (2009, p. 
248 fn. 8) says, it strains credulity to imagine that Kremlin officials are involved in resolving 
the hundreds of thousands of cases that are heard by the arbitrazh courts every year []. But 
at the same time, Hendley (2009) and Ledeneva (2008, p. 326 fn. 6) both suggest that judges 
 The FASs record of success in challenging Gazprom both in and out of court was patchy at best, but 
it was certainly enough to make Gazprom interested in complying with the relevant laws when there 
was no overriding imperative to get deals done quickly. 
operate to some extent under a form of self-censorship: without the need for a telephone call 
from the Kremlin, they understand which way a court case should go when (for example) one 
side is a state-owned company and the other a private business. Other institutions which enjoy 
no real autonomy from the executive are presumably similarly able to understand instinctively 
how they should behave vis--vis state-owned or state-backed companies. If this self-
censorship were functioning perfectly, then the Kremlins attempt to micro-manage complex 
state-led coercive takeovers should not run up against any administrative constraints: all the 
judges and regulators involved should know how to behave without any direct guidance 
required. That is clearly not what was happening in the cases: in addition to the struggles of 
the FAS against Gazprom in Chapter 4, a good example is the way Alfa Group fought 
successfully against Gazprom to defend its interests as a Sibur creditor in Chapter 3.  
In some instances, the apparent willingness of courts and regulators to take a stand against a 
company as powerful as Gazprom might be down to corrupt influence, or the fact that 
Gazproms rivals had an equally powerful source of patronage inside the Kremlin. However, 
it seems unlikely that this can explain all the moments where Gazprom felt the force of purely 
domestic institutional constraints. The evidence points instead to partial progress having been 
made towards the establishment of viable, independent market institutions. But this progress 
towards rule of law is at least as vulnerable as the pursuit of economic development to being 
trumped by higher priorities
Russia as flawed developmental state 
In arguing that the state actors involved in the coercive takeovers were motivated in part by 
developmental motives, this thesis has subscribed to the view that Russia was during this 
period not just some distance from being an ideal-type kleptocracy, but was in fact a form of 
 At the time of writing, there appears to be a serious risk that the partial progress in this area (and 
many others) will be undone by Russias incursions into Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.  
developmental state. When they were not aimed solely at countering perceived threats to 
sovereignty, the coercive takeovers were part of a wider set of dirigiste policies that had 
economic development as their goal.  
However, the Russian variant of the developmental state was flawed in significant and 
instructive ways. The developmental state literature (e.g. Doner, Ritchie, & Slater, 2005; 
Leftwich, 1995) has pointed to the presence of an external security threat (e.g. the threat of 
invasion by a foreign power) as a factor that focuses the minds of state actors on the need to 
make a serious commitment to a state-led developmental push. The above discussion of 
sovereign development suggests that insecurity within a countrys borders (when state 
power has not been fully consolidated) can have the opposite effect of distracting state actors 
from developmental objectives
. In the Russian case this may have been enough to doom the 
state-led developmental project to partial success at best. The political elites apparently 
exaggerated, ideology-based sensitivity to threats to state security only compounded the 
difficulty. 
However, even in those cases where the state was not distracted by sovereignty concerns from 
pursuing developmental objectives (such as the attempt to integrate Izhorskie Zavodys 
reactor production effectively into the overall nuclear industry development programme) the 
results were still patchy at best. That particular case was one of poor implementation, and not 
because of predatory behaviour on the part of state officials. In the absence of any meaningful 
market signals to help them agree on appropriate prices for reactors supplied by Izhorskie 
Zavody, the apparently development-minded state actors at Forpost-Management and at 
Rosatom were unable to cooperate effectively across the institutional lines that divided them. 
This underlines the importance of getting the right institutional design inside government. The 
developmental state literature already offers a potential solution to this problem in the form 
 Similarly, Leftwich (1995) observes that successful developmental states typically start from a 
position where state power and autonomy vis--vis national and foreign capital have already been 
consolidated. 
of the pilot organisation: a single institution within government that enjoys some autonomy 
from the rest of the bureaucracy, and that is tasked with devising developmental policies and 
coordinating their implementation across state agencies (Johnson, 1982). A pilot organisation 
would have been of considerable value for cooperation between Izhorskie Zavody and 
Rosatom through its simply ensuring that a single government body had both the power and 
the motivation to make two subordinate government agencies work together effectively.  
The pilot organisation might also provide a solution to the drawbacks of the directive system 
which is a central feature in the governance of Russias state-owned companies. As discussed 
in Chapter 3, this system requires sign-off from multiple state agencies before state 
representatives can vote at shareholder and board meetings. As Tompson (2008, p. 12) notes, 
this makes Russian state-owned companies inherently inefficient even when leaving aside 
their particular vulnerability (as he sees it) to corruption. It does so not solely because it is a 
piece of cumbersome red tape: it also exacerbates the historical problem noted by Vernon 
(1984) of state-owned companies being subject to poorly coordinated government control, and 
pursuing a multitude of sometimes conflicting political objectives. One solution to this 
problem, based on Hertog (2010), would be to allow state-owned companies to pursue profit-
maximisation with a minimum of government interference. However, this is not viable in 
situations where an important part of the raison d'tre of the state-owned company is to 
pursue political objectives besides profit-maximisation. Replacing the directive with a single 
sign-off from a pilot organisation would maintain the channel of government influence and 
control, but make it possible to exercise this control according to a single, coordinated 
strategy. The varying agendas of interested government agencies would have to be taken into 
account when the pilot organisation was formulating its strategy, but this process would be 
separated from the issue of obtaining government sign-off for particular votes at the board and 
shareholder meetings of state-owned companies. It would therefore allow the government to 
use state-owned companies for political purposes besides profit-maximisation, without them 
becoming subject to mission creep and bureaucratic paralysis
However, state-owned companies can be pulled in different directions by their masters in 
government not only because of flaws in their governance processes, but because the 
government has failed to devise an appropriate strategy for development. The Putin regime 
can perhaps be credited for having recognised the dangers of continuing to impose a 
neoliberal economic agenda, and for experimenting with forms of state intervention. In 
common with much of the rest of the world, Russia is feeling its way forward in terms of how 
best to bring the state back into economic strategy. But Putins policies have often been too ad 
hoc and impulsive to merit description as coherent strategy
If the developmental state literature is correct, the economic challenge facing Russia 
requires a far more ambitious and coordinated response. The state will be required to settle on 
a few sectors that hold the potential to break the dependence on hydrocarbons and other 
primary natural resources, because it will not have sufficient administrative resources to 
spread its developmental efforts any wider. It will then need to devise and implement 
sophisticated policies aimed at fostering the growth of those sectors into serious contenders on 
the world market. As the apparent failure of Prime Minister Dmitry Medvedevs 
nanotechnologies project indicates, these policies require long-term and institutional 
commitment rather than being associated too closely with the changing whims and fortunes of 
a particular politician or politicians.  
 Vernon notes that historically, various countries (including India) have attempted to solve the same 
problems through the creation of a special ministry for state-owned enterprises, which was expected to 
act as both a buffer and an advocate for such enterprises within the ministerial structure. The proposal 
made here is somewhat different, mainly because it places responsibility for strategic management of 
state-owned companies within the remit of a development-focused pilot organisation. This would 
eliminate the danger that a separate ministry for state-owned enterprises might begin pursuing its own 
self-interest (and that of the state-owned enterprises) at the expense of the wider developmental agenda. 
 Granted, it may be that devising such a coherent strategy requires the creation and empowerment of 
a pilot organisation staffed with the best and brightest minds, sufficiently protected from political 
interference to prevent policy capture by vested interests, yet sufficiently embedded in society to 
ensure adequate policy implementation and feedback regarding successes and failures (Evans, 1995). 
Making the decision to target only a small number of sectors for state support is bound to 
entail a more coherent strategy for dealing with the unprofitable sections of the Soviet 
industrial legacy. Autarchy is clearly a high priority for Russias security-minded political 
elite, and it has its place in any countrys economic strategy, but one suspects that Russias 
development is being hindered by an excessive emphasis on maintaining domestic production 
capabilities in many areas of the economy, including some where the national security 
imperative is limited. There may be other good reasons (both in terms of the social impact and 
the knock-on effect for other areas of the economy) for not letting much of Russias ailing 
industrial legacy go the way of creative destruction. But half-hearted and ad hoc attempts to 
keep alive failing enterprises such as Zapsibgazprom are surely not the answer. 
The world is full of examples where states have been unsuccessful in their attempts to make 
economic interventions, and a cynic might question the value of adding new case studies to 
the pile. But in an era of growing realisation that states are integral to all economies, it is more 
important than ever to learn the correct lessons from failed interventions as well as seeking to 
explain the rare successes. This thesis has argued that states economic interactions are too 
often explained away in terms of corruption and rent-seeking. The author hopes that it has 
made a small contribution towards correcting this imbalance, by providing an alternative 
account that allows for the possibility of state actors pursuing political objectives besides their 
own venal interest-maximising, and that focuses on institutional constraints on their efforts at 
economic intervention. 
References 
Adachi, Y. (2010). Building big business in Russia: the impact of informal corporate 
governance practices. London; New York: Routledge. 
Aglamishyan, V. (2001, November 16). Detei Gazproma razmoyut. Gazovaya 
korporatsiya mozet lishit svoei podderzhki biznes byvshikh menedzherov. 
Nezavisimaya Gazeta. 
Aglamishyan, V. (2004a, September 22). Gazprom igraet aktsiyami Mosenergo. 
Perekladyvanie ikh iz odnogo karmana v drugoi. Izvestiya. 
Aglamishyan, V. (2004b, October 8). Gazprom kupil aktsii RAO YeES. Kontsern 
stroit energokompaniyu. Izvestiya. 
Ahrend, R., & Tompson, W. (2005). Unnatural monopoly: the endless wait for gas 
sector reform in Russia. Europe-Asia Studies, 57(6), 801821. 
Alekseev, V. (2006, March 9). Uran izluchaet pessimizm. Trud. 
Aleksei Borisovich Miller. (n.d.). Gazprom.ru. Retrieved June 24, 2013, from 
http://www.gazprom.ru/about/management/board/miller/ 
Aliev, A. (2007, May 4). Neprozrachnyi Forpost. Ekspert. 
Allenova, O. (2012, October 19). Upravlenie v chetyre ruki. Kommersant. 
Alpert, L. I. (2014, January 23). Russia court orders release of executive in Yukos 
case. The Wall Street Journal Europe. 
Alyakrinskaya, N., & Vardul, N. (2010, March 22). Nepotoplyaemyi. The New 
Times. 
Amladov, I., Granik, I., & Gorodetskaya, N. (2010, September 9). V Bashkirii poshel 
obratnyi otschet. Kommersant. 
Amsden, A. H. (1989). Asias next giant: South Korea and late industrialization. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
Analiticheskii otdel RIA Rosbizneskonsalting. (n.d.). Portret predpriyatiya: OAO 
Zapsibgazprom (g. Tyumen). Retrieved from 
ecsocman.hse.ru/data/886/112/.../20010404432.doc 
Andrianov, A. N. (2008, August 14). Minpromenergo i Rosatom. Istoriya neprostykh 
otnoshenii. PRoAtom. Retrieved from 
http://www.proatom.ru/modules.php?name=News&file=article&sid=1482&m
ode=flat&order=1&thold=0 
Aslund, A. (2002). Building capitalism: the transformation of the former Soviet Bloc. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Badovskii, D. (2002, October 21). Zakon samosokhraneniya. Politbyuro. 
Baldwin, D. A. (1985). Economic statecraft. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University 
Press. 
Barnes, A. S. (2006a). Owning Russia: the struggle over factories, farms, and power. 
Ithaca N.Y.: Cornell University Press. 
Barnes, A. S. (2006b). Putin as Gerschenkron + Hamilton + Baldwin? Understanding 
the Russian approach to global integration. In Y. Akimov & D. Katsy (Eds.), 
Post-Cold War challenges to international relations (pp. 2450). St 
Petersburg: St Petersburg State University Press. 
Bashneft zavershila perekhod na edinuyu aktsiyu. (2012, October 1). RBK. 
Retrieved from http://top.rbc.ru/economics/01/10/2012/672092.shtml 
Batishchev, S., & Voronin, A. (2006, June 14). Gazprom nachal voinu. Vedomosti. 
Bekker, A. (2004, June 2). Intervyu: Kakha Bendukidze, ministr ekonomiki Gruzii. 
Vedomosti. 
Bekker, A., Nikolskii, A., & Ivanov, V. (2004, June 2). Gruziya odolzhila 
Bendukidze. Vedomosti. 
Belikov, D. (2007a, May 7). Forpost sdal. Kommersant. 
Belikov, D. (2007b, August 8). Izhorskim zavodam ne dali dorabotat po kontraktu. 
Kommersant. 
Belikov, D. (2008a, February 20). Gendirektor po svyazyam s Rosatomom. 
Kommersant. 
Belikov, D. (2008b, May 29). Atomenergoprom zapustil Silovye mashiny. 
Kommersant. 
Belikov, D. (2011, March 4). Izhorskim zavodam podbirayut konkurenta. 
Kommersant. 
Belin, L. (2002). The rise and fall of Russias NTV. Stanford Journal of International 
Law, 38(1), 1942. 
Belkovsky, S. (2010, August 11). Puting. Vozvrashchenie. Slon.ru. Retrieved August 
19, 2010, from http://slon.ru/articles/430542/?sphrase_id=112194 
Belton, C. (2014, March 6). US accused of trying to destroy Russia. Financial 
Times. 
Berres, L. (2002, February 1). Rukovoditelei SIBURa obvinili v khishchenii 
milliardov. Kommersant. 
Birman, A. (2005, May 17). Orden natsionalnogo dostoyaniya. Gazpromovskaya 
dochka, kotoraya gulyaet sama po sebe. Kompaniya. Retrieved from 
http://www.compromat.ru/page_16762.htm 
Biyanova, N., & Papchenkova, M. (2013, September 24). Status dorozhe deneg. 
Vedomosti. 
Blakkisrud, H. (2011). Medvedevs new governors. Europe-Asia Studies, 63(3), 367
Boardman, A., & Vining, A. (1995). Ownership and performance in competitive 
environments: a comparison of the performance of private, mixed and state-
owned enterprises. In E. Bailey & J. Rothenberg Pack (Eds.), The political 
economy of privatization and deregulation. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar. 
Bohlen, C. (2013, May 10). One man against the Kremlin. New York Times. 
Borisov, A. (2005, April 6). Oformit otkaz strogo v ramkakh zakona. Gazeta. 
Borisov, A. (2006, June 12). Atomnyi kush. Profil. 
Borozdina, S., Sharipova, A., Biyanova, N., & Davydova, M. (2004, June 2). Mozgi 
potekli. Gazeta. 
Buckley, N., & Belton, C. (2007, April 12). Transcript: Sergei Ivanov. FT.com. 
Retrieved January 26, 2011, from http://www.ft.com/cms/s/b7e458ea-ede1-
11db-8584-000b5df10621,dwp_uuid=ff3cbaf6-3024-11da-ba9f-
00000e2511c8,print=yes.html 
Bulavinov, I. (2003, November 1). Kadrovyi khod. Voloshin kaput. Kommersant. 
Bushueva, Y. (2000a, February 25). My budem predlagat pomoshch Gazpromu. 
Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y. (2000b, August 29). Gazprom stanovitsya vse menshe. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y. (2000c, November 13). Paket Gazproma mne navyazali. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y. (2000d, December 20). MAP blagoslovil SIBUR. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y. (2001a, January 25). Loyalnyi Gazprom. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y. (2001b, February 7). Itera mozhet lishitsya gaza. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y. (2001c, June 5). Gazpromu ne otdayut aktivy. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y. (2001d, July 12). Ministerstva delyat TEK. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y. (2001e, July 31). Gazprom sobiraet aktsii. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y. (2001f, August 1). Gazprom dumat budet. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y. (2001g, August 28). Vozvrashchat uzhe nechego. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y. (2001h, September 17). Intervyu: Arngolt Bekker, prezident 
Stroitransgaza. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y. (2002, October 1). Intervyu: Dmitrii Mazepin, prezident 
neftekhimicheskoi kompanii SIBUR. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y., & Berezanskaya, E. (2003, June 6). Gazprombank pomog Ruhrgas. 
Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y., Khrennikov, I., & Voronina, A. (2003, July 23). Privatizatsiya po-
bashkirski. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y., Nikolskii, A., Karpov, V., & Ivanov, V. (2003, October 27). YuKOS 
obezglavlen. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y., & Novolodskaya, S. (2002, January 28). Razgrom Goldovskogo. 
Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y., & Osetinskaya, Y. (2002, January 21). Goldovskii budet sidet. 
Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y., Osetinskaya, Y., & Shcherbakova, A. (2001, November 6). Miller 
vernulsya. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y., & Reznik, I. (2001a, October 18). Gazprom prospal. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y., & Reznik, I. (2001b, October 26). Rodionov khochet uiti iz 
Gazproma. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y., & Reznik, I. (2004, December 20). YuKOS lishili glavnogo. 
Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y., Reznik, I., & Lemeshko, A. (2004, January 14). Goldovskii svoe 
poluchil. Vedomosti. 
Bushueva, Y., Reznik, I., Novolodskaya, S., & Chertkov, O. (2002, July 23). 
Gazprom zabiraet zavody. Vedomosti. 
Butrin, D. (2000, October 28). Aktsii Gazproma dostalis detyam. Kommersant. 
Butrin, D. (2001, June 6). Nasledstvo Rema Vyakhireva. Kommersant-Dengi. 
Butrin, D. (2002a, March 26). SIBUR menyaet prezidenta. Kommersant. 
Butrin, D. (2002b, April 29). My ne mozhem sebe pozvolit 'Gazpromov' vnutri 
'Gazproma'. Kommersant. 
Butrin, D. (2002c, May 23). Aktsii Gazproma otdali neponyatno komu. 
Kommersant. 
Butrin, D., Sapozhnikov, P., Gerasimov, A., & Skorobogatko, D. (2003, July 3). 
Prishli za YuKOSom. Kommersant. 
Butrin, D., Skorobogatko, D., & Ilkhamov, R. (2003, August 21). Bashkirskii TEK 
sam sebe khozyain. Murtaza Rakhimov konvertiroval vlast v dolgi. 
Kommersant. 
Bychina, I. (2009, August 18). Pribylnoe delo. Kommersant (Sankt-Peterburg). 
Retrieved from http://www.kommersant.ru/Doc-y/1222807 
Chabanenko, S. (2007, April 13). Dochernii dolg Mikhaila Gutserieva. Kommersant. 
Chadaev, A. (2006). Putin. Ego ideologiya. Moskva: Evropa. 
Chaikina, Y. (2008, May 8). Mikhail Shishkhanov zanovo vozglavil Binbank. 
Kommersant. 
Chaudhry, K. A. (1993). The myths of the market and the common history of late 
developers. Politics and Society, 21(3). 
Chei Bank Moskvy? (2011, April 8). Kommersant. 
Chelnok, I. (2001, November 14). Stroitransgaz sdal detei Vyakhireva. Gazeta. 
Chelovek nedeli: odin za vsekh. (2002, January 21). Vedomosti. 
Chertkov, O., Osetinskaya, Y., & Bushueva, Y. (2002, July 1). Goldovskii menyaet 
aktivy na svobodu. Vedomosti. 
Clark, T. (2001, September 17). OMZ Posts GAAP Sales of $241M. Moscow Times. 
Colton, T. J. (2008). Yeltsin: a life. New York: Basic Books. 
Corcoran, J. (2007, February 13). Interview: Igor Artemyev, head of Russias Federal 
Antimonopoly Service. Business New Europe. Retrieved from 
http://www.bne.eu/story.php?s=228 
D. Medvedev naznachil chlenami Nablyudatelnogo soveta Rosatoma A. Dvorkovicha 
i Yu. Yakovleva. (2008, July 31). AK&M. 
Davydov, A. (1999, June 3). Shturm Gazproma otlozhen. Vremya MN. 
Davydova, M., & Reznik, I. (2001, July 31). Gazprom vozvrashchaet bludnykh 
dochek. Kommersant. 
Denisov, A. (2001a, August 8). Zapsibgazprom sdaetsya. Vremya Novostei. 
Denisov, A. (2001b, October 29). Gazprom bez energii. Paralich vlasti v 
krupneishei korporatsii strany. Vremya Novostei. 
Denisova, A. (2008, June 17). Zagadka Gazprombanka. Vedomosti. 
Derbilova, Y. (2005, August 15). Sistema podeshevela. Vedomosti. 
Derbilova, Y., Kostenko, N., & Simakov, D. (2010, August 18). Yevtushenkov nanyal 
prezidenta. Vedomosti. 
Derbilova, Y., Nikolskii, A., & Yegorova, T. (2006, January 27). Tolko AES ne 
khvatalo. Vedomosti. 
Derbilova, Y., & Tutushkin, A. (2009, November 13). Nazad k Gutserievu. 
Vedomosti. 
Dmitry Medvedev nagradil Farida Kantserova. (2010, July 26). Narodnaya Volya. 
Retrieved from http://nv-online.info/by/93/60/17948/--
----.htm 
Dobrov, A. (2004, March 18). Oligarkh-rante. Gazeta. 
Doner, R. F., Ritchie, B. K., & Slater, D. (2005). Systemic vulnerability and the 
origins of Developmental States: Northeast and Southeast Asia in Comparative 
Perspective. International Organization, 59(2), 327361. 
Drankina, Y., & Tatevosova, M. (2002, January 21). Gazprom vozvrashchaet 
aktivy. Yashina tyurya. Ekspert, 1318. 
Dugin, A. (2004, March 2). Naznachenie: Premer, kotorogo net. Vedomosti. 
Dzyadko, T. (2012, May 29). Murtaza Rakhimov ukhodit iz Bashnefti. 
Vedomosti.ru. 
Dzyadko, T., Derbilova, Y., Kezik, I., & Voronova, T. (2013, June 25). Novaya tsel 
Rosnefti. Vedomosti. 
Epshtein, Y., & Reznik, I. (2001, December 4). Defolt otmenyaetsya. Vedomosti. 
Ermakova, M. (2006, February 7). OMZ may delist stock as Gazprombank group buys 
more than 75%. Bloomberg. 
European Stability Initiative. (2010). Bendukidze and Russian capitalism (No. 2). 
Berlin, Tbilisi, Istanbul. Retrieved from http://www.esiweb.org/pdf/esi_-
_georgias_libertarian_revolution_-_part_two_-
_bendukidze_and_russian_capitalism_-_17_april_2010.pdf 
Evans, P. B. (1995). Embedded autonomy: states and industrial transformation. 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 
FAS odobrila pokupku Gazpromom kontrolnogo paketa Atomstroieksporta. 
(2005, March 28). Federalnaya antimonopolnaya sluzhba. Retrieved August 
14, 2013, from http://www.fas.gov.ru/fas-in-press/fas-in-press_1809.html 
FAS razreshila vernut Nortgaz pod kontrol Gazproma. (2005, September 7). 
Vedomosti.ru. 
FAS zainteresovalas pokupkami Gazproma. (2004, December 16). Kommersant. 
Fatikhova, V. (2012, January 24). Raskrytie informatsii: chto nuzhno znat vsem 
aktsionernym obshchestvam. Gestion.ru. Retrieved from 
http://www.gestion.ru/news/38/706/ 
Fearon, J. D. (1991). Counterfactuals and hypothesis-testing in political science. 
World Politics, 43(2), 169195. 
Federalnaya tselevaya programma Razvitie atomnogo energopromyshlennogo 
kompleksa Rossii na 2007-2010 gody i na perspektivu do 2015 goda. (2006, 
October 6). Pravitelstvo Rossiiskoi Federatsii. Retrieved from 
http://www.rosteplo.ru/Npb_files/npb_shablon.php?id=1031 
Fedorin, V., & Denisov, A. (2001, October 24). Gazprom ne daet deneg na "russkii 
BASF". Vremya Novostei. 
Fedorinova, Y., & Stolyarov, G. (2006, December 19). Nedaleko uekhali. Vedomosti. 
Finansovye rezultaty za 2005 god po MSFO svidetelstvuyut ob uspekhakh 
programmy optimizatsii kommercheskikh i administrativnykh zatrat. (2006, 
July 3). Finam. Retrieved January 31, 2014, from 
http://www.finam.ru/analysis/investorquestion000650F6F9/ 
Firestone, T. (2008). Criminal corporate raiding in Russia. The International Lawyer, 
42(4), 12071229. 
Fitch upgrades Gazprom. (2006, July 14). RosBusinessConsulting. Retrieved from 
http://www.rbcnews.com/komment/komment.shtml?2006/07/14/26654428 
Fokina, Y. (2005, August 22). Vo imya ottsa, syna i Sistemy: bashkirskaya stena 
rukhnula. Profil, 4647. 
Freeland, C. (1995, July 15). Biologist is reborn as a Russian raider. Financial Times. 
Frumkin, K. (2009, January 19). Pensionnye komandiry. Kompaniya, (1 (542)). 
Frye, T. (2004). Credible commitment and property rights: evidence from Russia. 
American Political Science Review, 98(3), 453466. 
Frye, T. (2006). Original sin, good works, and property rights in Russia. World 
Politics, 58(4), 479504. 
FSB nashla shpionov na Uralmashe. (2003, December 19). Lenta.ru. 
Fyodorov, M., Kiseleva, E., Rebrov, D., & Orlov, I. (2007, August 29). Utechka 
neftekapitala. Kommersant. 
Gaddy, C. G., & Ickes, B. W. (2010). Russia after the global financial crisis. Eurasian 
Geography and Economics, 51(3), 281311. 
Gainullin, I. (2005, June 10). Semeinye tsennosti. Murtaza Rakhimov proyavil Ural-
patriotizm. Kommersant. 
Gainullin, I., & Skornyakova, A. (2005, August 13). Predpriyatiyam bashkirskogo 
TEKa ustroili sistematizatsiyu. Kommersant. 
Galperin, I. (2008, October 27). Voina za bashkirskoe nasledstvo. The New Times. 
Gans-Morse, J. (2011, Fall). Building property rights: capitalists and the demand for 
law in post-Soviet Russia (Ph.D.). University of California, Berkeley. 
Gans-Morse, J. (2012). Threats to Property Rights in Russia: From Private Coercion 
to State Aggression. Post-Soviet Affairs, 28(3), 263295. 
Garfinkel, H. (1981). Forms of explanation: rethinking the questions in social theory. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
Gavshina, O. (2006, September 11). Sistemnaya dolya. Gazeta. 
Gazprom. (2003). Financial report 2002. Retrieved from 
http://www.gazprom.ru/f/posts/80/718398/fin_rus.pdf 
Gazprom. (2006). Annual Report 2005. 
Gazprombank khochet sdelat OMZ nepublichnoi kompaniei. (2006, February 8). 
Kommersant. 
Gazprombank ostalsya s Izhoroi, a Rosatom - s Atomstroieksportom. (2009, January 
21). Atominfo.ru. Retrieved June 29, 2012, from 
http://www.atominfo.ru/news/air5721.htm 
Gazprombank poluchil kontrol nad ZAO Atomstroieksport. (2004, October 15). 
RBK Quote. Retrieved from 
http://quote.rbc.ru/news/merge/2004/10/15/5203163.html 
Gazprombank stal sobstvennikom 85% aktsii ZAO Forpost-Menedzhment, 
kontroliruyushchego OMZ. (2009, February 13). Rossiiskoe atomnoe 
soobshchestvo. Retrieved February 8, 2011, from http://www.atomic-
energy.ru/news/2009/02/13/2241 
George, A. L., & McKeown, T. J. (1985). Case studies and theories of organizational 
decision-making. In R. Coulam & R. Smith (Eds.), Advances in Information 
Processing in Organizations (Vol. 2, pp. 2158). 
Gerring, J. (2006). Case study research: principles and practices. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
Gerschenkron, A. (1962). Economic backwardness in historical perspective: a book of 
essays. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 
Glava Bashkirii Rustem Khamitov predupredil ob ugroze sotsialnogo vzryva. (2012, 
May 22). Newsru.com. Retrieved from 
http://www.newsru.com/russia/22may2012/rustem.html 
Godlevskaya, Y. (2009, January 21). Gazprombank sdal Atomstroieksport. RBK 
Daily. Retrieved from http://www.rbcdaily.ru/industry/562949979004368 
Goldman, M. I. (2004). The Yukos affair. Current History, 103(675), 319323. 
Goldman, M. I. (2008). Petrostate: Putin, power and the New Russia. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Goode, J. P. (2007). The puzzle of Putins gubernatorial appointments. Europe-Asia 
Studies, 59(3), 365399. 
Gorelov, N. (2001, November 21). U kogo rul, u togo i gaz. Prezident lichno nachal 
reformu Gazproma. Vremya Novostei. 
Gorshkova, A. (2007, July 26). Moya khata s krayu. Vremya Novostei. 
Gotova, N. (2004, February 2). Energeticheskii vampir. Profil, (4), 2629. 
Govorun, Y. (2008, July 3). V nadezhnykh rukakh. Forbes. Retrieved from 
http://www.forbes.ru/forbes/issue/2008-07/7620-v-nadezhnyh-rukah 
Granik, I. (2006, January 27). Schetnaya palata doberetsya do Izrailya. Kommersant. 
Greffenius, S., & Gill, J. (1992). Pure coercion vs. carrot-and-stick offers in crisis 
bargaining. Journal of Peace Research, 29(1), 3952. 
Grib, N. (2004, September 21). Mosenergo otpravleno na pensiyu. Kommersant. 
Grib, N. (2005, June 1). Ushla dochka, pogulyala i dolzhna vernutsya. 
Kommersant. 
Grib, N. (2006, November 29). Yuzhno-Tambeiskoe poluchilo novykh vladeltsev. 
Kommersant. 
Grib, N. (2007, September 20). Russnefti podobrali novykh direktorov. 
Kommersant. 
Grib, N., Akhundov, A., Rebrov, D., & Pleshanova, O. (2007, July 30). Mikhailu 
Gutserievu naznachili vykhodnoe posobie. Kommersant. 
Grib, N., & Butrin, D. (2005, June 14). Nortgaz voshel v Gazprom po-angliiski. 
Kommersant. 
Grib, N., & Chaikina, Y. (2006, October 30). Gazfondu prodadut polovinu 
Gazprombanka. Kommersant. 
Grib, N., & Pleshanova, O. (2007, July 28). Russneft pereletsya v Bazovyi 
element. Kommersant. 
Gritskova, A., & Kornysheva, A. (2006, July 19). Rosatom zakreplyaetsya na 
Izhorskikh zavodakh. Kommersant. 
Grivach, A. (2003, March 12). Gazprom priznalsya. Aleksei Miller i Alisher 
Usmanov sobrali kontrolnyi paket. Vremya Novostei. 
Grivach, A. (2005, January 19). FAS atakuet malymi silami. S Gazproma mogut 
vzyskat do 500 tysiach rublei. Vremya Novostei. 
Grivach, A. (2007, May 17). Operatsiya prikrytiya. Vremya Novostei. 
Grozovsky, B. (2007, February 26). Startovye usloviya. Vedomosti. 
Gubenko, O. (2002, March 26). Gazprom khochet sokhranit svoyu 
neftekhimicheskuyu "dochku". Izvestiya. 
Gudkov, A. (2008, August 28). Yurist vmesto doktora. Kommersant. 
Gurova, T., Rubchenko, M., & Tsunskii, A. (2004, July 12). Delo Yukosa. Cherez 
dvoinuyu sploshnuyu. Ekspert, 2023. 
Gustafson, T. (2012). Wheel of fortune: the battle for oil and power in Russia. 
Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press. 
Gutseriev, M. (2007, July 30). Ya reshil uiti. Vedomosti. 
Haber, S., Razo, A., & Maurer, N. (2003). The politics of property rights: political 
instability, credible commitments, and economic growth in Mexico, 1876-
1929. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hall, P. A. (2003). Aligning ontology and methodology in comparative research. In J. 
Mahoney & D. Rueschemeyer (Eds.), Comparative historical analysis in the 
social sciences. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hanson, P. (2007a). The Russian economic puzzle: going forwards, backwards or 
sideways? International Affairs, 83(5), 869889. 
Hanson, P. (2007b). The turn to statism in Russian economic policy. International 
Spectator, 42(1), 2942. 
Hanson, P. (2009). The resistible rise of state control in the Russian oil industry. 
Eurasian Geography and Economics, 50(1), 1427. 
Hanson, P. (2011). Networks, cronies and business plans: business-state relations in 
Russia. In Russia as a network state: what works in Russia when state 
institutions do not? (pp. 113138). Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Hanson, P. (2014). Reiderstvo: asset-grabbing in Russia (No. Russia and Eurasia PP 
2014/03). London: Chatham House. 
Heinrich, A. (2008). Under the Kremlins thumb: does increased state control in the 
Russian gas sector endanger European energy security? Europe-Asia Studies, 
60(9), 15391574. 
Heinrich, A., & Kusznir, J. (2005). Independent gas producers in Russia (No. 2). 
Koszalin Institute of Comparative European Studies. 
Heln, H. (2010). The EUs energy security dilemma with Russia. Polis (University of 
Leeds), 4. 
Hellman, J. S. (1998). Winners take all: the politics of partial reform in 
postcommunist transitions. World Politics, (50). 
Hellman, J. S., Jones, G., & Kaufmann, D. (2003). Seize the state, seize the day: state 
capture and influence in transition economies. Journal of Comparative 
Economics, 31(4), 75173. 
Henderson, J. (2010). Non-Gazprom gas producers in Russia. Oxford: Oxford 
Institute for Energy Studies. 
Henderson, J. (2011). Domestic gas prices in Russia - towards export netback? (No. 
NG 57). Oxford Institute for Energy Studies. 
Hendley, K. (2006). Assessing the rule of law in Russia. Cardozo Journal of 
International and Comparative Law, 14(2), 347391. 
Hendley, K. (2007). Are Russian judges still Soviet? Post-Soviet Affairs, 23(3). 
Hendley, K. (2009). Telephone law and the rule of law: the Russian case. Hague 
Journal on the Rule of Law, 1(2), 241262. 
Hendley, K. (2012). Who are the legal nihilists in Russia? Post-Soviet Affairs, 28(2). 
Hertog, S. (2010). Defying the resource curse: explaining successful state-owned 
enterprises in rentier states. World Politics, 62(2), 261301. 
Holmberg, C. (2008). The struggle for bureaucratic and economic control in Russia 
(No. FOI-R--2504--SE). Stockholm: Swedish Defence Research Agency. 
Huskey, E. (1999). Presidential power in Russia. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe. 
Igumenov, V., & Kozyrev, M. (2009, December 18). Afera na $1.5 mlrd. Kto pytalsya 
ukrast Mikhailovskii GOK. Forbes.ru. Retrieved February 3, 2011, from 
http://www.forbes.ru/node/34552/print 
Igumenov, V., & Malkova, I. (2012, April 23). Alisher Usmanov: milliardy i 
chelovecheskie otnosheniya. Forbes.ru. Retrieved April 23, 2012, from 
http://www.forbes.ru/sobytiya/lyudi/81454-alisher-usmanov-milliardy-i-
chelovecheskie-otnosheniya 
Imamutdinov, I. (2006, December 25). Odnogo korpusa malo. Ekspert. 
Intervyu s Olegom Skorikom. (2002, May 29). Kommersant. 
Intervyu: Mikhail Khodorkovskii. (2005, August 4). Vedomosti. 
Isachenkov, V. (2002, January 9). Prosecutors detain Gazprom execs. Associated 
Press. Retrieved from http://www.apnewsarchive.com/2002/Prosecutors-
Detain-Gazprom-Execs/id-97640239d1888c10926a1dc8191643e3 
Ivanov, N. (1999, August 26). Vyakhirev ustoyal. Tsena neizvestna. Segodnya. 
Ivanov, V., & Voronina, A. (2003, March 11). Bitva za kurultai. Vedomosti. 
Ivanova, Y. (2001, November 27). Komu prinadlezhit Rossiya. Gazovaya 
promyshlennost. Istoriya: 1991-2000. Kommersant-Vlast. 
Jack, A. (2003, December 19). OMZ to merge with Power Machines. Financial 
Times. 
Johnson, C. (1982). MITI and the Japanese miracle: the growth of industrial policy, 
1925-1975. Stanford, CA.: Stanford University Press. 
Kak prodavalsya Severneftegazprom. (2001, September 10). Kommersant. 
Kamyshev, D. (2010, July 19). Murtaza Rakhimov ne perenes zasukhi. Kommersant-
Vlast. 
Karacheva, Y. (2007, May 12). Smeshnye dengi. Vremya Novostei. 
Khannanova, G. (2005, October 6). Sistema blokiruet bashkirskuyu neftyanku. 
Kommersant. 
Khannanova, G. (2006, October 6). Srok v obmen na neft. Kommersant. 
Khannanova, G. (2008, November 14). Bashkirskii TEK stal moskovskim. 
Kommersant. 
Khannanova, G. (2010, July 26). Chelovek iz volny. Kommersant-Vlast. 
Khannanova, G., & Gainullin, I. (2005, February 25). Borba za vlast. Murtaza 
Rakhimov razoblachil zagovorshchikov vo glave so svoim sobstvennym 
synom. Kommersant. 
Khannanova, G., & Gainullin, I. (2006a, August 12). Murtaza Rakhimov prepodal 
Kremlyu urok khimii. Kommersant (Kazan). Retrieved from 
http://www.kommersant.ru/doc/697555/ 
Khannanova, G., & Gainullin, I. (2006b, October 11). Murtaza Rakhimov 
perenaznachilsya v dolzhnosti pri vsenarodnom odobrenii. Kommersant. 
Khannanova, G., & Skorobogatko, D. (2002, September 9). Bashkirskie neftyaniki ne 
znayut, komu prodatsya. Kommersant. 
Kharatian, K. (2007, August 6). Konkurent. Vedomosti. 
Khodorkovsky, M. (2005, January 31). Tyazhelo, chto sovsem net solntsa. Russkii 
Newsweek. Retrieved from http://archive.khodorkovsky.ru/speech/1591.html 
Khodorkovsky, M., & Gevorkyan, N. (2012). Tyurma i volya. Moskva: Govard Rork. 
Kiryan, P. (2006, June 6). Kto ostanetsya rabotat na gosudarstvo? RBK Daily. 
Retrieved from http://www.rbcdaily.ru/politics/562949979066924 
Kiseleva, E. (2006, September 25). Premer popal v spisok preemnikov. Kommersant-
Dengi. 
Kleiner, V. (2002, April 17). Gazprom gifts to ITERA: review of PwC audit of Itera. 
Presented at the 3rd Eurasian corporate governance roundtable, Kyiv. 
Kleiner, V. (2008). Korporativnoe upravlenie i effektivnost deyatelnosti kompanii 
(pri primere OAO Gazprom). Voprosy Ekonomiki, (10). 
Koksharov, A. (2005, June 13). Den atomnogo surka. Ekspert. 
Kononczuk, W. (2006). The Yukos affair, its motives and implications (No. 25). 
Warsaw: Centre for Eastern Studies. 
Kornysheva, A., Yambaeva, R., & Grib, N. (2006, February 9). Rosatom sdaet aktivy 
v Atomprom. Kommersant. 
Korop, E., & Ratiani, N. (2004, June 2). Bendukidze stal ministrom. Izvestiya. 
Kostenko, N., Glikin, M., & Kholmogorova, V. (2009, June 22). Rakhimov partbilet 
sokhranit. Vedomosti. 
Kostenko, N., Glikin, M., & Shcherbakova, A. (2009, March 10). Rakhimov ukhodit. 
Vedomosti. 
Kostenko, N., & Tsvetkova, M. (2010, July 16). Rakhimov ushel. Vedomosti. 
Kotin, M. (2005, December 12). Chtob nikto ne donimal. Sekret Firmy. 
Kozyrev, M. (2008, January). Chto novomu khozyainu nado. Forbes Russia. 
Retrieved from http://www.forbesrussia.ru/forbes/issue/2008-01/12292-chto-
novomu-hozyainu-nado 
Kozyrev, M. (2011, May 31). Desyatiletka Millera. Forbes.ru. Retrieved from 
http://www.forbes.ru/ekonomika-column/vlast/68663-desyatiletka-millera 
Kozyrev, M., & Sokolova, A. (2008, August). Yury Kovalchuk. Starshii po Rossii. 
Forbes Russia. Retrieved from http://www.forbes.ru/node/7645/print 
Krasner, S. D. (1999). Sovereignty: organized hypocrisy. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton 
University Press. 
Kryshtanovskaya, O. (2003, October 27). Novaya povestka dnya. Vedomosti. 
Kryshtanovskaya, O., & White, S. (2005). Inside the Putin court: a research note. 
Europe-Asia Studies, 57(7), 10651075. 
Kto investiruet, tot i vyigryvaet. (2009, June 8). Ekspert. 
Kto zhe protiv? (2009, October 1). Vedomosti. 
Kudinov, V. (2008, February 22). Novyi khozyain Bina. Vedomosti. 
Kudiyarov, S. (2011, April 4). Slepili konkurenta. Ostalos ozhivit. Ekspert, 13(747). 
Kudryashov, D. (2005, November 7). Kakha Bendukidze ostalsya bez OMZ. Gazeta. 
Kudryashov, D. (2006a, February 9). Gazprombank ispolzuet yadernyi potentsial 
OMZ. Gazeta. 
Kudryashov, D. (2006b, October 2). Lipskii ostavil post gendirektora OMZ. RBK 
Daily. Retrieved from 
http://www.rbcdaily.ru/2006/10/02/industry/562949979055881 
Kuzin, A. (2007, June 14). Predsedatel soveta direktorov OMZ, zamestitel 
presedatelya pravleniya Gazprombanka Aleksei Matveyev: Zakazov budet 
mnogo. Izvestiya. 
LaCroix, K. (2007, November 26). Yukos shareholders case dismissed. The D&O 
Diary. Retrieved from http://www.dandodiary.com/2007/11/articles/yukos-
shareholders-case-dismissed/ 
Lander, A. (2007, February 12). Po logike biznesa. Vremya Novostei. 
Latukhina, K. (2006, October 6). Chetvertyi srok. Vedomosti. 
Latynina, Y. (2005, March 3). Statsionarnaya yadernaya bomba. Novaya Gazeta. 
Latynina, Y. (2007, May 17). A teper Russneft? Novaya Gazeta. 
Ledeneva, A. (2008). Telephone justice in Russia. Post-Soviet Affairs, 24(4). 
Ledeneva, A. (2011). Telephone justice in Russia: an update. The EU-Russia Centre 
Review, (18). 
Leftwich, A. (1995). Bringing politics back in: towards a model of the developmental 
state. Journal of Development Studies, 31(3). 
Lemeshko, A. (2003a, August 14). Intervyu: Dragan Kosorich, gendirektor 
Gazoneftekhimicheskoi kompanii. Vedomosti. 
Lemeshko, A. (2003b, November 3). Monopoliya dlya Bendukidze. Vedomosti. 
Lemeshko, A. (2003c, December 8). OMZ podelitsya atomom. Vedomosti. 
Lemeshko, A. (2004a, April 26). Intervyu: Yevgeny Yakovlev, gendirektor 
Obedinennykh mashinostroitelnykh zavodov. Vedomosti. 
Lemeshko, A. (2004b, August 11). Rasplata OMZ. Vedomosti. 
Lemeshko, A. (2004c, December 14). Intervyu: Sergei Lipskii, generalnyi direktor 
OMZ. Vedomosti. 
Lemeshko, A., & Petrova, S. (2004, October 8). Nazad, pod goskontrol. Vedomosti. 
Lepina, M. (2005, June 1). Devyat let s pravom pripiski. Kommersant. 
Levinskii, A., & Sokolova, A. (2010a, April 19). Eto byl poslednii nerazdelennyi 
kusok krupnoi neftyanki v Rossii. Forbes. Retrieved from 
http://www.forbes.ru/ekonomika/lyudi/48519-esli-kto-skazhet-chto-
neftepererabotka-i-neftehimiya-ne-vysokie-tehnologii-ply 
Levinskii, A., & Sokolova, A. (2010b, April 27). Vysokie tekhnologii dobychi. 
Forbes Russia. Retrieved from 
http://www.forbes.ru/ekonomika/kompanii/48849-vysokie-tehnologii-dobychi 
Levinskii, R. (2005, May 6). Nortgaz prosit mira. Vedomosti. 
Litsa goda. (2003, December 26). Slovo. 
Lokotetskaya, M. (2007, April 4). Mikhail Khodorkovskii ostalsya pod strazhei. 
Gazeta. 
Lysova, T., & Nogina, A. (1999, March 22). Soprotivlenie bespolezno Ekspert. 
Lysova, T., & Novolodskaya, S. (2001, October 3). Goldovskogo prosyat uiti. 
Vedomosti. 
Lysova, T., & Reznik, I. (2002, June 28). Gazprom obmenyal aktsii na gaz. 
Vedomosti. 
Makarkin, A. (2002, January 21). Kak sozdavalsya Sibur. Ekspert. 
Makeev, N., & Siluyanova, P. (2004, November 22). Gazprom priznalsya. Gazeta. 
Malkova, I. (2006, July 11). Gazprombank prodaet atom. Vedomosti. 
Malkova, I. (2007a, May 15). Nakazanie za skrytnost. Vedomosti. 
Malkova, I. (2007b, November 6). Nashli krainego. Vedomosti. 
Malkova, I. (2008, June 11). Gazprom oshtrafovali. Vedomosti. 
Malkova, I. (2011, November 24). Sibur: puteshestvie iz chastnoi sobstvennosti v 
gosudarstvennuyu i obratno. Forbes Russia. Retrieved from 
http://www.forbes.ru/print/node/76792 
Malkova, I., Berezanskaya, E., & Igumenov, V. (2012, March 26). Mikhail Gutseriev: 
netriumfalnoe vozvrashchenie. Forbes.ru. Retrieved from 
http://www.forbes.ru/sobytiya/lyudi/80447-mihail-gutseriev-netriumfalnoe-
vozvrashchenie?page=0,1 
Malkova, I., Fedorinova, Y., Rozhkova, M., & Yegorova, T. (2006, August 8). Stanki 
- Usmanovu Vedomosti. 
Malkova, I., & Igumenov, V. (2012, September 11). Poslednee intervyu Rema 
Vyakhireva: Putin kogda uslyshal, chto ya ukhozhu, tak obradovalsya. 
Forbes Russia. Retrieved from http://www.forbes.ru/sobytiya/lyudi/116511-
eksklyuzivnoe-intervyu-rema-vyahireva-putin-kogda-uslyshal-chto-ya-
uhozhu-tak-?page=0,1&post=123300554_623 
Malkova, I., & Mazneva, E. (2007, May 7). Plata za skrytnost. Vedomosti. 
Malkova, I., Reznik, I., & Fedorinova, Y. (2009, February 5). Kto meshaet Deripaske? 
Vedomosti. 
Malkova, I., & Simakov, D. (2006, March 9). Rosatomprom nachinaetsya. Vedomosti. 
Malkova, I., & Yegorova, T. (2006, February 9). Atomstroieksport menyaet 
khozyaina. Vedomosti. 
Manvelov, N. (2000, October 28). Vyakhirev potesnitsya. Pravleniyu Gazproma 
zapreshcheno samostoyatelno vyvodit imushchestvo iz kompanii. Segodnya. 
Markus, S. (2007). Capitalists of All Russia, Unite. Polity, 39(3). 
Markus, S. (2008). Corporate governance as political insurance: firm-level 
institutional creation in emerging markets and beyond. Socio-Economic 
Review, 6(1), 6998. 
Markus, S. (2012). Secure property as a bottom-up process: firms, stakeholders and 
predators in weak states. World Politics, 64, 242277. 
Mazneva, E. (2007, December 19). Gazovaya tseremoniya. Vedomosti. 
Mazneva, E. (2009a, April 3). Dobavit $2 mlrd. Vedomosti. 
Mazneva, E. (2009b, December 22). Dolg ne nuzhen. Vedomosti. 
Mazneva, E., & Chechel, A. (2009, June 9). Slozhno pokupaete. Vedomosti. 
Mazneva, E., & Nikolskii, A. (2007, August 29). Uslovno-zaochno. Vedomosti. 
Mazunin, A. (2008, September 26). Gazfond vyshel v roznitsu. Kommersant. 
Medetsky, A. (2007, May 17). Yukos tax going to housing, research. The Moscow 
Times. 
Medvedeva, Y. (2007a, January 30). Deshevyi Sibneftegaz. Vedomosti. 
Medvedeva, Y. (2007b, April 25). FAS meshaet Gazpromu. Vedomosti. 
Medvedeva, Y. (2007c, May 15). FAS uznaet vse. Vedomosti. 
Medvedeva, Y., Nikolskii, A., & Sunkina, V. (2006, November 16). Russneft 
uvleklas dobychei. Vedomosti. 
Mehdi, A., & Yenikeyeff, S. (2013). Governors, oligarchs, and siloviki: oil and power 
in Russia (No. Russia.NEI.Visions No. 68). IFRI. Retrieved from 
http://www.ifri.org/downloads/ifrimehdiyenikeyeffrussianoilindustryandelitese
ngfeb2013.pdf 
Metropol pokupaet Zapsibgazprom. (2012, December 22). Kommersant 
(Yekaterinburg). Retrieved from http://www.kommersant.ru/doc-rss/2096855 
Mikhailov, L. (2002, February 19). Khvatilas mat: obobrali ee dochki. Rossiiskaya 
Gazeta. 
Miledin, P., Myazina, Y., & Kudinov, V. (2004, August 13). Kto prodal SOGAZ? 
Vedomosti. 
Miledin, P., & Reznik, I. (2004, September 21). Zagadochnye sdelki Gazproma. 
Kompaniya izbavilas ot aktsii Mosenergo i 76% strakhovoi kompanii 
SOGAZ. Vedomosti. 
Miledin, P., Shcherbakova, A., & Petrova, S. (2005, January 21). SOGAZ prodali v 
Piter. Vedomosti. 
Mill, J. S. (1904). A system of logic, ratiocinative and inductive: being a connected 
view of the principles of evidence and the methods of scientific investigation 
(8th ed.). London: Longmans, Green. 
Milov, V. (2012, March 1). Pochemu Yuriy Koval'chuk ustupaet kontrol nad UK 
Lider tak deshevo. Forbes.ru. Retrieved from 
http://www.forbes.ru/sobytiya-column/kompanii/79612-pochemu-yurii-
kovalchuk-ustupaet-kontrol-nad-uk-lider-tak-deshevo 
Minatom RF preobrazuyut v federalnoe agentstvo. (2004, March 9). Utro.ru. 
Retrieved January 29, 2014, from 
http://www.utro.ru/news/2004/03/09/286320.shtml 
Minfin obyazhet negosudarstvennye pensionnye fondy naiti sebe vladeltsev. (2013, 
August 26). Lenta.ru. Retrieved from http://lenta.ru/news/2013/08/26/fund 
Minpromtorga Rossii. (2010). Strategiya razvitiya tyazhelogo mashinostroeniya na 
period do 2020 goda. Moscow. Retrieved from 
http://www.minpromtorg.gov.ru/ministry/strategic/sectoral/13/Strategiya_Tyaz
hmash_09-12-10.doc 
Mitrova, T., & Pappe, Y. (2006). Gazprom: ot bolshoi truby k bolshomu biznesu. 
Pro et Contra, 7385. 
Moiseev, I., Grib, N., Chaikina, Y., & Gosteva, Y. (2007, April 18). Gazprombank 
prodal reshayushchii golos. Kommersant. 
Mokrousova, I. (2003a, January 18). V Zapsibgazprome bankrotili vse podryad. 
Kommersant. 
Mokrousova, I. (2003b, March 13). Yuzhno-Russkoe mestorozhdenie dostalos 
Zapsibgazpromu. Kommersant. 
Mordyushenko, O., Khannanova, G., & Rebrov, D. (2009, March 31). Bashkirskii 
TEK popal v Sistemu. Kommersant. 
Morgun, P. (2002a, April 17). Zubry po-prezhnemu v stroyu. Tyumen'skie Izvestiya. 
Morgun, P. (2002b, June 18). Vladimir Zavyalov: My stremimsya sdelat kholding 
rabotosposobnym i rentabelnym. Tyumen'skie Izvestiya. 
Moroz, P. (2003, December 19). Biznesmen Bendukidze teryaet ves, podelivshis s 
Potaninym mashinostroitelnymi aktivami. Gazeta. 
Muradov, M. (2010, May 8). Mikhail Gutseriev nashelsya v Ingushetii. Kommersant. 
Muradov, M. (2013, January 22). Opasnost vyborov - v razlozhenii obshchestva. 
Kommersant. 
Murtaza Rakhimov: I ne takie trudnosti preodolevali. (n.d.). bfural.rf. Retrieved 
from http://./news/229/ 
Murtazaev, E. (2006, February 3). Vzglyad na veshchi. Kommersant. 
Naumov, I. (2006, February 22). Kirienko zakazhet muzyku. Regionam pridetsya 
voevat drug s drugom za mirnyi atom. Nezavisimaya Gazeta. 
Neimysheva, N., & Reznik, I. (2003, February 5). Mest Malina. Vedomosti. 
Nikolskii, A. (2004, July 27). Nashli zakazchika. Vedomosti. 
Nikolskii, A. (2006, January 23). $60 mlrd na AES. Vedomosti. 
Nikolskii, A., & Bekker, A. (2003, January 28). Vse pod kontrolem. Vedomosti. 
Nikolskii, A., Mazneva, E., & Petrachkova, A. (2005, November 17). Ivanovu 
ishchut podshefnykh. Vedomosti. 
Nikolskii, A., Mazneva, E., & Rakul, Y. (2009, October 28). K nevyezdu gotov. 
Vedomosti. 
Nikolskii, A., Reznik, I., & Rozhkova, M. (2007, May 15). Gotovyat k prodazhe. 
Vedomosti. 
Nikolskii, A., & Yegorova, T. (2005, November 23). Kirienko razdelit Rosatom. 
Vedomosti. 
Nikolaeva, A., Sterkin, F., & Kazmin, D. (2008, May 13). Peremeshchennye litsa. 
Vedomosti. 
North, D. C. (1990). Institutions, institutional change and economic performance. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
North, D. C., & Weingast, B. R. (1989). Constitutions and commitment: the evolution 
of institutions governing public choice in seventeenth-century England. 
Journal of Economic History, 49(4), 803832. 
Novolodskaya, S. (2000, July 4). Gazprom pogloshchaet Sibur. Vedomosti. 
Novolodskaya, S. (2001a, February 16). Izmenchivyi Sibur. Vedomosti. 
Novolodskaya, S. (2001b, December 10). Obmenyat dolgi na aktsii. Vedomosti. 
Novolodskaya, S. (2002, September 17). SIBUR rvetsya k dobyche. Vedomosti. 
Novolodskaya, S. (2003, March 13). Intervyu: Yakov Goldovskii, byvshii prezident 
SIBURa. Vedomosti. 
Novolodskaya, S., & Bushueva, Y. (2002, September 20). Eksklyuziv dlya Alfy. 
Vedomosti. 
Novolodskaya, S., & Chertkov, O. (2002, August 13). Goldovskii vyshel pod zalog. 
Vedomosti. 
Novolodskaya, S., & Tutushkin, A. (2001, December 27). SIBUR sbyl pervyi 
zavod. Vedomosti. 
O fonde. (2014). Gazfond.ru. Retrieved from http://gazfond.ru/about/ 
OAO Gazprom. (2002a). Godovoi otchet za 2001 god. 
OAO Gazprom. (2002b). Svodnaya bukhgalterskaya otchetnost za 2001 god. 
Retrieved from http://www.gazprom.ru/f/posts/73/470381/rar_fs_2001_rus.pdf 
OAO Regiongazkholding. (2003). Yezhekvartalnyi otchet emitenta emissionnykh 
tsennykh bumag za: 1 kvartal 2003 goda. 
OAO Severneftegazprom. (2003). Spisok affilirovannykh lits na 31.12.2002. 
OAO Severneftegazprom. (2007). Godovoi otchet, 2006 god. 
OAO Zapsibgazprom. (2002). Vozbuzhdenie v otnoshenii emitenta i (ili) ego 
dochernikh i zavisimykh obshchestv protsedury bankrotstva (Sushchestvennoe 
sobytie emitenta). 
Oil and gas company RussNeft plans $1bln net profit for 2006 - Companys President. 
(2006, September 4). Prime-Tass. Retrieved from 
http://eng.russneft.ru/september/news_17133.stm 
Olcott, M. B. (2004). Vladimir Putin and the politics of oil. The James A. Baker III 
Institute for Public Policy of Rice University. 
Olivier de Sardan, J. P. (1999). A moral economy of corruption in Africa? The 
Journal of Modern African Studies, 37(1), 2552. 
Olson, M. (1993). Dictatorship, democracy and development. The American Political 
Science Review, 87(3), 567576. 
OMZ-Silovye Mashiny prishli v Chekhiyu. (2004, April 26). Vedomosti. 
Osetinskaya, Y., Lysova, T., Bushueva, Y., & Lemeshko, A. (2003, July 3). Prinyalis 
za MENATEP. Vedomosti. 
Osin, D. (2010, May 25). Atomnaya gotovnost. Rossiiskaya Gazeta. 
Ostrovsky, A. (2005, September). Gazprom buys Sibneft stake for $13.1bn. Financial 
Times. 
Ostrovsky, A., & Jack, A. (2004, April 8). Gazprom chairman sets out his agenda: 
more of the same. Financial Times. 
Ot redaktsii: Bash na bash. (2005, March 23). Vedomosti. 
Ot redaktsii: Miller i dengi. (2002, September 23). Vedomosti. 
Ot redaktsii: otsy i dochki. (2002, April 22). Vedomosti. 
Panov, A. (2005, November 30). FAS ne sdaetsya. Vedomosti. 
Panyushkin, V., & Zygar, M. (2008). Gazprom: novoe russkoe oruzhie. Moscow: 
Zakharov. 
Pappe, Y. S. (2000). Oligarkhi: ekonomicheskaya khronika. Moskva: Vysshaya 
Shkola Ekonomiki. 
Pappe, Y. S., & Galukhina, Y. S. (2009). Rossiiskii krupnyi biznes: pervye 15 let. 
Moskva: Vysshaya Shkola Ekonomiki. 
Parfitt, T. (2013, March 5). Vladimir Putins chief of staff muses on their time as 
young spies. The Telegraph. 
Partiya Narodnoi Svobody. (2011). Putin. Korruptsiya. Moskva. 
Paszyc, E. (2012). Russia: Gazprom has activated Nord Streams second pipeline. 
EastWeek, 33(309). Retrieved from 
http://www.osw.waw.pl/en/publikacje/eastweek/2012-10-10/russia-gazprom-
has-activated-nord-stream-s-second-pipeline 
Peel, Q. (2007, October 31). Preaching creative destruction. Financial Times. 
Pensionnye rezervy. (n.d.). Gazfond.ru. Retrieved October 24, 2013, from 
http://gazfond.ru/about/official_information/indicators/pensionnye-rezervy/ 
Peregudov, S., Lapina, N., & Semenenko, I. (1999). Gruppy interesov i rossiiskoe 
gosudarstvo. Moskva: Editorial URSS. 
Perekrest, V., & Spirin, Y. (2005, July 19). Stepashin nashel kompromat na Adamova 
v Irane. Izvestiya. 
Petrova, S., & Reznik, I. (2002, June 24). Gazprom dal dochke zarabotat. 
Vedomosti. 
Petrovsky, O. (2002, September 26). Stroitransgaz pomirilsya s Gazpromom. 
Kommersant. 
Pitts, G. (2007, July 31). Battle of the oligarchs: Deripaska on top, as oligarchs 
collide. The Globe and Mail. 
Pleshanova, O. (2008a, April 4). Gosudarstvo lishitsya beznravstvennykh dokhodov. 
Kommersant. 
Pleshanova, O. (2008b, April 11). Pravila igry. Kommersant. 
Pleshanova, O., & Gritskova, A. (2008, June 17). Presledovateli Yukosa ukhodyat v 
bolshoe plavanie. Kommersant. 
Pleshanova, O., Kiseleva, E., & Grib, N. (2007, April 2). Litsenzionnyi prigovor. 
Kommersant. 
Pleshanova, O., & Zanina, A. (2009, January 16). Bashkirskie dela sovsem khoroshi. 
Kommersant. 
Pochemu prodolzhaetsya pressing Gutserieva? (2007, August 29). Vedomosti. 
Podplatnik, T. (2005). Big business and the state in Putins Russia, 2000-2004: 
towards a new state corporatism (D.Phil.). University of Oxford. 
Polanyi, K. (2001). The great transformation: the political and economic origins of 
our time (Second Beacon paperback edition.). Boston: Beacon Press. 
Polukhin, A. (2007, August 2). Spekulyant gosudarev. Novaya Gazeta. 
Ponomarev, D. (2004, July 2). Potanin porval s Bendukidze. Gazeta. 
Povestka dnya: OMZ stanet ZAO. (2006, February 13). Ekspert. 
Pravitelstvo RF utverdilo korrektirovku Generalnoi skhemy razmeshcheniya 
obektov elektroenergetiki do 2020 goda s perspektivoi do 2030 goda. (2010, 
June 3). Atominfo.ru. Retrieved from http://atominfo.ru/news2/b0149.htm 
Pravosudov, S. (2001, January 26). Abritrom naznachen Gref. Inostrannyi konsultant 
pomozhet emu razobratsya v otnosheniyakh Gazproma i Itery. 
Nezavisimaya Gazeta. 
Prezhentsev, P., & Reznik, I. (2001, June 14). Gosudarstvo voyuet za mesta v sovete 
direktorov Gazproma. Kommersant. 
Prokhorov, P. (2012, April 23). Goskorporatsiya vkladyvaet milliardy rublei v 
konkurenta Izhorskikh zavodov. Ekspert Severo-Zapad, 16(562). Retrieved 
from http://expert.ru/northwest/2012/16/rosatom-uprazdnyaet-monopoliyu/ 
Przeworski, A. (1991). Transitions to democracy. In Democracy and the market: 
political and economic reform in Eastern Europe and Latin America (pp. 51
99). Cambridge University Press. 
Pushkarskaya, A., & Kornysheva, A. (2006, July 17). Rosatom vzyal Izhorskie zavody 
pod upravlenie v ramkhakh sovmestnogo predpriyatiya s Gazprombankom. 
Kommersant. 
Putin osmotrel proizvodstvennye moshchnosti Izhorskikh zavodov. (2009, June 2). 
Rossiiskoe atomnoe soobshchestvo. Retrieved February 8, 2011, from 
http://www.atomic-energy.ru/node/4280 
Putin, V. (2005). Poslanie Prezidenta RF Federalnomu Sobraniyu Rossiiskoi 
Federatsii 2005. 
Putin, V. (2006, February 7). Intervyu ispanskim sredstvam massovoi informatsii. 
Retrieved from 
http://archive.kremlin.ru/appears/2006/02/07/1759_type63379_101129.shtml 
Putin, V. (2012, January 30). O nashikh ekonomicheskikh zadachakh. Vedomosti. 
Radygin, A. (2008). Gosudarstvennyi kapitalizm i finansovyi krizis: faktory 
vzaimodeistviya, izderzhki i perspektivy. Ekonomicheskaya Politika, (6). 
Radygin, A., & Malginov, G. (2006). Rynok korporativnogo kontrolya i gosudarstvo. 
Voprosy Ekonomiki, (3), 6285. 
Ravinskii, V. (2007, November 3). Mikhail Gutseriev ostalsya bez sody. Kommersant. 
Rebrov, D. (2007, July 23). Pravila igry. Kommersant. 
Rebrov, D. (2008, September 30). Russneft poluchila federalnoe znachenie. 
Kommersant. 
Rebrov, D. (2009, June 8). Russneft dlya russkikh. Kommersant. 
Rebrov, D. (2010, January 11). Russneft vernulas k Mikhailu Gutserievu. 
Kommersant. 
Rebrov, D., Grishkovets, E., Grib, N., & Paramonova, I. (2007, May 11). YuKOS 
peretek v Rosneft. Kommersant. 
Rebrov, D., & Pleshanova, O. (2007, June 21). Nalogoviki berut Russneft pod 
kontrol. Kommersant. 
Rebrov, D., & Zanina, A. (2008, February 21). FAS otlozhila Russneft v dolgii 
yashchik. Kommersant. 
Rem Vyakhirev. (2013, February 12). The Telegraph. 
Reznik, I. (2001a, June 30). Gazprom stal goskompaniei. Rem Vyakhirev ostalsya 
nablyudat. Kommersant. 
Reznik, I. (2001b, August 1). Gazprom vosstanavlivaet semyu. Kommersant. 
Reznik, I. (2001c, September 10). Gazprom naprasno voznamerilsya vernut 
dochku. Svoe Yuzhno-Russkoe mestorozhdenie ona uzhe otdala Itere. 
Kommersant. 
Reznik, I. (2002a, January 22). Intervyu: Aleksandr Ananenkov, zampred pravleniya 
OAO Gazprom po proizvodstvennym voprosam. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2002b, March 25). Zapsibgazprom pod kontrolem. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2002c, April 3). Detei Gazproma razmyli. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2002d, April 17). Novyi podryadchik Gazproma. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2002e, April 18). Zapsib vernuli. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2002f, April 30). Neulovimoe mestorozhdenie. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2002g, August 22). Novaya pokupka Gazproma. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2002h, December 26). Usmanov pomog Milleru. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2003, January 14). Intervyu: Alisher Usmanov, generalnyi direktor OOO 
Gazprominvestkholding. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2004a, May 18). Krasnenkov poproshchalsya, no ne ushel. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2004b, June 7). Bekker prodal aktsii Stroitransgaza. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2007a, July 24). Gutseriev otdal neft. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2007b, July 30). Lichnoe delo Gutserieva. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2007c, August 21). On vsegda byl beloi voronoi. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2009, April 20). Khroniki 2001-2009 gg.: Davi na gaz Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I. (2010, May 19). Ya nikogda ne torgoval Rossiei. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., & Bushueva, Y. (2001, October 18). Konets nezhnoi druzhby. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., Derbilova, Y., & Yegorova, T. (2004, December 24). Pod kryshu 
Rosnefti. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., & Khrennikov, I. (2001, December 18). Ded Moroz Miller. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., & Kornya, A. (2006, August 2). Prigovorili YuKOS. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., Lemeshko, A., & Golubovich, T. (2003, April 14). Naslednik 
Goldovskogo. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., & Lysova, T. (2002, February 11). Gazprom vospolzuetsya opytom 
FSB. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., & Mazneva, E. (2005, May 18). Nortgaz otbilsya. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., & Nikolskii, A. (2007, January 30). U Russnefti mnogo del. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., & Novolodskaya, S. (2002, March 26). Gazprom peredumal. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., & Osetinskaya, Y. (2007, July 26). Kak spasti Russneft. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., Osetinskaya, Y., & Nikolskii, A. (2002, January 24). Gazprom vybral 
bankrotstvo. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., Osetinskaya, Y., & Novolodskaya, S. (2002, February 12). Sibur 
obankrotyat. Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., Simakov, D., & Kornya, A. (2007, June 13). Vosem del Gutserieva. 
Vedomosti. 
Reznik, I., & Yegorova, T. (2004, April 29). Gazprom v razdumyakh. Vedomosti. 
Riley, A. (2012). Commission v. Gazprom: the antitrust clash of the decade? (No. 
285). Centre for European Policy Studies. 
Rochlitz, M. (2010). The political economy of industrial policy in Putins Russia. 
Presented at the BASEES, Cambridge. 
Rochlitz, M. (2013). Corporate raiding and the role of the state in Russia. Post-Soviet 
Affairs. 
Rosneft soletsya s Gazpromom bez Yuganskneftegaza. (2005, March 2). 
Newsru.com. Retrieved from 
http://www.newsru.com/arch/finance/02mar2005/slilis.html 
Rostovskii, M. (2009, June 5). Dissident respubliki Bashkortostan. Moskovskii 
Komsomolets. 
Rozhkov, A., Reznik, I., Baraulina, A., & Myazina, Y. (2006, August 23). Pristroili 
3% Gazproma. Vedomosti. 
Rubanov, I. (2007, February 5). Krakh balovnya sudby. Ekspert. 
Rubanov, I., & Vinkov, A. (2007, August 13). Kost v gorle Belogo rytsarya. 
Ekspert. 
Rubnikovich, O., Rebrov, D., & Muradov, M. (2010, April 24). Mikhail Gutseriev 
prigovoren k vozvrashcheniyu. Kommersant. 
Russian tycoon to reform Georgia. (2004, June 2). BBC News. Retrieved from 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/business/3769373.stm 
Rustem Khamitov: v Bashkortostane preodolen krizis upravleniya dengami ot 
prodazhi TEK. (2010, November 30). Ufimskii Zhurnal. Retrieved from 
http://journalufa.com/page,1,5,694-rustem-hamitov-v-bashkortostane-
preodolen-krizis-upravleniya-dengami-ot-prodazhi-tek.html 
Rybalchenko, I. (2001, November 15). Stroitransgaz pomozhet inostrantsam. 
Kommersant. 
Rybalchenko, I., & Kornysheva, A. (2003, November 5). Deprivatizatsiya. Kakhu 
Bendukidze tesnyat v eksporte AES. Kommersant. 
Rybalchenko, I., & Mokrousova, I. (2002, January 19). Gazprom zanyalsya 
povtornym udochereniem. Kommersant. 
S&P drops OMZ suspended ratings at issuers request. (2012, July 13). Reuters. 
Retrieved from 
http://uk.reuters.com/article/2012/07/13/idUKWLA024620120713 
Sakwa, R. (2009). The quality of freedom: Khodorkovsky, Putin, and the Yukos affair. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Samedova, Y., Tikhomirova, Y., & Terletsky, V. (2005, November 10). Uralmash 
zavis v vozdukhe. Nezavisimaya Gazeta. 
Sapozhnikov, P. (2002, June 15). Gazprom vybivaet golos iz Stroitransgaza. 
Kommersant. 
Sapozhnikov, P. (2003, August 15). MAP razreshil YukosSibneft'. Kommersant. 
Sapozhnikov, P., & Skorobogatko, D. (2004, July 21). Nachalas rasprodazha 
YuKOSa. Kommersant. 
Schetnaya Palata RF. (2004). Otchet po itogam kompleksnoi proverki sostoyaniya, 
perspektiv razvitiya i finansovogo polozheniya OAO Gazprom (unpublished 
report). 
Sechin, Igor. (n.d.). Lenta.ru (Lentapediya). Retrieved from 
http://lenta.ru/lib/14160890/ 
Semenenko, I. (2003, July 8). Yukos powers ahead with Sibneft merger. Moscow 
Times. 
Seregin, V. (2004, April 5). Gazprom skupaet OMZ. RBK Daily. Retrieved from 
http://balancer-humma.v3.rbcdaily.ru/2004/04/05/industry/562949979070724 
Sergeev, N. (2007, May 15). Militsiya predprinyala Mikhaila Gutserieva. 
Kommersant. 
Sergeev, N., Grib, N., Rebrov, D., & Butrin, D. (2007, January 29). Mikhailu 
Gutserievu napomnili o dochkakh. Kommersant. 
Sharafutdinova, G. (2010). Subnational governance in Russia: how Putin changed the 
contract with his agents and the problems it created for Medvedev. Publius, 
40(4), 672696. 
Shcherbakov, P., & Gorodetskaya, N. (2009, March 23). Murtaza Rakhimov 
zashchishchaetsya federalizmom. Kommersant. 
Shiryaev, V. (2001, June 30). Novaya stranitsa v gazovoi istorii. Novye Izvestiya. 
Siemens zavershil prodazhu blokpaketa Silovykh mashin A. Mordashovu. (2011, 
December 1). RBK. Retrieved June 20, 2012, from 
http://top.rbc.ru/economics/01/12/2011/627842.shtml 
Sikamova, A. (2008, January 21). OMZ ne delitsya atomom. Vedomosti. 
Silaev, N. (2003, November 3). Oktyabrskii perevorot. Profil. 
Silin, T. (2003, November 17). I eto vse otem. Kommersant-Vlast. 
Sim, L.-C. (2008). The rise and fall of privatisation in the Russian oil industry. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Sixsmith, M. (2010). Putins oil: the Yukos affair and the struggle for Russia. 
London: Continuum. 
Skorlygina, N., & Rebrov, D. (2007, September 6). Russneft vylilas za predely 
Rossii. Kommersant. 
Skorobogatko, D., Butrin, D., & Kovalev, N. (2004, December 20). Prodano. 
Yugansk kupili lyudi iz Londona. Kommersant. 
Skorobogatko, D., Kiseleva, E., & Skornyakova, A. (2005, July 22). Rasplata. 
Rosneftegaz otdal Gazpromu vse, chto nashel. Kommersant. 
Smirnov, K. (2003, April 18). Mikhail Kasyanov ne vozrazhaet protiv stroitelstva 
chastnogo nefteprovoda. Kommersant. 
Sobyanin, Sergei: mer Moskvy. (n.d.). Lenta.ru (Lentapediya). Retrieved from 
http://lenta.ru/lib/14161169/full.htm 
Sokolov, M. (2005, July 11). Sekretnyi doklad Vladislava Surkova. Radio Svoboda. 
Retrieved from http://www.svobodanews.ru/articleprintview/127679.html 
Sostoyalos sobranie aktsionerov OAO Zapsibgazprom. (2002, May 28). 
Gazprom.ru. Retrieved from 
http://www.gazprom.ru/press/news/2002/may/article53933/ 
Sovet direktorov Gazproma. (2000, October 28). Trud. Retrieved from 
http://dlib.eastview.com.gate2.library.lse.ac.uk/browse/doc/2256887 
Speckhard, C. T. (2004, December). The ties that bind: big business and center-
periphery relations in the Russian Federation (PhD). University of Texas at 
Austin. 
Standard and Poors. (2012). Industry Report Card: Despite a slower economy, 
European Capital Goods Firms Ratings Look Resilient. Retrieved from 
http://www.standardandpoors.com/spf/upload/Ratings_EMEA/IRCEuropeanC
apitalGoods.pdf?elqIsAgent=True&elq=000000000000000000000000000000
Stepanova, N. (2007, November 26). Ne mytem, tak katanem. PRoAtom. Retrieved 
June 9, 2010, from 
http://www.proatom.ru/modules.php?name=News&file=article&sid=1160 
Stepanova, V., & Yambaeva, R. (2005, December 27). Uralmashzavodu podyskali 
gendirektora na Ukraine bez uchastiya novykh vladeltsev OMZ. Kommersant. 
Stepovoi, A. (2011, October 5). Nuzhno vremya, chtoby lyudi osvobodilis ot 
rozovykh ochkov. Novye Izvestiya. Retrieved from 
http://www.newizv.ru/politics/2011-10-05/152463-prezident-respubliki-
bashkortostan-rustem-hamitov.html 
Stern, J. (2005). The future of Russian gas and Gazprom. Oxford: Oxford Institute for 
Energy Studies. 
Sudebnaya praktika. (2002, June 6). Kommersant. 
Surnacheva, Y. (2010, September 8). Rakhimovy poluchat schet. Gazeta. 
Surzhenko, V. (2007, March 20). Gazprombank otvetit za Status. Vedomosti. 
Surzhenko, V., & Mazneva, E. (2007, May 4). Chto vyroslo, to vyroslo. Vedomosti. 
Sverdlovskie vlasti vydali pokupatelya OMZ. (2005, November 9). Newsru.com. 
Retrieved July 16, 2012, from 
http://www.newsru.com/finance/09nov2005/kaha.html 
Tazhetdinov, S. R. (1996). Ponyatie affilirovannoe litso i gruppa lits v 
antimonopolnom zakonodatelstve: kommentarii deistvuyyshchego 
zakonodatelstva ot 20 noyabrya 1996 g. Yuridicheskaya Praktika, (3), 6064. 
Terenteva, A. (2011, June 1). Goldovskii eshche pokhimichit. Vedomosti. 
Thornhill, J. (1998, March 5). Uralmash to acquire rival. Financial Times. 
Timeline of events. (n.d.). Mikhail Khodorkovsky press-center. Retrieved September 
25, 2012, from http://www.old.khodorkovsky.info/timeline/ 
Tompson, W. (2005). Putin and the oligarchs: a two-sided commitment problem? In 
Leading Russia: Putin in perspective: essays in honour of Archie Brown (pp. 
179203). Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Tompson, W. (2008). Back to the future?: thoughts on the political economy of 
expanding state ownership in Russia (No. 6). [Paris]: CERI, Sciences Po. 
Tovkailo, M. (2013, April 1). Gazprom bez sprosu. Vedomosti. 
Transnatsionalnyi Sibur. (2001, July 2). Vedomosti. 
Treisman, D. (2007). Putins Silovarchs. Orbis, 51(1), 141153. 
Tsitata nedeli. (2001, November 27). Vedomosti. 
Tsymbalov, A. (2007, August 6). Gosudarstvo prodolzhaet uvelichivat svoe 
prisutstvie v neftegazovom sektore. The New Times. 
Tutushkin, A. (2006, November 28). Sistema ukreplyaetsya v Bashkirii. Vedomosti. 
Tutushkin, A. (2007a, February 19). U Rakhimova otbirayut TEK. Vedomosti. 
Tutushkin, A. (2007b, November 13). Plan Deripaski. Vedomosti. 
Tutushkin, A., Bushueva, Y., & Lysova, T. (2003, December 1). Polnyi nazad. 
Vedomosti. 
Tutushkin, A., & Reznik, I. (2006, July 6). Za Tambeineftegaz vzyalis sledovateli. 
Vedomosti. 
Tutushkin, A., & Tsukanov, I. (2009, November 10). Ishchet neft. Vedomosti. 
Ukaz Prezidenta Rossiiskoi Federatsii ot 20 maya 2004 g. N 649 Voprosy struktury 
federalnykh organov ispolnitelnoi vlasti (2004). 
Usmanov Alisher. (n.d.). RB.ru. Retrieved from 
http://www.rb.ru/biz/people/show/247/ 
Usmanov vozglavil reiting samykh bogatykh rossiyan po versii Forbes. (2013, April 
18). Forbes.ru. Retrieved from http://www.forbes.ru/news/237814-usmanov-
vozglavil-reiting-samyh-bogatyh-rossiyan-po-versii-forbes 
Usov, P., & Cherkasova, M. (2007, November 28). Russkii ugol prodadut po 
chastyam. Kommersant. 
Van Evera, S. (1997). Guide to methods for students of political science. Cornell 
University Press. 
Varese, F. (2005). The Russian Mafia: private protection in a new market economy. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Vchera. (2002, August 21). Kommersant. 
Vernon, R. (1984). Linking managers with ministers: dilemmas of the state-owned 
enterprise. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 4(1), 3955. 
Vinkov, A. (2004, January 26). Okhota na mirnyi atom. Ekspert. 
Vinkov, A. (2006, October 9). Razderbanili do atoma. Ekspert, (37). 
Vinkov, A. (2007, May 21). Bystro ne otstanut. Ekspert, 3233. 
Vinkov, A. (2010, December 21). Dorogoi sposob kupit deshevo. Ekspert, 50(734). 
Vinkov, A., & Sivakov, D. (2003, April 28). YuKOS + Sibneft = YuKOS. 
Ekspert. 
Vinogradov, D. (2006, October 10). Chetvertyi prezidentskii srok. Gazeta. 
Vkrattse. (2010, June 29). Vedomosti. 
Volkov, V. (2004). The selective use of state capacity in Russias economy: property 
disputes and enterprise takeovers, 1998-2002. In B. Rothstein, S. Rose-
Ackerman, & J. Kornai (Eds.), Creating social trust in post-socialist transition 
(pp. 126147). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Volkov, V. (2008a). Standard Oil and Yukos in the Context of Early Capitalism in the 
United States and Russia. Demokratizatsiya, 16(3), 240264. 
Volkov, V. (2008b). State corporations: another institutional experiment. Pro et 
Contra, 12(5-6). Retrieved from 
http://carnegieendowment.org/files/TwoCrisesConsequencesandOutlook.pdf 
Volkov, V. (2010). Problema nadezhnykh garantii prav sobstvennosti i rossiiskii 
variant vertikalnoi politicheskoi integratsii. Voprosy Ekonomiki, (8). 
Wade, R. (2004). Governing the market: economic theory and the role of government 
in East Asian industrialization (2nd paperback ed.). Princeton and Oxford: 
Princeton University Press. 
Waldner, D. (1999). State building and late development. Ithaca and London: Cornell 
University Press. 
Weingast, B. (1993). Constitutions as governance structures: the political foundations 
of secure markets. Journal of International and Theoretical Economics, 149. 
Weiss, M. (2012). Man on a mission: Bill Browder vs. the Kremlin. World Affairs. 
Wengle, S. A. (2012). Post-Soviet developmentalism and the political economy of 
Russias electricity sector liberalization. Studies in Comparative International 
Development, 47(1), 75114. 
White, G. L. (2008, April 11). Russian court limits use of civil law to seize assets. The 
Wall Street Journal Europe, p. 2. 
Williamson, O. E. (1981). The Economics of Organization: The Transaction Cost 
Approach. American Journal of Sociology, 87(3), 548577. 
Wilson, A. (2005). Virtual politics: faking democracy in the post-Soviet world. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
Wilson, A. (2012, October 4). Greedy presidents. European Council on Foreign 
Relations. Retrieved from http://ecfr.eu/blog/entry/greedy_presidents 
Woodruff, D. M. (1999). Its value thats virtual: bartles, rubles, and the place of 
Gazprom in the Russian economy. Post-Soviet Affairs, 15(2), 130148. 
Woodruff, D. M. (2003). Khodorkovskys gamble: from business to politics in the 
Yukos conflict (No. 308). PONARS Eurasia. 
Woodruff, D. M. (2013). Laws authorizations and rule of law ideals: lessons from 
Russia. Georgia Journal of International and Comparative Law, 41(1). 
Yakubova, I. (2001, August 29). Bezotsovshchina. Kommersant. 
Yambaeva, R. (2002, May 29). Zapsibgazprom dostalsya Gazpromu. Kommersant. 
Yambaeva, R. (2003, December 5). V Atomstroieksporte nachalos upravlyaemoe 
delenie. Kommersant. 
Yambaeva, R. (2004, October 8). Gazprom prikryl Atomstroieksporta ot 
Federalnogo agentstva po atomnoi energii. Kommersant. 
Yambaeva, R., Grib, N., & Belikov, D. (2005, November 3). Razedinennye 
mashinostroitelnye zadody. Kommersant. 
Yambaeva, R., Kornysheva, A., & Gritskova, A. (2006, September 30). 
Obedinennye mashinostroitelnye zavody gotovy k rasformirovaniyu. 
Kommersant. 
Yaroshevskii, V. (2008, July 10). Oni unichtozhili YuKOS. Novaya Gazeta. 
Yartsev, I., & Vadimova, A. (2005, August 19). Kupil - otmyl - pereprodal. 
Moskovskie Novosti. 
Yegorov, N. (2013, September 30). Mikhail Gutseriev vernul svoe. DP.ru. 
Retrieved from http://www.utronews.ru/economics/001380529358859/ 
Yegorova, T., & Malkova, I. (2005, November 3). S Rossiei v raschete. Vedomosti. 
Yegorova, T., Medvedeva, Y., & Nikolskii, A. (2006, July 19). Yadernyi bank. 
Vedomosti. 
Yegorova, T., Simakov, D., & Malkova, I. (2005, September 22). OMZ otdadut 
Gazpromu. Vedomosti. 
Yemelyanenkov, A. (2006, July 5). Renessans po Kirienko. Rossiiskaya Gazeta. 
Yenikeyeff, S. (2005). Bringing the regions back in? Federal corporate groups vs. 
regional elites in the Russian oil sector. University of Oxford, Oxford. 
Yukos rejects Sibneft demand. (2003, December 1). Reuters. Retrieved from 
http://edition.cnn.com/2003/WORLD/europe/12/01/russia.yukos.reut/index.ht
Yuliya Latynina: Gutseriev otdal Russneft ne tem, kto za nim okhotilsya. (2007, 
August 28). DP.ru. Retrieved from 
http://www.dp.ru/a/2007/08/28/JUlija_Latinina_Guceriev/ 
Zapodinskaya, Y. (2005, April 12). Mikhail Khodorkovskii otkazal sudu v 
sniskhozhdenii. Kommersant. 
Zapsibgazprom. (n.d.). Gazprom.ru. Retrieved from 
http://www.gazprom.com/about/subsidiaries/list-items/zapsibgazprom/ 
Zayavlenie Soveta Blagotvoritelnogo fonda Ural po materialam intervyu R.Z. 
Khamitova gazeta Novye Izvestiya ot 5 oktyabrya 2011 g. (2011, October 
7). Politufa. Retrieved from http://politufaru.blogspot.co.uk/2011/10/5-
2011.html 
Zhuravskaya, E. (2008). Is there the Rule of Law in Russia? The case of corporate 
raiding - a note (No. 94). London: Centre for the Study of Economic and 
Social Change in Europe, UCL School of Slavonic and East European Studies. 
Zubova, Y. (2013, November 19). Pensionnyi peredel: chetvert rynka NPF smenila 
vladeltsev. Forbes.ru. Retrieved from 
http://www.forbes.ru/finansy/investitsii/247562-kto-i-zachem-pokupaet-npf 
