Integrating Rational and Heuristic Elements in 
Executives Decision-Making Processes in Qatar 
Yousef M. Al-Kuwari 
Submitted in partial 
fulfilment of the requirements for  
the degree of Doctor of Philosophy  
February, 2022 
CONTENTS 
FRONT MATTER 
CHAPTER ONE:  INTRODUCTION 
CHAPTER TWO:  LITERATURE REVIEW 
2.6 THE USE OF RATIONAL AND HEURISTIC ELEMENTS 
DURING EXECUTIVE DECISION-MAKING IN QATAR  
2.7 BEST PRACTICE IN THE USE OF USE OF RATIONAL AND 
HEURISTIC ELEMENTS DURING EXECUTIVE DECISION-
MAKING IN QATAR 
CHAPTER THREE:  RESEARCH METHEDOLOGY 
CHAPTER FOUR: DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
 4.2.1 QUESTIONNAIRE DESIGN AND SAMPLE 
SELECTION 
 4.3.2 DECISION MAKING STYLES EXHIBITED BY 
RESPONDENTS 
4.5 VALIDITY   
CHAPTER FIVE: DISCUSSION 
5.3 DEFINING EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL 
CONCURRENT VALIDITY  
CHAPTER SIX: CONCLUSION 
LIST OF TABLES 
TABLE 2.1 CONSTRUCTS AND CONCEPTUALIZATIONS 
OF RATIONALITY 
TABLE 3.2 THREE CONDITIONS ARE RELATED 
TOWARDS THE FIVE MAJOR RESEARCH 
STRATEGIES 
TABLE 4.1 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF 
PARTICIPANTS 
TABLE 4.2 AVOIDANT DECISION-MAKING STYLE 
EXHIBITED BY RESPONDENT 
TABLE 4.3 EXPERT HEURISTIC DECISION-MAKING 
STYLE EXHIBITED BY RESPONDENTS 
TABLE 4.4 RATIONAL DECISION-MAKING STYLE 
EXHIBITED BY RESPONDENTS 
TABLE 4.5 INTUITION DECISION-MAKING STYLE 
EXHIBITED BY RESPONDENT 
TABLE 4.6 DEPENDENT DECISION-MAKING STYLE 
EXHIBITED BY RESPONDENTS 
TABLE 4.7 SPONTANEOUS DECISION-MAKING STYLE 
EXHIBITED BY RESPONDENTS 
TABLE 4.14 CORRELATIONS MATRIX BETWEEN 
FACTORS AND DEMOGRAPHIC VARIABLE 
TABLE 4.15 HOW THE FIVE DECISION-MAKING 
FACTORS DEPEND SIGNIFICANTLY WITH 
DIFFERENT CONTEXTS 
TABLE 4.16 AVERAGES FOR THE YES/NO CONTEXT 
QUESTIONS FOR STANDARDIZED FACTORS 
TABLE 4.17 MEAN SCORE FOR EACH FACTOR IN 
RELATION TO QUESTION 41 
TABLE 4.18 MEAN SCORE FOR EACH FACTOR IN 
RELATION TO QUESTION 42 
TABLE 4.19 MEAN SCORE FOR EACH FACTOR IN 
RELATION TO QUESTION 43 
TABLE 4.20 MEAN SCORE FOR EACH FACTOR IN 
RELATION TO QUESTION 44 
TABLE 4.21 MEAN SCORE FOR EACH FACTOR IN 
RELATION TO QUESTION 45 
TABLE 4.22 MEAN SCORE FOR EACH FACTOR IN 
RELATION TO QUESTION 46 
TABLE 4.23 MEAN SCORE FOR EACH FACTOR IN 
RELATION TO QUESTION 47 
TABLE 4.24 MEAN SCORE FOR EACH FACTOR IN 
RELATION TO QUESTION 48 
TABLE 4.25 MEAN SCORE FOR EACH FACTOR IN 
RELATION TO QUESTION 49 
TABLE 4.26 MEAN SCORE FOR EACH FACTOR IN 
RELATION TO QUESTION 50 
TABLE 4.27 MEAN SCORE FOR EACH FACTOR IN 
RELATION TO QUESTION 51 
TABLE 5.1 MEANS AND STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR 
THE STANDARDISED FACTOR SCORES 
LIST OF FIGURES 
FIGURE 2.1 THE PROCESS OF THINKING AND DECISION-
MAKING 
FIGURE 2.3 RESULTS OF TTB ALGORITHM COMPARED 
WITH OTHER DECISION MODELS 
FIGURE 5.1 DECISION-MAKING STYLES EXHIBITED BY 
RESPONDENTS (BOX AND WHISKER PLOT) 
FIGURE 5.2 YES NO RESPONDENTS ANSWERS TO LEVELS 
OF DECISION-MAKING 
FIGURE 5.3 MIXED ENVIRONMENT DRIVEN MODEL TO 
DECISION-MAKING PROCESS 
FIGURE 5.3A MIXED ENVIRONMENT DRIVEN MODEL 
UNDER UNCERTAINTY  
FIGURE 5.3B MIXED ENVIRONMENT DRIVEN MODEL 
UNDER CERTAINTY  
FIGURE 6.1 MIXED ENVIRONMENT DRIVEN MODEL TO 
DECISION-MAKING PROCESS 
LIST OF APPENDICES 
APPENDIX 11 COVID-19 IMPACTING ON RESEARCH IN 
QATAR 
. 366 
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 
ePIPE: ENVIRONMENT, PURPOSE, INFORMATION, PEOPLE, 
EXECUTION 
GSDP: GENERAL SECRETARIAT FOR DEVELOPMENT 
PLANNING 
PMM: PROBABILISTIC MENTAL MODELS  51 
Dedication 
To My Wonderful Family For Their 
Love, Care, Inspiration and 
Encouragement  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
I would like to express my deepest gratitude and appreciation to my supervisor Dr. David 
Bamber, Director of PhD Studies, Bolton Business School, University of Bolton, for his invaluable 
support during my study in University of Bolton and, at the same time, I would like to express the 
same gratitude and appreciation to Dr Chris Bamber from University of Bolton for his great 
support.  I am also grateful to Bolton Business School and Bolton University for the homey 
ambiance and the widely available and easily accessible resources which without, my work could 
not have been easily completed. 
In Qatar, great people are to be mentioned, my gracious acknowledgement and sincere 
gratitude goes to my brother Dr. Ahmad Al-Kuwari for his encouragement, support and invaluable 
advice, whose wide knowledge and experience have been of great value for me. Also, my deepest 
gratitude and appreciation goes to Dr. Reda Al Btoush from the Community College of Qatar for 
his invaluable support. 
I hope that, based on this work, researchers from my country and elsewhere will be 
encouraged to continue the theoretical background and take advantage of the achieved results and 
build new approaches. 
Last but not least, one thing that is beyond doubt is that my thesis would have taken more 
years without the support of my family, special thanks to whom I am deeply indebted, my wife, 
son and daughters for their patience, support and encouragement.  
ABSTRACT 
This research used a theoretical model that included six decision-making styles to analyse the 
decision-making styles of executives in Qatar. Quantitative research techniques were used in this study, 
but these were supplemented with semi-structured interviews conducted with four top executive 
decision makers to provide an indication of decision-making in Qatari Executives, the covid 19 
pandemic obstructed further interviews and detail thematic analysis. However, a five-point Likert scale 
questionnaire was custom designed that contained six decision-making styles of the theoretical model 
that were identified from existing theory and empirical research: rational, heuristic, intuitive, 
dependent, avoidant, and spontaneous decision-making styles. A series of eleven dichotomous 
questions represented decision-making contexts at different levels and there were four demographic 
variables. The questionnaire was administered to 350 Qatari executives. Principal components analysis 
indicated that all the six decision-making styles were important to the Qatari executives with different 
level of agreement.  
The research findings confirm that decision-making is a multifaceted and multi-dimensional 
phenomenon, where the focus in decision-making varies from context to context: Qatari executives 
use a combination of decision-making styles in making important decisions. However, the research 
indicates that individuals, at times rely on shortcuts when making decisions.  A mixed environment 
driven model to decision-making process is proposed. In this model, when problems that are more 
complex, and dynamic are coupled with a poor environment then more intuitive and heuristic processes 
are used and less rational. That contrasts with situations involving simple, stable scenarios that are 
coupled with a supportive environment where more rational and risk avoidant process are used, using 
less intuition and fewer heuristics.  
Age was not significantly correlated with any of the decision-making styles. Avoidant 
decision-making style had a positive significant correlation with number of years in the current 
business. Intuitive decision-making style had a positive significant correlation with level of Education 
and dependent decision-making style has positive significant correlation with both number of years in 
the current business and level of education. Spontaneous decision-making was not dependent on any 
of the eleven business contexts.  
Concerning different business contexts, immediate payment decisions slightly negatively 
impacted on all the six decision-making styles but not significantly. Avoidant decision-making style 
was negatively impacted by the day-to-day activities of the business and negatively impacted by short-
term activities but positively impacted by long-term activities. Heuristic decision-making was 
impacted positively by short-term activities but negatively by the allocation of resources, the use of 
resources, how many people to deploy on the task, broad organisational issues, top executives, and 
strategic decisions. Rational decision making was significantly impacted on by the use of resources 
and how many people are deployed on tasks. Intuitive decision making was significantly impacted 
negative by short-term activities. Dependent decision-making was impacted negatively by how many 
people to deploy on tasks and broad organisational issues. Two of the eleven business concerns a) 
immediate payment decisions and b) managers across the organisation do not significantly impact on 
any of the decision-making styles.  
Keywords: Decision Making Process, Decision Making Styles, Factor Analysis, Heuristic Decision 
Making, Rational Decision Making, Intuitive Decision Making, Dependent Decision Making, 
Spontaneous Decision Making, Avoidant Decision Making. 
CHAPTER ONE:  INTRODUCTION  
1.1 RESEARCH OVERVIEW 
Decision making theory primarily addresses how situational organisational structures 
impact decisions. According to decision making theorists, decision making is not centred around 
efficiency; things are done in particular ways because that is how it was done in the past. 
Contradictions and irrationality are prevalent within organisations. Decision makers are limited 
because of their perceptions and inability to adequately obtain and assess information (March & 
Simon, 1958). Perceptions are bias and bounded by sense-making determined by previous 
experience and knowledge (Weick, 1970). For this reason, organisational history is vital to 
understanding the behaviour of individuals within organisations.  
From the decision-making perspective, organisational structure is fluid, as it must be 
enacted each moment as individuals must continuously perceive and make sense of the world 
around them. However, decision-making is limited due to bounded rationality (limits in 
information and constraints on individuals to adequately assess information). According to 
decision making theory, organisations are made up of a mix of goals, problems, and possible 
solutions (Levitt & Nass, 1989). To ensure routine behaviour in organisations, programs are 
developed. Programs are routinised activities in response to frequently experienced stimuli. 
Programs facilitate yet limit worker understanding. Programs increase understanding, as they 
evoke meaning to common experiences. However, programs limit understanding, as they focus 
attention to some events, while ignoring others. Organisations affect individual rationality through 
programs which influence individual attention and subgoals along with the division of labour and 
communication structures.   
Whereas scientific management and human relations focus on managerial decisions to 
increase efficiency, decision making theory focuses on effectiveness. Decision making theorists 
claim decisions are usually determined by effectiveness, not efficiency (March and Simon, 1958). 
Individuals tend to routinise their behaviour and develop programs in response to stimuli.  It is 
costly for actors to have efficiency involved when making decisions. Instead, actors tend to think 
of effectiveness when completing tasks- they just worry about getting the job done. 
Decision making theory strongly contrasts with both the scientific management and human 
relations theory. Decision making theory strongly criticizes the managerial bias, as it claims it is 
not possible for managers to control the work process. From this perspective, control systems are 
situated (Vaughn, 1998). Control systems emerge because of past decisions and others 
interpretation of responses, they cannot be determined by current management. All individuals in 
the organisation, including managers, face bounded rationality. As such, everyone within the 
organisation is constrained in their ability to adequately assess information and control 
organisational outcomes.  
Decision making theory builds from formal rational perspectives of organisations, but 
according to decision making theory, formal rationality only has half of the equation. Whereas 
formal rationality emphasises how organisational control is ensured through a focus of 
information, decision making theory emphasises how both the focus of information and the focus 
of attention is related to organisational control (March and Simon, 1958). Historically developed 
control systems (programs) influence the way individuals decide when and how to act when 
experiencing stimuli. In conclusion, according to decision making theory, organisations work as 
sets of continuously enacted programmed responses, allowing worker discretion and flexibility in 
how a mix of goals is achieved.  
Most of economic and business firms meet daily set of structural and unstructured problems 
which need managers with high skills and capabilities to make solutions through decisions 
(Francis, 2016; Radaoui et al., 2019). Structural decisions are defined as simple or routine 
decisions, but the problem lies on the unstructured decisions which the success or failure of firms 
depends on (Radaoui et al., 2019). In additions, the development process within the firm must go 
on in the goal of taking decisions that are able to find solutions necessary to solve all problems 
and issues. 
Developing the decision-making process is considered a development for business 
processes and functions, because it is difficult to perform any activity without having a good 
decision maker (Francis, 2016) and decision-making may be undertaken by one individual, or a 
group of individuals where different opinions are needed (Ogarca, 2015). 
In approaching the organisational decision-making processes, the managers behave 
differently. These differences are due to the specific way of framing the decisional problems, 
perceiving and analysing the available information, experience, interacting with the subordinates 
in the decision-making process. Furthermore, when approaching the management processes, there 
are sensitive differences between entrepreneurs and the managers of the large companies (Ogarca, 
2015). 
The organisation with flat structure which give the ability for employees to enter in the 
decision-making process is considered more effective than the hierarchical organisation which 
only the executive manager is making decisions (Adam et al., 2018). for that, most of firms started 
to adopt the concept of empowerment, which means expanding the circle of participants of internal 
customers (employees) and external customers to have innovative ideas and solutions and to have 
more experience to support decision-making with more efficient results even if there is a 
disadvantage of needing more time to decide. 
Over the past 25 years, as some senior executives of several organisations, they noticed 
that the decision-making process they have applied was often based on personal experience. 
Discussing this decision-making process with their colleagues possessing similar organisation 
backgrounds confirms that most organisation executives they talked with rely on personal 
experience when solving challenging organisation problems. Of course, they could not always 
share with others, especially the competition, the specifics of the problems facing their 
organisation (Frankl, 2010).  
Nowadays the role of senior executives includes a large amount of decision-making and 
complex problem solving. The ability of organisations to take efficient and effective decisions can 
have a major impact on business sustainability and agility (Forrester, 2003). Organisations realise 
the significance positive impact of developing true decision competencies and only realise this 
when solid, high-quality decision-making becomes embedded in the fabric of their DNA (Spetzler, 
2007). 
Decision literature depicts that past researchers introduced numerous unique decision-
making styles according to their cultures, contexts, and circumstances, but the shared aspect of the 
research on decision making styles is the consideration of rational and intuitive decision making  
style by almost all of the decision researchers (Arroba, 1977; Harren, 1979; Mitroff & Kilmann, 1975; 
Phillips et al., 1984; Scott & Bruce, 1995) although they considered both styles as distinctive 
dimensions of human nature. Researchers (Klaczynski, 2001; Stanovich & West, 2000; Sternberg, 
1997) illustrated that the line of distinction between cognitive style, learning style, thinking style, 
and decision-making style is based on the distinction between rational and intuitive approaches. 
The existing literature indicates that decision researchers were stick to the assumption that 
decisions are solely based either on rationality or on intuition. Payne & Bettman (2004) suggested 
that attempts should be made to understand the interaction between these two styles instead of 
considering them as separate dimensions to confirm Stanovich & West, (2002) argument that these 
two styles do not stand apart on the poles and are more interactive in nature. Francis (2016) defined 
four decision making models: the rational, intuitive decision, dependent decision, and avoidant 
decision models. 
In this research the rational model will be taking into consideration. The rational model is 
an extremely important model, since it is publicly prescribed to and because it is often the target 
of those who support alternative models, it is simple to overlook that it is merely a model, an 
incomplete representation of what occurs (AlHussayen, 2009). Researchers often measure 
decisions and inferred processes. A long-standing assumption within the decision-making 
literature is that the deliberative mode results in good (unbiased, rational) decisions (Peters et 
al., 2010; Strough et al., 2011). However, heuristics such as avoid waste often yield effective 
solutions and require minimal time and cognitive effort they are fast and frugal. 
This research analyses the decision-making styles, including rational and heuristic 
elements, in executive decision-making process in Qatar. The research studies how heuristic and 
rational, and other approaches to decision-making vary according to different strategic decision-
making contexts. Measures of rationality drawn from the literature are used in conjunction with 
techniques of argument mapping to represent decisions in a standardized manner. The concept of 
the strategic level of a decision will be investigated and a scale constructed for its assessment 
drawing on factors in the literature and a survey of managers understanding of the concept of 
strategic level.  
A structured questionnaire has been custom designed and completed by 350 Qatari 
Executive Managers from public sector and various business areas and semi-structured interviews 
were conducted with a subset of four Qatari senior managers. All four managers that participated 
in the semi-structured questionnaire are at CEO, divisional head, or similar senior positions level. 
1.2 RESEARCH CONTEXT 
Management, in both private and public sector, is the major component to increase the 
capacity of economy to improve its performance, and cope with continuous technological changes. 
In todays world, organisations are faced with thousands of decisions daily, and how they make 
these decisions will have a huge impact on their financial status (Forrester, 2003). These decisions 
set the tone for the entire organisation in terms of image, profits and customer service. That is why, 
it is especially important that organisations adopt best practices and execute good judgment when 
it comes to making decisions. Because the right decision at the right time could help companies 
achieve great success whereas a wrong decision could end up costing them dearly (Gal et al., 
2013). 
Frankl (2010) argued that wide varieties of human endeavours use heuristics for problem-
solving and noticed that his decision-making processes were often based either on experience or 
on advice received from colleagues. Seldom were the decisions based on formal or informal 
academic-based methods. He argued that there is no substitute for years of experience in any 
human endeavour. However, tapping into some of the principles and lessons learned from most of 
the senior executives personal experience can result in useful methods for others to follow, 
especially for entrepreneurs interested in building their own businesses. Therefore, a method for 
organising and compiling various forms of decision-making methods could deliver significant 
benefits by improving the decision-making process of executives in their institution. 
Decision making plays a vital and crucial role within large organisations, and how they 
react could very well have a substantial impact on their financial standing. Failure to make the 
correct decision could lead to huge financial loss, while on the other hand making the right decision 
could help achieve a financial gain. The importance of the correct decision being made cannot be 
signified. Therefore, and to guarantee success and survival in intensifying competition, all factors 
affecting decision-making need to be considered when deciding on a course of action 
(AlHussayen, 2009). 
The rational model suffers from several limitations like not having enough information 
which is crucial and relevant to problem, problems can also change during short period of time. In 
reality, the goals of an organisation are not the same of those of complex groups working in it. As 
there are different individuals in affirm, they have their own views, desires and objectives which 
might not be relevant and crucial for an organisation. In fact, they can work against the firm; those 
individuals will try to maximize their own set of goals rather than those which hold relevance for 
the firm (Verma, 2014). 
Although decision-making process has been a subject of research in big corporations, 
investigating decision-making using heuristics element remains limited. A method for organising 
and compiling various elements of decision-making using different elements of heuristics and 
rational can deliver significant benefits to during decision-making process. Behavioural 
economists acknowledge that decisions are often irrational and subject to systematic biases 
(Strough et al., 2011). However, they have not addressed whether the heuristics and rational 
element will improve the decision-making process.  
Qatars economy is one of the richest economies in the world based on GDP per capital, 
ranking between fifth and seventh on world rankings for 2015 and 2016 data compiled by the 
World Bank, United Nations, and IMF. Petroleum and natural gas are the cornerstones of Qatars 
economy and account for more than 70% of total government revenue, more than 60% of gross 
domestic product, and roughly 85% of export earnings. Qatar has the worlds third largest proven 
natural gas reserve and is the second-largest exporter of natural gas. 
Despite turbulent oil prices in the couple of last years the countrys economic growth 
remained stable. Government efforts to diversify incomes and globally invest reserves supported 
the GDP. The economy is also showing resilience and despite the ongoing blockade had an 
estimated growth of 2.6% in 2017. Sustaining economic prosperity is a strategic goal for Qatar in 
2030 and effective and efficient decision making will support achievement of that goal. Qatar 
National Vision 2030 (2022) presents three interrelated goals for the economy: to sustain a high 
standard of living, to expand innovation and entrepreneurial capabilities and to align economic 
outcomes with economic and financial stability. 
The population of Qatar is also on a rise by 2.1% from 2017, reaching 2.7 million people, 
more than doubling in the last ten years. It is a young population with an average age of 31 years 
coming from 87 nationalities. Only 12% of the population are local Qatari, while more than a third 
is coming from India and Nepal. People from Bangladesh and Philippines are also numerous with 
around 10% of the population each. 
Individuals seem to make decisions using a wide variety of strategies, ranging from careful 
and reasoned examination of alternatives to simple and fast rules of thumb. How do people decide 
how to decide? What factors determine the strategy a decision-maker will use in one situation as 
opposed to another? Answers to such questions are crucial for building a theoretical and empirical 
account of Decision-making. The challenge Qatari executives face is that of making better 
decisions. Currently manager executives make decisions using gut feel, common sense, intuition, 
experience, and, often without knowing it, various forms of heuristics or rules of thumb, and some 
time various form of rational element.  
Therefore, this thesis is an in-depth study of decision-making process, it assesses decision-
making elements (heuristics and rational) across Qatari executive managers and attempts to 
formulate guidelines for improving these elements. Although the empirical evidence is drawn from 
Qatar specific result, this study can be applied to other countries, individuals, and any decision-
making processes. Current research in the field has only explored elements of good decision 
quality, and smart organisations in contrast extraordinarily little guidance is available for 
organisations to improve their decision-making abilities. This research identifies different 
decision-making styles and develops a model that businesses can use to improve their decision-
making capabilities. 
1.3 THE IMPORTANCE OF STUDYING MANAGEMENT 
One of the essential indicators, of the development in any economy is management. There 
is increasing awareness about the impact of management on economic growth, the quality of 
management, and the adoption of appropriate management practices, matters and directly impacts 
economic growth (Keith, 2014) ), who argues that a review of the literature indicates that the 
contribution of management to economic growth has been largely obscured in theory and ignored 
in empirical work), he continues (Routine innovation in established firms is emphasised as a 
fundamental, normal part of management activity, and as such highlights the importance of 
management for economic growth, management is not homogeneous, and the actions of managers 
differentially affect the performance outcomes of firms). 
On the other hand, many significant contributions within recent theoretical debate about 
the differences between developing and developed economies; acknowledge that the distinction 
between them becomes less clear. The contrast between them, is not as clear as it was in the early 
post WWII times. Experts in the United Nations specialized agencies, start revising the classical 
approach, and its specialized team keep proposing new indicators, one of them is the model of 
management in private and public sectors.  
The rapid and continuous changes in many economies, creates theoretical and practical 
difficulties in differentiating between developed and developing countries. Some indicators were 
self-sufficient and valid few decades ago, becomes outdated by the fact that, the phenomenon 
weighted by these indicators has changed. However, the gap between developed and developing 
economy, measured in some new indicators is widening. 
Qatar is a country of obscured contrast between developed and developing economies. 
Which in many indicators it is a developed economy, and in some others, it is still far behind, and 
belongs to the developing world. One of the factors, which might refer to the possibilities and 
speed of development, is the gap between old rules of practice, and the new requirements to adapt 
with the recent technological change. It is easy to see in Qatar recent technology, concurrent with 
old modes of management and administration. 
1.4 RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
Based upon the literature review on decision-making styles, this study extends what Scott 
and Bruce (1995) have used during their research investigations and consequently the research 
explores different decision-making styles, including rational and heuristic elements, in executive 
decision-making process in Qatar. Hence, the following research questions are proposed which are 
linked to the research objectives: 
 RQ1  How could the use of rational and heuristic elements be used effectively in decision-
making in Qatar? (O1, O4 and Chapter 2  Literature Survey) 
 RQ2  What in practice is the use of different decision-making styles by executives in 
decision-making? (O1, O2, O3 and Chapter 3  Literature Survey and Questionnaire). 
 RQ3- What is the relation between the rational and heuristic decision-making styles with 
executive decision-making processes? (O2, O3 and Chapter 3  Literature Survey and 
Research Questionnaire). 
 RQ4  What decision-making styles profiles do executive decision-makers in Qatar have? 
(O2, O3 and Research Questionnaire) 
 RQ5  What recommendations can be made for improving the use of decision-making 
styles by executive decision makers in Qatar? (O4 and Chapter 5  Questionnaire). 
1.5 THE AIM OF THE STUDY 
The aim of this research is to analyse in detail the decision-making processes and the use 
of rational and heuristics elements in executives decision-making processes in Qatar. The research 
answers several specific questions, related to different decision-making styes which have not yet 
been answered by the presently available literature in general and specifically in the Qatari context. 
1.6 RESEARCH OBJECTIVES 
The objectives of this study are as follows and are connected to the research questions: 
O1: To investigate the managers awareness and understanding of the applied mix of decision-
making styles, including rational and heuristic styles, in executive decision-making in Qatar (RQ1 
and RQ2),  
O2: To investigate the relationship of decision-making styles with executives strategic contexts 
(RQ2 and RQ3),  
O3: To investigate the relationship of decision-making styles with executives demographics (RQ2 
and RQ3), 
O4: To suggest the direction of improvement, derived from relevant academic research, by which 
executives' decision-making should follow (RQ5). 
Accordingly, the following overall proposition and two hypotheses are presented: - 
The main proposition: 
P1 Executives in Qatar use a range of decision-making styles, including rational and heuristic 
styles, that can be profiled using a structured questionnaire. 
Hypotheses: 
H01: There is NO Statistically Significant (0.05) difference between decision-making styles of 
executives and their strategic contexts in Qatar. 
H02: There is NO Statistically Significant (0.05) difference between decision-making styles of 
executives and their demographics in Qatar. 
1.7 THEORETICAL MODEL 
Krabuanrat (1997) investigated Strategic Decision Making for Thai Executive Managers, 
concluding that in all cases the strategic decisions involved the use of both rational and intuitive 
elements in combination and that rationality vs heuristic could be regarded as opposite ends of one 
dimension; instead, both elements appear to contribute to practical decisions. Furthermore, the 
higher the strategic level of the problem, the higher the rational content of the decision-making 
process becomes. In Figure 1.1 below, Krabuanrat (1997) described the following types of decision 
making within organisations. 
Figure 1.1 
Types of Decision-Making (Krabuanrat, 1997)   
There is a group decision making process, which involves more than one person to 
conclude the final decision and the individual decision-making process in which the decision 
maker has full authority to make the decision alone. Within the Group decision making process, 
there are the Garbage Can Model and Power and Politics Model. The Garbage Can process is one 
in which problems, solutions and participants move from one choice of opportunity to another in 
such a way that the nature of the choice, the time it takes and the problems it solves all depend on 
a relatively complicated intermeshing of elements. The Powers and Politics model suggests that 
decision-makers with conflicting preference engage in political debate to identify a favorable 
decision. 
The individual decision-making process includes the Heuristics model, which is based on 
intuition or educated guesswork, and Quasi-rational model. Accordingly, this research intends to 
answer the following questions regarding the heuristics model: 
 Are they used in the strategic decision-making process? 
 How much are they used? 
 Are they used together with the rationality model? 
 Are they used with high levels of strategic decision-making? 
A conspicuous gap lies between the rational-choice paradigm and the behavioural 
decision-making paradigm. The missing model is heuristic (research-based) yet rational (non-
biasing): a set of methods for the logically sound discovery and design of economic actions, 
options, and objectives. Such a model is developed in this paper, enriching the notion and repertory 
of heuristics that are typically considered in economic and cognitive sciences with the notion and 
set of heuristics typically considered in the philosophy of science and the logic of discovery. The 
model then provides a response to the hitherto unaddressed question of how knowledge, on which 
the rationality and wisdom of any decision largely depends, can be constructed in a valid and 
reliable way. The specification of the heuristics that can effectively and efficiently guide economic 
discovery and innovation seems to be overdue in an economy said to be knowledge intensive and 
innovation oriented. This study investigates all possible decision-making styles found in the 
literature (Scott and Bruce, 1995), (Dew et al., 2009), (Ballou,1989), (Williams, 2010) and the 
study operationalises them as independent variables to analyse their effect on decision making 
process as reflected by respondents from executive decision makers in Qatar. The reason for that 
is to find out what other alternatives in terms of decision-making styles other than rational and 
heuristic, like intuitive, dependent, avoidant, and spontaneous decision-making styles founded in 
the literature that executive decision makers in Qatar might pursue, accordingly, this study propose 
the following theoretical model as shown in Figure 1.2. 
Figure 1.2 
Theoretical Model  
Rational Decision-making Style 
Intuitive Decision-making Style 
Dependent Decision-making Style 
Avoidant Decision-making Style 
Spontaneous Decision-making Style 
Expert Heuristic Decision-making Style 
Decision-making Styles  
Decision-making Process 
1.8 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  
This study uses a Mixed Methods approach. However, qualitative type of research is 
generally discouraged by natural scientists, but it is of great importance for social scientists 
(Creswell, 2014). It is usually criticised due to its inability to be generalized, but it is more reality 
based and more flexible in nature. A qualitative analysis was conducted for this research by 
performing face to face interviews. The purpose of selecting face to face interviews for this 
qualitative analysis was to collect as much rich data as possible and to construct a strong 
foundation from which to establish the body of results and conclusions. This method allowed 
insight into not just words but body language, gestures and facial expressions allowing a good 
balance of flexibility and consistency. In this case, the researcher collected quantitative data using 
an on-line Monkey Survey questionnaire completed by 350 Qatari Executive Managers of all 
levels of management both public sector and private sector of various business areas (Appendix 
1). Qualitative data was first collected from semi-structured interviews with four top Qatari senior 
managers (Appendix 2) to provide a preview of decision-making contexts in Qatar. 
1.9 IMPORTANCE OF THE STUDY 
Since the the blockade on Qatar, which was started in June 2017, pressure has increased 
on Senior Managers in Qatar to maintain standards, staff morale and profitability in an increasingly 
uncertain geo-political and economic environment. Therefore, the frequency and importance of 
executive decisions has increased dramatically and so have the costs of making wrong strategic 
decisions. Therefore, this study comes at a critical period for many senior managers in Qatar, who 
should use rational and heuristic elements to facilitate the executive decision-making process.  
1.10  POTENTIAL CONTRIBUTIONS OF THE STUDY  
The utility of this study and its contribution on the individual-difference decision-making 
paradigm within academic research is related to the possibility of developing a wider and more 
comprehensive taxonomy of rational and heuristic decision-making process, still grounded on an 
evidence-based approach. Adopting evidence- based categories of rational and heuristic may allow 
future research to investigate more precisely the presence of multiple processes in decision-making 
against the idea of a single decision-making competence (Ceschi et al., 2017). On the other hand, 
even if the present study showed the presence of consistent relationships between some traits and 
rational and heuristic, some of the variance remains unexplained by leaving room to other possible 
predictors (expertise, tacit knowledge, and self-regulation mood) Which have proved to have a 
role in the Anchoring and Adjustment). Such variables, in comparison to individual differences, 
may be developable characteristics, which would be possible to train to avoid certain rational or 
heuristic decision-making styles.  Understanding strategies by which individuals approach 
decisions and improve them has relevant implications for physical, mental, and financial well-
being. It is important to recall how several studies have shown that the tendency to respond 
irrationally is associated with problematic behaviours and outcomes across the lifespan 
(Dieckmann, & Weller, 2011; Weller et al., 2012). This study designed to promote better decision-
making process within Qatari executives in both public and private sectors through by 
recommending debiasing strategies that might consider present evidence-based dimensions of 
rational and heuristic decision-making styles that might have better impact on real-world decision 
outcomes. 
1.11 LITERATURE GAPS AND UNIQUENESS OF THE STUDY 
The uniqueness of this research stems from two factors. The first is using self-reporting 
approach (questionnaire), to explore the culture and the awareness of the managers in Qatar about 
their own practice. The second is, identifying the dominant culture within the managers 
community by revealing the discrepancies in self-reported practice. By these two elements, this 
study got the opportunity to propose the direction of improvement and its general requirement.  
While research studying Qatari economy is tremendous and covers many perspectives; exploring 
management as a driving force to understand possibilities of transformation, is not found.  By 
focusing on analyzing self-reporting attitude within managers in private and public sectors, this 
research attempts to explore the direction of changing decision-making model within the Qataris 
economy, as a driving force for economic transformation. Five gaps in the literature are identified: 
1) The degree to which heuristic decision-making style are used in executive decision-making 
process in Qatar. 2) The degree to which rational decision-making style are used in executive 
decision-making process in Qatar. 3) The relation between rational and heuristics in executive 
decision-making process. 4) The best practices of rational and heuristic elements during executive 
decision-making process. 5) The relation of both elements (heuristics and rational) with the 
Executive Decision-making process 
1.12 THE STRUCTURE OF THIS THESIS  
This thesis is organised in six chapters as follows.  
Chapter One provides an introduction and background of this research. It explores the underlying 
motivations for researching decision-making styles. This chapter also discusses the research 
context by providing a concise theoretical background of the research related domains. Further, 
the chapter highlights the importance of the research and explains the research objectives and its 
approach in fulfilling the defined objectives. 
Chapter Two presents a comprehensive and critical review of the literature related to decision-
making styles. by doing this critical evaluation of these works in relation to the research problem 
being investigated, this will place each work in the context of its contribution to understand the 
research problem being studied and reveal any gaps that exist in the literature, and more 
importantly, to locate this research within the context of existing literature. 
Chapter Three reviews research methodology including criteria for judging research design and 
the associated research methods, population and sample, data collection, and data analyses. A 
quantitative research approach using survey questionnaire as well as different data analysis 
techniques as appropriate to address research questions. 
Chapter Four presents two major topics: analyses of the survey data collected from Qatari 
different levels of management, and results from addressing five reduced components using factor 
analysis techniques.  
Chapter Five presents discussions. This study presents the development and preliminary 
validation of an instrument to assess decision making styles within executive decision makers in 
Qatar, accordingly this chapter reports the research results and conclusion. Also, the chapter 
highlights the research contribution both to theory and practice. Thereafter, the chapter provides 
recommendations concerning the methodology and methods that are consistent with the research 
results. Finally, the chapter provides important avenues for future research in this area. 
Chapter Six presents the conclusion, which will wrap up the main ideas and summarise the overall 
arguments and findings. 
CHAPTER TWO:  LITERATURE REVIEW 
2.1 INTRODUCTION  
In todays world, organisations are faced with thousands of decisions daily, and how they 
make these decisions will have a huge impact on their financial status (Forrester, 2003). These 
decisions set the tone for the entire organisation in terms of image, profits, and customer service. 
That is why, it is especially important that organisations adopt best practices and execute good 
judgment when it comes to making decisions, because the right decision at the right time could 
help companies achieve great success whereas a wrong decision could end up costing them dearly 
(Capgemini, 2004). 
Businesses are nowadays faced with complex and ill-defined decision problems. Decision 
making is an organisational process of paramount importance. Yet, evidence in organisational 
decision making suggests that businesses incur substantial losses due to bad practice in decision 
making (Papamichail & Rajarm, 2007). 
 Top management teams make strategic decisions, the quality of which influences 
organisational performance. Because consensus among team members facilitates the 
implementation of those decisions, consensus also influences organisational performance. Further, 
to sustain their ability to produce and implement strategic decisions, top management teams must 
maintain positive affective relationships among their members. Thus, decision quality, consensus, 
and affective acceptance are, together, all necessary for sustainable high performance (Amason, 
1996). Strategic decisions address complex and ambiguous issues that involve large amounts of 
organisational resources (Mason & Mitroff, 1981). Thus, it is not surprising that strategic decision 
making has been so heavily re- searched. One stream of this research, focusing on the quality of 
the decisions themselves, has identified two principal antecedents of decision quality: the cognitive 
capabilities of a top management team and the interaction process through which the team 
produces its decisions (Amason, 1996). 
Nowadays the role of senior executives includes a large amount of decision-making and 
complex problem solving. The ability of organisations to take efficient and effective decisions can 
have a major impact on business sustainability and agility (Forrester, 2003). Organisations realize 
the significant positive impact of developing true decision competencies and only realize this when 
solid, high-quality decision-making becomes embedded in the fabric of their DNA (Spetzler, 
2007). 
The most important job of any manager is making decisions. It is also the hardest and the 
most dangerous. With decisions valued in their millions (Forrester, 2003) a bad decision can 
damage a business and a career irreparable (Hammond et al., 2006). Fragmented and inaccurate 
data causes executives and managers to make delayed and flawed decisions costing millions 
(Forrester, 2003). Finding the right data at the right time and analyzing it fast enough remains a 
challenge for businesses as poor decisions can be very costly (Teradata, 2006). 
Managers within organisations are often making bad decisions, solving the wrong 
problems, and ignoring uncertainty (Forrester, 2003). According to (Forrester, 2003), managers 
make bad decisions and find it hard to decide because of decision biases, they do not want to give 
anything up nor do they want to make mistakes. That is why they procrastinate and only make 
decisions when events force them to. Managers often solve the wrong problems because they lack 
a structure for making decisions. As a result, they do not generate value-creating alternatives, they 
look for quick and partial solutions and they fail to seek out all the necessary data or clarify 
objectives (Forrester, 2003). Managers also tend to ignore uncertainty they focus on a single 
outcome, such as the most likely case, and take refuge in ambiguity or imprecise language. 
Managers use the complexity of uncertainty as an excuse for not deciding (Forrester, 2003). 
According to Steward (2004), a good review should be: Comprehensive where evidence 
should be gathered from all relevant sources,  fully referenced; allowing others to follow the path 
of the author to the papers conclusion,  selective; using appropriate search strategies to find the 
key evidence, relevant; focusing on pertinent data, a synthesis of key themes and ideas, balanced; 
between different ideas and opinions, critical; in its appraisal of the literature, and analytical; 
developing new ideas and understandings from the evidence. 
To achieve an understanding of executive decision-making process and how it may be 
improved by integrating the rational and heuristic elements, a literature review has been conducted 
by going over relevant papers, journals, articles, books, conferences and dissertations. The review 
of the literature was conducted by a selection of several authors on the executive decision-making 
field in the last decades. The executive decision-making topic is an overly broad area with 
implications not just in management, but also in many other subjects such as psychology, 
sociology, mathematics, and economics. Starting from the broad concept of Decision-making, this 
research narrows down the subject to make sense of a specific topic, which is the executive 
decision-making process in executives and the role that different decision-making styles play in it.  
This research examined executive decision-making in the business world from a time frame 
perspective. Looking at the evolution of this concept resulted in further understanding the 
directions this phenomenon took during the past decades and the current state of the research. 
Gaining an insight into what has been done until now is crucial to comprehend the possible future 
outcomes and direction of the research. The collection of relevant literature was made mainly 
through revising several scientific journals about management, executives, and organisations. The 
time frame for this research considered the 1950s until the most recent years. The main core of 
the literature is based on previous studies conducted mainly in the last two decades. This provided 
a support for the conceptual analysis which is based on the most modern and updated studies on 
the executive decision-making field.  
2.2 EXECUTIVE DECISION-MAKING  
Mintzberg (1973) defines decision-making as a commitment to action. It can also be 
considered as the process of making intentional, informed choices (Marakas, 2003) between 
alternative actions that are possible. Paradice & Dejoie (1991) defines decision-making as the 
product of intellectual processes resulting in the selection of a course of action between numerous 
options, leading to a final selection. Decision-making is an essential part of management, and it 
occurs in every function at all levels, often taken in the face of uncertainty, conflicting objectives, 
value preference, and risk attitudes. 
The most important job of any manager is making decisions. It is also the hardest and the 
most dangerous. With decisions valued in their millions (Forrester, 2003) a bad decision can 
damage a business and a career irreparable (Hammond et al., 2006). Fragmented and inaccurate 
data causes executives and managers to make delayed and flawed decisions costing millions. 
Finding the right data at the right time and analyzing it fast enough remains a challenge for 
businesses as poor decisions can be very costly (Teradata, 2006). 
Nowadays, decision makers are expected to make more decisions than ever before, often 
without much support and with a limited amount of time. As the complexity of decision-making 
increases, the issue of developing decision-making capabilities remains a challenge (Papamichail 
& Rajarm, 2007; Francis, 2016). 
Literature provides a broad range of definitions concerning Decision-making. The research 
can focus either on the decision itself or the process that leads to a decision (Harrison, 1996). 
Simon (1960) for instance, states I shall be referring not merely to the final act of choice among 
alternatives, but rather to the whole process of decision (p.1). Harrison instead defined the concept 
of decision as a moment in an ongoing process of evaluating alternatives for meeting an 
objective (1996, p.46). In addition to this, Ofstad (1961) described management decision as a 
judgment regarding what one ought to do in a certain situation after having deliberated on some 
alternative courses of actions (1961, p.5). Mintzberg et al. (1976) described a decision as a 
specific commitment to action (usually a commitment of resources) and a decision process as a 
set of actions and dynamic factors that begins with the identification of a stimulus for action and 
ends with the specific commitment to action (p. 246). 
An executive decision can be defined in many ways. Mador (2000) notes that these kinds 
of decisions are characterized by complexity and a high level of uncertainty. Eisenhardt and 
Zbaracki (1992) describe them as infrequent decisions made by the top leaders of an organisation 
that critically affect organisational health and survival (p. 17). On the same line is Harrison 
(1996), for whom executive decisions are those made by top managers and able to set the tone 
and tempo of managerial decision-making for every individual and unit throughout the entire 
organization (p. 46). Hickson et al. (1986) add that a decision may be considered executive in one 
industry, but the same decision may very well be considered less executive or not executive in a 
different one. For instance, an executive decision could be the launch of a new product such as a 
new car in the automotive industry. However, the launch of a new product such as a new toy in a 
factory that produces hundreds of toys every year might not be executive (Elbanna, 2006). 
Regarding the characteristics of an executive decision, Elbanna (2006) distinguishes four 
different attributes: the association with high risks and uncertainties, the interrelations with other 
decisions in the organisation, the fact that they do not have one best solution among the others, 
and it is hard to reverse the decision once it has been made. Shirley (1982) instead, provides a set 
of five distinctive criteria to identify these decisions: (1) the decision needs to define the 
relationship between the organisation and its environment, (2) the decision must be affecting the 
whole organisation, (3) the decision has to be based on inputs from different organisational areas, 
(4) the decision must provide constraints and directions for all the administrative and operational 
activities of the organisation, (5) the decision needs to be salient for the long term success of the 
organisation. (Mador 2000), after an extensive literature review and empirical studies on decision-
making, identified a few common characteristics to recognize good executive decisions: 
comprehensiveness, extensiveness, and speed (2000, p.217). 
From the previous considerations it is possible to understand the importance that such 
decisions have for an organisation. They give origin to several other decisions of lesser magnitude 
through all the descending management levels of the company (Harrison, 1996; Francis, 2016; 
Ogarca, 2015). On this point, Harrison (1996) specifies that a wrong decision taken at the top of 
the organisation is likely to have the same negative effect on the lower levels of management. 
Therefore, executive decisions are responsible for the future outcomes of the organisation seen in 
its entirety and, most of all, for its survival (Francis, 2016; Ogarca, 2015). 
2.3 EXECUTIVE DECISION-MAKING PROCESS 
Executive decision-making process is growing of importance because of the characteristics of 
strategic decisions (Papula, & Papulova, 2015): they are large-scale, risky and hard to reverse; they 
are a bridge between deliberate and emerging strategies; they can be a major source of 
organisational learning; they play an important part in the development of individual managers, 
and they cut across functions and academic disciplines. Joshi et al. (2018) indicated that the nature 
of the decision to be made will influence the nature of the process to be used. 
Executive decision-making process is crucial because it involves fundamental decisions 
which shape the course of a firm, thus the approach to Executive decision-making process should 
be considered very carefully. First, a brief look at some views and approach to decision-making. 
The current environment is in constant motion, and it is necessary to respond to ongoing changes. 
This knowledge is not new. As already ancient philosopher Heraclitus pointed out "Panta Rhei" - 
everything flows. The change and life are interdependent and interconnected. People can adapt to 
living in changing environment due to their thinking ability. It is known how to monitor 
environment, how to identify the effects, how to understand and how to make decisions.  
The process of human thought reflected the well-known philosopher Immanuel Kant 
(Papula, & Papulova, 2015) when he stated that all knowledge begins with the perception, then 
proceeds to the understanding and ends with judgment/idea, on this basis, a model of thinking and 
decision-making can be proposed to describe how people are reaching decisions or how the people 
should approach decision-making as shown in Figure 2.1. 
Figure 2.1 
The process of thinking and decision-making 
Decision-making is undoubtedly one of the basic management functions despite the fact 
that the founders of management theory set the basic functions of management as planning, 
organising, leading people and controlling (Robbins & Coulter, 2013). Decision-making has an 
important cross-cutting feature that is organically incorporated into all other management 
functions. The importance of decision-making and the need for a separate investigation and 
improvement has begun to draw attention in the sixties of the twentieth century by Simon (1960), 
who pointed out the need to understand the decision-making as a process as shown in Figure 2.2. 
Figure 2.2  
Decision-making process by Simon (1960) 
The decision-making theory, which is based on the initiative of Simon (1960), has begun 
to develop since then. Since that time, theory has created a multitude of analytical methods and 
techniques that are used in detecting opportunities, searching, and developing of alternative 
solutions, as well as making choice of suitable alternatives to solve problems. Various techniques 
were created also for decision-making at the executive level. For example, AlHussayen (2009) 
presents twenty-three rules and guidelines for improving organisational decision making, 
including: understanding the environment, having top management support, using available 
resources, embracing uncertainty, considering the long and short term, clearly stating goals and 
objectives, problem identification, objectivity, creating alternatives, setting clear criteria and 
sticking to them, using reliable information, being open to information, using experience, 
consulting, using gut feeling, having distinct roles and responsibilities, having shared values and 
beliefs, having good communication, having the appropriate group composition, having a devils 
advocate, allocation of time, realistic assessment of execution capabilities and commitment to 
follow-through. Importantly, AlHussayen (2009) also presents a conceptual framework (ePIPE) 
for improving organisational decision making: that considers the environment, the purpose, the 
information, the people and the execution when making decisions. 
According to Harrison (1996) decision-making is the principal activity that differentiates 
the role of the manager from other occupations in the society. On the same line is Drucker (1967) 
that states to make the important decision is the specific executive task (p. 98). The significance 
of decision-making for an organisation is highlighted by Cornell (1980), who states that of all the 
managerial functions that executives perform, the act of making a decision is without equal in 
importance (p. 13). Similarly, McLaughlin (1995) claims that organisations reach success when 
they outperform their competitors in at least three different ways: by making better decisions, by 
deciding faster and by implementing more decisions. 
The studies on decision-making processes started to take place in the business world when 
Chester Barnard placed it at the center of the executives functions (Barnard, 1938). Since then, 
the research on decision-making went through different approaches. For many years in the last 
century, decisions have been seen and studied as phenomena driven exclusively by a rational mind 
(Langley et al., 1995), even though bounded (Simon, 1979). According to Langley et al. (1995) 
this approach to the study of decision-making has produced a credible description of the 
phenomenon, but it has failed in explaining its most significant aspects. To give a better 
explanation about strategic Decision-making, the research started to consider other elements in 
relation to rationality, such as intuitive processes and political models (Khatri & Ng, 2000; Langley 
et al., 1995; Eisenhardt & Zbaracki, 1992; Francis., 2016; Ogarca, 2015). Therefore, rationality 
and intuition are now accepted as both valuable for strategic decision-making (Calabretta et al., 
2017). 
The literature in decision-making processes divides the decision-making models in 
structured, and unstructured or less structured models. When they are structured, authors talk about 
a rational approach, where each phase can be distinguished and individually defined, to help 
decision makers to make better decisions (Francis, 2016; Ogarca, 2015). Unstructured or less 
structured models are, instead, the ones considering other elements, such as a political behaviour 
view, according to which the strategic decision is formed in a process in which decision makers, 
having different interests, try to influence others opinion to achieve their goals (Elbanna, 2006). 
Another unstructured approach sees the strategic decision as the outcome of an intuitive process, 
focused more on the emotions and the senses of the managers, rather than structured models 
(Gigerenzer, 2001; Simon, 1993; Francis, 2016; Ogarca, 2015). 
An example of a structured model is described in six main functions as follows: (1) setting 
managerial objectives, (2) searching for alternatives, (3) comparing and evaluating alternatives, 
(4) the act of choice, (5) implementing the decision, and (6) follow-up and control (Harrison,1996; 
Song et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019). The process starts with setting objectives and scanning the 
internal and external environment of the organisation helps to gather information to set different 
alternatives. At this point the alternatives are compared and evaluated, and only after this point the 
decision maker makes his choice. The decision now needs to be transformed in an operational 
reality by implementing it. The last phase concerns the coincidence of the initial objective and the 
actual outcome (Harrison, 1996). 
Another model is described by Corner et al. (1994). The authors in this case studied the 
interaction between the organisational and individual levels in the strategic decision-making 
process. The first stage is the attention. The top managers focus their attention on a specific 
information about a strategic decision before processing it. The second stage is the encoding, 
which means to interpret the information. This phase is usually characterized by biased decisions 
because of the inclusion of previous existing knowledge. The third stage is the storage or 
retrieval, which means the preservation of the information previously interpreted. In this case 
the link between the individual and the organisational level is the socialization. This can be seen 
when senior top executives influence newcomers with routines and already accepted knowledge. 
The next stage is the decision. Mintzberg et al. (1976) agreed that decisions on a strategical level 
came from the information that was previously stored. After the decision comes the stage of 
action. This is the enactment of the strategic decision. On the individual level this is the action 
of the executive within the personal sphere of responsibility. On the organisational level it is the 
coordinated action of the different people involved in the process to implement a strategic decision. 
Finally, the outcomes are the results of the implementation of the decision, and can be either on 
an individual level, as for example in terms of personal evaluation, or on the organisational level 
in terms of financial returns (Corner et al., 1994). 
2.4 RATIONAL ELEMENTS  
2.4.1 RATIONALITY 
Rationality in decision-making is part of the broader discussion about economic rationality 
(Langley et al., 1995; Francis, 2016). According to Elbanna (2006), the level of rationality in 
strategic decision-making has played an important role as one of its main elements, and it has been 
intensively investigated by many researchers. Rationality as the relationship between means that 
humans use to reach certain ends, ends which themselves become means to reach other ends. 
Weber: distinguishes between substantive and formal rationality; substantive rationality designates 
material behaviour shaped by political, religious or ethical standards; formal rationality refers to 
action based on calculation and means-to-ends reasoning (Fforde, 2018). 
There are several definitions of rationality depending on the specific field in which the 
research puts its focus. In the economic perspective, rationality often refers to the maximization of 
utility; in this view the assumption is that individuals tend to maximize their expected utility 
(Elbanna & Child, 2007). The theory of expected utility was formulated for the first time by 
Neumann & Morgenstern (1953 cited in Fox, 2015). Right after its formulation other authors began 
to apply this model of rational behaviour as the explanation of how people make decisions (Fox, 
2015).  
Simon (1978) was one of the first researchers to challenge this notion in the 1950s. According to 
Simon (1978 cited in Langley, et, al., 1995), decision makers are not omniscient, and their 
rationality is limited by their own capabilities. Simon (1978)s view remained confined, however, 
in what was lately defined as the cerebral rationality (Langley et al.,1995, p.262). Simon (1978) 
kept seeing the decision-making as a cognitive process that could be easily explained by a step-to-
step succession (Langley et al.,1995). On the same line as Simon (1978), Butler (2002) gives a 
definition indicating that Rationality is the reason for doing something and to judge a behaviour 
as reasonable is to be able to say that the behaviour is understandable within a given frame of 
reference (p. 226). Alternatively, Dean & Sharfman (1993) claim rationality represents the type 
of behaviour that is logical in pursuing goals. Eisenhardt & Zbaracki (1992) state that rationality 
follows the assumption that human behaviour has some purpose (p. 18) and this usually is 
expressed in a model of rational action. Put another way, rationality characterizes that behaviour, 
which is logical in pursuing goals, this broad conception underlies many social science models of 
rationality. Rational choice is championed by a wide range of disciplines, because of its ability as 
a theory to tie together so many of the social sciences within one rubric (Lazo et al., 2015). 
Given the historical evolution of rationality, scholars developed some constructs of 
rationality to be distinguished from more global conceptions of rationality, which have overtones 
of decision-maker omniscience (Simon, 1978). These constructs represent measures of the extent 
to which the SDMP approximates the rational model of decision-making (see Table 2.1). In this 
case, decision-makers are rational to the limits of their own capabilities (bounded rationality); as 
Snyman & Drew (2003) stress, bounded rationality emphasises the decision-making process which 
is limited by cognitive and political realities. Given these limitations, decision-makers aspire to 
achieve objectives which are good enough rather than the best (Eisenhardt, 1997) as shown in 
Table 2.1 (below). 
Although those constructs all derive from the rational model of decision-making, there are 
many differences between them, and various authors have used different labels to define 
rationality. 
Moreover, studies which use the same label may use different indicators to operationalize 
it. For example, Khatri (1994) uses comprehensiveness as one indicator of what he calls strategic 
rationality. He measures this indicator, using one item of a Likert-type scale, while both 
Fredrickson & Mitchell (1984) and Jones et al. (1992) divide comprehensiveness into two 
components: analytical and integrative. Although both Fredrickson & Mitchell (1984) and Jones 
et al. (1992) divide comprehensiveness into the same two components and define them in a similar 
way, they operationalize them differently. 
The theory of bounded rationality was proposed for the first time in the 1950s as an 
alternative to the classical concept of rationality (Langley et al., 1995). Snyman & Drew (2003) 
point out that bounded rationality centers on the decision-making process which is limited by 
cognitive and political realities. Because of these restrictions, decision makers attempt to reach 
goals which are sufficient rather than optimal (Eisenhardt, 1997). Claims from Eisenhardt & 
Zbaracki (1992) support that empirical research has proven decision makers are more boundedly 
rational than purely rational. They refer to the cognitive limits of the rational decision-making 
model, the complexity of problems and the conflicts between decision makers which form the 
decision process. 
There are three main obstacles in adopting a rational decision-making process, as identified 
by Jones et al. (1992). First, the organisation may lack the necessary recourses to find and examine 
the respective information, secondly, the cognitive abilities of decision makers could be limited 
and, thirdly, managers could be reluctant to stir up the political structure of the organisation (Jones 
et al.,1992). 
Rational processes have been a central part of strategic decision-making and a great amount 
of theoretical and empirical research has been conducted on the topic (Elbanna & Child, 2007). 
The interplay between rational decision processes and organisational outcomes has divided the 
scholars in the field and no consensus has been reached (Goll & Rasheed, 1997). Elbanna (2006) 
mentioned that there is empirical evidence for all kinds of possible relationships between the 
rationality and organisational outcomes, positive relationship, negative relationship, or no 
relationship whatsoever. For instance, Fredrickson & Mitchell (1984) identified a negative 
relationship between rationality and performance in an unstable environment, whereas a positive 
relationship was proven in a stable environment (Fredrickson, 1984). In contrast to the findings of 
Fredrickson and his colleagues, Dean & Sharfman (1996) found a stronger relationship between 
rationality and decision effectiveness in unstable environments, rather than in stable ones. 
Furthermore, Eisenhardt & Bourgeois (1988) concluded that a positive relationship between 
rationality and firm performance exists in a high-velocity environment. 
Table 2.1 
Constructs and Conceptualizations of Rationality 
Study Construct of Rationality Conceptualization 
Langley (1989) Formal analysis 
Written documents reporting the results of 
some systematic study 
Kukalls (1991) 
Planning 
comprehensiveness 
The completeness of the strategic planning 
process and the number of areas in which 
strategic planning is applied (capital 
spending, investment planning and new 
product development) 
Dean and Sharfman 
(1996) 
Procedural rationality 
The extent to which the decision process 
involves the collection of information 
relevant to the decision and the reliance 
upon analysis of this information in making 
the choice 
Khatri (1994) Strategic rationality 
An explicit (formal), systematic and 
analytical approach to decision-making 
Schwenk (1995) Decisional rationality 
The extent to which decision-makers follow 
a systematic process in reaching carefully 
thought-out goals 
Fredrickson (1984). 
Papadakis et al. 
(1998) 
Comprehensiveness 
The extent to which organisations attempt to 
be exhaustive or inclusive in making and 
integrating strategic decisions 
Butler (2002) Rationality 
The reason for doing something and to 
judge a behaviour as reasonable is to be able 
to say that the behaviour is understandable 
within a given frame of reference 
Hough (2005) and 
Hough and White 
(2003) 
Availability and 
pervasiveness 
Availability captures the degree to which the 
available cues were known by the team 
when they made their decisions. 
High availability indicates that the team had 
a great deal of knowledge about the issue. 
Pervasiveness assesses to what extent all 
team members were informed of the 
available information 
2.4.2 RATIONAL DECISION THEORY 
Rational decision theory was derived from laws that psychologists believed to be the laws 
of human reasoning (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1996; Xiao et al., 2018). Decision makers identify 
the best decision to take by computing, with perfect accuracy, how different decision alternatives 
will play out. They choose the alternative that maximizes the value of outcomes to them (Berger, 
1999). This choice is based on two assumptions about the future: a guess about the future state of 
the world that is contingent upon the choice and a guess about how the decision maker feels about 
the future when he experiences it (March, 1994; Francis, 2016).  In many real-world problems, the 
exact consequences of the choice are unknown. 
Uncertainty may exist because some processes are vague at the fundamental level, or 
decision makers are ignorant of the driving mechanism, which makes the outcomes look uncertain 
to them, or because of dependency on unexpected future events (March, 1994; Francis, 2016). 
Uncertainty can be modelled through probabilities. 
Rational decision theory relies on an extensive use of logic and mathematical models to 
represent decision situations. The strength of these rational approaches to decision-making is in 
their rigor. Working within the decision theoretic model allows one to identify answers and weigh 
the alternatives within the model. These approaches encompass a substantial amount of 
educational content that is straightforward to teach and to test (Smith, 2003; Francis, 2016). 
Although there are many mathematical decision-making approaches, few of them are used. 
Rather than using formal methods or following systematic procedures, managers usually make 
decisions by reflecting on action or having an understanding only of the immediate situation and 
surface appropriate courses of action. Some blame this on the mathematical complexity or time 
limitation (Fahrni, 1990; Lockett, 1986) others blame the limited applicability of models (Smith, 
2003). Smith (2003) found that there are just a few decision situations that managers routinely 
face, which can effectively be addressed by decision analytic techniques, attributes that to a lack 
of sufficient information about problems, alternatives, contingencies, and outcomes. Uncertainty 
is not usually localized in a few easily identified contingencies, but is rather highly diffused 
(Sauter, 1999). Rational models cannot offer enough assistance in identifying the problem, 
predicting, measuring, quantifying, or generating alternatives and other elements decision makers 
need to analyse before making decisions (Smith, 2003). 
2.5 HEURISTIC ELEMENTS 
In a world of limited knowledge, resources, and time, the concept of rational decision-
making is not always a suitable model to describe and explain human behaviour. Research 
indicates that individuals, due to a lack of time and commitment, tend to rely on shortcuts when 
making decisions (Payne et al.,1993; Kitjacharoenchai et al., 2019). Empirical literature has shown 
that heuristics are not universally used; they are used only by a fraction of subjects, and only in 
certain situations (Campo et al., 2016). Consequently, the concept of fast and frugal heuristics has 
gained attention as an important concept to describe human judgments (Gigerenzer et al., 1999). 
The term heuristic stems from Greek, meaning to find, and it is used in cognitive psychology as a 
useful shortcut, an approximation, or a rule of thumb for searching through a space of possible 
solutions (Hoffrage & Reimer 2004, p. 439). The literature on fast and frugal heuristics pioneered 
by Gigerenzer et al. (1999) has identified several different types of heuristics that can be used in 
decision processes. There are two heuristics from the adaptive toolbox proposed by Gigerenzer 
et al. (1999), which are widely discussed in literature, and which can be seen as particularly closely 
related to consumer decision-making (Hauser, 2014, p.1692), the recognition heuristic and the 
take-the-best heuristic. The recognition heuristic has been related to consumer choices in several 
empirical studies (Marewski et al., 2010; Hauser, 2011; Thoma & Williams 2013; Hilbig, 2014; 
Kitjacharoenchai et al., 2019). Take-the-best is among the most studied heuristics, and since it 
refers to potentially multiple attributes of alternatives, it is considered a plausible model of 
boundedly rational decision-making (Martignon & Hoffrage 2002). The use of those heuristics in 
comparison to a more rational, but also cognitively more demanding decision process, as well as 
an affective decision process guided by emotions can be studied experimentally. 
The recognition heuristic as an efficient rule of thumb can be described as a frugal inference 
strategy relying on only one piece of information, namely the recognition cue (Hilbig & Pohl 2008) 
and ignoring other information (Hilbig, 2014). According to Gigerenzer & Goldstein (2011), if a 
decision maker must make a choice between two objects and recognizes one of them, he or she 
infers that the recognized object has the higher value on a given criterion and thus will prefer it 
over the unrecognized object. Empirical evidence demonstrates that this one-cue non-
compensatory heuristic can be surprisingly accurate (Hilbig 2014), resulting in a remarkably high 
number of correct inferences by individuals (Borges et al.,1999) and in better predictions regarding 
consumer behaviour than compensatory models (Marewski et al., 2010). Relying on recognition 
can be useful, particularly because recognition lasts long and is easily accessible.  
While it is not limited to the case of just two alternatives, its application is limited to 
problems involving only a small number of alternatives (Marewski et al., 2010; Kitjacharoenchai 
et al., 2019), and some experiments have shown that alternative compensatory models account 
better for aggregate data patterns (Hilbig, 2014). The recognition heuristic has been widely studied 
but has received only mixed support in literature on probabilistic inferences. However, very few 
studies focus on the application of the recognition heuristic in preferential decision situations such 
as consumer choice (Hilbig, 2014). Marewski et al. (2010) propose that recognition is used to form 
consideration sets of alternatives, so that unrecognized alternatives are ranked behind recognized 
alternatives. 
The take-the-best heuristic considers that decision makers might possess several clues 
about the objects they have to decide on, but it proposes that decision makers use only one single 
cue in the decision-making process. For example, when estimating the size of a city, such cues 
could be whether the city has an airport, an opera house. (Reimer & Rieskamp, 2007; 
Kitjacharoenchai et al., 2019). Decision makers then would assume that the city that has such a 
facility (while the others do not) is also larger. The take the-best heuristic tries cues in order of 
validity, one after the other, and stops at the first cue that discriminates between the objects under 
consideration (Gigerenzer et al., 1999). Take-the-best is a fast heuristic since it does not require 
complicated computations and it is frugal because the stopping rule limits the search for cues, 
sometimes even to just one cue. Fast and frugal heuristics like recognition or take-the-best still 
resemble rational theories of decision-making in that they apply (although only limited) 
information on the available alternatives to evaluate the alternatives and ultimately make a choice. 
Depending on the heuristic, information can be processed in a compensatory or non-compensatory 
manner. However, humans sometime approach decision problems in a hugely different ways and 
they may rely on emotions in their decision-making. 
Gigerenzer (2001, p. 6-7) points out that theories of decision-making have often 
neglected emotions, and sometimes even cast them as the very opposite of rationality. 
Nevertheless, emotions are a crucial factor when being engaged in decisions and can support the 
process of decision-making (Gigerenzer, 2001). In this context, emotions can be classified as 
behavioural theories and are sometimes also referred to as affect heuristic (Kitjacharoenchai et al., 
2019). 
2.5.1 HEURISTICS IN DECISION-MAKING 
Seldom is the exact probability that would lead to the best outcome is known, and the 
tendency is to apply certain heuristics. Heuristics are the general problem-solving strategies that 
we apply for certain classes of situations (Passer & Smith, 2004, Wang et al., 2019); they are the 
rule of thumb for calculating certain kinds of numbers or solving certain problems. They can also 
be interpreted as rules following behaviour that pursue a logic quite different than the 
consequential logic (March, 1994).  
In the early 1800s up until about 1970, the term heuristics was used to refer to useful and 
indispensable cognitive processes for solving problems that cannot be handled by logic and 
probability theory (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002; Luan et al., 2019).  In the past 25 years, the 
definition of heuristics has changed to something that connotes almost its opposite meaning; 
instead of being useful and indispensable cognitive processes for solving problems, heuristics have 
come to connote an unreliable method to make decisions. In research on reasoning, judgment and 
Decision-making, heuristics have come to denote strategies that prevent one from finding out or 
discovering correct answers to problems that are assumed to be in the domain of probability theory 
(Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 2002; Wang et al., 2019). Heuristics and Biases demonstrated that 
human judgment has shortcomings and biased conclusions under certain conditions. The 
naturalistic view sees the decision-making process as a situated activity that cannot be described 
or prescribed for in general terms (Smith, 2003). 
The Heuristics and Biases theory concluded that human inference is systematically biased 
and error-prone and suggests that the laws of inference are quick-and-dirty while the laws of 
probability are not. They accept the laws of probability and statistics as normative, but they 
disagree about whether humans can stand up to these norms or not (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1996). 
Heuristics and Bias blame this inability of making good decisions to cognitive limitations. One of 
these limitations is a limit of working memory; where the cognitive system can process, remember, 
compare, and recognize up to seven variables -plus or minus two- at the same time; if there is have 
more variance, knowledge about what is going to happen lessens (Miller, 2003; Luan et al., 2019). 
Gould (2007) implies that our minds are not built to work by rules of probabilities, that heuristics 
are used in making decisions that fly in the face of logic (Passer & Smith, 2004), and that the 
term heuristics is used to account for discrepancies between these rational strategies and actual 
human thought processes (Smith & Gilhooly, 2006; Luan et al., 2019).  
Simple heuristics can be efficient ways of decision-making and the literature has shown 
that they are widely used in actual decision situations. Although many types of heuristics have 
been found and analysed, there is a paucity on research on factors that lead to the use of a particular 
heuristic. The present study assesses and analyses the use of executives' six decision-making styles 
in different contexts. 
2.5.2 FACTORS INFLUENCING THE USE OF HEURISTICS 
Empirical literature has shown that heuristics are not universally used: they are used only 
by a fraction of subjects, and only in certain situations. For example, Newell et al. (2003) found 
that roughly one third of subjects used take-the-best. Similarly, in the experiments of Brder 
(2000) and Brder & Schiffer (2006), between 28 and 53 % of the subjects were classified as using 
take-the-best. Other studies found even lower numbers, for example Luan et al. (2019) found that 
less than 10 % of their subjects used recognition, and only about 15 % used take-the-best. 
Concerning the recognition heuristic, Pachur et al. (2008) found that about half of their subjects 
used recognition in a strict sense (without incorporating additional information). 
This limited extent of actual use of heuristics has led researchers to study factors that could 
influence the application of heuristics. Gigerenzer & Goldstein (2011) thus noted that decision 
makers seem to apply different decision strategies, but little is known about the factors that 
influence their choice. One model to explain the choice of different approaches to decision-making 
is the effort-accuracy model by Payne et al. (1993). According to this model, a decision-making 
strategy is selected by considering the trade-off between the cognitive effort needed to decide, and 
the quality of the decision, since methods leading to better decisions typically also require higher 
effort. However, since the fast and frugal heuristics that are considered here are all characterized 
by little cognitive effort, this model cannot be applied to the choice between these heuristics. 
Two types of factors can be distinguished: factors that refer to individual characteristics of 
the decision maker, and factors related to the decision problem or the environment. Research on 
individual factors has indicated that intelligence moderates the choice of decision strategies such 
as heuristics (Brder, 2003; Luan et al., 2019). 
Researchers also studied the impact of the Big Five personality traits on the use of 
heuristics and found that persons high in neuroticism are more likely to use the recognition 
heuristic (Hilbig, 2008). Furthermore, additional knowledge (beyond recognition) a decision 
maker has about alternatives has some impact on choices (Pohl, 2006), although its impact seems 
to be limited (Hilbig et al., 2009; Wang et al., 2019). 
The type of environment in which a decision is made has also an impact on the decision-
making strategy (Brder, 2003). A high amount of uncertainty present in the environment seems 
to increase reliance on heuristics like take-the-best (Newell et al., 2003; Wang et al., 2019). The 
choice of strategies also depends on the availability of additional cues, their validity and the cost 
at which such information can be obtained. If the validity of the primary cue is high, take-the-best 
is more often used (Newell et al., 2003), while higher validity of other cues reduces its usage 
(Newell & Fernandez 2006). Some authors also report that the cost of additional information 
increases the use of heuristics (Newell et al., 2003), while others report that choices can still be 
better explained by alternative models even if information acquisition has high costs (Ayal and 
Hochman, 2009). 
Another important factor that influences the use of heuristics is time pressure. A positive 
effect of time pressure on the use of the recognition heuristic was found by Pachur and Hertwig 
(2006). Furthermore, Hilbig et al. (2012) found that time pressure increases reliance on the 
recognition heuristic even when violating time constraints does not have a negative impact on the 
decision maker. It thus seems that the mere presence of time pressure has a strong effect on the 
choice of a decision strategy. Time pressure was also used as an experimental factor to induce 
heuristic choice behaviour in consumer decision experiments, like for example Langner and 
Krengel (2013). 
Since the presence or absence of time pressure is likely to induce different levels of use of 
heuristics for the same decision problem, this study employs time as an experimental context 
dependable variable to see if "time" triggers the use of different decision-making styles in 
executives. "Time" is operationalised in the questionnaire context items Q42 and Q47: "The 
decisions I make usually concern long term activities" and "The decisions I make usually concern 
short term activities". 
2.5.3 RESEARCH ON OTHER HEURISTICS 
Building on Gigerenzer et al. (1999), many studies have tested the efficiency of simple 
heuristics in Decision-making. These studies mathematically tested model results and compared 
them with compensatory mathematical decision models. 
Two different approaches are used to assess the quality of heuristics; the first group 
compares the results of using simple heuristics against commonly used decision models and 
against logistic regression. The fast and frugal models have been tested on simulated data, as well 
as on real cases: 
Katsikopoulos and Fasolo (2009)s model registers a performance accuracy of 72% of the 
cases, while the logistic regression system achieved 75% accuracy, but took a longer time 
(Katsikopoulos & Fasolo, 2009). Smith & Gilhooly (2006) found that their fast and frugal decision 
model based on matching heuristics achieved almost as good results as the logistic regression 
model but was faster and more flexible in making decisions about the medication that should be 
prescribed for depression. 
The second group of studies researched the quality of forecasts that are based on fast and 
frugal methods. Andersson et al. (2003) tested the fast and frugal method by comparing the 
performance and information process strategies of experts and non-experts when predicting results 
in the 2002 World Cup soccer tournament. From this experiment that included 250 participants 
with different levels of knowledge, they concluded that participants who had obtained a lot of 
information about the teams did not outperform those who had no such information, because just 
a slice of information was enough to make good prediction. 
In a study on intelligence analysis and early warning systems, Perry (2008) used only three 
indicators to forecast conflict escalation, instead of drawing on dozens of indicators like most early 
warning systems. Traditional approaches necessitate access to substantial amounts of data, most 
of which is highly aggregated and/or of poor quality. Perry used the results from his good enough 
model to argue that both the conflict early warning and intelligence communities should consider 
the value of fast and frugal analysis. 
In business forecasting, Astebro & Elhedhli (2006) have tested the success of simple 
heuristics in forecasting commercial success of new products. They tracked the success of 561 
projects which have been evaluated between 1989 and 1994 by experts from Canadian Invention 
Assessment Program (IAP). They found that a simple decision heuristic (conjunctive decision 
model) to forecast if early-stage R&D projects are commercialized succeeds in predicting 86.0% 
of the projects correctly; experts predict 82.6% correct, while a log-linear additive statistical model 
correctly predicts 78.6%. They tried to link these results to the number of cues used for the forecast 
and found that the experts forecasting rules uses 33 out of 37 possible cues, while the model with 
the best forecast of project success only uses 21 cues. In addition, models that use all cues do not 
perform as well as those that use a selected set of cues. These results support other research which 
calls for using less attributes (Blink, 2005), because the use of more information than what they 
call optimal can incorrectly affect the forecasts. 
2.6 THE USE OF RATIONAL AND HEURISTIC ELEMENTS DURING EXECUTIVE 
DECISION-MAKING IN QATAR 
The essence of management is Decision-making. Success in competitive environments 
often depends on quality decisions despite huge amounts of information and large numbers of 
alternatives. Making a wrong decision can cause a company to lose its market or to run out of 
business. Companies do not only need systems and models to improve Decision-making, but they 
also need to counsel humans to improve the ways they think, analyse information, and make 
decisions. Decision-making process is centrally concerned with the process by which alternatives 
are evaluated and options selected for implementation (Egan, 2006). Decision-making process can 
be regarded as an outcome of mental processes leading to the selection of a course of actions 
among several alternatives. To make successful decisions, decision makers must clearly define the 
goals to be achieved, build a mental representation of the situation or the system to be managed, 
predict or forecast the future and make plans for actions under different situations, while 
monitoring their own (and the organisations) strategies for gathering and processing information 
(Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1996).  
Decision-making is not a one-step process, but a compound process where three 
components interact with each other: the decision parameters, the decision-making process and the 
decision implementation (Chung & McLarney, 1999). The process by which decision makers 
choose the decision parameters they will use to evaluate decision alternatives usually involves 
cognitive biases constrained by past events and individual cognitive styles (Chung & McLarney, 
1999). The decision-making process is the stage where all alternatives are evaluated to produce a 
final choice. 
This process can be based on reasoning, or it can be an emotional process. It can be rational 
or irrational and can be based on explicit or tacit assumptions (Chung & McLarney, 1999). In the 
final step, actions need to be planned and decisions implemented (Chung & McLarney, 1999).  
For a long time, good decision-making was considered equivalent to a rational choice 
between decision alternatives that is free of biases and emotions. Heuristics, simple rules of 
thumbs, which are based on common sense and used to solve problems quickly, were considered 
inferior decision-making techniques that result in irrational behaviour. Recently, this view has 
changed and psychological research (Gigerenzer, 2007), as well as popular management 
publications (Klein, 2003; Blink, 2005), stress the usefulness of simple heuristics, applying 
rational and heuristic models can enhance the ability to improve the way of making decisions 
which directly affect the value creation of any organisation (Xiao et al., 2018).  
While some models of human behaviour (like the rational choice theory) in the social 
sciences assumes that humans can be reasonably approximated or described as "rational" entities, 
others, like the Heuristics and Bias theory assume that humans have cognitive limitations that 
prohibit them from being rational and they are emotional and subjective all the time (Blink, 2005). 
Decision makers appear to be good analysts, learn from their previous experiences, and use their 
schemas efficiently. However, decision makers do not consider all the alternatives, but instead, 
consider only a few and look at them consequentially instead of simultaneously (March, 1994). 
Accordingly, studies of decision models in real world show that not all alternatives are known, not 
all consequences are considered and not all preferences are evoked at the same time (Smith, 2003). 
All these factors helped derive the concept of bounded rationality. 
Prietula & Simon (1989) pointed out that most people are only partly rational and are 
mostly emotional or irrational when they make decisions. That theory is known as the theory of 
Bounded Rationality. Bounded rationality is experienced in formulating and solving complex 
problems and in processing information including receiving, storing, retrieving, and transmitting 
information (Smith, 2003; Hodgkinson et al., 2008, Koen et al., 2002). Kahneman proposes 
bounded rationality as a model to overcome some of the limitations of the rational-agent models 
in economic literature (Koen et al., 2002). The concept of bounded rationality implies that perfect 
rational decisions cannot be considered in practice due to the finite computational resources 
available for making them. Even if decision makers try to make rational decisions, they will be 
constrained by limited cognitive capabilities. 
Therefore, actions may not be completely rational even with the best of intentions and 
efforts (March, 1994). At the same time, heuristics do not come completely from emotions and 
against rationality (Khatri & Alvin, 2000), they come from long retained rational experiences that 
have been saved and previously implemented in the cognitive system (Prietula & Simon, 2008). 
Heuristics are sophisticated reasoning tools based on schemas (or mental databases) that experts 
hone over years of experience and that help them solve everyday problems and make fast and 
urgent decisions (Prietula & Simon, 1989). More research suggests to not ignore the usefulness of 
heuristics (Gigerenzer, 2007) and states that heuristics can help experts solve problems that they 
face in their domain. Polya (1957), a mathematician who researched mathematical problem 
solving, argued that formality of mathematical proof has little to do with real life problem solving. 
He describes how decision makers find problem solutions by using heuristics or what she calls 
general strategies for attacking a problem that does not guarantee the solutions (Perkins &. 
Salmon, 1989). Prietula & Simon (2008) state that intuition is not a magical sixth sense, but a 
sophisticated form of reasoning, which allows thinking and analysis of the situation even if when 
there is no previous experience and are not slaves to feelings or intuitions. (Klein, 2003) added 
that intuition should be treated as a skill that can be acquired and taught.  
Goldstein & Gigerenzer (1996) argues that most decision theorists that came after the 
theory of bounded rationality and have not really followed the ideas of Simon (1978) about 
bounded rationality. Instead, they have researched either how decisions are sub-optimal because 
of limitations of human rationality, or they have constructed elaborate optimizing models of how 
people might cope with their inability to optimize. 
As an alternative, Goldstein & Gigerenzer (1996) proposed to examine simple alternatives 
to a full rationality analysis as a mechanism for decision-making. He, with his colleagues, has 
shown that, in some cases, such simple heuristics frequently lead to better decisions than the 
theoretically optimal procedure. These models are known as Fast and frugal decision models. 
Others have identified a new class of cognitive heuristics that can be logically applied. 
Rather than starting with a normative process model, they started with fundamental psychological 
mechanisms. The fast and frugal techniques that they identified, adaptively match the 
informational structure, and demands of decision makers environments (Hodgkinson & Healey, 
2008). 
Fast and frugal heuristics are simple task specific decision strategies that are ecologically 
rational because they exploit structures of information in the environment. They are founded in 
evolved psychological capacities such as memory and the perceptual system. They are fast, frugal 
and simple enough to operate effectively when time, information and computation might be 
limited, precise enough to be modeled computationally and powerful enough to model good 
reasoning (Reimer & Rieskamp, 2007). In the classical decision-making process, all attributes 
should be analysed, scored, and weighted for all options. This process can be complex and 
exhausting for decision makers when the number of options and attributes increase. Because most 
traditional rational models of inference, from linear multiple regression models to neural networks, 
try to find some optimal integration of all information available, they consider every bit of 
information. Since decision makers do not usually have sufficient information and time to do 
such processes, the satisfying algorithms, those who follow the rational theory of probabilistic 
mental models (PMM), do not search for the optimal solutions, but instead they look for the best 
solution that would fit with the needs and satisfy the decision maker (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 
1996). In this technique the decision maker, or the computer, need to search their memories for 
relevant information. They do not have to integrate them, but rather a substitution of pieces of 
information will be sufficient (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1996). One example of such simple 
heuristics is the Take-the-Best Algorithm (TTB). TTB is based on a rule of thumb that human 
beings apply in their lives: Try to take the best and ignore the rest. The simple idea of this 
algorithm is to treat what is known as important, ignore what is not known and start by testing the 
most important cues. Once a differentiation is found between the alternatives, stop looking for 
other cues and choose the alternative that satisfies the tested criteria. Psychological experiments 
suggest that people follow this rule and often base their intuitive judgment on a single good reason 
(Fasolo et al., 2007). Gigerenzer (2007) has analysed the quality of results of TTB by asking people 
to decide which of two cities has a larger population. Employing the TTB algorithms, people would 
first check if they know one of the two cities. If they do, they pick the one they know. If they do 
not know either city or both, they search for additional cues, such as city has a major league 
soccer team or city has a university until they find one that helps them discriminate between 
the two choices. In this case, they decide and ignore all other potentially relevant cues. TTB is thus 
based on satisfying, rather than optimization: decision makers choose the first object that satisfies 
their objectives without surveying all possible alternatives. Gigerenzer tested the algorithm 
through simulation and compared the results to other algorithms that integrate all information and 
are considered rational. For the simulation, they combined pairs of different cities from a set of 84 
German cities to come up with 3,403 city pairs. In addition to the recognition cue, they identified 
nine cues that had different levels of ecological validity and different discrimination rates. To 
model limited knowledge of cue values, they simulated classes of people with different percentage 
of knowledge about cues, which is associated with different values of recognizing objects. They 
compared the TTB algorithm with other decision algorithms, such as weighted tallying, which 
weighs and combines all alternatives, and a regression model. They found that TTB algorithm 
drew as many correct inferences as any of the integration models, including the regression model, 
and performed substantially better than linear models. Figure 2.3 shows the results of the six tested 
models. Even though heuristics can lead to deviations from optimal decisions, recent psychological 
and social decision research is increasingly interested in decision makers use of heuristics. 
Heuristics are rules of thumbs for problem solving (March, 1994) that do not guarantee optimal 
solutions (Perkins & Salmon, 1989). They do, however, have accuracies close to more complex 
decision rules and seem particularly useful in difficult decision-making contexts (2006) especially 
when there is uncertainty over the future or when quick decisions are needed (Goldstein & 
Gigerenzer, 2002). A class of remarkably simple decision heuristics, the so-called fast and frugal 
heuristics, is currently at the center of the academic debate and has found their way into 
practitioners literature. They seem to prove that in an unpredictable environment   complex 
problems do not always need complex solutions (Gigerenzer, 2007). 
Figure 2.3 
Results of TTB algorithm compared with other decision models (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 
1996) 
Gigerenzer tested TTB again, but instead of predicting the population of a city, he used it 
to predict the smallest dropout rate in a comparison of 57 high schools in Chicago, Illinois, based 
on 18 cues (Gigerenzer, 2007). 
From these two experiments, the simple heuristic of one good reason, or Take-the-Best 
algorithm, proved better and generated faster results than evaluating all reasons in predicting what 
is not known. On average, TTB algorithm tested three clues before it stopped searching and picked 
a choice, which they found to be an acceptable choice. The complex strategies that use all weights 
and all clues perform better than the TTB when there is enough information about the alternatives 
and tested criteria, but they take a longer time (Goldstein & Gigerenzer, 1996).  
Gigerenzer explains the reason behind these results as follows: in uncertain, a complex 
strategy can fail because it explains too much in hindsight. Only part of information is valuable 
for future, and the art of intuition is to focus on that part and ignore the rest. A simple rule that 
relies only on the best clue has a good chance of hitting on that useful piece of information 
(Gigerenzer, 2007). 
2.7 BEST PRACTICE IN THE USE OF RATIONAL AND HEURISTIC ELEMENTS 
DURING EXECUTIVE DECISION-MAKING IN QATAR 
Over the past decade, Qatar has both garnered significant attention and generated 
considerable controversy through its pursuit of several high-profile conflict mediation efforts. 
These included mediating between the Yemeni government and Houthi rebels in 2007-2008, 
hosting 2008 negotiations to head off political conflict in Lebanon, and facilitating talks between 
the Sudanese government and various rebel movements in Darfur. While Qatars record of success 
in these efforts is mixed, an in-depth analysis of its mediation history reveals several areas that, if 
fine-tuned, could potentially enable Qatar to play a much-needed role in regional conflict 
resolution (Barakat, 2014).   
The events of the Arab Spring marked a turning point in Qatars regional engagement, 
shifting its focus from conflict mediation to proactive intervention (Barakat 2014). Strategic 
decision-making process is especially important aspect to this engagement. Dean & Sharfman 
(1996) describe strategic decisions as: committing substantial resources, setting precedents, and 
creating waves of lesser decisions. 
Strategic decisions are the responsibility of top management. They reflect the interaction 
between an organisation and its environment and show how an organisation manages this 
relationship (Ginsberg, 1988). The rationality of decision-making processes has received a central 
place in the strategic decision-making theory and practice (Papadakis & Barwise, 1997). Political 
behaviour among decision-makers has long been recognized as an aspect of decision-making 
(Child & Tsai, 2005; Wilson, 2003).  
The rationale advanced by Qatari officials does not deny Qatars vision of becoming a 
leading actor in the Middle East, the wider Islamic world, and on the global diplomatic stage. They 
acknowledge mediation as a strategic priority that could reduce the risk of threats such as terrorism 
or population displacement, promote a business environment conducive for Qatari investments 
(Barakat, 2014). Butler (2002) concludes that more recent research has emphasised how executives 
make decisions using intuitive and political processes in addition to rational procedures. Qatars 
choices to engage in conflict mediation were due in part to the states highly personalized decision-
making structure (Barakat, 2014). 
Strategic decision making is based on the premise that executives are humanly finite and 
involved in a multi-step process manipulated by behavioural adaptive choices that take place over 
time (Hambrick, 2007; Miller, 1991; Mintzberg et al.,1976; Simons et al.,1999) 
Research reveals that numerous factors shape the knowledge-based economy in Qatar. The 
main strength of the knowledge-based economy is the determination of the Qatari government to 
diversify the economy and the main weaknesses are the shortage of qualified human resources, the 
fear of failure and the low performance of the innovation system (Hassen, 2020). 
Cross-cultural studies of managers reveal that national culture do strongly influence 
managerial practices, especially in its strategic posture (Song et al., 2000). Furthermore, the role 
of decision-making aspects has become a challenging issue, given the imperative of globalization 
and the rules of the free market (Buckley, 1993; Herrmann & Datta, 2002). This implies that 
management thoughts and performance affect the growth of internationalized firms (Burton & 
Schlegelmilch, 1987; Tyebjee, 1994), causing a cross-cultural transformation, based on human 
social interactions. 
The study of (Ekaterini et al., 2014) provides an empirical justification for the relative 
relationships between individual cultural factors and strategic decision-making characteristics, 
which are the two basic aspects that influence the strategic decision-making process, in a Qatar 
business setting, and showed that cultural values had a significant and crucial impact on 
individuals thoughts and understanding and, therefore, shaped and directed managers innovation 
practice.  
Although Qatar shares different cultural traits from those in Western or developed 
countries, it is moving toward creating a knowledge-based economy that is focused on innovative 
thinking into organisational strategic development. This observation is becoming increasingly 
crucial when accounting for the growing numbers of overseas businesses seeking to operate within 
the Arab world and vice versa. This implies that strategic decision-making process implementation 
is equivalently important for Qatari managers. Thus, the role of industry leaders in the region has 
been recognized as an essential source of confidence, not only in fueling the economic prospects 
of the country but also to encourage, nurture, and provide inspiration in product creation and 
service delivery (Ekaterini et al., 2014). 
In general, the findings from Ekaterini et al. (2014) indicate that locus of control, decision 
style, hierarchy, and collectivism - the four components that characterize cultural traits in Western 
societies - have some utility for examining cultural constructs across cultures and viewed as 
behaviours and characteristics that contribute to a person strategic decision making. The 
understanding of the similarities and differences between Qatari and Western strategic decision-
making models can improve business transaction activities and performance through providing 
management (both east and west) with enhanced insights into the Qatari strategic decision-making 
process.  
Further, according to of (Ekaterini et al., 2014), Qatari managers prefer simplifications in 
a highly dynamic economic environment and, concurrently, view the differences in their actions 
within the proposed model. To be more specific, the study showed that executives cultural 
believes affect their managerial decision-making practices, focusing more on process innovation 
than product innovation. For international businesses considering or facing competition on a global 
scale, such information will be of critical importance and may lead to some corrective movements 
in marketing intelligence programs and competitive assessment to improve market entry decisions 
and defend their existing markets against competition.  
Eisenhardt & Zbaracki (1992) argue that the debate over whether decision-makers are 
rational or boundedly rational is no longer very controversial, where empirical research clearly 
supports the following. First, the existence of cognitive limits to the rational model of decision-
making; Janis (1989), for example, points out that executives are likely to take any of the following 
decision shortcuts to overcome cognitive limitations, namely, satisficing, simple decisions rules, 
instrumentalism and the nutshell briefing rule. Second, the pursuit by many strategic decision-
makers of the basic phases of problem identification, development, and selection, but they cycle 
and recycle through the various stages of decision-making, frequently repeating, often going 
deeper, and always following different paths by fits and starts. Third, the complexity of then 
problem and the conflict among the decisionmakers often influence the shape of the decision 
process. Jones et al. (1992) identify three main obstacles to adopting rational decision processes. 
First, the organisation may lack the required resources to search for and analyse the relevant 
information. For example, it has been argued that the rational model assumes that information will 
be available when needed but neglects the cost of providing this information (Braybrooke & 
Lindblom 1970). 
However, even if the organisation has the required resources, the comprehensive processes 
may lead to achieving tomorrows solution to yesterdays problem (Braybrooke & Lindblom 
1970, 121). Second, as noted above, the decision-makers may have limited cognitive capabilities. 
Third, executives may be apprehensive about upsetting the organisations existing political 
structure and dealing with its consequences. 
The relationship between rational decision processes and organisational outcomes seems 
to be problematic because it has been a subject of continuing controversy among researchers, and 
no consensus has yet emerged (Goll & Rasheed, 1997). Empirical evidence exists for all possible 
relationships between rationality and organisational outcomes: positive relationships, negative 
relationships, and no relationship. Fredrickson & Mitchell (1984) conducted a series of studies on 
this relation. They found a negative relationship between rationality and performance in an 
unstable environment.  
Rational theories of decision making would propose that the best option is chosen from all 
the alternatives that are on offer. But Simon (1957) argued that people in choice situations 
satisfice  a decision heuristic that involves choosing the first alternative that meets their 
minimum requirements. Satisficing is much simpler in terms of its cognitive operations, so it 
makes fewer demands on scarce mental resources. However, it may lead to suboptimal behaviour 
given that once an acceptable option is found the search for and evaluation of further, potentially 
better, alternatives cease (Maule & Hodgkinson, 2002). This argument can reflect positively on 
Qatar conflict mediation efforts which is undertaken in dynamic, uncertain environment when 
satisficing is important to parties involved in the conflict under consideration. 
2.8 INTUITIVE DECISION-MAKING  
Intuition is a well-known concept. It can safely be said that everybody, to a greater or lesser 
extent, makes use of it in both personal and professional situations. It is most often experienced, 
in a conscious or unconscious way, in the decision-making process. The notion of intuition is 
widely described both in popular literature, where it is not supported by scientific evidence, as well 
as in specialist literature, mainly in the field of psychology. When defining intuition, most authors 
state that it is the opposite of logical, rational thinking (Haensel et al., 2002). According to Wray  
(2017), the intuitive decision-making style is a type of right-brain decision-making approach that 
encourages the use of feelings over facts in the process of making a decision. 
Intuition refers to a sense of feeling of pattern or relationships and vague feelings. 
Intuition also can be holistic thinking, immediate insight, seeing the answer without knowing how 
it was reached (Sauter, 1999, 109). While intuition can promote innovation, it can also be 
negative. Intuitive managers become impatient with routine, details, or repetition. They may reach 
conclusions too quickly, ignore relevant facts, or follow an inspiration when it is clearly bad (Agor, 
1984). The factors of intuitive decision-making style consist of experience, knowledge, and others 
(Harteis et al., 2008). Intuitive is often integrated in decision making as human nature is becoming 
hardly to measure. In fact, intuitive decision making has little deviation from human performance. 
Seeing that human life becomes more complexity and less structured, intuitive recognition is rather 
useful and effective to make decision (Andersen, 2000).  
Intuition is referred to as a gut feeling. It is a kind of inner conviction about something 
being right without any prior consideration or reflection. Intuition is sometimes defined as an 
extraordinary state of mind, a state of knowledge experienced in unforeseen circumstances; it is 
the voice of the subconscious (Malewska, 2018). 
Intuitive decision-making style is characterized by a reliance on hunches and feelings. The 
rational decision makers focus on logic, order, and systematic analysis limits the boundaries on 
problem formulation, in contrast, the intuitive decision maker being data sensitive and focusing on 
an intuitive sense of rightness about decisions is likely to be more open to alternatives in problem 
formulation (Scott & Bruce, 1995). 
In certain conditions, a manager would sometimes be expected to make an intuitive 
decision (DuBrin et al., 1989). An intuitive decision is a decision made according to intuition or 
gut feeling with limited information to reach a decision quickly; it is an unconscious process based 
on experience. Although the rational decision-making style might be more desirable to analyse a 
problem rationally, the intuitive decision is also appropriate to face situations quickly. A manager 
would tend to put greater weight on the intuitive decision than on analytic reasoning when the 
problems become more complicated (Yang, 2003). 
Scott and Bruce (1995) defined decision-making style as the habitual, learned response 
pattern an individual exhibit when tackled with a problem or situation. Behling et al. (1980) 
associated decision-making style with cognitive style, because it is believed that those who gather 
information intuitively are more likely to be feeling as information evaluators while those who 
gather information systematically are more likely to be thinking as information evaluators. A 
classification scheme for decision-making style proposed by Harren (1979) includes two opposing 
categories regarding information gathering and evaluation: intuitive and rational. Therefore, 
individuals can be classified as consistently intuitive or consistently analytical in information 
gathering and evaluation. 
Intuition denotes a vague feeling or sense of feeling of pattern or relationships. It is 
also referred as holistic thinking, immediate insight, seeing the answer without knowing how it 
was reached (Thorne, 1990), or as a technique of swiftly retrieving hunks and forms of 
knowledge molded from previous experience (Seal, 1990). Decision-makers might sense 
patterns, feelings, and objects in seemingly unconnected facts. Intuition is often perceived by 
people as a sudden awareness of information (Ritter & Dijskterhuis, 2014; Sauter, 1999). Intuition 
also provides the decision-makers with relationships and facts without understanding why such 
relationship or facts existed (Zander et al., 2016). Patton (2003) identified three sources of intuition 
used by decision makers: (1) general experience, the learning that occurs during the normal process 
of accumulating and aging of experience (2) innate response, the instinct that brings subconscious 
but appropriate reactions to situations. It is usually inborn not learned; and (3) focused learning, 
the learning that originates from deliberate efforts to cultivate habits and attain intuitive responses. 
2.9 DEPENDENT DECISION-MAKING 
Scott and Bruce (1995) developed a five-dimensional instrument for measuring decision 
making styles, in which they distinguish between rational, intuitive, spontaneous, dependent, and 
avoidant styles, where dependent decision-making style is characterized by a search for advice and 
direction from others. They found that dependent decision makers are more likely to avoid decision 
making, which supports Harrens (1979) notion that dependent decision makers are relatively 
passive and seek to avoid decision making.  
Dependent decision-making style represents decision makers who tend to consult others 
before deciding, and who rely on the assistance and support of others (del Campo et al., 2016). 
The negative association between the avoidant and dependent styles suggests that 
dependence on others in decision-making can be accompanied by a lower tendency to avoid 
making decisions. Avoidance can be inevitable only with a lack of other people able to provide 
advice (Bavolr & Orosov, 2015), in their study they found no relation between dependent 
decision-making style and decision outcome and at the same time no association with depression. 
Baiocco et al. (2009) and Loo, (2000) argued that rational style correlated positively with the 
dependent style. 
According to the Scott and Bruce (1995) study rational decisionmakers attribute their 
destiny to factors inside themselves whereas dependent and avoidant decision makers do not feel 
control over their own destiny and attribute what happens to them to external factors. 
Loo (2000) found that characteristics of the decision-maker are important to consider when 
evaluating decision behaviour. Self-reported values were positively correlated with decision-
making styles indicative of these values. For example, positive correlations were identified 
between values of social interaction and social relations and dependent decision-making style. 
Results of a study by Schoemaker (2010) revealed a lack of significant group differences, 
among five decision-making styles (rational, avoidant, intuitive, dependent, spontaneous) except 
for gender differences on dependent decision-making style. The difference between male and 
females on dependent decision-making style, is that female participants scored significantly higher 
on the scale that measured dependent decision-making style, as compared with their male 
counterparts, irrespective of their symptoms of anxiety or depression. 
According to Allwood & Salo (2012), persons scoring high on Dependent style have less 
flexibility in planning and accomplishing their decision-making errands because they are 
dependent on other persons in the decision process. This would result in less control over the 
decision process and its outcomes. Deficient control produces ambiguity, a well-documented 
stressor. For these reasons, dependent style decision makers will have greater stress and poorer 
sleep than people who tend to have the other decision-making styles. 
Dependent styles suggests that dependence on others in decision-making can be 
accompanied by a lower tendency to avoid making decisions. Avoidance can be inevitable only 
with a lack of other people able to provide advice, while a higher reported use of the rational style 
correlated positively with the dependent style (Bavolr & Orosov, 2015), which is like the 
findings of previous studies (e.g., Baiocco et al., 2009; Loo, 2000). A possible explanation could 
be that an effort to seek advice from other people is a part of a rational process (Bavolr & 
Orosov, 2015). 
2.10 AVOIDANT DECISION-MAKING 
Avoidant decision-making style is characterized by attempts to avoid decision making. The 
negative correlation between rational and avoidant decision-making style (Scott & Bruce, 1995) 
supports the conclusion of Phillips et al. (1984) that rational decision makers tend to approach 
rather than avoid problems.  
In the few studies with employees as participants, Rational (Russ et al.,1996, sales-
managers) and Intuitive (Sadler-Smith, 2004, managers) styles were found to be associated with 
better job performance and Avoidant style (Russ et al.,1996) with poorer job performance. 
According to Allwood & Salo (2012), persons scoring high on Avoidant style may have 
difficulties planning their work activities efficiently and may complete less of their decision 
errands in a reasonable amount of time. This would result in missed deadlines and the ensuing 
negative consequences that would contribute to their stress, and less control over the decision 
process and its outcomes. Deficient control produces ambiguity, a well-documented stressor. For 
these reasons, Avoidant style decision makers will have greater stress and poorer sleep than people 
who tend to have the other decision-making styles.  
According to Bavolr & Orosov (2015), there is a negative association between the 
avoidant and dependent styles suggests that dependence on others in decision-making can be 
accompanied by a lower tendency to avoid making decisions. Avoidance can be inevitable only 
with a lack of other people able to provide advice. 
A study by Omotola (2012) revealed that there is positive relationship between rational and 
each of intuitive as well as dependent decision-making styles, whereas there is no association 
between rational decision-making style and avoidant decision-making style. Avoidant decision 
style managers are also likely to be spontaneous but not intuitive nor dependent nor rational. This 
result is consistent with Scott & Bruce (1995)s finding that individuals do combine decision 
making styles in making important decisions and do not rely on single decision style (Scot & 
Bruce,1995). 
The avoidant decision-making style was found to be negatively related to well-being 
(Bavolr & Orosov, 2015), also depression was found to be positively correlated with the 
avoidant style, brooding and anxious style and was negatively associated with the vigilant and 
intuitive decision-making styles.  
According to Hariri et al. (2014), leadership styles are associated with decision making 
styles. The analyses of the relationships of transformational leadership style with rational decision-
making style and avoidant decision-making style. which is consistent with previous research, a 
significant and positive relationship between transformational leadership style and rational 
decision-making style, but a significant and negative relationship between transformational 
leadership style and avoidant decision-making style. 
2.11 SPONTANEOUS DECISION-MAKING 
Spontaneous style is characterized by a sense of immediacy and desire to complete the 
decision-making process as soon as possible (Bavolr & Orosov, 2015). According to Scott and 
Bruce (1995), individuals generally have different levels of all five styles: Rational (exhaustive 
information search, systematic evaluation of alternatives), Intuitive (unsystematic information 
processing and reliance on premonitions and feelings), Dependent (dependent on advice from 
others), Avoidant (tries to avoid making decisions), and Spontaneous (wants to reach a decision 
quickly). although one style is usually dominant.  
Quick and impulsive decisions are usually made, and the spontaneous decision-maker 
bases decisions on what seems natural at that moment. The spontaneous style could be seen as a 
kind of high-speed intuitive style, perhaps used in decision situations with time-pressure 
(Thunholm, 2004). Spontaneous Decision Making, meaning impulsive and prone to making "snap" 
or "spur" of the moment. This style characterized by a feeling of immediacy and desire to come 
through the decision-making process as quickly as possible (Spicer & Sadler-Smith, 2005). 
Bavolr & Orosov (2015), found mostly weak, but statistically significant relationships 
between the decision-making styles and decision-making competencies. It was mainly the 
spontaneous and avoidant decision-making styles that correlated negatively with the decision-
making competencies, and this was also partly true for the intuitive decision-making style. While 
the reported use of the dependent style was weakly and negatively related to decision-making 
competence, there the only (but again low) significant positive correlation was were found in the 
rational style. The more general view using linear regression showed that mainly using the 
avoidant and spontaneous styles is associated with lower decision-making competence. 
Decision-making style a leader displays depends on certain contextual variables. For 
example, when transformational leaders need to make a comprehensive decision by involving 
others to obtain information, they tend to use rational decision-making style. In contrast, leaders 
with transactional and laissez-faire leadership styles tend to produce a less comprehensive 
decision; thus, such leaders are likely to exhibit spontaneous and even avoidant decision-making 
styles (Hariri et al., 2014). 
 Recent research by Tabesh and Veradescribe (2020) discusses how top management teams' 
make rapid comprehensive and intuitive decisions that are effective in times of crisis, using a range 
of decision-making tools. Additionally, Okoli and Watt (2018) review the literature to explain how 
experienced crisis managers use both intuitive and analytical strategies to manage complicated 
events. While Backus and Bruhl (2022) argue that facilities management is a key function for most 
businesses or enterprise and many decisions concern the businesses physical assets and state that 
there is no standardised decision-making model, presented in literature or in practice. Arguing that 
such a model could empower facility managers so that they could justify decisions made in terms 
of capital and operational expenses. Also, Testa and Karpova (2021) argued that when making 
decisions, executives in the US fashion industry, drew on vast amounts of information drawn from 
industry specific academic research and facts drawn from information internal and external to the 
business noting that information from social media was as useful as information from other 
sources. Five major strategies: collaboration, adaptability, speed, gut instinct and creativity, which 
resonates with the theoretical model of this research, were regularly used by the fashion retail 
executives across various sorts of business. Moreover, Frisk and Bannister (2021) note that in 
making complex decisions, in Swedish local authorities, design thinking could facilitate decision-
making by increasing the range of solutions to be considered, people consulted and involved, 
sources of data, sources of information and decision tools used as well as in realising buy-in to the 
eventual decision. Using the results of a survey, Yi (2020) showed that library directors used 
multiple and dual decision-making approaches more than a single approach and that the number 
of library branches, the number of subordinates, total years of directorship and years of present 
position in the executive role, significantly predicted the approaches used to making change 
decisions. However, the findings showed that other demographic and organisational variables of 
age, gender, library size, library type, number of different positions, total years of library service 
and education level were not significant determinants of the approaches used to making change 
decisions. These findings are in concert with the findings of this thesis that finds multiple decision-
making strategies are used in different organisational contexts. 
CHAPTER THREE:  RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  
3.1 INTRODUCTION  
In the last decade there has been an increasing interest in the study of the role of the rational 
and heuristic in the executive decision-making process, especially in organisations (Elbanna & 
Fadol, 2016). However, the research is still lacking relevant empirical data and consistent methods 
(Papadakis et al., 2010). Elbanna & Fadol (2016) clearly state more research of an empirical kind 
is required to better understand the role of the rational and heuristic in the executive decision-
making process. Elbanna et al. (2013) argue that to better understand the use of the rational and 
heuristic in the executive decision-making process more research is needed, especially when 
considering the relation with other variables, such as the characteristics of the decision itself, but 
also the characteristics of the company and the external environment. Moreover, most empirical 
studies on intuitive processes do not investigate the relationship between the rational and heuristic 
in the executive decision-making process and organisational outcomes (Elbanna & Child, 2007). 
Therefore, a gap was identified in the existing empirical research on the role of the rational and 
heuristic in the executive decision-making process. 
The choice of which method to employ is dependent upon the nature of the research 
problem, Morgan & Smircich (1980) argue that the actual suitability of a research method derives 
from the nature of research phenomena to be explored. There are basically two basic 
methodological traditions of research in social science, namely positivism and post-positivism 
(phenomenology).   Positivism is an approach to the creation of knowledge through research which 
emphasises the model of natural sciences: the scientist adopts the position of objective researcher, 
who collects facts about the social world and then builds up an explanation of social life by 
arranging such facts in a chain of causality (Finch, 1986). In contrast post-positivism is about a 
reality which is socially constructed rather than objectively determined. Hence, the task of social 
scientists should not be gathering facts and measure how offer certain patterns occur, but to 
appreciate the different constructions and meanings that people place upon their experience 
(Easterby-Smith et al.,1991). According to Saunders et al. (2012), individuals make assumptions 
in every phase of a research, and this affects the overall way they understand the research 
questions, the data collection and how they elaborate the findings. 
3.2 ONTOLOGY AND EPISTEMOLOGY 
Ontology is the study of the nature of being or becoming existence and their differences 
and similarities. It tries to answer questions that begin with What. Ontology helps us to 
understand questions like what God is? what a disease is, what happens after death, or what is 
artificial intelligence? Here What will optimise the impact of the rational and heuristic in the 
executive decision-making process? Ontology is concerned with the veracity of facts and reality 
whereas epistemology explains different ways to explore the reality (Easterby-Smith et al., 2012).  
Epistemology includes different ways of studying the social world. A paradigm is a belief 
system that guides the way of doing things. The three most common research paradigms are: 
 Positivism, which takes the view that there is a single reality, which can be measured and 
known. Therefore, positivists generally use Quantitative methods to measure this reality as 
Quantitative data can be gather using questionnaires or surveys applied to a large sample 
size and variables can be controlled within the study. Quantitative data can be analysed 
using statistics software such as SPSS. 
Constructivism, which takes the view there is no single reality or truth as the world, is 
only socially constructed. Constructivists generally use Qualitative methods to understand 
multiple realities. Qualitative researchers use focus groups, interviews, and observations to collect 
detailed data (from smaller samples) which may be analysed using software such as NVIVO. 
Thematic analysis can be used to analyse data collected by semi-structured interviews where 
Thematic Analysis is a method for identifying and analysing patterns of meaning in a dataset 
(Braun & Clarke, 2006). It illustrates which themes are important in the description of the 
phenomenon under study (Daly et al.,1997). The result of a thematic analysis should highlight the 
most salient constellations of meanings present in the dataset. Data from verbal interviews (or 
focus groups) or textual newspaper data tend to be at the root of thematic research. However, open-
ended responses to questionnaire items, diaries, video material, images and essays can also be 
thematically analysed. Interview data are usually collected via semi-structured interviews: an 
interview with 5-7 topics that the respondent is prompted to talk about (Wilkinson et al., 2004). 
This imposes topic areas on peoples thinking, where it may be preferable to gain a more 
naturalistic inroad into peoples meaning systems concerning the phenomenon under study. 
Pragmatism, which takes the view that reality, is constantly renegotiated, debated and interpreted. 
Therefore, the best method to use is the one that solves the problem by combining both positivist 
and interpretivist positions within the scope of a single research study. Pragmatists often use Multi-
Methods, which involves using both Qualitative and Quantitative methods to answer the research 
question effectively. 
Interpretivisms purpose is to understand human action through supportive comprehension 
so that the researcher appreciates the world through the eyes of the performers doing the acting 
(Harvey. 2021). The researcher is a social actor that appreciates differences between people. In 
this research new understanding was to be gained by the researcher through a subjective analysis 
of the language and verbal reports presented by executive decision makers, with the presumption 
that the researcher as a Qatari decision-making executive could be empathetic and enter the world 
of other executives. That presumption of the research was undermined by the pragmatic needs of 
dealing with the COVID 19 pandemic. Thus, the research reverted to positivism and a form of 
mathematical constructivism with a view adapted from the philosophy of mathematics that it is 
necessary to find mathematical objects (factors) within the collective of the executives minds and 
prove, through the use of factor analysis, that they exist collectively and that the relationships 
between those objects can be determined ready to be later interpreted further (Mulaik, 1987). This 
philosophical stance facilitates accomplishment of the aim of this research, which is is to analyse 
in detail the decision-making processes and the use of rational and heuristics elements in 
executives decision-making processes in Qatar. Hence, a pragmatic stance is taken due to the 
effects of the Covid 19 pandemic, and the research was redirected to take a mainly objective stance, 
drawing on the quantitative questionnaire and analysis. 
3.3 RESEARCH APPROACH 
The present thesis research was conducted with an abductive approach, since data, in the 
form of qualitative interviews, were collected to explore a phenomenon, recognize themes, and 
explain patterns, to complement the existing theory (Saunders et al., 2012). Unlike the deductive 
approach, where a researcher moves from theory to data, or the inductive approach, where a 
researcher moves from data to theory, in the abductive approach one needs to move back and forth, 
combining deduction and induction in a sense (Suddaby, 2006). For the sake of this study, the 
phenomenon to be analysed is rational and heuristics in an executive decision-making context and 
known premises about this phenomenon are used to produce testable conclusions (Saunders et al., 
2012). A planned qualitative phase would be derived from a subjective philosophical basis to 
obtain deep understandings of the decision-making processes of the executives and a quantitative 
phase derived from an objective basis would quantify and analyse relationships between concepts.  
The research design contains the logic that links the data to be collected (and the 
conclusions to be drawn) to the initial questions of a study (Yin, 1994). For a case study, it is 
important to explain the different designs that are relevant for this research. After that it is 
important to maximize four aspects which influence the quality of any design: construct validity, 
internal validity (for explanatory or causal case studies only), external validity and reliability. This 
means that in this case it is important to explain the construct validity, external validity, and 
reliability.  
Yin (1994) describes five components of a case study design: the research question(s), its 
propositions, its unit(s) of analysis, a determination of how the data are linked to the propositions 
and criteria to interpret the findings.  The research questions are presented in the first chapter, the 
proposition and hypotheses of this research are explained in the second chapter, so it is also 
important to understand the other three components. The third component, unit of analysis, is 
related to the fundamental problem of what is the case, a problem that has plagued many 
investigators at the outset of case studies (Yin, 1994). In this research the case will consist of 
multiple organisations that are prone to information overload in the context of SDM. The specific 
sample will be determined later. As a general guide, the definition of the unit of analysis (and 
therefore of the cases) is related to the way the initial research questions have been defined (Yin, 
1994). The fourth and fifth component, linking the data to proposition and hypotheses, and criteria 
for interpreting the findings are important to represent the data analysis steps in the case study 
research. A complete research design that covers all the five components that are described above 
requires the development of a preliminary theory (Yin, 1994, p27). Yin (1994) argues that every 
good case study, regardless of, if the study is explanatory, descriptive, or exploratory, requires the 
development of a preliminary theory. Developing the preliminary theory, that is already developed 
in chapter two, is an immense aid in defining the appropriate research design and data collection 
and becomes the main vehicle for generalizing the results of the case study. To keep an overview 
of this study, the five research components are summarized in Figure 3.1. 
Before assessing the reliability and validity questions and designing the study, it is 
important to understand the goals of a multiple case study and the types of errors that can occur 
when performing the questionnaire. The two main goals of a questionnaire are to minimize error 
in the collected data and measuring the error that is part of the questionnaire (Fowler, 2009). 
Fowler (2009) also defines two fundamental premises. The first premise of the questionnaire 
process is to describe the sample of people who respond, can describe the target population. The 
second premise of a questionnaire research process is that the answers of the respondents can be 
used to accurately describe the characteristics of the respondents. It is therefore important to create 
a sample which is representative for the bigger population, which in this case are managers who 
are involved in strategic decision-making processes. 
The representativeness of a sample depends on the sample frame, the sample size and the 
specific design of the selection procedures (Fowler, 2009). Therefore, taking these criteria in 
consideration when selecting the sample in this study is of high importance. The major source of 
questionnaire error is failure to collect data from a high percentage of the selected sample (Fowler, 
2009). The choice of data collection mode (mail, telephone, internet, personal interview, or group 
administration) is directly related to the sample frame, research topic, characteristics of the sample, 
and available staff and facilities. This has effect on the response rates, question form and 
questionnaire costs (Fowler, 2009). 
Table 3.1 
The Components of the Research 
Components Specification 
1. Research Question (Ch. 1)  
Exploratory what question: What is the effect of 
rational and heuristic elements on the executive 
strategic decision-making process?  
2. Proposition and hypotheses (Ch. 2)  
The conceptual model is based on the literature 
review and proposition and hypotheses are 
formulated to connect the variables with each other 
and explain the connection between the variables.  
3. Unit(s) of analysis (Ch. 3)  
The unit of analysis is based on individuals but must 
be connected to the context of the organisation.  
4. Linking data to proposition and 
hypotheses (Ch. 3)  
The data is linked to the proposition and hypotheses 
through the quantitative analysis.  
5. Criteria for interpreting findings (Ch. 3)  
The criteria for interpreting the findings are 
construct validity, internal validity, external 
validity, reliability.  
Some major issues about choosing an appropriate strategy are sampling, the type of 
population, the question form, the question content, response rates, costs, available facilities, 
length of data collection and computer-assisted data collection (Fowler, 2009). So, the choice for 
a research model concerns complex decisions and depends on a lot of factors. This study will be 
based on a computer assisted data collection method because of the low cost of data collection, the 
potential for high-speed returns, and the accessibility to a database of organisations, which make 
it possible to gather the right information in a fast, reliable, and valuable way. In the next 
paragraphs, also the validity, reliability and generalizability of questionnaires will be discussed to 
establish quality within this empirical research. 
3.4 RESEARCH DESIGN 
Research designs are either classified as qualitative, quantitative research or mixed method. 
Method of research is generally believed to reside in paradigms and communities of scholars 
(Cohen et al., 2011). Johnson & Christensen (2012) stated that a paradigm is an approach about 
research or doing research. It is interesting to note that in the research approaches, whether 
qualitative or quantitative method, the key words explaining phenomena are used irrespective 
of the approach (Muijs, 2004). All the definitions, criticisms, arguments, and counter arguments 
made by authors about the research approaches border only on the methods of data collection, 
analysis, and summary of the results (Daniel 2016). The choice of which method to employ is 
dependent upon the nature of the research problem, Morgan & Smircich (1980) argue that the 
actual suitability of a research method derives from the nature of research phenomena to be 
explored. There are basically two basic methodological traditions of research in social science, 
namely positivism and post-positivism (phenomenology).     
This study was conducted predominately used a quantitative approach coupled with a small 
qualitative study. According to Creswell (2014), constructivism is typical in qualitative research, 
indicating that the constructivist view gets complex answers, and a way to do this is by using open 
ended questions, where the constructivists approach looks for the meanings that individuals give 
to a specific experience they had, and therefore, the best way to collect qualitative data in by 
discussion and open-ended questions, and the top managers, are the ones that try to understand the 
world surrounding them by personal or subjective meanings and the researchers philosophical 
view of the constructivism gives meaning and interprets the ways other people see the world. This 
study tries to make sense of the personal views of the executives interviewed by interpreting their 
meanings concerning the executive decision-making process, through real life case examples. 
Therefore, this study mainly focused on getting different views and meanings of the same subject 
from all the executives interviewed. 
To ensure that the knowledge gained from this scientific research is conclusive and credible 
it is important that an appropriate method of inquiry is chosen. In this study, a multiple case study 
will be conducted. A multiple case study will be performed, because in that way the results of this 
study will have a higher external validity, it is easier to generalize the data to the bigger population. 
An explorative quantitative study was undertaken to answer the research question. An exploratory 
study describes the assessment of existing phenomena, searches for new insights and finds out 
what is happening (Saunders et al., 2009, 133). The combination of interviews and a questionnaire 
will be used to provide results. Using a questionnaire will enable to explore how executive 
decision-making process takes place in the organisations. The quantitative research design and 
qualitative research design will be explained at the end of this paragraph. Other reasons to choose 
for a questionnaire are the time limitation of the data collection, the practicality of the format and 
of course the user anonymity.  
In general, the goal of explorative research is to gather information to help define 
challenges and provide valuable information for future research. Marshall & Rossman (2010) 
describe the goal of exploratory research as follows: to investigate little understood phenomena, 
to identify/discover important variables, or to generate hypotheses for further research, then a case 
study or field study is an appropriate strategy and participant observation, and interviewing are 
important data collection techniques (p. 41). That is why this case study has a quantitative 
explorative research method, because the goal of this research is to conduct a study of the decision-
making process of managers within the context of an organisation. 
A literature review will be performed first, since a lot of theories exist around the subjects 
of information overload and strategic Decision-making, which may be helpful to explain the 
challenges in this decision-making process. After that, a questionnaire will be conducted. 
It was initially intended that this research should contain multiple case studies because in that way 
the research can be more in depth, which also means that heuristics and rational can be researched 
more in depth. Yin (1994), states that the case study contributes uniquely to the knowledge of 
individual, organisational, social, and political phenomena. Not surprisingly that the case study 
has been a common research strategy in psychology, sociology, political science, business, social 
work, and planning (Yin, 1983). The main reason why a case study is conducted is because the 
distinctive need for case studies arises out of the desire to understand complex social phenomena 
(Yin, 1994). Understanding the use of heuristics and biases in the context of SDM is a complex 
social phenomenon and therefore is a case study a suitable method. To be able to choose the best 
method, three conditions are important to keep in mind, these three conditions are elaborated and 
show how they are related towards the five major research strategies as shown in in Table 3.2 
according to Yin (1994):  
1) The type of research question posed. 
2) The extent of control an investigator has over actual behavioural events. 
3) The degree of focus on contemporary as opposed to historical events. 
Table 3.2 
Three conditions are related towards the five major research strategies 
Strategy Form of  
Research Questions 
Requires control  
over behavioural 
events 
Focuses on 
contemporary 
events 
Experiment How, why  Yes Yes 
Survey 
(questionnaire) 
Who, What, Where, 
How many, How much  
No Yes 
Archival 
analysis 
Who, what, where, how 
many, how much  
No Yes/no 
History How, why  No No 
Case study How, why  No Yes 
With regards to the research question, Yin (1994) argues the following: If research 
questions focus mainly on what questions, there are two possibilities. The questions can focus 
on exploratory measures, or they can focus on identifying outcomes. This research focuses on 
exploratory measures. A question like this is a reasonable sign for conducting an exploratory study, 
with the goal to develop pertinent hypotheses and propositions for further inquiry (Yin, 1994). As 
an exploratory study, any of the five research strategies can be used. Yin (1994) adds to that, that 
it is possible to use more than one strategy in any given study (for example, a questionnaire within 
a case study or a case study within a survey).  
To summarize, the most important condition for differentiating among the various research 
strategies, is to identify the research question that is being asked. The second important 
determinant of the strategy is the extent of control that is needed over behavioural events. In the 
case of this exploratory research, no control over behavioural events is needed. Regarding the third 
point, the degree of focus on contemporary as supposed to historical events, it is clear that this 
research focuses on contemporary events. So, if looking at Table 3.2 of Yin (1994) this research 
concludes that a questionnaire within the multiple case study is the most appropriate design. In the 
event due largely to the restrictions faced by the COVID 19 pandemic that occurred at the 
beginning of the qualitative data collection phase and ensuing difficulties in obtaining interviews 
only three interviews with individual executives were possible and the research was redirected to 
focus of the quantitative design. 
3.4.1 QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH DESIGN 
To create a valid and reliable questionnaire it is important to create the right procedures. In 
this way conducting the questionnaire can have a major effect on the likelihood that the resulting 
data will describe accurately what they intended to describe (Fowler, 2009). A questionnaire is 
used because it is a cost-efficient, practical, fast, scalable, anonymous, confidential and it will 
cover all the aspects of the topics (Drnyei & Taguchi, 2009). When a questionnaire is used as a 
data collection method, three different methodologies must be used. First, the sampling method, 
then the questions must be designed and after that the data must be collected (Fowler, 2009). The 
following points should be considered during research design: 
1) Feasibility of the research project. 
For the project to be useful within the scope of the research (in terms of timings, budget 
and access to organisations) it is important to be specific about the companies that are suited for 
this research. To be able to complete the research in time and within the scope of this thesis, it is 
important to target at medium-sized companies or independent divisions of larger companies.  
2) The principle of theoretical sampling  
The selection of the cases must be in line with the principles of theoretical sampling 
according to Eisenhardt (1989). The goal of theoretical sampling is to choose cases which are 
likely to replicate or extend the emergent theory (Eisenhardt, 1989, p. 537). So, it is sampling 
based on non-statistical reasons.  
3) Transparency of the process  
To create results, the company should be aware of the problem that information overload 
can create at multiple levels in the company. The company should also be interested in creating 
solutions regarding this problem they face.  
4) Access to multiple hierarchical levels  
The strategic decision-making takes place at an individual level but has an effect on both the 
individual level and the organisational level. That is why this research is focused on decision-
making in the context of organisations to be able to get a better overview of the problems that arise 
and the solutions that may result from the collected data. So, to have control on both the individual 
and organisational level, access to multiple hierarchical levels is required.  
5) The information-intensive type of work  
The participants of the questionnaire must be connected to the strategic decision-making 
process of the organisation and must be aware what heuristics and biases are. Therefore, the focus 
is on strategic decision-makers within organisations. 
3.4.2 QUALITATIVE RESEARCH DESIGN 
The current study implements a qualitative research design. This technique is employed to 
describe any data collection or data analysis that generates or uses non-numerical data (Saunders 
et al., 2012). In management research, the use of language data provides the opportunity to gain 
insights into social and organisational realities (Easterby-Smith et al., 2012, p. 129). The 
exploratory study approach was exercised, which is suitable when uncertainty about the precise 
nature of a problem is identified (Saunders et al., 2012).  
The research strategy applied is the qualitative case study, which facilitates exploration 
of a phenomenon within its context using a variety of data sources (Baxter & Jack, 2008, p. 544). 
According to Yin (2003), there are four distinctive conditions which favor the use of a case study:  
 When the study focuses on answering how and why questions, 
 When the researcher cannot manipulate the behaviour of the people involved in the study,  
 When the researcher needs to investigate contextual conditions, relevant to the phenomenon 
under study, and 
 When the boundaries between the phenomenon and the context are ambiguous.  
Since this research will contain more than one single case, the selected method is the 
multiple-case study. The logic behind the use of multiple cases is based on whether results can be 
replicated among cases (Saunders et al., 2012). Baxter & Jack (2008) claim that the multiple-case 
study is used when the researcher examines several cases to understand the similarities and 
differences among the cases. The evidence produced by a multiple-case study is reliable and 
robust, but on the other hand it can also be very time consuming and costly (Baxter & Jack, 2008). 
The time constraints for conducting this research and the collection of data over a short period of 
time imposed the choice of a cross-sectional study, serving as a snapshot of a particular 
phenomenon at a particular time (Saunders et al., 2012). 
3.5  DATA COLLECTION METHOD 
To investigate the theoretical model, a custom designed questionnaire was administered 
and a series of semi-structured interviews, meaning that they were based on a set of questions that 
were prepared beforehand, but the interviewees were encouraged to reflect on their personal 
experiences, so that better insights could be gained. The choice of discursive interviews was made 
in line with the qualitative data method and the initial subjective research approach. The interview 
questions were formulated considering the three main aspects of analysis; the successful decision-
making case dimensions, the rational elements, and the heuristic elements, as presented in the 
theoretical model, in Chapter 2.  
The interviews were conducted directly in the main offices of the companies. All the 
interviews were recorded, and their duration was between 40 and 48 minutes. The interview 
questions, collected relevant information, have been elaborated by the researcher and comprised 
of 21 questions. This basic set of questions provided us with general, as well as complex 
information about the participants. The interview questions were also written considering the role 
and professional background of the participants. Given that all of them were executives, holding a 
top management position, it was decided to use the same basic set of questions for all of them. 
According to each specific executive more specific questions could be integrated in to the 
interview.  
The interview questions (see Appendix 2) were structured in different parts. The first part, 
or the introduction part, gained general information about the position and the role of the 
participant, the organisatinal structure of the company, the performance of the company, and 
relevant facts about the internal and the external environment in which the organisation operates. 
The relevance of gaining this information can be found in the fact that they provide a background 
of the executives and the environment in which they operate. Furthermore, the relation between 
these characteristics and the executive decision-making process, as well as the role of rational and 
heuristic could be extremely relevant for the aim of the research. The second part of the interview 
questions concerned the introduction to the heart of the study, the executive decision-making 
process. The participants were asked to make an example of a successful executive decision-
making in which they were involved in the past. By focusing the attention on a specific example 
provided a more reliable set of data, avoiding abstract conceptualization regarding general 
executive decisions. In this second section, there are two subgroups of question. The first subgroup 
reveals understanding of the extension of the rationality approach in that situation. The second 
subgroup explored the role of heuristic and the implication that personal judgments and 
professional experience had in that specific case. By submitting this set of questions to the 
participant the goal was to gather reliable qualitative data to support the conceptual analysis.  
The present multiple-case study examined each executive as a different case, focusing on 
their individual executive decision-making processes. Therefore, the spotlight was turned on each 
manager, each within different organisational environments. A total of four executives belonging 
to three different companies participated in the research and the interviews were conducted in 
Qatar. 
The data will be collected with the use of questionnaires that are operationalized in a way 
that the constructs (rational and heuristic) can be measured in a viable and reliable way. The 
empirical data will be collected in the period from November 2019 to January 2020. The 
questionnaires will be designed by the author and will be collected online. 
The main instrument for data collection in this study is the use of questionnaires and 
interview. It depends on the organisations where the case study will be conducted, but the sample 
size will be around four questionnaires at three companies, so twelve in total. The number of 
questionnaires for this multiple case study is determined in consultation with the supervisor. The 
goal of these questionnaires is to determine if the interviewees used heuristics and rational while 
enduring information overload in the context of executive decision-making process and what effect 
it had on them and the organisation. As stated in the second chapter, information overload is 
studied from an organisational perspective (Bazerman & Moore, 2008). To determine the amount 
of information overload that the respondents face, general questions about information overload 
in an organisational environment will be asked.  
The representativeness rational and heuristic will be measured in the following way. Fong 
& Nisbett (1991) and Fong et al. (1986) use an approach to measure these rational and heuristic. 
They developed scenarios which represented real-life executive decisions, which led to two 
alternatives. The first alternative is based on quantitative or statistical information; the other 
alternative is based on rational and heuristic reasoning. Subjects were asked to make the executive-
decision and then describe the reasoning of how they came to their decision. After that one can 
determine whether one of the two reasoning types (rational or heuristic reasoning) was used to 
make the decision. In this research the coding schema that will be used will be closely related to 
the Fong and Nisbett (1991) and the Fong et al. (1986) article to be able to connect all the important 
parts regarding the representativeness rational and heuristic together.  
Executive decision-making process will be measured using the three items developed by 
Amason (1996) to assess the quality of the executive decision made within the cases. In line with 
previous studies, the data will be collected from experts who are involved in the executive 
decision-making process.  
An absolute objective measure of the executive decision-making process of a single 
decision is hard to take in isolation and impossible for the research to assess, therefore a perceptual 
measure of the relative executive decision-making process will be used. This is because a decision 
that is good in one context can create poor results when the context changes. When using an 
objective measure the different decisions imply that each decision has an equal chance of 
producing the preferred outcome. But that is not always true. Because when a team only has the 
option to choose between poor alternatives, an objective measure of executive decision-making 
process would result in the impression that the executive decision-making process of the team was 
worse, than a team that had better alternatives to choose from. However, this does not confirm that 
the first team choose wisely and emerged in a better way than expected, than the other team. 
Therefore, the best way to measure the executive decision-making process is to ask those who 
have observed its effects and observe those who understand its context to judge, retrospectively 
and on several dimensions, how the decision turned out. Therefore, a perceptual measure is used. 
3.6  DATA ANALYSIS 
Since concepts in qualitative research depend on social interpretation, qualitative data have 
the tendency to be more ambiguous, elastic, and complex than quantitative data, so analysis of the 
data ought to be responsive to these attributes to be meaningful (Saunders et al., 2012). The data 
analysis procedure entails a process of summarising data, categorising and grouping them 
according to themes, and finally connecting these categories in such a way that a structure is 
formed to answer the research questions (Saunders et al., 2012). The interviews conducted for the 
purpose of this research were audio-recorded and subsequently transcribed, making use of the 
online transcription and dictation software Transcribe (2017), to perform the transcriptions in a 
time-efficient way. The transcriptions were performed by the authors, so that better insights about 
their personal interviewing style would be gained, whereas the social and emotional perspectives 
of the interviews could be reminded during the transcriptions and an initial analysis of the meaning 
could commence (Brggen &Willems, 2009).  
The analytical process that was employed in the current study was inspired by the 
suggestions of Saunders et al. (2012), which can be summarized in the following steps: identify 
categories or codes to understand the data, develop further analytical categories to pinpoint 
relationships and patterns, develop testable arguments and, finally, draw and verify conclusions. 
In the beginning, the acquired data were divided into 4 categories, based on the structure of the 
interview questions which the participants were called to answer. Building on this analysis and the 
discussion that it initiated, the researchers were able to draw their conclusions on this study. The 
main proposition P1 (Executives in Qatar use a range of decision-making styles, including rational 
and heuristic styles, that can be profiled using a structured questionnaire) and the two main 
hypotheses H01: there is NO Statistically Significant (0.05) difference between decision-making 
styles of executives and their strategic contexts in Qatar and H02: there is NO Statistically 
Significant (0.05) difference between decision-making styles of executives and their 
demographics in Qatar. As described in paragraph 3.1 the heuristic and rational will be measured 
via the Fong & Nisbett (1991) and Fong et al. (1986) approach where real-life scenarios will be 
developed to assess the representativeness in use of the heuristic. The custom designed 
questionnaire will use a 5-point Likert scale, so that data can be analysed to produce a reliable 
factor scale. 
3.7  DATA QUALITY 
According to Saunders et al. (2012) there are data quality issues associated with semi-
structured interviews that need to be overcome in this kind of research. These data quality issues 
are associated with reliability, forms of bias, generalizability, and validity (Saunders et al., 2012).  
The first problem discussed by Saunders et al. (2012) is the concern about reliability. This 
is because semi-structured or in-depth interviews lack of a standardization process. According to 
Saunders et al. (2012) this problem is overcome by the fact that qualitative research assumes that 
the situations to be explored are complex and dynamic. Furthermore, the findings of this kind of 
research approaches do not need to be always repeatable because they come from a specific reality 
and a particular time, that could also change (Saunders et al., 2012). The authors believe that this 
study is a snapshot of the examined situation at a specific, and limited, time frame, though it is 
structured in such a way that could be repeatable in the future by other researchers.  
Connected to reliability is the problem of biases. According to Saunders et al. (2012) there 
are three different kinds of biases that must be considered. The first one is the bias of who conducts 
the interview. This is related to the behavioural approach of the interviewer, that through 
comments or a certain attitude might influence the way the participants answer the questions posed 
(Saunders et al., 2012). Another issue is connected to the interviewee rational that can be called 
also response bias. Saunders et al. (2012) note that this kind of bias may be linked either to the 
perception about the interviewer or to the typical characteristics of the interview process. Saunders 
et al. (2012) argue that the semi-structured interview process, as well as the in-depth one, is 
characterized by an intrusion into the personal sphere of the participant. Even though they might 
be willing to contribute with personal experiences, in some cases they might be sensitive in the 
disclosure of certain information through an unstructured interview process (Saunders et al., 2012). 
The problem in this case is that the participant would give only a partial picture of the situation to 
be explored. The last form of bias analysed by Saunders et al. (2012) is the participation bias. This 
kind of bias is related to the nature of the individuals who agree to participate in the research 
(Saunders et al., 2012). In other words, the interview process takes time, and this factor might 
negatively affect the will of the participants to participate (Saunders et al., 2012).  
According to Saunders et al. (2012) one way to overcome issues of biases is to have a good 
degree of knowledge about the organisation and the culture of the company. Before each interview 
information was gained concerning the companys website and other different sources, such as 
online articles and news. In such a way the researcher became more familiar with the situation at 
hand. Another way to overcome these biases was to provide the least information possible about 
the research to the participants, before conducting the interview. This method allowed us to have 
a more reliable set of data. The interviews were conducted in the main offices of the companies, 
in quiet conference rooms, which enabled the interview process to be more professional and 
therefore the answers to be more accurate. The researcher's behaviour during the interviews was 
also central in trying to overcome these biases. Overall, a neutral behaviour is maintained by the 
researcher to reduce to the minimum extent possible influence on the participants. The interviews 
were conducted to avoid leading questions that would compromise the validity of the data.  
A third problem connected to the semi-structured interview process is the generalizability 
issue. This problem is related to the extension of the research findings that might not be applicable 
to other fields of the research (Saunders et al., 2012). According to Saunders et al. (2012) this 
problem is overcome by the fact that qualitative research is related to the theoretical model chosen 
for the study. This research strived to demonstrate that the findings have a solid meaning from a 
theoretical perspective.  
The last issue that Saunders et al. (2012) consider is the validity problem. This relates to 
the level of extension that the interviewers had in exploring the interviewees knowledge and 
experience, and how they made sense of it (Saunders et al., 2012). This issue was mitigated against 
and the researcher explored the specific situation by making in-depth questions on the subject that 
was relevant for the study. This allowed an extended exploration of the participants knowledge.  
Triangulation, as Long & Johnson (2000) indicate, refers to using various data sources, 
data collection methods, or investigators, to tackle the drawbacks of using any single source, 
method, or investigator. There are several elements related to the design of a case study, so that 
the quality and trustworthiness of the project can be increased. According to DiCenso at al., (2005), 
a researcher is responsible to guarantee that the research questions of the case study are clearly 
defined, the case study design is suitable for the research questions, purposeful sampling strategies 
have been used, data are collected and processed in a systematic way and the data analysis in done 
properly. Triangulation of data sources, types or researchers, Baxter & Jack (2008) claim, is a 
useful strategy to support the principle in case study research, so that each phenomenon is analysed 
from various perspectives. Additional strategies which contribute to the overall credibility include 
the use of reflection or the maintenance of field notes and peer examination of the data (Baxter 
& Jack, 2008, p. 556). In this study, triangulation was achieved through a delegation of interviews 
and tasks. Out of the five interviews, two of them were conducted by a single and different 
researcher, while the other three were conducted by both researchers, but tasks were rotated. More 
specifically, during these interviews, one researcher would commence by posing the questions, 
while the other would keep notes about the most interesting comments of the participant or facial 
expressions and emotional characteristics. After the middle of the interview, roles were exchanged, 
thus minimizing the drawbacks of a single interviewer. 
For the questionnaires, the executive decision-making process will be measured using the 
three items developed by Amason (1996) to assess the quality of the executive decision-making 
process made within the cases. In line with previous studies, the data will be collected from experts 
who are involved in the executive decision-making process. The outcomes of the decisions are a 
function of the people who are involved in making the decisions (Amason, 1996; Amason & 
Mooney, 2008). This measurement is used in research to measure the executive decision-making 
process (Amason & Mooney, 2008). The respondents will be asked to rate the overall executive 
decision-making process and the effect on the organisation. A perceptual measure of executive 
decision-making process will be used, which also have been used in previous studies (Amason, 
1996). Also, Dess and Robinson (1984) proposed that when objective measures are not available, 
perceptual measures of executives are effective substitutes. 
3.8  CRITERIA FOR INTERPRETING THE FINDINGS 
Regarding a case study, there are some validity problems. It is hard to generalize findings 
(external validity). It therefore can be hard to relate back to the theoretical model after the research 
has been conducted. Therefore, a multiple case study can provide more valuable information 
regarding the use of heuristics and rational for companies in general. But to generalize the findings 
of this research can be difficult. However, if the model seems to work fine in this explorative 
research, the model can be applied in other case studies in future research. There are four tests that 
are important to keep in mind when conducting a case study. With a case study, it is much more 
complex that the standard validity and reliability notions to which most subjects have been 
exposed, and each item deserves explicit attention (Yin, 1994). They will be discussed below. 
3.8.1  CONSTRUCT VALIDITY 
The construct validity is about establishing the correct optimal measures for the concepts 
being studied. This test can be problematic in case study research. Yin (1994) argues that 
researchers often fail to develop a sufficiently operational set of measures and subjective 
judgments are often used to collect the data. To meet the test of construct validity it is important 
to cover the following two steps: 1) Selecting the specific types of changers that are to be studied 
(in relation to the original objectives of the study). 2) Demonstrate that the selected measures of 
these changes do indeed reflect the specific types of change that have been selected. 
To establish the first step of construct validity in this study it is important to operationalize 
the chosen heuristic and the associated rational, so that they can be measured in a viable way. The 
second step is justifying why using a questionnaire are the right measures that reflect the constructs 
in a way that the research is viable. 
In case studies, according to Yin (1994), there are three available tactics to increase the 
construct validity: 1) Using multiple sources of evidence in a way that encourages convergent lines 
of inquiry. 2) Establishing a chain of evidence. 3) Have the draft case study report reviewed by 
key informants. 
In this research, multiple interviews will be conducted to create convergence in the multiple 
sources of evidence. Also, the selected heuristic and associated rational decision styles will be 
measured with the use of a questionnaire; this will create a chain of evidence. Before conducting 
the questionnaires, a draft case study will be reviewed by the supervisor of this Ph.D thesis. 
3.8.2  INTERNAL VALIDITY 
The internal validity is especially critical in experimental and quasi-experimental research 
(Cook & Campbell, 1979). Internal validity is only a concern for causal (or explanatory) case 
studies, in which an investigator is trying to determine whether event x led to event y (Yin, 1994). 
This is not the case in this research. However, another main concern regarding internal validity is 
the fact that internal validity may be extended to the broader problem of making inferences. An 
inference arises when an event cannot be directly observed.  
The investigator will thus infer that a particular event resulted from an earlier occurrence, 
based on interview and documentary evidence collected as part of the case study (Yin, 1994). This 
is a particularly important point to keep in mind in this study. This study tries to infer a particular 
event from the past with conducting a questionnaire. It can be extremely hard for people to even 
recognize the use of heuristics and rational now they use them, let alone when questionnaires are 
conducted about how people experienced certain strategic decisions in their organisation. It can be 
hard to achieve internal validity in this research, so operationalizing the construct has to be 
executed in a cautious way. 
3.8.3 EXTERNAL VALIDITY 
The external validity determines how much the domain to which the studys findings can 
be generalized. This test deals with the problem whether the findings of the study are generalizable 
beyond the case study. The external validity problem has been a major barrier in doing case 
studies (Yin, 1994, p. 36). A case study offers a poor basis for generalizing. Case studies rely on 
analytical generalization where the investigator strives to generalize the results of the case study 
to a broader theoretical frame, because of this lack of generalizability of the findings it is important 
to look at the analytical generalizability. (Yin 2010; Tsang, 2013) describes the analytical 
generalizability as follows: 
"With both the case study and the laboratory experiment, the objective for generalizing the 
findings is the same: The findings or results from the case study are to follow a process of analytic 
generalization. Analytic generalization may be defined as a two-step process. The first involves a 
conceptual claim whereby investigators show how their case study findings bear upon a particular 
theory, theoretical construct, or theoretical (not just actual) sequence of events. The second 
involves applying the same theory to implicate other, similar situations where analogous events 
also might occur." (Yin, 2010) 
So, the analytical generalizability consists of two steps. The first step is showing the case 
findings regarding the theoretical part of this research. After that it is important to apply that theory 
to other similar situations where comparable events take place. Therefore, this research has an 
explorative focus, while working in a deductive way. 
3.8.4 RELIABILITY 
Reliability refers to whether an assessment instrument gives the same results each time it 
is used in the same setting with the same type of subjects. Reliability essentially means consistent 
or dependable results. Reliability is a part of the assessment of validity (Sullivan, 2011). Reliability 
is defined as the extent to which test scores are free from measurement error (Muijs, 2011). It is 
a measure of stability or internal consistency of an instrument in measuring certain concepts 
(Jackson, 2003). The reliability of the instrument is measured using internal consistence reliability, 
which is measured by alpha coefficient reliability or Cronbach Alpha, the value of Cronbachs 
alpha must be above 0.7 for the items to be acceptable for the research purposes (Ghazali, 2016). 
A relationship exists between validity and reliability. Any instrument can be reliable but not valid 
however, it cannot be valid if it is not reliable (Jackson, 2003). 
Reliable research demonstrates that the study can be repeated and ending with the same 
results. So, the emphasis is on doing the same case over again and create the same results, it is not 
about doing another case study and arrive at the same results. The goal of reliability is to minimize 
the errors and biases in a study (Yin, 1994, p. 36). The general way of tackling the reliability 
problem is to make as many steps in the operationalization as possible to achieve the same process 
when the research is repeated. 
In conclusion, the four tests can be considered as relevant in judging the quality of a 
research design. Some of the tactics are needed when designing the case study, other tactics are 
occurring during the data collection and analysis. A summary of this analysis of these four criteria 
of assessment of the interpretation of findings is presented in Table 3.3 which shows the approach 
used against each of the four tests. 
Table 3.3 
Validity and Reliability 
Criteria Definition Used Approach 
Construct 
validity 
Establishment of 
correct operational 
measures for the 
concepts 
 Questionnaire check with supervisor regarding 
operationalization of the measures for the concepts. 
 Using a panel of experts to gather opinions regarding the 
propositions 
Internal 
validity 
Establishment of 
the casual 
relationships where 
conditions are 
projected that lead 
to other conditions 
 To increase the internal validity this study relies on the 
theoretical propositions that are stated in this research. 
 The actual patterns from the data will be compared with 
the predicted patterns. 
 The conceptual model will provide the possibility to 
match the empirical data with the theoretically predicted 
events. 
 The sample consist of experts in the field regarding 
External 
validity 
Establishment of 
the domain to 
which a studys 
finding can be 
generalized  
 Analytical generalization through collecting data via 
multiple cases.  
 Questionnaire to a sample population of executive 
respondents from different managerial levels, to 
demonstrate external validity.  
Reliability 
The operations of 
the study -Such as 
the data collection 
procedures  can be 
repeated with the 
same results 
 The questionnaire will be taken online. A clear 
description of respondent demographics is kept. 
CHAPTER FOUR: DATA ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
The previous chapter (Chapter 3) reviewed research methodology including criteria for 
judging research design and the associated research methods, population and sample, data 
collection, and data analyses. A quantitative research approach using survey questionnaire and a 
qualitative research approach using interviews as well as different data analysis techniques as 
appropriate to address research questions were used. 
This chapter presents several major topics that include analyses of the survey data collected 
from Qatari different levels of management and data collected by interviews, results of using 
different analysis techniques to include descriptive analysis, reliability tests, correlations, 
multivariate analysis, multiple linear regression, factor analysis addressing five reduced 
components. 
4.2 OPERALISATION OF THE STUDY 
This study uses mainly used quantitative approaches to construct a questionnaire from which to 
establish decision making factors the relationships between the demographic and contextual 
variables to form the main body of results and conclusions. In the event only four qualitative 
interviews were conducted. It was hoped that several more, perhaps up to 20 interviews would be 
conducted, until theory saturation was reached. However, due largely due to the Covid 19 
pandemic it became impossible to conduct more than four interviews and the need for thematic 
analysis using NVivo was reassessed and not implemented. The four interviews essentially were 
used to represent the executive personas that broadly confirmed the first part of the main 
proposition P1: that executives in Qatar use a range of decision-making styles, including rational 
and heuristic styles. 
The use of the interview method is deemed useful in this research. By using the interview, 
this research seeks to enrich the information collected from the secondary data by reviewing the 
literature concerning decision making styles and decision making processes  and the data set 
collected by a quantitative research questionnaire contains scale items used by different 
researchers that were identified from prior theorizing and empirical research and defined in 
behavioural terms according to Scott and Bruce (1995), Dew et al. (2009), Matzler et al. (2007), 
Ballou (1989), and Williams (2010). These items cover all decision-making styles mentioned in 
the research theoretical model. Analyzing the interviewers responses, where to some degree 
thematic analysis and overviews for each executive are used to depict the main ideas that all 
interviewers have the same opinion about them as shown in appendix 10: semi structured 
interviews responses, although data collection was limited by the COVID 19 pandemic (see 
APPENDIX 11) the data revealed the following findings:  
1) All interviewees responses reflect rationality in decision making process and at the same time 
use heuristic elements to enhance quality of decisions. So, both the rational decision-making 
style and the heuristic decision-making style are combined in their decision-making process.   
2) When asked how thoroughly did the executive's group search and analyse information in 
making this decision?  The answers were very thoroughly and comprehensively using analytic 
techniques in making the decision which are especially important to them in the process, 
focusing their attentions on crucial information, ignoring irrelevant information. They all 
expressed the importance of their professional experience as crucial while deliberating for the 
decision and expressed that their primary care is for the organisational needs and see those as 
their personal goals and not purely as organisational needs.  
4.2.1 QUESTIONNAIRE DESIGN AND SAMPLE SELECTION 
In the quantitative approach, a research questionnaire is used where six decision-making 
styles were identified from prior theorizing and empirical research and defined in behavioural 
terms according to Scott and Bruce (1995), Dew et al. (2009), Matzler et al. (2007), Ballou (1989), 
and Williams (2010):  
1) Rational decision-making style is characterized by a thorough search for and logical 
evaluation. 
2) Heuristic decision-making style where heuristics are strategies that ignore part of the 
information with the goal of making decisions faster, more frugally, and/or more accurately 
than more complex methods. 
3) Intuitive decision-making style is characterized by a reliance on hunches and feelings. 
4) Dependent decision-making style is characterized by a search for advice and direction from 
others. 
5) Avoidant decision-making style is characterized by attempts to avoid decision making.  
6) Spontaneous decision-making style where spontaneous decision-makers have a sense of 
urgency and make rapid decisions. 
A pilot study was used to test the questionnaire, in terms of face validity and utility to 
investigate the relationships between different decision-making styles and relevant outcomes. 
Then an on-line Survey Monkey questionnaire was administered and carried out between 
November 2019 to January 2020, using social media outlets (Facebook and WhatsApp). A 
minimum sample size of 200 was consider necessary for principal components analysis given the 
number of items in the questionnaire but not necessarily adequate, which would be determined by 
the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) statistic.  The sampling continued until the KMO was shown to be 
adequate. The KMO was tested at a sample size of 200, 250, 300 and 350. In the event, a sample 
of 350 was shown to be adequate and was eventually completed by 350 Qatari Executive 
Managers, at which point the sampling stopped. Principal components analysis was conducted 
using SPSS software. which produced a measure of the adequacy of the sample using the Kaiser-
Meyer-Olkin statistic, which was 0.601 which showed the sample was adequate for the principal 
components analysis. There are no official statistics detailing how many of the approximately 330,000 
Qatari nationals are executives but ity is estimated that there are at most 10% in executive positions. So 
the 350 would represent over 1% of the entire Qatari national executives.  Participation was 
voluntary encouraged to answer as honestly as possible, and they were assured that their answers 
would remain confidential. The survey questionnaires were in 3 parts:  
1) Demographic questions consist of 4 questions to include age, number of years in the current 
business, highest level of education, and business organisation/unit. Participants were asked to 
choose the answer for each question that best described their situation. 
2) 25 closed questions describe different decision-making styles, taken from Scott and Bruce 
(1995) study, including rational decision-making style, dependent decision-making style, 
avoidant decision-making style, and spontaneous decision-making style (5 questions each), 
and 15 closed questions taken from Dew et al. (2009), Matzler et al. (2007), Ballou (1989), 
and Williams (2010), describe an expert heuristic decision making,  
3) 11 closed dichotomous questions (Yes/No) represent 3 levels of decision making that include: 
1) Decision Making Level 1: Operational decisions which Concern day to day activities, and 
normally involve actions in the short term. 2) Decision-Making Level 2: Managerial decisions 
which concern the allocation and use of resources and normally involve longer term. 3) 
Decision-Making Level 3: Strategic decisions which concern broader organisational issues and 
normally involve the long term.  
Data was prepared and coded in an Excel spreadsheet prior to analyses then pasted into SPSS, 
cleaned for errors, and checked for missing data. Factor analysis (Principal components analysis) 
was used to reduce number of items and to form six components (concepts that group together in 
the respondents minds without the other items that were mixed up in the respondents minds; 
sometimes called fragmented cognitive shrapnel). 
In this study five analysis techniques using SPSS version 23 were used to address the 
research questions. The analysis techniques with the associated research questions are: 1) 
Descriptive analysis. 2) Principal Components Analysis to confirm the six decision-making styles, 
Component 1 is Avoidant decision-making, Component 2 is Heuristic decision-making, 
Component 3 is Rational decision-making, Component 4 is Intuitive decision-making, Component 
5 is Dependent decision-making, and Component 6 is Spontaneous decision-making. 3) one-way 
ANOVA 4) GLM analysis, and 5) Pearson correlations. 
Results and discussions of the results are presented in association with the analysis 
techniques and the research questions. In the discussion section, the results are explained within 
the context of this study as well as prior studies reviewed in Chapter 2. Significance of test results 
is reported in the ways suggested by Alghabban (2001, 2004) based on p the probability level: 
1) Not significant (symbolised as NS): p > 0.05, 
2) Significant (symbolised as *): p < 0.05, 
3) Highly significant (symbolised as **): p < 0.01, and 
4) Very highly significant (symbolised as ***): p < 0.001. 
Alghabban (2001) affirms that a p-value < 0.05 suggests that the probability of the result 
occurring by chance is 1 in 20; whereas, when p < 0.01, the chance is 1 in 100, and likewise if p < 
0.001, the chance is 1 in 1000 (Alghabban, 2001, 2004, p. 397). All probabilities reported are based 
on two-tailed tests as each comparison has two possible directions (Perry, 1998). 
Factor analysis was performed with 1 as the Eigen value. Then, six factors were extracted 
when the rotation converged in their iterations. The first factor (Qs 16, 17, 19) is avoidant decision-
making style where avoidant decision-makers avoid making a decision whenever possible, the 
second factor is (Qs 33, 34, 38) is expert heuristic style, the third factor (Qs 2, 3, 4) is rational 
decision-making style where rational decision-makers conduct an extensive search for alternatives 
and make a logical choice between them, the fourth factor (Qs 6,7) is intuitive decision-making 
style where intuitive decision-makers use their intuition to make decisions, the fifth factor (Qs 13, 
15) is dependent decision-making style where dependent decision-makers rely on others to guide 
their decision-making, the sixth factor is spontaneous decision-making style. The second factor is 
according to (Dew et al. (2009), Matzler et al (2007), Ballou (1989), and Williams (2010), while 
the rest of the factors (1, 3, 4, 5, 6) are according to Scott & Bruce (1995). A MANOVA was 
conducted to see how the six decision-making factors vary according to various managers concerns 
include the following: day to day activities of the business, short term activities, immediate 
payment decisions, the allocation of resources, the use of resources, managers across the 
organisation, long term activities, how many people to deploy on tasks, broad organisational 
issues, top executives, and strategic decisions. 
4.3 ANALYSIS 
4.3.1 DEMOGRAPHICS 
The participants demographics surveyed include age, number of years in the current 
business, highest level of education, and business organisation/unit. This includes executive 
decision makers from all levels of management (strategic, managerial, and operational) from both 
public sector that includes military and government background, and different business of private 
sector from different industries that include oil and gas construction, food industry.  
The following are the descriptive statistics of participants in terms of frequency and 
percentage that include age group in years, highest level of education, number of years in current 
business and business organisation/ unit as shown in Table 4.1 below. 
Table 4.1 highlights the descriptive statistics (frequency) for demographics of the 350 
respondents of executive managers of all levels in Qatar that includes executive decision makers 
from all levels of management (strategic, managerial and operational) from both public sector (241 
respondents) performing roles ranging from different level of military background to different 
level of government employees, and different business of private sector (109 respondents) 
employed to different companies of oil and gas industries, constructions, food industries and others 
working in the market. Results were as follow:  
 Age Group: The respondents with an age of 60 and above were the smallest number (4.6%), 
and respondents with an age 20-29 were the second smallest number (8.2%); in contrast, 
respondents with an age 40-49 were the largest number (36.3%); and respondents with an age 
50-59 were the second largest (26%); followed by those in age 30-39 (24.9%). 
 Highest level of Education: Most respondents in the sample hold postgraduate degrees 
(48.3%); Bachelors degrees (46.9%) and, (4.8%) holding A high National Diploma (HND). 
 Number of Years in Current Business: Respondents working 1-9 years in current business 
were the highest number (39.4%), followed by those working for 10-19 years (26.8%); and 
those working for 20-29 years (22.9%), in contrast (8.6%) working 30-39 years and less (2.3%) 
working 40-49 years in current business.  
 Business Organisation/Unit: Most respondents are working in public sector (68.9%); while 
those working in private sector are less (31.1%). Those respondents from public sector are 
government employed personnel working in different ministries, government institutions and 
military personnel from ministry of defense, and those from private sectors are personnel 
working in different industries and business organisations owned by private entities.  
TABLE 4.1 DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF PARTICIPANTS 
4.3.2 DECISION MAKING STYLES EXHIBITED BY RESPONDENTS 
Tables 4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, and 3/7 show the six different decision-making styles exhibited by 
respondents.  
Table 4.2 
Avoidant Decision-making Style Exhibited By Respondents 
 Factor 1: Avoidant Decision-Making Style  
Item Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Neither Agree nor 
Disagree 
Agree Strongly 
Agree 
Q 16 16% 37.7% 17.4% 24.9% 4% 
Q 17 12% 46.9% 22.6% 17.7% 0.9% 
Q 19 18.3% 52.9% 14% 14.3% 0.6% 
Average 15.4% 45.8% 18% 18.96% 1.8% 
Table 4.3 
Expert Heuristic Decision-making Style Exhibited By Respondents 
 Factor 2: Heuristic Decision-Making Style  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither Agree nor 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Q 33 0.3% 0% 6.6% 60.9% 32.3% 
Q 34 0.6% 0% 1.7% 63.4% 34.3% 
Q 38 0.6% 0% 2.9% 60.9% 35.7% 
Average 0.5% 0% 3.7% 61.7% 34.1% 
Table 4.4 
Rational Decision-making Style Exhibited By Respondents 
 Factor 3: Rational Decision-Making Style  
Item Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Neither Agree nor 
Disagree 
Agree Strongly 
Agree 
Q 2 8.3% 0% 2.3% 39.4% 50% 
Q 3 3.7% 1.4% 7.4% 52.3% 35.1% 
Q 4 3.7% 1.4% 7.7% 53.7% 33.4% 
Average 5.2% .93% 5.8% 48.7% 39.5% 
Table 4.5 
Intuitive Decision-making Style Exhibited By Respondents 
 Factor 4: Intuitive Decision-Making Style  
Item Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Neither Agree nor 
Disagree 
Agree Strongly 
Agree 
Q 6 4.6% 18.6% 28.6% 37.7% 10.6% 
Q 7 1.4% 16.3% 28.9% 46% 7.4% 
Average 3% 17.45% 28.75% 41.85% 9% 
Table 4.6 
Dependent Decision-making Style Exhibited By Respondents 
 Factor 5: Dependent Decision-Making Style  
Item Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Neither Agree nor 
Disagree 
Agree Strongly 
Agree 
Q 13 .6% 8.9% 20.9% 40.9% 28.9% 
Q 15 .3% 14.6% 26% 36.9% 22.3% 
Average .45% 11.75% 23.45% 38.9% 25.6% 
Table 4.7 
Spontaneous Decision-making Style Exhibited By Respondents 
 Factor 6: Spontaneous Decision-Making Style  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither Agree nor 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Q 21 10.30% 25.10% 44.30% 20.30% 0.00% 
Q 22 8.60% 26.60% 39% 23.70% 1.70% 
Average 9.45% 25.85% 41.85% 22.00% 0.85% 
As shown in Tables (4.2. 4.3. 4.4, 4.5, 4.6, 4.7) above, respondents exhibited all decision-
making styles with different level of agreement. 88.2% agreement on rational decision-making 
style, 50.85% agreement on intuitive decision-making style, 64.5% agreement on dependent 
decision-making style, 61.23% disagreement on avoidant decision-making style, 22.85% 
agreement on spontaneous decision-making style, and 95.8% agreement on expert heuristic 
decision-making style. The above percentages of agreement (Strongly agree and agree) indicate 
that respondents exhibited mostly the expert heuristic decision-making style with 95.8% and 
rational decision-making style with 88.2%, while the lowest are avoidant decision-making style 
with 38.77% and spontaneous decision-making style with 22.85 and the rest of decision styles 
came in the middle. 
4.4 RELIABILITY TESTS 
The reliability test of the variables related to each factor was conducted using Cronbachs 
alpha, Table 4.8 shows results of Reliability Test under the factors 1,2,3,4, 5 and 6. All Cronbachs 
Alpha results are above .8 except Factor 6 which has 0.647 reliability, where the threshold of 
accepted Cronbachs Alpha is 0.7. Cronbachs alpha is a statistic commonly quoted by authors to 
demonstrate that tests and scales that have been constructed or adopted for research projects are 
fit for purpose (Taber, 2018). A wide range of different qualitative descriptors was used by authors 
to interpret alpha values calculated (Taber, 2018), these descriptors are reported with the range 
representing the highest and lowest values of alpha which were described as excellent (0.930.94), 
strong (0.910.93), reliable (0.840.90), robust (0.81), fairly high (0.760.95), high (0.730.95), 
good (0.710.91), relatively high (0.70 0.77), slightly low (0.68), reasonable (0.670.87), 
adequate (0.640.85), moderate (0.61 0.65), satisfactory (0.580.97), acceptable (0.450.98), 
sufficient (0.450.96), not satisfactory (0.40.55) and low (0.11). The common notion of there 
being a threshold of acceptability for alpha values, if only as a rule of thumb (Plummer et al., 
2015), was not always seen as implying that lower values of alpha should be taken as indicating 
an unsatisfactory instrument. Nunnally (1978) is often associated with the assertion that 
instruments used in basic research should have reliability of 0.70 or better. Taber (2018) Alpha is 
then widely used by authors in science education to represent the reliability, or the internal 
consistency, of an instrument or an instrument scale in relation to a particular sample or subsample 
of a population. These terms are often seen as synonymous in relation to alpha, and a number of 
alternative terms are also associated with alpha values cited in science education. 
Table 4.8  
Reliability Tests 
 Reliability Statistics  
Items Cronbachs Alpha N of Items 
Q 16, Q 17, Q 19 of Factor 1 (Avoidant) 0.803 3 
Q 33, Q 34, Q 38 of Factor 2 (Heuristic) 0.808 3 
Q 2, Q 3, Q 4 of Factor 3 (Rational) 0.813 3 
Q 6, Q 7 of Factor 4 (Intuitive) 0.842 2 
Q 13, Q 15 of Factor 5 (Dependent) 0.806 2 
Q21, Q22 of Factor 6 (Spontaneous) 0.647 2 
A value of around 0.70 or greater is widely considered desirable (although characterization 
of the qualitative merits of specific values seems highly variable between studies). Schmitt (1996) 
has suggested that there is no general level (such as 0.70) where alpha becomes acceptable, but 
rather that instruments with quite a low value of alpha can still prove useful in some circumstances. 
Accordingly, the researcher assumes that the values Cronbachs Alphas of the factors variables 
are acceptable.  
4.5 VALIDITY 
Given the natural ordering of the concepts in the collective minds of the executives in the sample, 
that represented all the executives in Qatar and the principal components analysis itself confirms 
the validity of the six decision making components as shown in the rotated factor matrix (Table 
4.12) and of the six scales' abilities to discriminate between respondents (Table 4.15). The items 
in each sub-scale were in the same factor space across the sample of respondents. Thus, the 
decision-making questionnaire is valid for use with Qatari executives but as Knekta et al. (2019, 
page 1) state "validity is not a property of the measurement instrument but rather refers to its 
proposed interpretation and use. Validity must be considered each time an instrument is used 
(Kane, 2016)". When used if other contexts confirmatory factor analysis will then confirm or refute 
the validity of the questionnaire in those contexts. It is also reasonable to assume that the 
executives were motivated and honest when answering the instrument as executives making 
decisions in different contexts were shown to have similar decision-making profiles to other 
executives making decisions in similar contexts. 
4.6 FACTOR ANALYSIS 
As shown in Table 4.9, KMO statistic is 0.601, which is above the acceptable threshold 
(0.5) which means that KMO statistic is adequate. Similarly, the Bartletts test sphericity is 0.000 
which is statically significant since its value is less than .001 p-value. Testing the hypotheses, Ho: 
correlation matrix which is Identity Matrix against H1: correlation matrix which is not Identity 
Matrix and based on (Bartletts Test) and Since (p-value) is equal 0.000, then 0 is rejected and 
1 accepted which means that correlation matrix is not the identity matrix. 
Table 4.9 KMO and Bartletts Tests 
 KMO and Bartletts Tests  
Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin Measure of Sampling Adequacy. 0.601 
Bartletts Test of Sphericity Approx. Chi-Square 2155.863 
df 105 
Sig. 0.000 
Table 4.10 shows variable correlation values. the correlation value 0.8 is the cut off for 
considering an item multi-collinearity, none of the values in the correlation matrix exceed 0.8. The 
Determinant is 0.002 which is greater than 0.00001, so the correlation is acceptable and there is 
no Multi-Collinearity Problem. The values under the extraction column indicate the proportion of 
each variables variance that can be explained by the retained factors. All variables in Table 4.11 
are with high values and there are no variables with low values. So, by looking to these values 
under the extraction column, it can seen that all the values are greater than 0.5 which are 
acceptable. Table 4.12 above is the Rotated Component Matrix. This table contains the rotated 
factor loadings. The rotated factor loading represent two things: (1) How the variables are weighted 
for each factor. (2) The correlation between the variables and the factor.   
Table 4.10 Correlation Matrix 
 Q2  Q3  Q4  Q6  Q7  Q13  Q15 Q16  Q17  Q19  Q21  Q22  Q33  Q34  Q38  
Correlation 
Q2  1.000 .580 .556 .123 .109 -.041 -.060 -.352 -.227 -.215 .085 .031 .111 .126 .101 
Q3  .580 1.000 .685 .121 .053 -.025 -.022 -.133 .050 -.053 -.014 -.024 .011 .065 .062 
Q4  .556 .685 1.000 .255 .165 .030 .081 -.175 -.125 -.140 -.078 .020 .093 .031 .046 
Q6  .123 .121 .255 1.000 .735 -.013 -.059 -.204 -.131 -.245 .033 .167 .060 .133 .082 
Q7  .109 .053 .165 .735 1.000 .050 .043 -.147 .007 -.068 .122 .150 -.009 .001 -.019 
Q13  -.041 -.025 .030 -.013 .050 1.000 .675 .038 .001 .105 -.143 -.034 .110 .140 .097 
Q15  -.060 -.022 .081 -.059 .043 .675 1.000 .202 .096 .215 -.045 .029 -.032 .022 .059 
Q16  -.352 -.133 -.175 -.204 -.147 .038 .202 1.000 .597 .517 .060 .122 .041 -.035 -.019 
Q17 -.227 .050 -.125 -.131 .007 .001 .096 .597 1.000 .644 .085 .061 .033 -.008 -.032 
Q19  -.215 -.053 -.140 -.245 -.068 .105 .215 .517 .644 1.000 .109 .123 .001 -.101 -.109 
Q21  .085 -.014 -.078 .033 .122 -.143 -.045 .060 .085 .109 1.000 .479 -.080 -.012 .019 
Q22  .031 -.024 .020 .167 .150 -.034 .029 .122 .061 .123 .479 1.000 .029 .024 .051 
Q33  .111 .011 .093 .060 -.009 .110 -.032 .041 .033 .001 -.080 .029 1.000 .539 .400 
Q34  .126 .065 .031 .133 .001 .140 .022 -.035 -.008 -.101 -.012 .024 .539 1.000 .832 
Q38  .101 .062 .046 .082 -.019 .097 .059 -.019 -.032 -.109 .019 .051 .400 .832 1.000 
Sig. (1-
tailed) 
Q2   .000 .000 .011 .021 .223 .130 .000 .000 .000 .056 .282 .019 .009 .030 
Q3  .000  .000 .012 .159 .317 .341 .006 .177 .162 .400 .328 .421 .111 .123 
Q4  .000 .000  .000 .001 .290 .066 .000 .009 .004 .074 .356 .042 .282 .194 
Q6  .011 .012 .000  .000 .402 .134 .000 .007 .000 .269 .001 .132 .006 .064 
Q7  .021 .159 .001 .000  .177 .213 .003 .448 .103 .011 .003 .431 .495 .362 
Q13  .223 .317 .290 .402 .177  .000 .239 .490 .025 .004 .262 .020 .004 .036 
Q15  .130 .341 .066 .134 .213 .000  .000 .037 .000 .200 .294 .278 .340 .134 
Q16  .000 .006 .000 .000 .003 .239 .000  .000 .000 .133 .011 .223 .256 .365 
Q17  .000 .177 .009 .007 .448 .490 .037 .000  .000 .056 .126 .272 .440 .274 
Q19  .000 .162 .004 .000 .103 .025 .000 .000 .000  .020 .011 .495 .030 .021 
Q21  .056 .400 .074 .269 .011 .004 .200 .133 .056 .020  .000 .067 .410 .365 
Q22  .282 .328 .356 .001 .003 .262 .294 .011 .126 .011 .000  .293 .327 .169 
Q33 .019 .421 .042 .132 .431 .020 .278 .223 .272 .495 .067 .293  .000 .000 
Q34  .009 .111 .282 .006 .495 .004 .340 .256 .440 .030 .410 .327 .000  .000 
Q38  .030 .123 .194 .064 .362 .036 .134 .365 .274 .021 .365 .169 .000 .000  
a. Determinant = .002 
The correlations vary with a range from -1 to +1.  The reduced number of items shows that 
six components (concepts that group together in the respondents minds) were extracted, as the 
other items are shrapnel and are mixed up in the respondents minds, all questions within each 
component have a strong relation as shown in the table. These components are as follows: 
component 1 is (Qs 16, 17, 19) reluctance to make decisions , Component 2 is (Qs 33, 34, 38) 
balancing the requirements, component 3 is (Qs 2, 3, 4) rational decision making , component 
4 is (Qs 6, 7) intuitive decision making, Component 5 is (Qs 13, 15) co-operative decision 
making, and component 6 is spontaneous decision-making. Table 4.13 is the Total Variance 
Explained. In this table the initial Eigenvalues are the variances of the factors.  Since factor analysis 
is conducted on the correlation matrix, the variables are standardized, so, each variable has a 
variance of 1, and the total variance is equal to the number of variables used in the analysis, which 
is in this case, 15.  
Figure 4.1 shows the eigenvalue against factor number. 6 components were extracted based 
on Eigenvalue greater than 1. The values in the first six columns of Table 4.13 are immediately 
above the Eigenvalue 1, and from the 7th possible component the line starts to flatten, which means 
that each successive factor starts to account for less and less amounts of the total variance. This 
means that just the six factors are relevant and connected in the minds of the respondents. 
Figure 4.1 Scree Plot 
A six-components solution were extracted (Table 4.12), each with Eigen values above one 
which explains a cumulative of 77.987 % of the total variance. Under the Initial Eigenvalues, 
Component 1 explains 19.815 % of the total variance, while component 2 explains 15.091 % of 
the total variance, with a cumulative value 34.906 %, factor 3 explains 12.800 % of the total 
variance, with a cumulative value 47.706 %, factor 4 explains 11.614 % of the total variance, with 
a cumulative value 59.320 %, factor 5 explains 10.661 % of the total variance, with a cumulative 
value 69.981 %, and factor 6 explains 8.006 % of the total variance, with a cumulative value 77.987 
% (Table 4.13). 
Table 4.11 
Communalities 
 Communalities  
 Initial Extraction 
Q 2 I double-check my information sources to be sure I have 
the right facts before making decisions 
1.000 0.727 
Q 3 I make decisions in a logical and systematic way 1.000 0.821 
Q 4 My decision-making requires careful thought 1.000 0.780 
Q 6 When making decisions, I rely upon my instincts 1.000 0.881 
Q7 When I make decisions, I tend to rely on my intuition 1.000 0.868 
Q13 If I have the support of others, it is easier for me to 
make important decisions 
1.000 0.840 
Q 15 I like to have someone to steer me in the right direction 
when Im faced with important decisions 
1.000 0.854 
Q 16 I avoid making important decisions until the pressure 
is on 
1.000 0.686 
Q 17 I postpone decision-making whenever possible 1.000 0.814 
Q 19 I generally make important decisions at the last minute 1.000 0.719 
Q 21 I generally make snap decisions 1.000 0.767 
Q 22 I often make decisions on the spur of the moment 1.000 0.716 
Q 33 I consider the costs when making decisions 1.000 0.544 
Q 34 I consider many outcomes and possibilities when 
making decisions 
1.000 0.886 
Q 38 I often compare the current situation with similar ones 
already in my memory 
1.000 0.795 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. 
Table 4.12 
Rotated Component Matrix 
Rotated Component Matrixa 
Component 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Q 17 I postpone decision-making whenever possible 0.901      
Q 19 I generally make important decisions at the last 
minute 
0.818      
Q 16 I avoid making important decisions until the 
pressure is on 
0.794      
Q 34 I consider many outcomes and possibilities when 
making decisions 
 0.937     
Q 38 I often compare the current situation with similar 
ones already in my memory 
 0.883     
Q 33 I consider the costs when making decisions  0.727     
Q 3 I make decisions in a logical and systematic way   0.902    
Q 4 My decision-making requires careful thought   0.857    
Q 2 I double-check my information sources to be sure I 
have the right facts before making decisions 
  0.788    
Q 7 When I make decisions, I tend to rely on my 
intuition 
   0.922   
Q 6 When making decisions, I rely upon my instincts    0.912   
Q 15 I like to have someone to steer me in the right 
direction when Im faced with important decisions 
    0.911  
Q 13 If I have the support of others, it is easier for me 
to make important decisions 
    0.905  
Q 21 I generally make snap decisions      0.868 
Q 22 I often make decisions on the spur of the moment      0.828 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis.  
 Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization. 
a. Rotation converged in 5 iterations. 
Table 4.13 Total Variance Explained 
 Total Variance Explained  
Component 
Initial Eigenvalues 
Extraction Sums of Squared 
Loadings 
Rotation Sums of Squared 
Loadings 
Total 
Variance 
Cumulative 
% Total 
Variance 
Cumulative 
% Total 
Variance 
Cumulative 
1 2.972 19.815 19.815 2.972 19.815 19.815 2.269 15.126 15.126 
2 2.264 15.091 34.906 2.264 15.091 34.906 2.229 14.862 29.988 
3 1.920 12.800 47.706 1.920 12.800 47.706 2.225 14.836 44.824 
4 1.742 11.614 59.320 1.742 11.614 59.320 1.759 11.725 56.549 
5 1.599 10.661 69.981 1.599 10.661 69.981 1.706 11.371 67.920 
6 1.201 8.006 77.987 1.201 8.006 77.987 1.510 10.067 77.987 
7 .681 4.541 82.528       
8 .597 3.980 86.507       
9 .455 3.034 89.541       
10 .370 2.470 92.011       
11 .352 2.345 94.356       
12 .268 1.787 96.143       
13 .227 1.512 97.655       
14 .214 1.424 99.079       
15 .138 .921 100.000       
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. 
Table 4.14 Correlations Matrix Between Factors, Demographic Variables 
N=350  Age 
Number of years in 
the current business 
level  
of Education 
F1 (Avoidant) Pearson Correlation  0.062   0.115* -0.041 
  Sig. (2-tailed)  0.247  0.032  0.450 
F2 (Heuristic) Pearson Correlation -0.077 -0.045  0.003 
  Sig. (2-tailed)  0.151  0.405  0.959 
F3 (Rational) Pearson Correlation -0.003  0.045 -0.024 
  Sig. (2-tailed)  0.960  0.397  0.649 
F4 (Intuitive) Pearson Correlation  0.002  0.010    0.142** 
  Sig. (2-tailed)  0.976  0.847  0.008 
F5 (Dependent) Pearson Correlation  0.064   0.121*   0.118* 
  Sig. (2-tailed)  0.231  0.024  0.028 
F6 (Spontaneous) Pearson Correlation -0.027 -0.030 -0.007 
  Sig. (2-tailed)  0.611  0.572  0.901 
As shown in Table 4.14, H02 (there is NO Statistically Significant (0.05) difference 
between decision-making styles of executives and their demographics in Qatar is only partially 
supported. Factor 1 (Avoidant decision-making style) has positive significant correlation with 
number of years in the current business at the 0.05 level, Factor 4 (intuitive decision-making 
style) has positive significant correlation with level of Education at the 0.01 level, and F5 
(dependent decision-making style) has positive significant correlation with both number of years 
in the current business and level of education at the 0.05 level. Age is not significantly correlated 
with any of the decision-making styles. 
4.7 CONTEXTS: MULTIVARIATE ANALYSIS  
The multivariate analysis technique (MANOVA) was used to analyse the level of decision-
making from the respondents points of view and to address H01 (there is NO Statistically 
Significant difference between decision-making styles of executives and their strategic contexts in 
Qatar). H01 was only partially supported as shown in table 4.15.  
Table 4.15 
How The Six Decision-Making Factors Differ Significantly With Different Contexts 
Spontaneous decision-making was not dependent on any of the eleven business concerns. 
Immediate payment decisions slightly negatively impacted on all the six decision-making styles 
but not significantly. Avoidant decision-making style was negatively impacted by the day-to-day 
activities of the business (p=0.05) and negatively impacted by short-term activities (p=0.001) but 
positively impacted by long-term activities (p=0.05). Heuristic decision-making was impacted 
positively by short-term activities (p=0.05) but negatively by the allocation of resources, the use 
  Day to day 
activities of the 
business. 
Short term 
activities. 
Immediate 
payment 
decisions. 
The allocation 
of resources. 
The use of 
resources. 
Managers across the 
organisation. 
Long term 
activities. 
How many 
people to 
deploy on 
tasks. 
Broad 
organisational 
issues. 
Top executives. 
Strategic 
decisions. 
Decision Style Factor Q41 Q42 Q43 Q44 Q45 Q46 Q47 Q48 Q49 Q50 Q51 
Avoidant F1 -.112* -.168** -.078 .044 .017 .020 .113* -.098 .001 .020 .062 
Heuristic F2 -.021 .117* -.033 -.193** -.145** .049 -.041 -.155** -.173** -.222** -.153** 
Rational F3 .001 .058 .078 -.017 -.128* .043 -.072 -.112* -.068 -.093 -.062 
Intuitive  F4 -.069 -.120* -.061 .049 -.045 -.079 .017 .042 -.098 -.100 -.031 
Dependent  F5 -.081 .006 -.016 .008 -.007 -.082 -.036 -.196** -.203** -.064 .030 
Spontaneous  F6 -.024 -.048 -.034 .010 -.051 -.011 -.059 -.097 -.063 -.048 .005 
**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). 
*. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). 
of resources, how many people to deploy on the task, broad organisational issues, top executives, 
and strategic decisions (all p=0.01). Rational decision making was significantly impacted by the 
use of resources (p=0.05) and how many people are deployed on tasks (p=0.05). Intuitive 
decision making was significantly impacted negative by short-term activities (p=0.05). Dependent 
decision-making was impacted negatively by how many people to deploy on tasks and broad 
organisational issues. Two of the eleven business concerns a) Immediate payment decisions and 
b) Managers across the organisation do not significantly impact on any of the decision-making 
styles. The multivariate analysis technique (MANOVA) is used to analyse level of decision-
making from the respondents points of view. The level of decision-making includes Decision-
Making Level 1 (Operational decisions) which concern day to day activities, Decision-Making 
Level 2 (Managerial decisions) which concern the allocation and use of resources that normally 
involve longer term and Decision-Making Level 3 (Strategic decisions) which concern broader 
organisational issues that involve the long term as shown in the following tables. Analysis includes 
decision-making levels Q41- Q51 (41=Low, 51=High). F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style), F5 
(Dependent Decision-making Style), and F6 (Spontaneous Decision-making Style) each have two 
items whereas the other factors have three items, so those three scores were standardized to reflect 
a scale with three items (FS4=3 times the average of two items, FS5=3 times the average of two 
items, and FS6=3 times the average of two items, FS1=F1, FS2=F2, FS3=F3). The averages of the 
standardized factor scores for the YES/NO context items are presented in Table 4.16. 
The multivariate analysis technique (MANOVA) was used to analyse level of decision-
making from the respondents points of view. The level of decision-making includes Decision-
Making Level 1 (Operational decisions) which concern day to day activities, Decision-Making 
Level 2 (Managerial decisions) which concern the allocation and use of resources that normally 
involve longer term and Decision-Making Level 3 (Strategic decisions) which concern broader 
organisational issues that involve the long term as shown in the following tables. Analysis includes 
decision-making levels Q41-Q51 (41=Low, 51=High). F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style), F5 
(Dependent Decision-making Style), and F6 (Spontaneous Decision-making Style) each have two 
items whereas the other factors have three items, so those three scores were standardized to reflect 
a scale with three items (FS4=3 times the average of two items, FS5=3 times the average of two 
items, and FS6=3 times the average of two items, FS1=F1, FS2=F2, FS3=F3). The averages of the 
standardized factor scores for the YES/NO context items are presented in Table 4.16. 
Table 4.16 
Averages for the YES/NO Context Questions for Standardized Factors 
  Standardised Factors 
Item  FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 
Q41 YES 7.4983 12.8956 12.4815 10.1717 11.4141 8.3939 
NO 6.6981 12.8113 12.4906 9.6509 10.8113 8.2358 
Q42 YES 7.5971 12.7986 12.4101 10.2572 11.3147 8.4281 
NO 6.5278 13.2083 12.7639 9.4583 11.3542 8.1458 
Q43 YES 7.4961 12.9109 12.3682 10.1919 11.3488 8.4186 
NO 7.0435 12.8043 12.8043 9.8152 11.2500 8.2337 
Q44 YES 7.3276 13.0034 12.5017 10.0341 11.3140 8.3601 
NO 7.6316 12.2632 12.3860 10.3947 11.3684 8.4211 
Q45 YES 7.3667 12.9333 12.5606 10.1227 11.3273 8.4000 
NO 7.5500 12.0500 11.2000 9.6000 11.2500 7.8750 
Q46 YES 7.3583 12.8567 12.4430 10.1726 11.4039 8.3795 
NO 7.5116 13.0698 12.7674 9.5233 10.7442 8.3023 
Q47 YES 7.2816 12.9019 12.5411 10.0775 11.3544 8.4161 
NO 8.2647 12.7059 11.9412 10.2353 11.0294 7.9412 
Q48 YES 7.4948 12.9861 12.6132 10.0401 11.5662 8.4774 
NO 6.8413 12.4127 11.8889 10.3333 10.2143 7.8810 
Q49 YES 7.3750 13.0227 12.5795 10.2443 11.6307 8.4545 
NO 7.3837 12.4535 12.1860 9.6279 10.3779 8.1105 
Q50 YES 7.3452 13.0794 12.6270 10.2619 11.4286 8.4405 
NO 7.4592 12.3776 12.1122 9.6582 11.0510 8.1888 
Q51 YES 7.3085 12.9763 12.5492 10.1288 11.2881 8.3644 
NO 7.7455 12.3818 12.1273 9.9000 11.5091 8.4000 
The level of decision making includes Decision-Making Level 1 (Operational decisions) 
which concern day to day activities, Decision-Making Level 2 (Managerial decisions) which 
concern the allocation and use of resources that normally involve longer term and Decision-
Making Level 3 (Strategic decisions) which concern broader organisational issues that involve the 
long term as shown in the following tables. Analysis includes decision-making levels Q41-Q51 
(41=Low, 51=High). 
Table 4.17 
Mean Score For Each Factor in Relation to Question 41
When asked, the decisions I make usually concern day to day activities of the business, 
Table 4.16 above shows that the highest mean score of YES (12.89) is under factor 2, expert 
heuristic decision-making style (Balancing the requirements), and the lowest mean score of YES 
(5.59) is under factor 6, spontaneous decision-making style, where spontaneous decision-makers 
have a sense of urgency and make rapid decisions, while the highest mean score of NO (12.81) is 
also under factor 2, and the lowest mean score (5.49) is also under factor 6.  
Table 4.18 
Mean Score For Each Factor in Relation to Question 42 
When asked the decisions I make usually concern short term activities Table 4.17 above 
shows that the highest mean score of YES (12.79) under factor 2, expert heuristic decision-making 
style (Balancing the requirements), and the lowest mean score of YES (5.61) is under factor 6, 
spontaneous decision-making style, where spontaneous decision-makers have a sense of urgency 
and make rapid decisions, while the highest mean score of NO (13.20) is also under factor 2 
(heuristic decision-making style), and the lowest mean score (5.43) is also under factor 6 
(spontaneous decision-making style).  
Table 4.19 
Mean Score For Each Factor in Relation to Question 43 
When asked the decisions I make usually concern immediate payment decisions, Table 
4.18 above shows that the highest mean score of YES (12.91) under factor 2, expert heuristic 
decision-making style (Balancing the requirements), and the lowest mean score of YES (5.61) is 
under factor 6 (spontaneous decision-making style), where spontaneous decision-makers have a 
sense of urgency and make rapid decisions, while the highest mean score of NO (12.80) is also 
under factor 2 (heuristic decision-making style) and factor 3 (rational decision-making style), and 
the lowest mean score (5.48) is also under factor 6 (spontaneous decision-making style). 
Table 4.20 
Mean Score For Each Factor in Relation to Question 44 
When asked The decisions I make usually concern the allocation of resources, Table 4.19 
above shows that the highest mean score of YES (13.00) under factor 2, expert heuristic decision-
making style (Balancing the requirements), and the lowest mean score of YES (5.57) is under 
factor 6, spontaneous decision-making style, where spontaneous decision-makers have a sense of 
urgency and make rapid decisions, while the highest mean score of NO (12.38) is under F3 
(rational decision-making style), and the lowest mean score (5.48) is also under factor 6 
(spontaneous decision-making style).  
Table 4.21 
Mean Score For Each Factor in Relation to Question 45 
When asked, the decisions I make usually concern the use of resources, Table 4.20 above 
shows that the highest mean score of YES (12.93) under factor 2, expert heuristic decision-making 
style (Balancing the requirements), and the lowest mean score of YES (5.60) is under factor 6, 
spontaneous decision-making style, where spontaneous decision-makers have a sense of urgency 
and make rapid decisions, while the highest mean score of NO (12.05) is also under factor 2, expert 
heuristic decision-making style, and the lowest mean score (5.25) is also under factor 6 
(spontaneous decision-making style).  
Table 4.22 
Mean Score For Each Factor in Relation to Question 46 
When asked, the decisions I make usually concern managers across the organisation, Table 
4.21 above shows that the highest mean score of YES (12.85) under factor 2, expert heuristic 
decision-making style (Balancing the requirements), and the lowest mean score of YES (5.58) is 
under factor 6, spontaneous decision-making style, where spontaneous decision-makers have a 
sense of urgency and make rapid decisions, while the highest mean score of NO (13.06) is also 
under factor 2, expert heuristic decision-making style, and the lowest mean score (5.53) is also 
under factor 6 (spontaneous decision-making style). 
Table 4.23 
Mean Score For Each Factor in Relation to Question 47 
When asked, the decisions I make usually concern long term activities, Table 4.22 above 
shows that the highest mean score of YES (12.90) under factor 2, expert heuristic decision-making 
style (Balancing the requirements), and the lowest mean score of YES (5.61) is under factor 6, 
spontaneous decision-making style, where spontaneous decision-makers have a sense of urgency 
and make rapid decisions, while the highest mean score of NO (12.70) is also under factor 2, expert 
heuristic decision-making style, and the lowest mean score (5.29) is also under factor 6 
(spontaneous decision-making style). 
Table 4.24 
Mean Score For Each Factor in Relation to Question 48 
When asked, the decisions I make usually concern how many people to deploy on tasks, 
Table 4.23 above shows that the highest mean score of YES (12.98) under factor 2, expert heuristic 
decision-making style (Balancing the requirements), and the lowest mean score of YES (5.65) is 
under factor 6, spontaneous decision-making style, where spontaneous decision-makers have a 
sense of urgency and make rapid decisions, while the highest mean score of NO (12.41) is also 
under factor 2, expert heuristic decision-making style, and the lowest mean score (5.25) is also 
under factor 6 (spontaneous decision-making style). 
Table 4.25 
Mean Score For Each Factor in Relation to Question 49 
 When asked, The decisions I make usually concern broad organisational issues, Table 4.29 
above shows that the highest mean score of YES (13.02) under factor 2, expert heuristic decision-
making style (Balancing the requirements), and the lowest mean score of YES (5.63) is under 
factor 6, spontaneous decision-making style, where spontaneous decision-makers have a sense of 
urgency and make rapid decisions, while the highest mean score of NO (12.45) is also under factor 
2, expert heuristic decision-making style, and the lowest mean score (5.40) is also under factor 6 
(spontaneous decision-making style). 
Table 4.26 
Mean Score For Each Factor in Relation to Question 50 
When asked, the decisions I make usually concern top executives, Table 4.25 above shows 
that the highest mean score of YES (13.07) under factor 2, expert heuristic decision-making style 
(Balancing the requirements), and the lowest mean score of YES (5.62) is under factor 6, 
spontaneous decision-making style, where spontaneous decision-makers have a sense of urgency 
and make rapid decisions, while the highest mean score of NO (12.37) is also under factor 2, expert 
heuristic decision-making style, and the lowest mean score (5.45) is also under factor 6 
(spontaneous decision-making style). 
Table 4.27 
Mean Score For Each Factor in Relation to Question 51 
When asked, the decisions I make usually concern strategic decisions, Table 4.26 above 
shows that the highest mean score of YES (12.97) under factor 2, expert heuristic decision-making 
style (Balancing the requirements), and the lowest mean score of YES (5.57) is under factor 6, 
spontaneous decision-making style, where spontaneous decision-makers have a sense of urgency 
and make rapid decisions, while the highest mean score of NO (12.38) is also under factor 2, expert 
heuristic decision-making style, and the lowest mean score (5.60) is also under factor 6 
(spontaneous decision-making style). 
CHAPTER FIVE: DISCUSSION  
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
This chapter presents the development and preliminary validation of the custom designed 
instrument to assess decision making styles within executive decision makers in Qatar. Six 
decision making styles postulated a priori from the literature were used as independent styles in 
the executive decision makers in Qatar. The chapter then discusses the decision-making 
components and their validity and the application in the model in different business environments. 
Two models are presented and discussed: a) the "Mixed Environment Driven Model Under 
Uncertainty" and b) the "Mixed Environment Driven Model Under Certainty". The applications of 
the research and its implications for policy, practice and theory are also discussed. 
Studying the effects of rational and heuristic models elements on decision making process 
is something not new; but this research is giving set of advantages which make it a holistic study 
especially in promised developing country such as Qatar. Discussing the effects of rational and 
heuristic models on improving decision making process has been discussed and reported in the 
literature (Papamichail & Rajarm, 2007; Francis, 2016; Papula, & Papulova, 2015; Fox, 2015; 
Xiao et al., 2018; Marewski et al., 2010; Hauser, 2011; Thoma & Williams, 2013; Hilbig, 2014; 
Kitjacharoenchai et al., 2019). Most of previous studies agreed that applying rational or heuristic 
model can give the firm more ability to improve the way of making decisions which directly affects 
the firm products and services. In this research, the researcher tried to give more added values 
through entering deeply in the effectiveness of rational model, heuristic model, and their effects 
on the whole decision-making process. 
As it has been found in this research, though, level of education is not a decisive factor in 
developing and applying new advanced model of management. The results support the argument 
that, while education is a prerequisite for management advancement and transformation, it is not 
sufficient, and it does not bring automatic results.  
The results of this research support the idea that, the dominant mode of decision-making 
process in any economy is influenced by many factors, and while it is an indicator of the level of 
advancement in the entire economy, it has its impact on the rate and direction of socio-economic 
growth. In other word, while management has its own impact on the advancement of the economy, 
it is not developed in vacuum (Keating, 2001).  There is a feedback loop between advancement in 
management and other socio-economic factors.     
While management advancement is a tool of socio-economic transformation, there is a 
relation between the sense of need for economic development and transformation in one hand, and 
the development in public management in the other hand. (Indeed, public management reform did 
not develop out of a vacuum. The drive for public management reform was fundamentally a 
response to the increasing dissatisfaction with government performance in maintaining economic 
and social development). (Keating, 2001).  
The case of developing private management is not far from this perspective. It has many 
levels of positive correlation. (The analysis reveals that the positive effects of performance 
management on work effort and innovative behaviour were significant for private sector 
employees), (Lee, 2018). Also, Lee (2018) argues that (performance management influences 
performance outcomes in otherwise similar public and private organisations).  
The profiles of the decision-making styles of the Qatari executives are shown in the box 
and whisker plot of Figure 5.1 derived from the standardised factor data and the means and 
standard deviations shown in Table 5.1 below. 
Figure 5.1 
Decision-making Styles Exhibited by Respondents (Box and Whisker Plot) 
Table 5.1 
Means and Standard Deviations for the Standardised Factor Scores 
Factor Mean Std. Deviation 
FS1 7.3771 2.57062 
FS2 12.8829 1.42048 
FS3 12.4829 2.47821 
FS4 10.0929 2.70293 
FS5 11.3229 2.65657 
FS6 8.3700 2.37274 
Findings from addressing the research questions and by using descriptive statistics show 
that respondents exhibited all decision-making styles at different levels. The correlations showed 
support the notion that the decision-making styles are not mutually exclusive and that individuals 
do not rely on a single decision-making style. The findings in this study indicate that individuals 
use a combination of decision-making styles in making important decisions, which support the 
argument of Scott & Bruce (1995), However, research indicates that individuals, due to a lack of 
time and commitment, tend to rely on shortcuts when making decisions (Payne et al., 1993). 
Consequently, the concept of fast and frugal heuristics has gained attention as an important concept 
to describe human judgments (Gigerenzer et al., 1999). In this study, respondents mostly exhibited 
Expert Heuristic Decision Making style (balancing the requirement) with 27.9% (agree and 
strongly agree responses). 
Rational decision-making is achieved through a long decision-making process because a 
leader seeks significant amounts of information to make an objective and logical decision (DuBrin 
et al.,1989). As a result, rational decision-making style yields a rational decision. In this study, 
respondents exhibited rational decision-making style where Rational decision-makers conduct an 
extensive search for alternatives and make a logical choice between them with 25.72% (agree and 
strongly agree responses). These percentages (27.9% and 25.72%) support the argument of Simon 
(1957) bounded rational model, where the perfect rationality turned into bounded rationality based 
on limited information processing judgment heuristics and satisfying choices. 
On the other hand, 14.82% (agree and strongly agree) of respondents exhibited intuitive 
decision-making style where intuitive decision-makers use their intuition to make decisions. 
However, a leader sometimes makes an intuitive decision (DuBrin et al.,1989) because intuition is 
a real phenomenon and contributes to effectiveness, especially in situations where it counts time-
pressured complex decision-making in the real world (Salas et al., 2010, p. 966), while 18.8% 
(agree and strongly agree) exhibited dependent decision-making style, where dependent decision-
makers rely on others to guide their decision-making. On the questions regarding avoidant 
decision-making style where avoidant decision-makers avoid deciding whenever possible 
Reluctance to make decisions, respondents exhibited 6.1% (disagree and strongly disagree 
responses) and 6.66 % spontaneous. What does that mean? That idicates the fact that Qatar is one 
of the developing countries with huge economic resources that must be used in a professional way, 
effectively and efficiently, so there is no room for avoiding decisions or applying spontaneous 
decision making style, avoidant decision making style is arguably a risk aversion approach to 
decision making which does not provide effectiveness and efficiency when economy work in 
dynamic and uncertain environment rather than to be proactive in taking decisions, at the same 
time taking spontaneous decisions in uncertain, dynamic environment might be too risky. I believe. 
Therefore, respondents exhibited all important decision-making style with high percentage except 
avoidant and spontaneous decision-making style. These finding also supports Spicer & Sadler-
Smith (2005) argument that people were likely to use various decision- making styles despite 
practicing one dominant style.  
In this context, Bavolr & Orosov (2015), found mostly weak, but statistically significant 
relationships between the decision-making styles and decision-making competencies. It was 
mainly the spontaneous and avoidant decision-making styles that correlated negatively with the 
decision-making competencies, and this was also partly true for the intuitive decision-making 
style. While the reported use of the dependent style was weakly and negatively related to decision-
making competence, the only (but again low) significant positive correlation was found in the 
rational style. The more general view using linear regression showed that mainly using the 
avoidant and spontaneous styles is associated with lower decision-making competence. 
The decision-making style a leader displays depends on certain contextual variables. For 
example, when transformational leaders need to make a comprehensive decision by involving 
others to obtain information, they tend to use rational decision-making style. In contrast, leaders 
with transactional and laissez-faire leadership styles tend to produce a less comprehensive 
decision; thus, such leaders are likely to exhibit spontaneous and even avoidant decision-making 
styles (Hariri et al., 2014).  
The nature of todays environment is problematic, dynamic, and uncertain, where 
incomplete and imperfect information a companied with scarcity of resources and time constraints 
are the dominant factors when taking decisions, besides what complicate decision process in terms 
of shifting, ill-defined or competing goals. People trying hard to figure out what to do in the face 
of such difficult circumstances. Governments struggle to face such challenges when the stakes 
often high and the impact of decisions are significant on people lives. The activities involving 
decision making process under these circumstances are complex. When decision making is spoken 
of, this concerns the activities in mind that seeks optimal solutions to the problems. So, it is not 
surprising that substantial efforts have been devoted to understanding the best mechanism to make 
decisions. Accordingly, people that are using their knowledge and experience in coping with 
complex decision tasks are expert decision makers, which does not mean decision analysts, but 
they are familiar with the tools and information sources relevant decision-making. Thus, 
proposition P1 is supported and executives in Qatar have been shown to use a range of decision-
making styles, including rational and heuristic styles, that can be profiled using a structured 
questionnaire. 
When asked, The decisions you make usually concern the following (Please tick "YES" 
to all that apply to you? Q41: Day to day activities of the business, Q42: Short term activities, Q43: 
Immediate payment decisions, Q44: The allocation of resources, Q45: The use of resources, Q46: 
Managers across the organisation, Q47: Long term activities, Q48: How many people to deploy 
on tasks, Q49: Broad organisational issues, Q50: Top executives, and Q51: Strategic decisions. 
These questions represent all decision-making levels which include decision making Level 1 
(operational decisions which concern day to day activities), decision Making Level 2 (managerial 
decisions which concern the allocation and use of resources), and decision-making Level 3 
(Strategic decisions which concern broader organisational issues. As shown in Figure 5.2, 70% - 
94% responses were YES to all concerned Questions, which means that respondents are 
experienced and professional decision-making executives, according to their answers on all levels 
of decision making, and therefore respondents exhibited heuristic, rational, dependent and intuitive 
decision-making styles in that order as shown in Figure 5.1. But the question is, why the YES 
percentage is high on all questions, which concerns all levels of decision making?  The reason 
might be that respondents organisations are highly centralized, and respondents are involved in 
all decision-making levels. 
Figure 5.2 
Yes / No Respondents Answers to Levels of Decision-making 
5.2 ABOUT THE FACTORS 
Principal components analysis was used to reduce number of items to six components 
(concepts that group together in the respondents minds), as the other items are shrapnel and are 
mixed up in the respondents minds. In this study five analysis techniques using SPSS version 23 
was used to address research questions. The analysis techniques with the associated research 
questions are1) Descriptive analysis. 2) Principal components analysis to address six decision-
making styles, Component 1 is Avoidant decision making, Component 2 is Heuristic decision-
making, Component 3 is Rational decision making, Component 4 is Intuitive decision making, 
Component 5 is Dependent decision making, and Component 6 is Spontaneous decision making. 
3) MANOVA and 4) Pearson correlation. 
Results and discussions of the results are presented in association with the analysis 
techniques and the research questions. In the discussion Chapter, the results are explained within 
the context of this study as well as prior studies reviewed in Chapter 2. Significance of test results 
is reported in the ways suggested by Alghabban (2001, 2004) based on p-value the probability 
level: Not significant (symbolised as NS): p > 0.05, significant (symbolised as *): p < 0.05, Highly 
significant (symbolised as **): p < 0.01, and very highly significant (symbolised as ***): p < 
0.001. 
Alghabban affirms that a p-value < 0.05 suggests that the probability of the result occurring 
by chance is 1 in 20; whereas, when p < 0.01, the chance is 1 in 100, and likewise if p < 0.001, the 
chance is 1 in 1000 (Alghabban, 2001, 2004, p. 397). All probabilities reported are based on two-
tailed tests as each comparison had two possible directions.  (Perry, 1998). 
Factor analysis was performed with 1 as the Eigen value. Then, six factors were extracted 
when the rotation converged in their iterations. The first factor (Qs 16, 17, 19) is avoidant decision-
making style where avoidant decision-makers avoid making a decision whenever possible, the 
second factor is (Qs 33, 34, 38) is expert heuristic style, the third factor (Qs 2, 3, 4) is rational 
decision-making style where rational decision-makers conduct an extensive search for alternatives 
and make a logical choice between them, the fourth factor (Qs 6,7) is intuitive decision-making 
style where intuitive decision-makers use their intuition to make decisions, the fifth factor (Qs 13, 
15) is dependent decision-making style where dependent decision-makers rely on others to guide 
their decision-making, the sixth factor is spontaneous decision-making style. The second factor 
(expert heuristic style) is according to Dew et al. (2009), Matzler et al (2007), Ballou (1989), and 
Williams (2010), while the rest of the factors (1, 3, 4, 5, 6) are according to Scott & Bruce (1995). 
When factor analysis is used to reduce number of items to six components (concepts that 
group together in the respondents minds), the following findings were noticed: 
1) Factor 1  Q16, Q17, Q19 (Avoidant decision-making style) where avoidant decision-makers 
avoid making a decision whenever possible, the value of (p-value = 0.000), which means that 
the independent variables (Q16, Q17, Q19) together have a significant (substantial) effect on 
the dependent variable (Factor 1) at a significant level of (  0.05). 
2) Factor 2  Q33, Q34, Q38 (Heuristic decision-making style) where heuristic is a mental 
shortcut that allows people to solve problems and make judgments quickly and efficiently. 
These rule-of-thumb strategies shorten decision-making time and allow people to function 
without constantly stopping to think about their next course of action, the value of (p-value = 
0.000), this means that the independent variables represented by (Q33, Q34, Q38) together 
have significant (substantial) effect on the dependent variable (Factor 2) at a level of 
significance of (  0.05).  
3) Factor 3  Q2, Q3, Q4 (Rational decision-making style) where rational decision-makers 
conduct an extensive search for alternatives and make a logical choice between them, the value 
of (p-value = 0.000), which means that the independent variables (Q2, Q3, Q4) combined have 
a significant (substantial) effect on the dependent variable (Factor 3) at a significant level of 
(  0.05) 
4) Factor 4  Q6, Q7 (Intuitive Decision-making Style) where intuitive decision-makers use their 
intuition to make decisions, the value of (p-value = 0.000). This means that the independent 
variables represented by (Q6, Q7) together have a significant (substantial) effect on the 
dependent variable (Factor4) at the significant level of (  0.05). 
5) Factor 5  Q13, Q15 (Dependent Decision-making Style) where dependent decision-makers 
rely on others to guide their decision-making, the value of (p-value = 0.000), which means that 
the independent variables represented by (Q13, Q15) combined have a significant (substantial) 
effect on the dependent variable (Factor5) at the level of significance of (  0.05). 
6) Factor 6  Q21, Q22 (Spontaneous Decision-making Style) where decision makers made Quick 
and impulsive decisions), the value of (p-value = 0.000), which means that the independent 
variables represented by (Q21, Q22) combined have significant (substantial) effect on the 
dependent variable (Factor 6) at the level of significance of (  0.05). 
As shown in Table 5.2, it is also clear that when factor analysis is used to reduce number 
of items to five components (concepts that group together in the respondents minds), and being 
respondents exhibited all decision-making styles at different levels the following correlations were 
noticed:  
 Factor 1 (avoidant decision-making style) negative significant correlation with Factor 3 
(rational decision-making style) and Factor 4 (intuitive decision-making style) at the 0.01 level, 
positive significant correlation with Factor 5 (dependent decision-making style) and F6 
(spontaneous decision-making style) at the 0.05 level, and negative correlation (not significant) 
with Factor 2 (heuristic decision-making style). 
 Factor 2 (heuristic decision-making style) has negative correlation (not significant) with Factor 
1 (avoidant decision-making style, and positive correlation (not significant) with Factor 3 
(rational decision-making style), Factor 4 (intuitive decision-making style) Factor 5 
(dependent decision-making style), and Factor 6 (spontaneous decision-making style). 
 Factor 3 (rational decision-making style) has negative significant correlation with Factor 1 
(Avoidant decision-making style) at the 0.01 level, positive significant correlation with Factor 
4 (intuitive decision-making style) at the 0.01 level, positive correlation (not significant) with 
Factor 2 (heuristic decision-making style), and F6 (spontaneous decision-making style) , and 
negative correlation (not significant) with Factor 5 (dependent decision-making style). 
 Factor 4 (intuitive decision-making style) has negative significant correlation with Factor 1 
(avoidant decision-making style) at the 0.01 level, positive significant correlation with Factor 
3 (rational decision-making style), and F6 (spontaneous decision-making style) at the 0.01 
level, and positive correlation (not significant) with Factor 2 (heuristic decision-making style), 
and Factor 5 (dependent decision-making style). 
 Factor 5 (dependent decision-making style) positive significant correlation with Factor 1 
(avoidant decision-making style) at the 0.01 level, positive correlation (not significant) with 
Factor 2 (heuristic decision-making style), and F4 (intuitive decision-making style), negative 
correlation (not significant) with Factor 3 (rational decision-making Style), and Factor 6 
(spontaneous decision-making Style). 
 Factor 6 (spontaneous decision-making style) has positive significant correlation with Factor 
1 (avoidant decision-making style) at the 0.05 level, and positive significant correlation with 
Factor 4 (intuitive decision-making style) at the 0.01 level, positive correlation (not significant) 
with Factor 2 (heuristic decision-making style), and Factor 3 (rational decision-making style), 
and negative correlation (not significant) with Factor 5 (dependent decision-making style). 
The correlations found between different factors may support some of previous literature. A 
positive significant correlation of Factor 3 (Rational decision-making style) with Factor 4 
(Intuitive decision-making style) at the 0.01 level, may support the argument made by Betsch & 
Kunz (2008), that intuitive thinkers were more likely to make intuitive decisions and rational 
thinkers were more likely to make a rational decision.  
Table 5.2 Correlations Matrix Between Factors 
 Correlations  
 F1  F2  F3  F4  F5  F6  
F1  Pearson Correlation 1 -.032 -.226** -.175** .143** .128* 
Sig. (2-tailed)  .553 .000 .001 .007 .017 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
F2  Pearson Correlation -.032 1 .102 .056 .083 .007 
Sig. (2-tailed) .553  .056 .298 .123 .891 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
F3  Pearson Correlation -.226** .102 1 .173** -.012 .010 
Sig. (2-tailed) .000 .056  .001 .820 .849 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
F4  Pearson Correlation -.175** .056 .173** 1 .002 .147** 
Sig. (2-tailed) .001 .298 .001  .972 .006 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
F5  Pearson Correlation .143** .083 -.012 .002 1 -.059 
Sig. (2-tailed) .007 .123 .820 .972  .274 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
F6  Pearson Correlation .128* .007 .010 .147** -.059 1 
Sig. (2-tailed) .017 .891 .849 .006 .274  
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed). 
*. Correlation is significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed). 
F1 (Avoidant Decision-making Style), F2 (Heuristic Decision-making Style), F3 (Rational Decision-making Style), 
F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style), F6 (Spontaneous Decision-making Style) 
Avoidant decision-making style is characterized by attempts to avoid decision-making. 
The negative significant correlation between Factor 1 (Avoidant decision-making style) and Factor 
3 (Rational decision-making style) at the 0.01 level supports the argument of Scott & Bruce (1995) 
and the conclusion of Phillips et al. (1984) that rational decision makers tend to approach rather 
than avoid problems. The avoidant decision-making style was found to be negatively related to 
well-being (Bavolr & Orosov, 2015), also depression was found to be positively correlated with 
the avoidant style, brooding and anxious style and was negatively associated with the vigilant and 
intuitive decision-making styles. In the few studies with employees as participants, Rational (Russ 
et al.,1996, sales-managers) and Intuitive (Sadler-Smith, 2004, managers) styles were found to be 
associated with better job performance and avoidant style (Russ et al.,1996) with poorer job 
performance. 
According to Allwood & Salo (2012), persons scoring high on dependent style have less 
flexibility in planning and accomplishing their decision-making errands because they are 
dependent on other persons in the decision process. This would result in less control over the 
decision process and its outcomes. Dependent styles suggests that dependence on others in 
decision-making can be accompanied by a lower tendency to avoid making decisions. Avoidance 
can be inevitable only with a lack of other people able to provide advice, while a higher reported 
use of the rational style correlated positively with the dependent style (Bavolr & Orosov, 2015), 
which concurs with the findings of two previous studies (Baiocco et al., 2009; Loo, 2000). A 
possible explanation could be that an effort to seek advice from other people is a part of a rational 
process (Bavolr & Orosov, 2015). 
Factor 3 (Rational decision-making style) has positive significant correlation with Factor 
4 (Intuitive Decision-Making Style) at the 0.01 level, A classification scheme for decision-making 
style proposed by Harren (1979) includes two opposing categories regarding information gathering 
and evaluation: intuitive and rational. Therefore, individuals can be classified as consistently 
intuitive or consistently analytical in information gathering and evaluation. However, optimal 
strategic decision making may require both rationality and intuition (Elbanna, 2006; Elbanna & 
Child, 2007; Hitt & Tyler, 1991; Langley et al.,1995). Intuition denotes a vague feeling or sense 
of feeling of pattern or relationships. It is also referred as holistic thinking, immediate insight, 
seeing the answer without knowing how it was reached (Thorne, 1990), or as a technique of 
swiftly retrieving hunks and forms of knowledge molded from previous experience (Seal, 1990). 
Decision-makers might sense patterns, feelings, and objects in seemingly unconnected facts. 
Intuition is often perceived by people as a sudden awareness of information (Ritter, & Dijskterhuis, 
2014; Sauter, 1999). Intuitive managers become impatient with routine, details, or repetition. They 
may reach conclusions too quickly, ignore relevant facts, or follow an inspiration when it is clearly 
bad (Agor, 1984). The factors of intuitive decision-making style consist of experience, knowledge 
and others (Harteis et al., 2008). 
A mixed environment driven model to decision-making process is proposed based on 
research results and findings as depicted in Figure 5.3.  This model supports previous literature on 
decision making styles. Previous decision-making theorists used rational decision style and 
intuitive style as two separate techniques of making decisions. A classification scheme for 
decision-making style proposed by Harren (1979) includes two opposing categories regarding 
information gathering and evaluation which are intuitive and rational. Therefore, individuals can 
be classified as consistently intuitive or consistently analytical in information gathering and 
evaluation. 
Three factors that can increase uncertainty in organisation environment. These factors are 
complexity, dynamism, and richness, on Figure 5.3 As the curve progress to the right, the 
environment becomes more complex, less stable, and poorer, the level of uncertainty increases. 
Environmental complexity is a function of the strength, number, and interconnectedness of the 
specific and general forces that an organisation must manage. 
Figure 5.3 
Mixed Environment Driven Model to Decision-making Processes 
The greater the number, and the greater the differences between them, the more complex 
and uncertain is the environment and the more difficult to predict and control (Child, 1972). 
Environmental dynamism is a function of how much and how quickly forces in the specific and 
general environments of an organisation change over time and thus increase the uncertainty an 
organisation faces (Aldrich, 1979). Environmental richness is a function of the abundance of 
resources available to support an organisations domain, where in rich environments, uncertainty 
is low because of the plethora of resources and no need to compete for them (Starbuck, 1976). The 
certainty is high in simple, stable, and rich environment, but in complex, dynamic and poor 
environment the uncertainty is high.  
Rational Decision-Making Style is characterized by a thorough search for and logical 
evaluation of alternatives (Scott & Bruce, 1995), where rational causes decision makers to be 
obliged to consider several alternative scenarios and probabilities for each alternative before 
making decision (Busari & Spicer, 2015; Oliveira, 2007). According to Dean & Sharfman (1993), 
rationality is the extent to which the decision-making process involves the collection of 
information relevant to the decision, and the reliance upon analysis of this information in making 
the choice. Rational decision-making incorporates critical evaluation of evidence and a structured 
process that requires time and conscious effort (Fitzgerald et al., 2017). Rational procedures help 
decision makers establish relevant decision criteria, identify a comprehensive set of alternatives, 
and evaluate the individual alternatives objectively (Kaufmann et al., 2012). In contrast to intuitive 
decision-making style, rational decision-making style encompass cautious and methodical 
thoughtfulness of all conceivable decision choices (Baird, 1989; Tetlock et al.,1993). Scrutinizing 
the available options by means of rational decision-making style necessitates the decision maker 
to deliberately appraise options and their relevant probable consequences. In addition to being a 
cognisant and thoughtful process, rational decision-making style is largely free from 
ridiculousness and predispositions, and thus results in enhanced decision (Pacini & Epstein, 1999), 
higher work and organisational performance (Busari & Spicer, 2015; Singh, 2014; Smolka et al., 
2018; Uzelac et al., 2016). Rational economic model based on neo-classical economic ideology 
was also governed by logic and rational analysis in decision scenarios (Hendry, 2000). All the 
options are considered, rationally evaluated, and the final decision is based on optimal choices 
(Hellreigel et al., 2001; Mangalindan, 2004).  
The perfect rationalism was challenged with the passage of time. Simon (1957) criticized 
the mean-end sequence and proposed a bounded rational model which is well known as normative 
or administrative model of decision making. Thus, the perfect rationality turned into bounded 
rationality based on limited information processing, judgment heuristics, and satisfying choices. 
Lindbloms (1959) incremental model was also based on limited rationality although these models 
were more flexible than perfect rationalism. The major transition took place when Kahneman & 
Tversky (1979) rejected the legacy of perfect rationality and proposed prospect theory of decision 
making. 
Time constraints, decision speed, and cost of acquiring information restricted theorists to 
make decisions with an adequate amount of information (Buchanan & Connell, 2006), therefore 
decision makers tried to find alternatives to rational theory and this why intuitive decision-making 
style earned much popularity in the recent years. While theorists limited decision-making to either 
rational or intuitive strategies, Andersen (2000) proposed that individuals decision-making styles 
can be identified by assessing these two functional dimensions in conjunction. 
Decision literature depicts that past researchers introduced numerous unique decision-
making styles according to their cultures, contexts, and circumstances, but the shared aspect of the 
research on decision making styles is the consideration of rational and intuitive decision making  
style by almost all of the decision researchers (Arroba, 1977; Harren, 1979; Mitroff  & Kilmann, 1975; 
Phillips et al.,1984; Scott & Bruce, 1995) although they considered both styles as distinctive 
dimensions of human nature. Researchers (Klaczynski, 2001; Stanovich & West, 2000; Sternberg, 
1997) illustrated that the line of distinction between cognitive style, learning style, thinking style, and 
decision-making style is based on the distinction between rational and intuitive approaches. The 
past literature indicates that decision researchers were stick to the assumption that decisions are 
solely based either on rationality or on intuition. Payne & Bettman (2004) suggested that attempts 
should be made to understand the interaction between these two styles instead of considering them 
as separate dimensions to confirm Stanovich & West, (2002) argument that these two styles do not 
stand apart on the poles and are more interactive in nature. 
Scott & Bruce (1995) and Thunholm (2004) both found that innovativeness is inversely 
associated with rational, dependent, avoidant, and spontaneous decision-making styles. That is, 
the less innovative an individual is, the more likely it is that he/she will adopt a rational, dependent, 
avoidant, or spontaneous decision-making style. Conversely, an individuals innovativeness was 
positively related to an intuitive style of decision making, suggesting that more innovative 
individuals are more likely to take responsibility for a decision and approach the problem in a 
manner that is based on experience and intuition rather than analytic procedures. 
The mixed environment driven model to decision making process, this research proposed, 
came to support Rowe & Boulgarides (1992) argument that the distinction and integration in 
rational and intuitive decision-making style are based on individual differences, organisational, 
contextual, and environmental factors, but in a broader prospect that include other decision-making 
styles, heuristic, dependent and avoidant. In todays environment organisations are forced to work 
under uncertainty, where multicultural and diversity of the work forces environment is the 
dominant and the room for individual differences expanded. In the times of emergency, 
complexity, ambiguity, uncertainty, risk, and time pressure, intuitive decision-making style is  more 
appropriate that involves a creative solution based on overall situational recognition instead of 
making a feature-by-feature analysis (Bryant, 2002; Callan & Proctor, 2000), Similarly, in the 
absence of the consensus and in the presence of uncertainty, rational style is inappropriate (Dean 
& Sharfman, 1993), but  Bass & Reggio (2006) suggested that both styles stands on a continuum 
on which an individual leader rates his or her leadership which supported Hammond et al. (1997) 
argument that rational and intuitive style should not be rigidly placed on the ends of a continuum 
instead an individuals relative standing between these two styles should determine his or her style, 
where an intuitive decision maker should share some rationality and a rational decision maker 
should consider some intuition to make superior choices, which support the proposed mixed 
environment driven model to decision making processes of this study. This proposed mixed model 
support the argument of Spicer & Sadler- Smith (2005) that a balanced approach in decision making 
can be more appropriate for effective decision making. So, effective decisions can be made, when all 
decision-making styles proposed by the mixed model are taken into consideration by different levels 
of management in organisations. To illustrate the mixed environment driven model to decision 
making processes, the model will be discussed under uncertain environment first, then under 
certain environment. To do so, the mixed environment driven model is divided to two sub-models 
for the purpose of illustration. The first one is Figure 5.3A (see next page) which illustrate the 
model under uncertainty where the environment is complex, dynamic, and poor. 
According to Jones (2013) General environment of an organisation are the forces that shape 
the specific environment and affect the ability of all organisations in a particular environment to 
obtain resources. These forces are: 1) Economic forces, such as interest rates, the state of the 
economy, and the unemployment rate, that determine the level of demand for products and the 
price of inputs. 2) Technological forces, such as the development of new production techniques 
and new information-processing equipment, influence many aspects of organisations operations. 
3) Political, ethical, and environmental forces influence government policy toward organisations 
and their stakeholders, such as laws that favor business interest, and pressure from 
environmentalists. 4) Demographic, cultural, and social forces, such as the age, education, 
lifestyle, norms, values, and customs of a nations people, shape organisations customers, 
managers, and employees. 
Figure 5.3A 
Mixed Environment Driven Model Under Uncertainty  
Pressures from the organisational environment in which they operate also make 
organisations the favored mode for transforming inputs into outputs. An organisations 
environment is the source of valuable input resources and is the marketplace into which it releases 
outputs. It is also the source of economic, social, and political pressures that affect an 
organisations ability to obtain these resources. Managing complex environments is a task beyond 
the abilities of most individuals, but an organisation has the resources to develop specialists to 
anticipate or attempt to influence the many pressures from the environment. This specialization 
allows the organisation to create more value for the organisation, its members, and its customers. 
Accordingly, an organisation likes to have a steady and abundant supply of resources so it can 
easily manage its domain and satisfy stakeholders. All the forces just discussed cause uncertainty 
for organisations and make it more difficult for managers to control flow of resources they need 
to protect and enlarge their organisational domains. The set of forces that cause these problems 
can be looked at in another way; in terms of how they cause uncertainty because they affect the 
complexity, dynamism, and richness of the environment. As these forces cause the environment 
to become more complex, less stable, and poorer, the level of uncertainty increases as illustrated 
in Figure 5.3A by moving along the curve to the right from simple, stable and rich environment to 
complex, dynamic, and poor environment. 
Environmental complexity is a function of the strength, number, and interconnectedness of 
the specific and general forces that an organisation must manage (Child,1972; Dess & Beard, 
1984). The greater the number, and the greater the differences between them, the more complex 
and uncertain is the environment and the more difficult to predict and control. Complexity can 
increase greatly when specific and general forces in the environment become interconnected, that 
is, when forces begin to interact so their effects on the organisation become unpredictable (Emery 
& Trist1965). The more interconnected the forces in an organisations specific and general 
environments, the more uncertainty the organisation faces. The more complex an organisations 
environment, the greater the uncertainty about that environment. Predicting and controlling the 
flow of resources becomes extremely difficult. 
Environmental dynamism is the degree to which forces in the specific and general 
environments change quickly over time and thus contribute to the uncertainty an organisation 
faces. It is a function of how much and how quickly forces in the specific and general environments 
change over time and thus increase the uncertainty an organisation faces (Aldrich 1979).  An 
environment is stable if forces affect the supply of resources in a predictable way. An environment 
is unstable and dynamic if an organisation cannot predict the way in which the forces will change 
over time, global expansion even makes the environment more difficult to predict and control. An 
organisation in a dynamic, unstable environment will seek ways to make it more predictable and 
so lessen the uncertainty it faces. 
Environmental richness is defined as the range of resources available to support an 
organisations domain (Starbuck, 1976; Dess & Beard, 1984). In rich environments, uncertainty 
is low because resources are plentiful and so organisations need not compete for them. 
Environments may be poor for two reasons: 1) An organisation is located in a poor country or poor 
region of a country; and 2) there is a high level of competition and organisations are fighting over 
available resources (Aldrich 1979). In poor environments, the greater the problems organisations 
face in managing resource transactions. Organisations must battle to attract customers or to obtain 
the best inputs or the latest technology. These battles result in uncertainty for an organisation. In 
an environment that is poor, unstable, and complex, resources are especially hard to obtain, and 
organisations face the greatest uncertainty. By contrast, in a rich, stable, and simple environment, 
resources are easy to come by and uncertainty is low.  
Managing the organisational environment is a crucial task for an organisation. The first 
step is identifying sources of uncertainty and examining the sources of complexity, how rapidly it 
is changing, and how rich or poor it is. An organisation then needs to evaluate the benefits and 
costs of different interorganisational strategies and choose the one that best allows it to secure 
valuable resources (Jones, 2013). 
According to Sauter (1999), intuition helps decision-makers contend with uncertainty and 
complexity, so decision-makers reason, analyse, and gather facts that trigger intuition. If intuition 
leads the thought process in a different direction, decision-makers reason and analyse again to 
verify and elaborate upon it. These additional facts and analyses again trigger intuition, and the 
process repeats. Decision-makers can also start with an intuitive hunch, and then analyse it to 
determine its appropriateness. They can also apply intuition at the end of the process to reveal false 
premises, invalid inferences, and faulty conclusions. More and more people realize that intuition 
is essential to making good and right decisions, particularly for those managers at all levels in an 
organisation who sometimes are under conditions of high uncertainty or little precedent (Agor, 
1984; David, 2009). The factors of intuitive decision-making style consist of experience, 
knowledge, and others (Harteis, Koch, & Morgenthaler, 2008). Normally, most of the people use 
intuition for making decisions in situations of great uncertainty or lack of information (Judge & 
Robbins, 2006; David, 2009). Sinclair & Ashkanasy (2005) found that intuitive decision is 
especially useful in ambiguous situations, particularly for those decision makers in business world 
who have restricted information and they must decide which alternative strategies will benefit the 
most. In general, research has found that intuitive decision makers are likely to be more risk 
seeking, impulsive and have a greater belief in luck, while analytic decision makers tend to be less 
risk seeking and less impulsive (Nygren & White, 2002; Barber, 2005).  
Although both rational and intuitive decision-making styles are related to positive 
outcomes, rational decision-making style is considered appropriate in well-planned, well-
managed, and well-organised conditions where less time pressure, less ambiguity and less risk and 
uncertainty is present. In the opposite conditions, intuitive decision-making style is considered 
suitable (Scott & Bruce, 1995). Therefore, if the rational style serves the practical concerns, the 
intuitive style serves the time concerns. Beside these in-built qualities, intuitive decision makers 
are prone to miss some important information in haste and rational decision makers are more likely 
to involve in too much processing. Consequently, a balanced approach in decision making can be 
more appropriate for effective decision making (Spicer & Sadler- Smith, 2005). When both are 
considered at the same time, effective decisions can be made. Effective managers from different 
levels in organisations opt both rational and intuitive choices (Riaz, 2009), The type of 
environment in which a decision is made has also an impact on the decision-making strategy 
(Brder 2003) a high amount of uncertainty present in the environment seems to increase reliance 
on heuristics like take-the-best (Hogarth & Karelaia 2006; Newell et al., 2003). It is also worth 
mentioning that heuristics are argued to be essential in environments that are challenging or 
impossible to comprehend rationally due to high levels of complexity and uncertainty (Loock & 
Hennen, 2015). Bingham & Eisenhardt (2011), emphasise that heuristics may provide accuracy 
with less effort, especially in the context of unpredictable foreign markets. Similarly, Maitland & 
Sammartino (2015) stress that heuristics enable managers to make sense of highly complex and 
uncertain international environments. Researchers (Andersen, 2000; Hansson & Andersen, 2001) 
suggest that managers employing intuitive decision-making style are more likely to make effective 
decisions when the organisations are under a pressure for change. 
The decisions leaders make vary in risk and uncertainty (Certo et al., 2008). Risky decision 
making can be characterized as a decisional situation with objective or given probabilities. 
Conversely, decisions under uncertainty involve decisional scenarios in which probabilities are 
subjective or unknown. Most of the time important decisions involve uncertainty rather than risk 
(Wu et al., 2004). In the times of extreme uncertainty like crisis and emergencies (ODonnell & 
Osborne, 1988) spontaneous decisions are required 
On the other hand, and according to Scott and Bruce (1995), avoidant style is defined as 
an attempt of avoiding decisions whenever possible. It involves indecisiveness, deferring, evading, 
and postponing decisions and keeping oneself away from decision scenarios. They illustrated that 
people opting this style face difficulties while taking decisional initiatives and they are unable 
when they must act upon their intentions. It is ineffective in nature and outcomes. It is 
ineffectiveness is attributed to deficits in the decision maker regarding awareness about of self and 
the environment (Philips et al.,1984). It is positively connected with external locus of control 
demonstrating that individuals with avoidant style are controlled by the external factors rather than 
their internal control orientation (Scott & Bruce, 1995). Decision researchers (Blais et al., 2003) 
illustrated that people having high personal fear of invalidity (PFI) are reluctant decision makers 
who feel frustrated when errors occur, are uncomfortable regarding the costs of errors, hesitant 
while evaluating alternatives, and mostly delay and postpone decisions. Thus, researchers 
demonstrate that such individuals with high PFI are avoidant decision makers. Based on this 
argument, such individuals are not fit to be effective decision makers in uncertain environment 
where ambiguity, dynamism, and complexity are so high.  
Accordingly, the previous arguments about intuitive and heuristic decision-making styles 
support the argument of the proposed mixed environment driven model to decision making 
processes, emphasising that the more uncertain environment (complex, dynamic and poor 
environment) the more intuition and heuristic, the less rational as illustrated in Figure 5.3A. 
The immediate measures taken by the state of Qatar to confront the June 2017 blockade is 
an example of intuitive decisions that the government entities had taken under huge uncertainty 
politicly, economically, and militarily that the countries involved in the blockade put on Qatar. In 
light of such a situation, the exemplary response came from the state, as it was necessary to take 
immediate measures to confront the repercussions of this unjust blockade and its consequences, to 
include launching five direct shipping lines between Hamad Port, which is Qatars main gateway 
for trade with the world, and a number of ports in the region and abroad to ensure that ship traffic, 
maritime navigation and shipping in the country are not affected by the blockade. It was the first 
direct line linking Hamad Port with Sohar Port and another with Salalah Port in the Sultanate of 
Oman and another direct line with India as well as a line linking Hamad Port with the Turkish city 
of Izmir, as well as a new direct weekly shipping line linking Hamad Port in Doha and Karachi in 
Pakistan. All these measures were taken in uncertain environment using the available information 
in their decisions and the good relationship built by Qatari government with friendly countries 
before crisis. After a year of the blockade, these shipping lines reached 23 shipping lines between 
Hamad Port and most of the countries that have trade relations with Qatar. 
Other measures include the formation of a central compensation committee to receive all 
cases of those affected by the blockade, headed by the Attorney General, with the membership of 
representatives of the Qatari Ministries of Justice and Foreign Affairs, to receive compensation 
claims, by the public and private sectors, and by individuals, in addition to the possibility of 
submitting their claims via the committees website. Under the pressure of the crisis, Qatar starts 
immediately encouraging and stimulating the local industry and the shift from consumer culture 
to product culture, preferring and supporting the national product by placing stickers on it in sales 
outlets and commercial complexes, and the states encouragement for national products by 
purchasing a share of the products for the local market, in addition to facilitating and removing the 
difficulties facing exports, and launching many initiatives such as the initiatives launched by the 
Ministry of Economy and Trade Own a factory in Qatar within 72 hours initiative, which is the 
second initiative of the Single Window project in which 250 investment opportunities were offered 
in the industrial sector besides establishing low-cost storage areas that provide the market with 
storage areas estimated at two million square meters in a fast and competitive price that suit their 
demands, during the years 2018 and 2019.  
On the other hand, Figure 5.3B illustrates the 2nd sub-model of the mixed driven 
environment model to decision making processes under certainty. According to Jones (2013) the 
environment is characterized to be simple, stable, and rich, where in a rich, stable, and simple 
environment, resources are easy to come by and uncertainty is low. An environment is stable if 
forces affect the supply of resources in a predictable way. In rich environments, uncertainty is low 
because resources are plentiful and so organisations need not compete for them. An environment 
is characterized to be simple if the strength, number, and interconnectedness of the specific and 
general forces that an organisation must manage are low. 
Decision-Making Style causes decision makers be obliged to consider alternative scenarios 
and probabilities for each alternative before making decision (Busari & Spicer, 2015; Oliveira, 
2007). According to Dean & Sharfman (1993), rationality is the extent to which the decision-
making process involves the collection of information relevant to the decision, and the reliance 
upon analysis of this information in making the choice. Rational decision-making incorporates 
critical evaluation of evidence and a structured process that requires time and conscious effort 
(Fitzgerald et al., 2017). Rational procedures help decision makers establish relevant decision 
criteria, identify a comprehensive set of alternatives, and evaluate the individual alternatives 
objectively (Kaufmann et al., 2012). In addition to being a cognizant and thoughtful process, 
rational decision-making style is largely free from ridiculousness and predispositions, and thus 
results in enhanced decision (Pacini & Epstein, 1999). 
Most of the managers try to reduce uncertainty and ensure certainty to make a better 
decision (Greenberg & Baron, 1993). The uncertainty can be changed into certainty by collecting 
relevant informational and knowledge (Griffin, 2011). Therefore, knowledge management has 
received much attention in the recent years although its existence can be traced back in the history 
(Kucza, 2001). Bryant (2003) illustrates that in three core processes of knowledge management 
including creating, sharing and exploring knowledge, leadership plays a central role. However, 
transformational leaders are better at creating and sharing knowledge at individual and group level 
whereas transactional leaders are more competent in creating and sharing knowledge at 
organisational level. Beside the considerable importance of knowledge management, it is worth 
noticing that it is the responsibility of the leaders to share knowledge and enables subordinates in 
managing knowledge in the organisations and making knowledge-oriented rational decisions 
(Holowetzki, 2002). Transformational leaders use multiple decision-making strategies across 
different situations. Transformational style positively predicted rational, intuitive, and spontaneous 
style. Just like leadership styles, decision making situations directly affect decision making styles, 
in the same manner, certainty, risk and uncertainty directly predicted rational, intuitive and 
spontaneous style respectively (Riaz, 2015). 
Figure 5.3B 
Mixed Environment Driven Model Under Certainty  
Sadler-Smith (2008) asserted that human decision has an intertwined aspect of both 
intuition and deliberation. More generally, complex information processes depend on faint signals 
from the brain which results in considerations (Tranel et al.,1994). Further when these faint signals 
are no longer faint but strong enough to break individuals awareness threshold, it becomes an 
intuition (Becker, 2004). It is important to note that the choice of decision-making style is premise 
on the nature of the problem and the atmosphere. For example, some problems require the use of 
effortful information, deliberation, and precise rule to make decision. Other problems demand no 
predefined rules to arrive at solution. This exertion is the focal quality that differentiates intuitive 
from rational decision-making style (Dijksterhuis & Nordgren, 2006; Kahneman, 2011).  
Dependent decision-making style is attributed to the lack of self and environmental 
awareness (Blustein & Phillips, 1988). People exhibiting dependent style are occupied with 
difficulties in operations related to decision making processes involving deliberate thinking. With 
avoidant style, people find trouble while taking initiatives in decisional scenarios. They are unable 
to practice their attentions when decisional action has to be taken (Scott & Bruce, 1995). 
Rational processes have been a central part of strategic decision-making and a great amount 
of theoretical and empirical research has been conducted on the topic (Elbanna & Child, 2007). 
The higher the strategic level of the problem, the higher the rational content of the decision-making 
process becomes (Krabuanrat 1997). Decision makers identify the best decision to take by 
computing, with perfect accuracy, how different decision alternatives will play out. They choose 
the alternative that maximizes the value of outcomes to them (Berger, 1999). Rational decision 
theory relies on an extensive use of logic and mathematical models to represent decision situations. 
The strength of these rational approaches to decision-making is in their rigor. Working within the 
decision theoretic model allows one to identify answers and weigh the alternatives within the 
model. These approaches encompass a substantial amount of educational content that is straight 
forward to teach and to test (Smith, 2003; Francis, 2016).  
As the curve progresses to the left in Figure 5.3B, the environment becomes simple, stable, 
and rich, the level of certainty increases, and the dominant decision-making style becomes the 
rational with less use of other styles. An example of rational decisions that Qatari government had 
taken under good certainty, politicly, economically, and militarily, its mediation efforts. The small 
state of Qatar has both garnered significant attention and generated considerable controversy 
through its pursuit of several high-profile conflict mediation efforts.  
Mediation is defined by the United Nations as a process whereby a third party assists two 
or more parties, with their consent, to prevent, manage or resolve a conflict by helping them to 
develop mutually acceptable agreements, has long been a key component of international 
relations (United Nations, 2012). While international relations theory has long acknowledged the 
role that small states play in mediation, state-led mediation is often seen as the domain of so-called 
great powers, such as the United States and Russia, which are able to deploy hard power and 
financial might to secure and maintain agreements (Ingebritsen et al., 2012) Many small states, in 
contrast, have built firm reputations as mediators by facilitating dialogue between parties 
(Hoffman & Carment, 2013). Within the Middle East, Qatar has mediated a number of high-profile 
conflicts, bringing it unparalleled attention. Some of the conflicts Qatar attempted to mediate 
include those affecting Lebanon, Palestine, Yemen, Sudan, Djibouti, Eritrea, Morocco, and 
Mauritania (Barakat, 2014).  Qatars mediation efforts have come as part of the states attempts to 
brand itself while boosting its global reputation. A few factors have aided Qatar in translating these 
various motivations into actual mediation efforts. Among these factors, the highly active foreign 
policy, one that sought to raise Qatars profile while balancing between competing ties and 
maintaining open lines of communication with all parties. These contacts helped the country gain 
acceptance as a mediator. At the same time, Qatar possessed the financial resources to transport 
and host large delegations for extended periods of time and build credibility through extensive 
humanitarian work and pledges of investment to support eventual peace agreements. Most 
importantly, a highly personalized decision-making structure allowed a small number of key 
individuals, especially the former emir and former foreign minister/prime minister, to initiate 
mediation efforts and leverage their personal contacts and charisma to secure agreements (Barakat, 
2014).   
A rational theory of mediation must start with a rational theory of conflict because there is 
no mediation without conflict. Conflict can constitute a rational strategy that is preferred to a 
negotiated agreement owing to 1) incomplete information or incentives to misrepresent 
preferences; 2) commitment problems where a negotiated settlement lacks stability because at least 
one state has an incentive to defect; or (3) issue indivisibilities where some issues do not admit 
compromise (Fearon, 1995). Yet, mediators may have access to more information than either 
disputant or possess sufficient resources to change disputants preferences. Thus, they might be 
able to accomplish what the parties themselves are unable to. Accordingly, to succeed as a 
mediator critical information, time availability and enough resources are essentials for excellent 
rational planning and decision-making processes, where the rational decision-making style need. 
The previous arguments about rational decision-making style support the argument of the 
proposed mixed environment driven model to decision making processes, emphasising that as the 
curve progresses from right to left on Figure 5.3B certainty will increase, the more certain 
environment (simple, stable, and rich environment) the more rational, the less heuristic and 
intuition, as illustrated in Figure 5.3B. 
To summarize on the mixed environment driven model for decision making processes, 
progressing to the right along the curve, the more environment uncertainty there will be, the more 
intuition and heuristic and the less rational will be needed, and as the curve regresses right to the 
left on the more environment certainty there will be, the more rational the less heuristic and 
intuition is need as illustrated in Figure 5.3. The overviews of the four executive cases (below) 
broadly support and illustrate how the complexity of different environments tend to different 
decision-making profiles illustrated in Figures 5.3, 5.3A. and 5.3B. 
Overview Interview Case Study 1 
Stable Environment = Rational Decision-Making 
Executive 1 works in Educational and instructional Development profession with part-time 
administration assignment. The decision-making environment he works in has a bounded 
rationality with functional and divisional structure where the environment is stable with moderate 
uncertainty. The company follows a rational decision-making style with a thorough and 
comprehensive processes along with heuristic elements when needed, putting bottom-up plans 
into action to meet fixed strategic goals to seize on opportunities for growth and development. 
Decisions are made at the various divisional levels and are cascaded down to units. A successful 
strategic decision represents the restructuring of units goals and objectives to meet international 
standards but focus on local needs. 
Overview Interview Case Study 2 
Mixed Environment (Stable with Unstable Elements) = Conflict Avoidance and Mixed 
Decision-Making Style 
Executive 2 works in the Higher Education sector with responsibility for staffing, 
curriculum, and resources. The decision-making environment has a bounded complexity with fixed 
structures for governance and oversight. The internal environment is relatively stable and unstable 
situations are avoided whenever possible, although complexity arises when decisions must be 
implemented. Then, conflict is avoided and set procedures are followed. Heuristics may be used 
but within a set of analytic (rational) framework for analysis such as a strengths-weaknesses-
opportunities-threats analysis with progression towards goals being monitored and measured. In 
this sector when there are few complexities then intuition may be used. The executive moved to 
consolidate collaboration and partnership opportunities with key stakeholders, in order to 
minimized any potential types of conflict. There was a conscious effort to focus on the vision, 
mission and objectives to guide and harmonize processes. That is illustrated using the Blue 
Ocean Strategy (Kim and Mauborgne, 2014 
) which is the simultaneous pursuit of differentiation and low cost to open up a new market 
space and create new demand. It is about creating and capturing uncontested market space, thereby 
making the competition irrelevant. It is based on the view that market boundaries and industry 
structure are not a given and can be reconstructed by the actions and beliefs of industry players.  
Blue Ocean Strategy (2022). 
Overview Interview Case Study 3. 
Dynamic Environment = Mixed Approach to Decision Making 
Executive 3 works in the Higher Education sector with responsibility for research and 
planning. The working environment is dynamic where new universities were being established and 
research funding is changing every year without clear direction. As a director of research and 
planning development and based on the evolving environment a mixed of rational, heuristic and 
intuition decision making styles are used in decision making processes. This executive actively 
scanned the external environment and in particular visited universities in Saudi Arabia and Oman 
to understand their general research governance and funding schemes. He also actively 
developed relationships with industrial stakeholders. The focus was to draw on regional 
comparisons rather than wider international issues to move towards the organisations vision. 
Much information and data are considered by the senior management team but as required the 
executive uses his authority to move in a certain direction. 
Overview Interview Case Study 4. 
Stable Environment but Pushing to Maintain World Leading Position = Using Expert 
Heuristics within Rational Frameworks 
Executive 4 works in the Health Sector (in a specialist hospital that is considered world-
leading), specializing in sports medicine and exercise science, with the responsibility of hospital 
administrative matters such as strategic planning, communication management, financial planning, 
and analysis, includes working for critical to check on project implementation and business 
performance. The executive regards himself as a responsible leader that build trust, shares 
employees values and listens to drive engagement. The working environment is stable but a 
mixed of rational, heuristic and intuition decision making styles are followed in decision making 
processes. Strategic decisions are taken in accordance with organisational mission, and vision, 
patient experience and safety and as per the Authority Matrix. The authority matrix is a tool for 
empowerment and role clarification but can also be used for delegation and empowerment. There 
are guidelines on using an authority matrix, which may be thought of as heuristics. Organized 
Change (2022). Additionally, the hospitals vision and mission is directly aligned with the national 
decree issued first in 2012, on the directive of HH Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad Al Thani, the Deputy 
Emir, and Heir Apparent that the second Tuesday of February will be celebrated as Qatar's 
National Sports Day to promote a hearty lifestyle and healthy living among the Qatari population 
(Regency Holidays, 2022). 
5.3 DEFINING EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL CONCURRENT VALIDITY 
Internal validity refers to the degree of confidence that the causal relationship being tested 
is trustworthy and not influenced by other factors or variables. External validity refers to the extent 
to which results from a study can be applied (generalized) to other situations, groups, or events. 
Validity explains how well the collected data covers the actual area of investigation (Ghauri & 
Gronhaug, 2005). Validity basically means measure what is intended to be measured (Field, 
2005). 
Before assessing the validity questions, it is important to understand the goals of a case 
study and the types of errors that can occur when performing the questionnaire. The two main 
goals of a questionnaire are to minimize error in the collected data and measuring the error that is 
part of the questionnaire (Fowler, 2009). Fowler (2009) also defines two fundamental premises. 
The first premise of the questionnaire process is to describe the sample of people who respond, 
can describe the target population. The second premise of a questionnaire research process is that 
the answers of the respondents can be used to accurately describe the characteristics of the 
respondents. It is therefore important to create a sample which is representative for the bigger 
population, which in this case are managers who are involved in strategic decision-making 
processes. 
To confirm the validity of the Questionnaire Pearson Correlations coefficients were found 
by correlating each item questionnaire scores with the score total and based on significant value 
obtained by the Sig.2 tailed of 0.000 < 0.05, it can be concluded that all items are valid, and the 
questionnaire is valid. 
5.4 THE RESEARCH QUESTIONNAIRE 
On-line Survey Monkey questionnaire was administered and carried out between 
November 19 and January 2020 and completed by 350 Qatari Executive Managers.  Participation 
was voluntary encouraged to answer as honestly as possible, and they were assured that their 
answers would remain confidential. The survey questionnaire contains the following:  
1) Demographic questions consist of 4 questions to include age, number of years in the current 
Business, highest level of education, and business organisation/unit. Participants were asked 
to choose the one number for each question that best described their situation. 
2) 25 closed questions describe different decision-making styles, taken from Scott and Bruce 
(1995) study, including rational decision-making style, intuitive decision making style, 
heuristic decision making style, dependent decision-making style, avoidant decision-making 
style and spontaneous decision-making style, and 15closed questions taken from Dew et al. 
(2009), Ballou (1989), and Williams (2010), describe expert heuristic decision making style, 
besides 10 closed questions (Yes No) represent 3 levels of decision making that include 
Decision Making Level 1. Operational decisions: Concern day-to-day activities. Operational 
decisions normally involve actions in the short-term / Decision-Making Level 2 (Managerial 
decisions) that Concern the allocation and use of resources which normally involve longer 
term, and Decision-Making Level 3 (Strategic decisions) that concern broader organisational 
issues, which involve the long term.  
3) Using Likert scale as follows: 1 Strongly Disagree. 2 disagree, 3 Neither Agree nor Disagree, 
4 Agree, and 5 Strongly Agree. participants were asked to answer 40 items concerning the six 
decision-making styles developed by Dew et al. (2009), Ballou (1989), and Williams (2010), 
by choosing the one number for each question that came closest to reflecting their opinion on 
whether they agreed or disagreed with each statement. Besides 10 (YES NO) questions 
regarding decision making levels that include Operational decisions, Managerial decisions, and 
strategic decisions.   
Data were prepared and coded prior to analyses then entered into SPSS, cleaned for errors, 
and checked for missing data. Finally, factor analysis was used to reduce number of items to five 
components (concepts that group together in the respondents minds), as the other items are 
shrapnel and are mixed up in the respondents minds. 
5.5 GENERALISING THE METHODOLOGY 
The definition of generalization is closely related to the concept of external validity, which 
concerns whether findings of one study, and indeed the factor analytic scale used in this study can 
be applied to unexamined subjects and contexts. Generalization pertains to various aspects of a 
research design, including participants, settings, and measurements.  
According to (Best, et al, 2001) causal inferences to the general population from analyses 
of Internet samples necessarily rest on two untested assumptions: (a) that the decision-making 
processes of internet users are like those used by the general population, and (b) that representative 
samples of Internet users can be drawn. The authors provide mixed support for these assumptions. 
They find that current Internet sampling techniques only permit the generation of diverse, not 
representative, samples. However, comparing samples drawn simultaneously using the Internet 
and probabilistic telephone methods, the authors demonstrate that the psychological mechanisms 
underlying common political decisions do not differ between Internet users and the population. 
They discuss the implications of these findings for future survey research. Although Christensen 
& Johnson (2012) found that qualitative researchers view the social world as being dynamic and 
not static. In view of this, they limit their findings to the group of people being studied instead of 
generalizing (De Vaus, 2014). However, here the results of this study are likely to be generalisable 
and the questionnaire would be valid for use in other settings, due to the following: 
1) Social media outlets were used to distribute the questionnaire including Facebook, WhatsApp 
besides e-mails, the sample was representative of the executives and 
2) 40 items of the questionnaire were taken from different published articles and they were re-
evaluated in aa different context in this study. 
5.6 DISCUSSION OF THE MODEL 
Since the research topic is concerning integrating the rational and heuristic elements in 
executive decision-making process in Qatar and its the first in its nature in Qatar, the researcher 
found it important to incorporate all possible decision-making styles in the theoretical model. The 
theoretical model in this case study was developed by consulting literature in this domain as shown 
in Figure 1.2.  It was intended to include in this theoretical model the six common decision-making 
styles developed by researchers to assess the trends in responders minds of executive decision 
makers in Qatar by using different decision-making styles items developed by Scoot & Bruce 
(1995), Harren (1979), Dew et al. (2009), Ballou (1989), and Williams (2010) towards the process 
of decision making in public and private sectors in Qatar. The proposed model includes Rational, 
Intuitive, Dependent, Avoidant, Spontaneous, and Expert Heuristic.  Dependent decision makers 
project responsibility for decisions onto others, in contrast, both rational and intuitive decision 
makers assume personal responsibility for decisions affecting them (Harren 1979). Avoidant 
decision-making style is characterized by attempts to avoid decision making (Scott & Bruce, 
1995). Spontaneous decision-making style is characterized by a sense of immediacy and desire to 
complete the decision-making process as soon as possible (Bavolr & Orosov, 2015). Heuristics 
are rules of thumbs for problem solving (March, 1994). The theoretical model developed in this 
study can benefit future researchers in Qatar to take different approaches to fill gaps in this domain 
and recommend decision styles that fit Qatar environment. 
5.7 WHERE THE RESEARCH WAS UNDERTAKEN 
This case study was undertaken in Qatar. Qatar is a small country located in Southwest 
Asia as shown in figure 5.4. its area is 11,437 sq. km with 
a population of 2.7 million, of whom less than 10 percent 
are nationals. Qatar is also geographically located between 
two large neighbors: Iran, with which Qatar shares the 
worlds largest gas field (North Field, also known as the 
North Dome or South Pars, in the Persian Gulf), and Saudi 
Arabia, with which it has its sole land border, to the south. 
The rest of its territory is surrounded by Gulf waters 
(Baabood, 2017).  Its location in the center of the Gulf 
region and near the major petroleum deposits is 
strategically important. Qatars capital Doha is situated on the east coast of the country. Overall, 
the terrain is almost flat, and the desert is barren (CIA, 2016). Qatar constitutional emirate divided 
to 8 municipalities: Doha, Al Khor and Dhakhirah, Al Wakrah, Al Rayyan, Ash Shamal, Al 
Daayen, Al Sheehaniya and Umm Salal.  Qatar climate can be described as arid, winters are mild 
and very pleasant, summers are in contrast very hot and humid. The mean monthly temperature 
varies between 17 C in January and 36 C in July. In the summer, temperatures above 40 degrees 
are not uncommon. If it rains (which happens infrequently and mostly in winter months), the rain 
falls in brief showers (QTA, 2015). Haze, dust and sandstorms are common occurrences (CIA, 
2016). 
There are only few renewable natural water resources in Qatar, which are used mostly for 
agriculture and private consumption (Mohtar, 2016). Qatars freshwater deficit is addressed by 
desalinated sea water. Desalination plants have high energy demand. However, Qatars domestic 
water use is among the highest in the world (Mohtar, 2016, p. 297). 
The total population of Qatar amounts to 2,660,788 February 2021 published by the 
Planning and Statistics Authority (PSA, 2021). The State is home to people from all over the world 
resulting in the occurrence of many different ethnic groups. Over the years, Qatari nationals 
became a minority in their own country with just 12 percent of the total population (Snoj, 2013). 
In line with this, while the official language of Qatar is Arabic, English is the primary language 
used for communication in the country. 
According to the constitution (Art. 1), Qatars religion is Islam and Sharia law shall be a 
main source of its legislations. Key point in that formulation is that Sharia is a source, and not 
the one source (Tok et al., 2016, p. 8). Moslem religion is a source of the state of Qatar, but not 
the only one. 
Qatar is a monarchy, which is ruled by the tribally based elite Al Thani family, originating 
from the Maadid clan of the Banu Tamim tribe (Gause, 1994) and whose governmental system is 
based on the separation of powers (Hukoomi, 2016b). The Emir is the Head of State of Qatar 
(Hukoomi, 2016a). In 2013, the former Emir Sheikh Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani, who has 
embarked on an ambitious program of modernizing the country (Kamrava, 2009, p. 401), passed 
the power to his son Sheikh Tamim bin Hamad bin Khalifa Al Thani. This was the first time in 
Qatars history that a leader voluntarily retired from the position of Emir. The change in political 
leaders did not alter the structure of high-level decision making, but what has differed since the 
20112013 period is the larger regional and international contexts within which Qatari domestic 
and international policies are formulated, executed, and, importantly, perceived (Kamrava, 2015, 
p. xii). Together with the legal heir the Emir constitutes the executive authority of Qatar. The 
legislative authority is vested in the Advisory Council and the judicial authority in courts of law. 
Set under the authority of the Emir, the Defense Council supervises the armed forces (Hukoomi, 
2016b). A new permanent Constitution became effective on June 8, 2014 (Hukoomi, 2016c). As 
determined by this Constitution, the Council of Ministers supports the executive authority. It 
consists of the Prime Minister and six supreme councils. The Prime Minister is the head of the 
Council of Ministers and is appointed by the Emir just like all other ministers (Hukoomi, 2016b).  
Qatar is a small, open, well monetized economy with no interest rate ceilings on deposits, 
and where market forces determine the interest rates. It does not have a demographic trap, poverty 
trap, or a savings trap like some of the other developing countries. Since the mid-1990s, the 
continuous efforts by policy makers to diversify revenues, control public expenditures, and 
privatization have led to the improvement of productivity and enhanced long-term economic 
growth (El-Mefleh et al., 2008). 
Qatars economy is one of the richest economies in the world based on GDP per capital, 
ranking between fifth and seventh on world rankings for 2015 and 2016 data compiled by the 
World Bank, United Nations, and IMF. Petroleum and natural gas are the cornerstones of Qatars 
economy and account for more than 70% of total government revenue, more than 60% of gross 
domestic product, and roughly 85% of export earnings. Qatar has the worlds third largest proven 
natural gas reserve and is the second-largest exporter of natural gas. Despite turbulent oil prices in 
the couple of last years the countrys economic growth remained stable. Government efforts to 
diversify incomes and globally invest reserves supported the GDP. The economy is also showing 
resilience and despite the ongoing blockade had an estimated growth of 2.6% in 2017. 
The oil industry, which is owned by the government, is responsible for the power possessed 
by the state. Consequently, the decisions on how to spend oil revenues and who will profit from it 
and by how much is up to the rulers of Qatar. Thus, with oil and gas becoming the driving force 
of economy, the corporate identity and power of the ruling family of Qatar grows. Citizens are 
employed by the political elite and receive financial benefits from them. Because of that the 
citizens are tied to the rulers and are compelled to approve of the way of governance if they strive 
to succeed (Gause, 1994). 
Qatars pre-oil economy was dominated by the pearl industry; however, in the 1930s, 
demand for pearls collapsed due to the introduction of cultured pearls (Ulrichsen, 2016, p. 23). 
Production of oil in the Gulf area began in 1933 in Bahrain; in 1939, oil reserves in Qatar were 
discovered. Qatars economy can be characterized as state capitalism (Ulrichsen, 2016, p. 68), 
as nearly all-important oil and gas producing companies (as, for instance, Qatargas and Qatar 
Petroleum) as well as other non-oil/gas-based firms as Qatar Airways (transportation), Industries 
Qatar (heavy industry), Qatari Diar (real estate) or Ooredoo (telecommunication) are entirely state-
owned (Ulrichsen, 2016, p. 71). The oil and natural gas sector of Qatar is responsible for over 50 
percent of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) in 2016 (The Heritage Foundation, 2016). The 
countrys reserves of gas are the third largest in the world (CIA, 2016) and in 2007, the arising 
businesses made Qatar even to the top liquefied natural gas (LNG) exporter of the world (Alraouf, 
2012).  
Due to the small population that lacks the necessary skills to drive Qatars economic 
growth, the countrys development depends largely on foreign workers (Moini et al., 2009). Due 
to the increasing dependence on foreign workers, the government introduced a plan to counteract 
this phenomenon. The so-called Qatarization, a concept that requires that a certain percentage 
of Qataris must be employed in private-sector companies, was introduced by the Qatari Labor Law 
of 1962 and mentioned again in 2004 (Zakhidov, 2015). This strategy was implemented by the 
country to bring Qataris into professional and managerial jobs especially in the private sector 
which are currently occupied by expatriate workers. The government focusses strongly on the 
private sector because only a really few percent of all employed nationals work within the truly 
private sector (Moini et al., 2009; Powell, 2014). 
According to the National Vision 2030, one of the most important developments in Qatar 
is that of a world-class educational system that equips citizens to achieve their aspirations and to 
meet the needs of Qatars society, including: educational curricula and training programs 
responding to the current and future needs of the labor market, high quality educational and 
training opportunities appropriate to each individuals aspirations and abilities, and accessible 
educational programs for life-long learning (GSDP, 2008). 
5.8 QUESTIONING THE RESEARCH 
This non-experimental, descriptive study explored the perceptions of executive decision 
making in the minds of executive decision makers in Qatar in both public and private sector 
regarding integrating decision-making styles in decision making process and whether these styles 
is considered credible and usable; Data were collected from a 350 executives survey. This case 
study discussing integrating decision-making styles in decision making process is the first in its 
nature in Qatar. At late stage of this case study, the researcher noticed prospects that can be looked 
at in future for further study.  This issue is related to how to classify the population of this case 
study? Is it homogeneous or heterogeneous population different in its characteristics  and specialty? 
That reflects also on sampling, which entails cluster sampling. To this end also each level of 
management as distinct levels that entails the three levels of sampling for analysis should be 
considered.  
Some weaknesses were identified which come from some of the difficulties encompassed 
sampling. Lack of published literature on the topic of decision-making styles in Qatar made it 
difficult to benefit in assessing the gaps in literature where you can build on that and fill the gaps, 
this lack of studies limits the researchers ability to compare with other studies of the same caliber. 
The other issue in this regard is the difficulties of developing cluster samples to reflect 
different specialization in government and private institutions in Qatar which made it hard to 
pursue cluster sampling which provide a good representation to the whole population.  
Another environmental issue is coronavirus pandemic (COVID-19), which had engulfed 
the nations of the world since started which imposed huge restrictions on movement and official 
meetings, this in turn made it so difficult to administer good qualitative interviews to gain more 
knowledge regarding the process of decision-making of executive decision makers in both public 
and private institutions in Qatar.  
5.9 APPLICATIONS OF THE RESEARCH 
This research can help in enhancing decision-making process in both public and private 
sectors in Qatar. Qatar is one of the promising developing countries with growing economy. This 
case study can be a base for future study that entails many benefits to include making better 
decisions that can best use time and make better use of resources, and at the same time make 
employees to contribute more effectively and be more committed. Using this research and its 
findings can enhance professional development, employee satisfaction and improved engagement. 
This research can be used for further development in future research to fill the gaps and developing 
new theoretical models in the domain.  
5.10 IMPLICATIONS FOR POLICY AND PRACTICE 
Policy is a relatively stable, purposive course of action followed by an actor or set of actors 
in dealing with a problem or matter of concern. Public policies are developed by government 
bodies and officials, Public Policies are those things that governments do and respond to policy 
demand, so it is goal-oriented actions developed through courses or patterns of action over time. 
Policies entails different categories that include:  
1) Constituent policies that involve the composition of government and might be structural; what 
government looks like or Procedural; what government does. 
2) Distributive policies and redistributive policies that entail allocation of services or benefits to 
segments of population. 
3) Regulatory policies which restrict or limit certain behaviours and self-regulatory policies 
which also restrict behaviours but are controlled by the regulated group. 
Public policy decision-making refers to actions taken within governmental settings to 
formulate, adopt, implement, evaluate, or change policies. These decisions may occur at any level 
of government. Policymaking is Lots of decisions (routine or not) over an extended period, and 
decision-making involves making a discrete choice among alternatives at one point in time.  
So, this case study lays the ground for debating this topic related to decision making style 
and set the road by government to establish certain polices that contribute positively in enhancing 
decision making process in both public and private sectors that in turn enhance quality of decisions 
in all levels of leadership. 
5.11 IMPLICATIONS FOR THEORY 
The contributions to theory coming from this research are multifold and can be summarized 
as follows: 
1) Providing a comprehensive and critical review of literature related to decision-making process. 
The literature review conducted in this research is comprehensive and critical. Thus, it is useful 
for researchers and other stakeholders interested in this domain. This is because such a review 
can be used by other researcher to understand what has been done in this domain and what has 
been left behind. This significant in showing the gaps that can be fulfilled to improve the 
related body of knowledge.  
2) Many researchers discuss the subject of this thesis but the differences between them all lies on 
the elements of research and the expansion which make this research consider a fuller study 
including (Papamichail & Rajarm, 2007; Francis, 2016; Papula, & Papulova, 2015; Fox, 2015; 
Xiao et al., 2018; Marewski et al., 2010; Hauser, 2011; Thoma & Williams, 2013; Hilbig, 
2014; Kitjacharoenchai et al., 2019). Thus, future researchers can start to make some 
comparisons between the results of this research with other research. 
3) The primary questions which this research has addressed were related to examining the 
following main points: the first, entering deeply in the usage of rational and heuristic elements 
and how it could be effective on the Executive Decision-making in Qatar. The second, defining 
best practices of the usage of rational and heuristic elements during executive decision-making. 
The third, examining the relation of using the rational and heuristic elements with executive 
decision-making Process. The fourth, choosing the best decision-making styles that executives 
in Qatar mostly exhibit as perceived by respondents, and the fifth conclude all 
recommendations can be made for improving the use of rational and heuristic elements during 
executive decision-making in Qatar.  
4) Elbanna & Child in (2007), rational processes have positive relationship and considered a 
central part of strategic decision-making. Goll & Rasheed in (1997); Elbanna in (2006) agreed 
that there is empirical evidence which ensured that the relationship between the rationality and 
organisational outcomes through decision-making process is a positive relationship. Dean and 
Sharfmanin (1996) found a stronger relationship between rationality and decision effectiveness 
in unstable environments, rather than in stable ones.  Francis (2016) found that older managers 
tend to lean and use rational model than younger as a solution for meeting risks, and rational 
model should be a part of decision-making process that all managers and employees have to 
apply through conducting their jobs.  
5) According to Gigerenzer (2007); and Luan et al. (2019), the heuristics is considered useful for 
decision making process when managers do not have the time to decide and the competition 
with competitors needs quick reaction. Passer & Smith in (2004), using a heuristic model can 
be convenient to define the discrepancies between these rational strategies and actual human 
thought processes which make it an integral part of decision-making process. Hafenbrdl et al. 
(2016) discussed the effects of heuristic model on decision-making model through taking the 
moderating of context-specific experience, technology adoption, and consumer inattention, 
arguing that applying a heuristic model could be beneficial for making decisions when there is 
a need for a quick reaction and there is no time to use all the data and information depending 
on the competitive situation. In addition, this research also agreed that heuristic model can 
affect positively in decision making process but there are several main conditions to be 
discussed related to the volume of information, time, and speed of decision-making. 
Thus, the implications this research presents to the contemporary theories of Rational and 
Heuristic Elements in the decision-making process is that this has now been critically studied 
in the context of Executive Management in Qatar. Furthermore, the literature on executive 
management decision making is extended because of this thesis publication with a theoretical 
model of a decision-making process represented in Figure 5.1 which has been presented and 
discussed in the context of Qatar.  
This study proposed a new mixed environment driven model to decision making process 
based on research results and findings as depicted in Figure 5.3.  This model supports previous 
literature on decision making styles. Previous decision-making theorists used rational decision 
style and intuitive style as two separate techniques of making decisions. To face the challenges of 
the environment that decision-makers must deal with, the mixed approach is propriate. In this 
model, the more complex, dynamic, and poor environment the more intuition and heuristic, the less 
rational. On the other hand, the more simple, stable, and rich environment the more rational and 
avoidant, and the less intuition and heuristic.  
CHAPTER SIX: CONCLUSION 
6.1 INTRODUCTION  
The strategic environment of Qatar is dramatically changing since the blockade of 5th June 
2017. As a small country, Qatar had to face numerous challenges and threats created by the 
blockade and the countries involved, to include sustaining normal life to its citizens and working 
labour forces of expatriates and keeping the execution retheme of its mega projects of highways, 
bridges stadiums and all preparations to world cup in 2022, where urgent plans executed to find 
new lines of logistics to sustain operations of all these projects and to keep normal life. Thus, the 
great success in managing the crisis is attributed to the talented experienced staff and top 
executives who developed excellent plans using instruments of the state national power to include 
political, economic, military, and informational to face the threats that were imminent to happen 
and deal with the consequences. Accordingly, the nature of todays environment has the utmost 
complexity, dynamism accompanied with scarcity of resources which complicated decision-
making processes where good planning became a victim uncertainty. Incomplete and imperfect 
information a companied with scarcity of resources and time constraints are the dominant factors 
when taking decisions, besides what complicate decision process in terms of shifting, ill-defined 
or competing goals. People trying hard to figure out what to do in the face of such difficult 
circumstances. Activities involving decision making processes under these circumstances are 
complex, so governments struggle on daily bases facing such challenges when the stakes often 
high and the impact of decisions are significant on people lives.  
Optimal solutions to current problems need substantial efforts to be devoted to adopting 
the best mechanism to make decisions. Accordingly, people that are using their knowledge and 
experience in coping with complex decision tasks are expert decision makers, which does not mean 
decision analysts, but they are familiar with the tools and information sources relevant to deciding. 
6.2 RESEARCH PURPOSE AND AIM 
The research analysed in detail the decision-making processes and the use of rational, 
heuristics and four other factors that in total accounted for 77% of the variance in executives 
decision-making processes in Qatar.  The utility of this study and its contribution on individual-
difference decision-making paradigm in the academic research is related to the possibility of 
developing a wider and more comprehensive taxonomy of rational and heuristic decision-making 
process, still grounded on an evidence-based approach. Adopting evidence- based categories of 
rational and heuristic may allow future research to investigate more precisely the presence of 
multiple processes in decision-making against the idea of a single decision-making competence 
(Ceschi, Costantini, Phillips, & Sartori, 2017; Ceschi, Demerouti, Sartori, & Weller, 2017).  
On the other hand, even if the present study showed the presence of consistent relationships 
between some traits and rational and heuristic, some of the variance remains unexplained by 
leaving room to other possible predictors (expertise, tacit knowledge, and self-regulation mood) 
Which have proved to have a role in the Anchoring and Adjustment). Such variables, in 
comparison to individual differences, may be developable characteristics, which would be useful 
to train to avoid or apply certain rational or heuristic decision-making styles in specific contexts.  
6.3 RESEARCH REVIEW  
This research investigates the integration of rational and heuristic elements in executive 
decision-making processes in Qatar. Qualitative and quantitative research design is used in this 
study to address the research problem and research questions. Semi-structured interviews were 
conducted with four top executive decision makers, along with a research questionnaire using six 
decision-making styles identified from prior theorizing and empirical research and defined in 
behavioural terms according to Scott and Bruce (1995), Dew et al. (2009), Ballou (1989), and 
Williams (2010), that include rational, intuitive, dependent, avoidant, and spontaneous decision-
making style. Data were analysed using SPSS Version 23 using factor analysis, descriptive 
statistics, MANOVA and correlations.  
The results developed from the descriptive analysis of the average percentage to 
respondents responses (Agree and Strongly agree) of scale items of each factor taking separately, 
where 88.2% agree and strongly agree on rational decision-making style, 50.85% agree and 
strongly agree on intuitive decision-making style, 64.5% agree and strongly agree on dependent 
decision-making style, 20.76% agree and strongly agree on avoidant decision-making style, 95.8% 
agreement on expert heuristic decision-making style and 22.85% agreement on spontaneous 
decision-making style. What does that mean? From the total respondents 27.9% agree and strongly 
agree on expert heuristic decision-making style, 25.72% agree and strongly agree on rational 
decision-making style, 14.82% agree and strongly agree on intuitive decision-making style, 18.8% 
agree and strongly agree on dependent decision-making style, 6.66% agree and strongly agree on 
spontaneous decision-making style, and 6.1% agree and strongly agree on avoidant decision-
making style. These findings support the argument of Sadler-Smith (2005) that despite practicing 
one dominant style, people were likely to use various decision-making styles supporting 
previously published quantitative research findings published by Sadler-Smith (2005). It is also 
noticed that the correlations found in this study support the notion that the decision-making styles 
are not mutually exclusive and that individuals do not rely on a single decision-making style but a 
combination of decision-making styles in making important decisions, which support the argument 
of Scott & Bruce (1995), However, research indicates that individuals, due to a lack of time and 
commitment, tend to rely on shortcuts when making decisions (Payne et al., 1993). Consequently, 
the concept of fast and frugal heuristics has gained attention as an important concept to describe 
human judgments (Gigerenzer et al., 1999) which supports the findings of this study, where 
respondents mostly exhibited expert heuristic decision-making style with 95.8% (agree and 
strongly agree responses). 
 When factor analysis is used to reduce number of items to six components (concepts that 
group together in the respondents minds), the following findings were noticed: 
1) Factor 1  Q16, Q17, Q19 (Avoidant decision-making style) where avoidant decision-makers 
avoid making a decision whenever possible, the value of (p-value = 0.000), which means that 
the independent variables (Q16, Q17, Q19) together have a significant (substantial) effect on 
the dependent variable (Factor 1) at a significant level of (   0.05). 
2) Factor 2  Q33, Q34, Q38 (Heuristic decision-making style) where heuristic is a mental 
shortcut that allows people to solve problems and make judgments quickly and efficiently. 
These rule-of-thumb strategies shorten decision-making time and allow people to function 
without constantly stopping to think about their next course of action, the value of (p-value = 
.000), this means that the independent variables represented by (Q33, Q34, Q38) together have 
significant (substantial) effect on the dependent variable (Factor 2) at a level of significance of 
(  0.05).  
3) Factor 3  Q2, Q3, Q4 (Rational decision-making style) where rational decision-makers 
conduct an extensive search for alternatives and make a logical choice between them, the value 
of (p-value = 0.000), which means that the independent variables (Q2, Q3, Q4) combined have 
a significant (substantial) effect on the dependent variable (Factor 3) at a significant level of 
(  0.05) 
4) Factor 4  Q6, Q7 (Intuitive Decision-making Style) where intuitive decision-makers use their 
intuition to make decisions, the value of (p-value = 0.000). This means that the independent 
variables represented by (Q6, Q7) together have a significant (substantial) effect on the 
dependent variable (Factor4) at the significant level of (  0.05). 
5) Factor 5  Q13, Q15 (Dependent Decision-making Style) where dependent decision-makers 
rely on others to guide their decision-making, the value of (p-value = 0.000), which means that 
the independent variables represented by (Q13, Q15) combined have a significant (substantial) 
effect on the dependent variable (Factor5) at the level of Significance of (  0.05). 
6) Factor 6  Q21, Q22 (Spontaneous Decision-making Style) where decision makers made Quick 
and impulsive decisions), the value of (p-value = 0.000), which means that the independent 
variables represented by (Q21, Q22) combined have significant (substantial) effect on the 
dependent variable (Factor 6) at the level of Significance of (  0.05). 
The correlations found between different factors is supported by some of previous 
literature. A positive significant correlation of Factor 3 (Rational decision-making style) with 
Factor 4 (Intuitive decision-making style) at the 0.01 level, support the argument made by Betsch 
& Kunz (2008), that intuitive thinkers were more likely to make intuitive decisions and rational 
thinkers were more likely to make a rational decision.  
Avoidant decision-making style is characterized by attempts to avoid decision making. The 
negative significant correlation between Factor 1 (Avoidant decision-making style) and Factor 3 
(Rational decision-making style) at the 0.01 level supports the argument of Scott & Bruce (1995) 
and the conclusion of Phillips et al. (1984) that rational decision makers tend to approach rather 
than avoid problems. The avoidant decision-making style was found to be negatively related to 
well-being (Bavolr & Orosov, 2015), also depression was found to be positively correlated with 
the avoidant style, brooding and anxious style and was negatively associated with the vigilant and 
intuitive decision-making styles. In the few studies with employees as participants, Rational (Russ 
et al.,1996, sales-managers) and Intuitive (Sadler-Smith, 2004, managers) styles were found to be 
associated with better job performance and avoidant style (Russ et al.,1996) with poorer job 
performance. 
According to Allwood & Salo (2012), persons scoring high on dependent style have less 
flexibility in planning and accomplishing their decision-making errands because they are 
dependent on other persons in the decision process. This would result in less control over the 
decision process and its outcomes. Dependent styles suggests that dependence on others in 
decision-making can be accompanied by a lower tendency to avoid making decisions. Avoidance 
can be inevitable only with a lack of other people able to provide advice, while a higher reported 
use of the rational style correlated positively with the dependent style (Bavolr & Orosov, 2015), 
which concurs with the findings of two previous studies Baiocco et al. (2009 and Loo, (2000). A 
possible explanation could be that an effort to seek advice from other people is a part of a rational 
process (Bavolr & Orosov, 2015). 
Factor 3 (Rational decision-making style) has positive significant correlation with Factor 
4 (Intuitive Decision Making Style) at the 0.01 level, A classification scheme for decision-making 
style proposed by Harren (1979) includes two opposing categories in regard to information 
gathering and evaluation: intuitive and rational. Therefore, individuals can be classified as 
consistently intuitive or consistently analytical in information gathering and evaluation. However, 
optimal strategic decision making may require both rationality and intuition (Elbanna, 2006; 
Elbanna & Child, 2007; Hitt & Tyler, 1991; Langley et al.,1995). Intuition denotes a vague 
feeling or sense of feeling of pattern or relationships. It is also referred as holistic thinking, 
immediate insight, seeing the answer without knowing how it was reached (Thorne, 1990), or as 
a technique of swiftly retrieving hunks and forms of knowledge molded from previous 
experience (Seal, 1990). Decision-makers might sense patterns, feelings, and objects in seemingly 
unconnected facts. Intuition is often perceived by people as a sudden awareness of information 
(Ritter, & Dijskterhuis, 2014; Sauter, 1999). Intuitive managers become impatient with routine, 
details, or repetition. They may reach conclusions too quickly, ignore relevant facts, or follow an 
inspiration when it is clearly bad (Agor, 1984). The factors of intuitive decision-making style 
consist of experience, knowledge, and others (Harteis et al., 2008). 
A Mixed environment driven model to decision-making process is proposed based on 
research results and findings besides environment characteristics and setting that increase 
uncertainty as depicted in Figure 6.1.  This model supports previous literature on decision making 
styles, where previous theorists used rational decision style and intuitive style as two separate 
techniques of making decisions. A classification scheme for decision-making style proposed by 
Harren (1979) includes two opposing categories regarding information gathering and evaluation 
which are intuitive and rational. Therefore, individuals can be classified as consistently intuitive 
or consistently analytical in information gathering and evaluation. 
Figure 6.1 
Mixed Environment Driven Model to Decision-making Processes 
Three factors that can increase uncertainty in organisation environment. These factors are 
complexity, dynamism, and richness, As the environment becomes more complex, less stable, and 
poorer, the level of uncertainty increases. Environmental complexity is a function of the strength, 
number, and interconnectedness of the specific and general forces that an organisation must 
manage. The greater the number, and the greater the differences between them, the more complex 
and uncertain is the environment and the more difficult to predict and control (Child, 1972). 
Environmental dynamism is a function of how much and how quickly forces in the specific and 
general environments change over time and thus increase the uncertainty an organisation faces 
(Aldrich, 1979). Environmental richness is a function of the amount of resources available to 
support an organisations domain, where in rich environments, uncertainty is low because of the 
plethora of resources and the lack of need to compete for them (Starbuck, 1976). The certainty is 
high in simple, stable, and rich environment, but in complex, dynamic and poor environment the 
uncertainty is high.  
When analyzing this type of environment where uncertainty is the concern for decision 
makers during decision making processes, it is concluded that using one decision-making style 
will be costly whether in preparation phase or as consequence of a wrong decision, accordingly, 
and to reach an effective decision a mixed environment driven model to decision-making process 
is proposed.  
Rational Decision-Making Style is characterized by a thorough search for and logical 
evaluation of alternatives (Scott & Bruce, 1995), where Rational causes decision makers to be 
obliged to consider several alternative scenarios and probabilities for each alternative before 
making decision (Busari & Spicer, 2015; Oliveira, 2007). According to Dean & Sharfman (1993), 
rationality is the extent to which the decision-making process involves the collection of 
information relevant to the decision, and the reliance upon analysis of this information in making 
the choice. Rational decision-making incorporates critical evaluation of evidence and a structured 
process that requires time and conscious effort (Fitzgerald et al., 2017). Rational procedures help 
decision makers establish relevant decision criteria, identify a comprehensive set of alternatives, 
and evaluate the individual alternatives objectively (Kaufmann et al., 2012). In contrast to intuitive 
decision-making style, rational decision-making style encompass cautious and methodical thought 
fulness of all conceivable decision choices (Baird, 1989; Tetlock et al.,1993). Scrutinizing the 
available options by means of rational decision-making style necessitates the decision maker to 
deliberately appraise options and their relevant probable consequences. In addition to being a 
cognizant and thoughtful process, rational decision-making style is largely free from 
ridiculousness and predispositions, and thus results in enhanced decision (Pacini & Epstein, 1999), 
higher work and organisational performance (Busari & Spicer, 2015; Singh, 2014; Smolka et al., 
2018; Uzelac et al., 2016). 
Rational economic model based on neo-classical economic ideology was also governed by 
logic and rational analysis in decision scenarios (Hendry, 2000). All the options are considered, 
rationally evaluated, and the final decision is based on optimal choices (Hellreigel et al., 2001; 
Mangalindan, 2004). The perfect rationalism was challenged with the passage of time. Simon 
(1957) criticized the mean-end sequence and proposed a bounded rational model which is well 
known as normative or administrative model of decision making. Thus, the perfect rationality 
turned into bounded rationality based on limited information processing, judgment heuristics, and 
satisfying choices. later, Lindbloms (1959) incremental model was also based on limited rationality 
although these models were more flexible than perfect rationalism. The major transition took place 
when Kahneman & Tversky (1979) rejected the legacy of perfect rationality and proposed prospect 
theory of decision making. Time constraints, decision speed, and cost of acquiring information 
restricted theorists to make decisions with an adequate amount of information (Buchanan & 
Connell, 2006), therefore decision makers tried to find alternatives to rational theory and this why 
intuitive decision-making style earned much popularity in the recent years. While theorists limited 
decision-making to either rational or intuitive strategies, Andersen (2000) proposed that 
individuals decision-making styles can be identified by assessing these two functional dimensions 
in conjunction. 
Decision literature depicts that past researchers introduced numerous unique decision-
making styles according to their cultures, contexts, and circumstances, but the shared aspect of the 
research on decision making styles is the consideration of rational and intuitive decision-making style 
by almost all of the decision researchers (Arroba, 1977; Harren, 1979; Mitroff & Kilmann, 1975; 
Phillips et al.,1984; Scott & Bruce, 1995) although they considered both styles as distinctive 
dimensions of human nature. Researchers (Klaczynski, 2001; Stanovich & West, 2000; Sternberg, 
1997) illustrated that the line of distinction between cognitive style, learning style, thinking style, 
and decision-making style is based on the distinction between rational and intuitive approaches. 
The past literature indicates that decision researchers were stick to the assumption that decisions 
are solely based either on rationality or on intuition. Payne & Bettman (2004) suggested that 
attempts should be made to understand the interaction between these two styles instead of 
considering them as separate dimensions to confirm Stanovich & West, (2002) argument that these 
two styles do not stand apart on the poles and are more interactive in nature. The mixed 
environment driven model to decision making process, this research proposed came to support 
Rowe & Boulgarides (1992) argument that the distinction and integration in rational and intuitive 
decision-making style are based on individual differences, organisational, contextual, and 
environmental factors, but in a broader prospect that include other decision-making styles, 
heuristic, dependent and avoidant. In todays environment organisations are forced to work under 
uncertainty, where multicultural and diversity of working forces, environment is the dominant and 
the room for individual differences expanded. In the times of emergency, complexity, ambiguity, 
uncertainty, risk, and time pressure, intuitive decision-making style is  more appropriate that involves 
a creative solution based on overall situational recognition instead of making a feature-by-feature 
analysis (Bryant, 2002; Callan & Proctor, 2000), Similarly, in the absence of the consensus and in 
the presence of uncertainty, rational style is inappropriate (Dean & Sharfman, 1993), but  Bass & 
Reggio (2006) suggested that both styles stands on a continuum on which an individual leader 
rates his or her leadership which supported Hammond et al. (1997) argument that rational and 
intuitive style should not be rigidly placed on the ends of a continuum instead an individuals 
relative standing between these two styles should determine his or her style, where an intuitive 
decision maker should share some rationality and a rational decision maker should consider some 
intuition to make superior choices, which support the proposed mixed environment driven model 
to decision making process of this study. This proposed mixed model support the argument of 
Spicer & Sadler- Smith (2005) that a balanced approach in decision making can be more appropriate 
for effective decision making. So, effective decisions can be made, when all decision-making styles 
proposed by the mixed model are taken into consideration by different levels of management in 
organisations. 
So, to summarize on the mixed environment driven model to decision-making processes, the 
more complex, dynamic, and poor environment the more intuition and heuristic, the less rational. On 
the other hand, the more simple, stable, and rich environment the more rational, the less intuition and 
heuristic.  
Findings and results of this case study can be used in Qatar to fill the gaps in practicing 
decision-making styles by government departments and other private sector institutions to enhance 
effectiveness of decision-making processes and help in capacity building programs tackling human 
resources development regarding decision-making domain and other domains of leadership and 
management in institutions across the country. The mixed environment driven model to decision-
making processes, can be used in Qatar and elsewhere to face the challenges that the environment 
present in terms of complexity dynamism and scarcity of resources.  
6.4 CONTRIBUTION TO KNOWLEDGE  
The current research contributes not only to theory, but also to practice. The following two 
subsections highlight the corresponding contributions. 
6.4.1 CONTRIBUTIONS TO THEORY 
The contributions to theory coming from this research are multifold and can be summarized 
as follows: 
1) Providing a comprehensive and critical review of recent and classified literature related to 
decision-making styles. The literature review conducted in this research is comprehensive and 
critical. Thus, it will be useful for researchers and other stakeholders interested in this domain. 
This is because such a review can be used by other researcher to understand what has been 
done in this domain and what has been left behind. This significant in showing the gaps that 
can be fulfilled to improve the related body of knowledge. 
2) Providing a theoretical model that can be used by researchers and presenting a case study 
concerning the integration of rational and heuristic elements in executive decision-making 
process in a developing country. This study is the first in its nature in Qatar and can be used 
for further investigation in this domain. 
6.4.2 CONTRIBUTIONS TO PRACTICE  
1) This thesis is a study of decision-making process it assesses decision-making elements 
(heuristics and rational) across Qatari executive managers and attempts to formulate guidelines 
for improving these elements. Current research in the field has only explored elements of good 
decision quality, and smart organisations in contrast extraordinarily little guidance is available 
for organisations to improve their decision-making abilities. This research identifies decision-
making styles and develop a model that businesses can use to improve their decision-making 
capabilities. 
2) The findings and results of this case study can be used in Qatar to fill the gaps in practicing 
decision-making styles by government departments and other private sector institutions to 
enhance effectiveness of decision-making processes. This will further help in capacity building 
programs tackling human resources development regarding decision-making domain which 
will also reflect positively on other domains of human resources development that can establish 
a high level of leadership and management in institutions across the country. 
3) The mixed environment driven model to decision-making processes, can be used in Qatar and 
elsewhere to face the challenges that the environment present in terms of complexity dynamism 
and richness.  
6.5 RESEARCH LIMITATIONS  
This study has the following limitations: 
1) Difficulties to assess the targeted population of different level of executive decision makers in 
Qatar in both public and private institutions. 
2) Difficulties in developing cluster samples to reflect different specialization in government and 
private institutions. 
3) The most important limitation of this study is that the lack of prior studies dedicated to the 
decision-making style in Qatar. However, this lack of studies was the main reason for 
conducting the study but as yet limits the research's ability to compare with other studies in 
order to confirm the external reliability of the questionnaire. 
4) Limitations related to environmental issues concerning COVID-19 which reflected negatively 
on administering the right process of sampling and hindered the process of conducting and 
analysing qualitative interviews that would lead to theory saturation.  
6.6 AREAS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH  
6.6.1 AREAS CONCERNING THE METHODOLOGY 
In this case study, subjects from one population participated in this research, where the 
research instrument was evaluated using one sample in a hope that this sample will represent the 
whole population. The researcher believe that the population of executive decision makers is 
spread over different discipline and specializations within different types of organisations whether 
organic or mechanistic types of organisations in both public and private sectors or different in the 
aspects of value creation. This should entail that the population of executive decision makers to be 
heterogeneous rather than homogeneous should be considered. If this concept proves to be correct, 
then the researcher recommends the following: 
1) Future researchers in this domain should start initially investigating this issue and go deep in 
analysing the population of executive decision makers in Qatar for clustering purposes and 
developing a database that is helpful in accomplishing research objectives and administering 
different phases of the research. 
2)  Develop and administer cluster samples that provide good representation of internally 
heterogeneous populations. 
3) Administering three cluster samples to be administered in three stages using the same 
theoretical model with the moderating variable. These three samples correspond with the three 
decision making levels that include a) operational decisions, b) managerial decisions and c) 
strategic decisions.  
4) Develop orientation mechanisms for participants that can reflect positively to accomplishing 
research objectives. This can be done by creating a sense of urgency in the minds of leaders on 
the national level to this type of study and ensuring the benefits of being ground in any future 
capacity building programs related to human resources development. 
6.6.2 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FURTHER RESEARCH 
In addition to the recommendations concerning the methodology and methods made in this 
research and briefly highlighted and discussed in the previous section, this research also provides 
some important avenues for future research to continue developing this important research domain, 
adding to the theoretical model moderating variables, like training programs, empowerment and 
capacity building programs, between independent and dependent variables to check if these 
moderating variables can influence the process of decision making. 
6.7 ACHIEVEMENT OF THE AIM AND OBJECTIVES 
The aim of this research is to analyse in detail the decision-making processes and the use 
of rational and heuristics elements in executives decision-making processes in Qatar, this was 
shown to be so, and has been detailed in chapters 4 and 5 of the thesis, and he research answers 
several specific questions, related to different decision-making styes which have not yet been 
answered by the available extant literature in general and specifically in the Qatari context. 
The objectives of this study are as follows and are connected to the research questions: 
O1: To investigate the managers awareness and understanding of the applied mix of 
decision-making styles, including rational and heuristic styles, in executive decision-making in 
Qatar (RQ1 and RQ2),  
O2: To investigate the relationship of decision-making styles with executives strategic 
contexts (RQ2 and RQ3),  
O3: To investigate the relationship of decision-making styles with executives 
demographics (RQ2 and RQ3), 
O4: To suggest the direction of improvement, derived from relevant academic research, by 
which executives' decision-making should follow (RQ5). 
Results of the study show that respondents exhibited all six decision-making styles with 
different level of agreement Figure 5.1 (Objective 1). The results developed from the descriptive 
analysis of the average percentage to respondents responses (Agree and Strongly agree) of scale 
items of each factor taking separately, where 88.2% agree and strongly agree on rational decision-
making style, 50.85% agree and strongly agree on intuitive decision-making style, 64.5% agree 
and strongly agree on dependent decision-making style, 20.76% agree and strongly agree on 
avoidant decision-making style, 95.8% agreement on expert heuristic decision-making style and 
22.85% agreement on spontaneous decision-making style. What does that mean? From the total 
respondents 27.9% agree and strongly agree on expert heuristic decision-making style, 25.72% 
agree and strongly agree on rational decision-making style, 14.82% agree and strongly agree on 
intuitive decision-making style, 18.8% agree and strongly agree on dependent decision-making 
style, 6.66% agree and strongly agree on spontaneous decision-making style, and 6.1% agree and 
strongly agree on avoidant decision-making style.  
These findings confirm the argument that decision making is a multifaceted and multi-
dimensional phenomenon, where the focus in decision making varies from in different contexts 
and from discipline to discipline. Table 4.15 shows how the six decision-making factors differ 
significantly with different strategic contexts (Objective 2) and H01 (that here is NO Statistically 
Significant (<0.05) difference between decision-making styles of executives and their strategic 
contexts in Qatar) is only partially supported. The achievement of objective 2 is further detailed 
in section 4.6. The most important decision related disciplines are economics and psychology 
(Harrison, 1999). Rational style is the brainchild of economics (Chater et al., 2003;  Mangalindan, 
2004) whereas intuitive style is the creation of psychology (Luthans, 2000).  So, the different levels 
of agreement on different decision-making styles are due to the fact that Qatars economy is one 
of the richest economies in the world based on GDP per capital, ranking between fifth and seventh 
on world rankings for 2015 and 2016 data compiled by the World Bank, United Nations, and IMF. 
So, decision makers are risk aversion where they tend to prefer certainty to uncertainty, and this 
explains why 27.9% agree and strongly agree on expert heuristic decision-making style, 25.72% 
agree and strongly agree on rational decision-making style, 14.82% agree and strongly agree on 
intuitive decision-making style, 18.8% agree and strongly agree on dependent decision-making 
style, 6.66% agree and strongly agree on spontaneous decision-making style, and 6.1% agree and 
strongly agree on avoidant decision-making style. which means where rational economic 
approaches advocated the economic man who is maximizer in nature and uses all the means to reach 
at an ideal end (Hendry, 2000), intuitive decision-making style is more satisfying in nature (Driver et 
al.,1993) which is more related to feelings, emotions, and impressions (Scott & Bruce, 1995). 
The study investigated the relationship of decision-making styles with executives 
demographics, and it was shown in able 4.14, that H02 (there is NO Statistically Significant 
difference between decision-making styles of executives and their demographics in Qatar) is only 
partially supported. In fact, Factor 1 (Avoidatnt decision-making style) has positive significant 
correlation with number of years in the current business at the 0.05 level, Factor 4 (intuitive 
decision-making style) has positive significant correlation with level of Education at the 0.01 level, 
and F5 (dependent decision-making style) has positive significant correlation with both number of 
years in the current business and level of education at the 0.05 level. Age is not significantly 
correlated with any of the decision-making styles (Objective 3). 
O4: To suggest the direction of improvement, derived from relevant academic research, by 
which executives' decision-making should follow (RQ5). 
P1 Executives in Qatar use a range of decision-making styles, including rational and 
heuristic styles, that can be profiled using a structured questionnaire. 
REFERENCES  
Agor, W. H. (1984). Intuitive management: Integrating left and right management skills. Prentice 
Hall, NJ, 1984. 
Aldrich, H. (1979). Organizations and Environments. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 
AlHussayen, T. F. (2009). Organisational decision-making assessment and improvement (Master 
dissertation), University of Manchester. 
Alghabban, A. (2001). Pharmaceutical medicine dictionary, p-value. Available at: 
http://www.credoreference.com.elibrary.jcu.edu.au/entry/pmd/p_value (Accessed 20: 
February 2022). 
Alghabban, A. (2004). Dictionary of pharmacovigilance. London: Pharmaceutical Press. 
Allison, C., & Hayes, J., The cognitive style index: A measure of intuition analysis for 
organizational research. Journal of Management Studies 33,1996, 119-135. 
Allwood, C. M., & Salo, I. (2012). Decision-making styles and stress. International Journal of 
Stress Management, 19 (1), 34-47.  
Alraouf, A. A. (2012). Dohaization: Constructing a new urbanity brand amid gulf and middle 
eastern cities. Available at: www.analchemyofarchitecture.blogspot.com (Accessed 20: 
February 2022). 
Amason, A. C. (1996). Distinguishing the effects of functional and dysfunctional conflict on 
strategic decision-making: Resolving a paradox for top management teams. Academy Of 
Management Journal, 39 (1), 123-148. 
http://www.credoreference.com.elibrary.jcu.edu.au/entry/pmd/p_value
http://www.analchemyofarchitecture.blogspot.com/
Amason, A. C., & Mooney, A. C. (2008). The Icarus paradox revisited: How strong performance 
sows the seeds of dysfunction in future strategic decision-making. Strategic Organization, 
6, 407434. 
Andersen, J. A. (2000). Intuition in managers: Are intuitive managers more effective? Journal of 
Managerial Psychology, 15(1), 46-63. 
Andersson, P., Ekman, M., & Edman, J. (2003). Forecasting the fast and frugal way: A study of 
performance and information-processing strategies of experts and non-experts when 
predicting the World Cup 2002 in soccer. SSE/EFI Working Paper Series in Business 
Administration, 9. 
Arroba, T. (1977). Styles of decision making and their use: An empirical study. British Journal of 
Guidance and Counselling, 5, 149 158. 
Artinger, F., Petersen, M., Gigerenzer, G., & Weibler, J. (2015). Heuristics as adaptive decision 
strategies in management. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 36(S1), S33-S52. 
Astebro, T., & S. Elhedhli, S. (2006). "The effectiveness of simple decision heuristics: forecasting 
commercial success for early-stage ventures. Management Science, 52(3), 395-409. 
Ayal S, Hochman G (2009). Ignorance or integration: The cognitive processes underlying choice 
behavior. Journal of Behavioural Decision-making 22(4), 455474. 
Baabood, A. (2017). Qatars resilience strategy and implications for statesociety relations. IAI 
Working Papers 17 (36). 
Baiocco, R., Laghi, F., & DAlessio, M. (2009). Decision-making style among adolescents: 
Relationship with sensation seeking and locus of control. Journal of Adolescence. 32(4), 
963976. 
Baird, B. F. (1989). Managerial decisions under uncertainty: An introduction to the analysis of 
decision making (Vol. 4). John Wiley & Sons. 
Backus, E. C., & Bruhl, J. C. (2022). "The need for a comprehensive facility decision-making 
process", Facilities, 40 (1/2), 40-55. 
Ballou, R. H. (1989). Heuristics: Rules of thumb for logistics decision making. Journal of Business 
Logistics, Vol 10(1), ISSN: 0197-6729. Wiley-Blackwell Publishers Limited. 
Barakat, S. (2014). Qatari mediation: between ambition and achievement. Brookings Doha Center 
Analysis Paper, Number 12. Available at: https://www.brookings.edu/wp-
content/uploads/2016/06/Final-PDF-English.pdf  (Accessed 20: February 2022). 
Barbara, L., & Nass, C. (1989). The lid on the garbage can: Institutional constraints on decision-
making in the technical core of college-text publishers. Administrative Science Quarterly, 
34(2) :190207, Sage Publications, Inc. 
Barber, L. L. (2005). Decision making styles associated with adolescent risk taking behavior. 
Psychology, The Ohio State University. 
Barnard, C. I. (1938). The functions of the executive. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard 
University Press. 
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Final-PDF-English.pdf
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/Final-PDF-English.pdf
Bass, B. M., & Riggio, R. E. (2006). Transformational leadership. (2nd ed.). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Bavolr, J., Orosov, O. (2015). Decision-making styles and their associations with decision-
making competencies and mental health. Judgment and Decision Making, 10(1), January 
2015, 115122.  
Baxter, P., & Jack, S. (2008). Qualitative case study methodology: Study design and 
implementation for novice researchers, Qualitative Report, 13(4), 544-559. 
Bazerman, M.H., & Moore, D.A. (2008). Judgment in managerial decision-making, 7th ed. New 
York, USA: Wiley. 
Becker, M. C. (2004). Organizational routines: A review of the literature. Industrial and Corporate 
Change, 13(4), 643678. 
Behling, O., Gifford, W. E., & Tolliver, J. M. (1980). Effects of grouping information on decision 
making under risk. Decision Sciences, 11(2), 272283.  
Bell, E., & Bryman, A. (2007). The ethics of management research: An exploratory content 
analysis. British Journal of Management, 18, 63-77. 
Berger, J. O. (1999). Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis, 2nd ed. Springer. 
Best, S. J., Krueger, B., & Hubbard, C. (2001). An assessment of the generalizability of internet 
surveys. Social Science Computer Review, 19(2), 131-145. 
Bingham, C., & Eisenhardt, K. (2011). Rational heuristics: The simple rules that strategist learn 
from process experience. Strategic Management Journal, 32(13), 14371464. 
Blink, M. G. (2005). The Power of Thinking Without Thinking. Back Bay Books, Little Brown. 
Blue Ocean Strategy (2022).  Blue Ocean Strategy, Available at: 
https://www.blueoceanstrategy.com/what-is-blue-ocean-strategy/ (Accessed 20: February 
2022). 
Blustein, D. L., & Phillips, S. D. (1988). Individual and contextual factors in career exploration. 
Journal of Vocational Behavior, 33, 203216.  
Borges B., Goldstein D. G., Ortmann A., Gigerenzer, G. (1999). Can ignorance beat the stock 
market? In: Gigerenzer G, Todd P, ABC Research Group (eds), Simple Heuristics That 
Make Us Smart, chapter 3. Oxford University Press, New York, 5972. 
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2006). Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qualitative Research in 
Psychology, 3, 77-101. 
Braybrooke, D., & Lindblom, C.E. (1970). A Strategy of decision: Policy evaluation as a social 
process. Free Press: New York. 
Brder, A. (2000). Assessing the empirical validity of the "Take-the-best" heuristic as a model of 
human probabilistic inference. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, 
and Cognition, 26(5), 13321346.  
Brder, A. (2003). Decision making with the "adaptive toolbox": Influence of environmental 
structure, intelligence, and working memory load. Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
Learning, Memory, and Cognition, 29(4), 611625.  
https://www.blueoceanstrategy.com/what-is-blue-ocean-strategy/
Brder, A., & Schiffer, S. (2006). Adoptive flexibility and maladaptive routines in selecting fast 
and frugal decision strategies. Journal of Experimental Psychology. Learning Memory and 
Cognition, 32(4), 904-918. 
Brggen, E., & Willems, P. (2009). A Critical comparison of offline focus groups, online focus 
groups and e-Delphi. International Journal of Market Research, 51(3). 
Bryant, D. J. (2002). Making naturalistic decision making fast and frugal. Toronto: Defence 
Research Development Canada. 
Bryman, A. (2016). Social Research Methods. 5th Edition, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 
United Kingdom. 
Buchanan, L., & OConnell, A. (2006). A brief history of decision making. In T. A. Stewart (Ed.), 
Decision making: Better, faster, smarter. Harvard Business Review, 6(8), 3341. 
Buckley, P. J (1993). The role of management in internalization theory. Management International 
Review 33(3), 197207. 
Burlinson, A., Giulietti, M., & Battisti, G. (2018). Technology adoption, consumer inattention and 
heuristic decision-making: Evidence from a UK district heating scheme. Research Policy, 
47(10), 1873-1886. 
Burton, F. N., & Schlegelmilch, B. B. (1987). Profile analyses of non-exporters versus exporters 
grouped by export involvement. Management International Review 27(1), 3849. 
Busari, A. H., & Spicer, D. P. (2015). The role of intuitive and analytical cognitive style towards 
leadership effectiveness: Exploration from Malaysian government-link-companies. In 
Proceedings of 2015 International Business and Education Conferences, 711.  
Butler, R. (2002). Decision-making. In: A. Sorge, eds. Organization. London: Thomson Learning, 
2002, 224251. 
Calabretta, G., Gemser, G., & Wijnberg, N. M. (2017). The Interplay between Intuition and 
rationality in strategic decision-making: A paradox perspective. Organization Studies, 38 
(3-4), 365-401.  
Callan, J., & Proctor, S. (2000). Tactical decision making under uncertainty: Experiments I, and 
II. Technical Report, 1821, April, Pacific Science and Engineering Group. California: SSC 
San Diego, Inc. 
Campo, C.,  Pauser, S. Steiner, E.  Vetschera, R (2016). Decision making styles and the use of 
heuristics in decision making, Journal Business Economics. 86, 389412 
Capgemini (2004). Business Decisiveness Report. Consultancy Report. 
Certo, S. T., Connelly, B. L., & Tihanyi, L. (2008). Managers and their not-so rational decisions. 
Business Horizons, 51(2), 113119.  
Ceschi, A., Costantini, A., Phillips, S. D., & Sartori, R. (2017). The career decision-making 
competence: a new construct for the career realm. European Journal of Training and 
Development, 41(1), 827. 
Ceschi, A., Demerouti, E., Sartori, R., & Weller, J. (2017). Decision-making processes in the 
workplace: How exhaustion, lack of resources and job demands impair them and affect 
performance. Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 313. 
Chater, N., Oaksford, M., Nakisa, R., & Redington, M. (2003). Fast, frugal, and rational: How 
rational norms explain behavior. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 
90, 6386. 
Child, J. (1972). Organizational structure, environment, and performance: The role of strategic 
choice, Sociology 6, 122; Dess, G. G & Beard, D. W. Dimensions of Organizational Task 
Environments, Administrative Science Quarterly, 29 (1984), 5273. 
Child, J., & Tsai T. (2005). The dynamic between firms environmental strategies and institutional 
constraints in emerging economies: Evidence from China and Taiwan. Journal of 
Management Studies 42(1), 95-125. 
Chung E., & McLarney (1999). When giants collide: Strategic analysis application. Management 
Decision (UK), 37, 233. 
CIA. (2016). The World Factbook Qatar. Available at: www.cia.gov (Accessed 20: February 
2022). 
Cohen, L., Manion, L., & Morrison, K. (2011). Research Methods in Education. (7th ed). London: 
Routledge. 
Cornell, A.H. (1980). The decision makers handbook. Englewood Cliffs, N.J: Prentice-Hall 
http://www.cia.gov/
Corner, P. D., Kinicki, A.J., & Keats, B. W. (1994). Integrating organizational and individual 
information processing perspectives on choice. Organization Science, 3, 294-308. 
Cook, T.D., & Campbell, D.T. (1979). Quasi-Experimentation: Design and Analysis Issues for 
Field Settings, 405 Dallas, Ill.: Houghton Mifflin. 
Cooper, R. G. (1997). "Fixing the fuzzy front end of the new product process: Building the 
business case. CMA Magazine, 71, 21-23. 
Creswell, J.W. (2014). Research design: qualitative, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches, 
Los Angeles, Sage Publications. 
Daly, J., Kellehear, A., & Gliksman, M. (1997). The public health researcher: A methodological 
approach. Melbourne, Australia: Oxford University Press. 
Daniel, E. (2016). The usefulness of qualitative and quantitative approaches and methods in 
researching problem-solving ability in science education curriculum. Journal of Education 
and Practice, 7(15), 91-100. 
David, F. R. (2009). Strategic management: concept and cases (12th ed). United States of America, 
Pearson Education, Inc. 
Dean, J. W., & Sharfman, M. P. (1993). Procedural rationality in the strategic decision-making 
process. Journal of Management Studies, 30(4), 587610. 
Dean, J. W., & Sharfman, M. P. (1996). Does decision process matter? A study of strategic 
decision-making effectiveness. Academy of Management Journal, 39(2), 368396. 
Deckert, J. C., Entin, E, B., Entin, E. E., MacMillan, J., & Serfaty, D. (1996). Military command 
decisionmaking expertise. United States Army Research Institute for the behavioral and 
Social Sciences.  
del Campo, C., Pauser, S., Steiner, E., & Vetschera, R. (2016). Decision making styles and the use 
of heuristics in decision making. Journal Business Economics, 86, 389412. 
Dess, G. G., & Beard, D. W. (1984). Dimensions of organizational task environments. 
Administrative Science Quarterly 29, 5273. 
De Vaus, D. A. (2014). Surveys in Social Research. (6th ed). Australia: UCL Press. 
Dew, N., Read, S., Sarasvathy, S. D., & Wiltbank, R. (2009). Effectual versus predictive logics in 
entrepreneurial decision-making: Differences between experts and novices. Journal of 
Business Venturing, 24(4), 287-309. 
DiCenso, A., Guyatt, G., & Ciliska, D. (2005). Evidence-based nursing: A guide to clinical 
practice. St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby. 
Dijksterhuis, A., & Nordgren, L. F. (2006). A theory of unconscious thought. Perspectives on 
Psychological Science, 1(2), 95109. 
Drnyei, Z., & Taguchi, T. (2009). Questionnaires in second language research: Construction, 
administration, and processing. Abingdon-on-Thames, England: Routledge.  
Driver, M. J., Brousseau, P. L., & Hunsaker, P. L. (1993). The dynamic decision maker. San 
Francisco: Jossey Bass Publications. 
Drucker, P.F. (1967). The Effective Decision. Harvard Business Review, 45(1). 92-98. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/08839026
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/journal/08839026
DuBrin, A.J., Ireland, R. D., J.C. Williams, J. C., & Sisk, H. L. (1989). Management and 
Organization. Ohio, South-Western Pub. Co. 
Easterby-Smith, M., Thorpe, R., & Lowe, A. (1991). Management research: An introduction. Sage 
Publication, London. 
Easterby-Smith, M., Thorpe, R., Jackson, P., & Lowe, A. (2012). Management Research (4th ed.). 
London, Sage. 
Eccles, H. E. (1966). The study of military management. Naval Research Logistics Quarterly. 
13(4), 437-445. 
Egan, B. D. (2006). Understanding analytical bias: Why brilliant decision dont come easily or 
often. Global Knowledge. 
Elbanna, S. (2006). Strategic decision-making: Process perspectives. International Journal of 
Management Reviews, 8(1), 1-20.  
Elbanna, S., & Child, J. (2007). Influences on strategic decision effectiveness: Development and 
test of an integrative model. Strategic Management Journal, vol. 28, no. 4, 431-453. 
Elbanna, S., Child, J., & Dayan, M. (2013). A model of antecedents and consequences of intuition 
in strategic decision-making: evidence from Egypt. Long Range Planning, Elsevier Science 
46, 149-176. 
Elbanna, S., & Fadol, Y. (2016). The Role of Context in Intuitive Decision-Making. Journal of 
Management & Organization, 22(5), 642-661. 
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. The Academy of 
Management Review, 14(4), 532-550.  
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Bourgeois III, L.J. (1988). Politics of strategic decision-making in high-
velocity environments: toward a midrange theory. Academy of Management Journal, 31, 
737770.  
Eisenhardt, K. M., & Zbaracki, M.J. (1992). Strategic decision-making. Strategic Management 
Journal, 13(2), 17-37.  
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1997). Strategic decisions and all that jazz. Business Strategy Review, 8(3), 1-
Ekaterini, N., Galanou & Farrag, D. (2014). Mapping and interpreting a decision-making 
framework for the implicit managerial theory in the Arab Gulf States: The case of Qatar. 
International Journal of Cross-Cultural Management, 5(1), 73-99. 
El-Mefleh, M., & Shotar, M. (2008). A contribution to the analysis of the economic growth of 
Qatar. Applied Econometrics and International Development, 8(1), 147-154. 
Emery, F.E & Trist, E. L. (1965). The causal texture of organizational environments. Human 
Relations, 18, 2132. 
Fahrni, P. (1990). An application-oriented guide to R&D selecting and evaluation methods. R&D 
management, 20(2), 155-171. 
Fasolo, B., McClelland, G. H., & Todd, P. M. (2007). Escaping the tyranny of choice: When fewer 
attributes make choice easier. Marketing Theory, 7, 13-26. 
Fearon, J. D., (1995). Rationalist explanations for war. International Organization, 49(3), 379
Fforde A (2018). Yes, but what about services: is development doctrine changing? Canadian 
Journal of Development Studies/Revue canadienne d'tudes du dveloppement. 39(4),550-
Field, A. P. (2005). Discovering Statistics Using SPSS. Sage Publications Inc. 
Finch, J. (1986). Research and policy. The Falmer Press, London. 
Fitzgerald, D. R., Mohammed, S., & Kremer, G. O. (2017). Differences in the way we decide: The 
effect of decision style diversity on process conflict in design teams. Personality and 
Individual Differences, 104, 339344. 
Fong, G. T., & Nisbett, R. E. (1991). Immediate and delayed transfer of training effects in 
statistical reasoning. Journal of Experimental Psychology, 120(1), 34-45.  
Fong, G. T., Krantz, D. H., & Nisbett, R. E. (1986). The effects of statistical training on thinking 
about everyday problems. Cognitive Psychology, 18, 253-292.  
Forrester (2003). Enterprise visibility makes decisions profitable. Consultancy Report. 
Fowler, F. J. (2009). Applied social research methods: Survey research methods. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: SAGE Publications Ltd.  
Fox, J. (2015). From economic man to behavioral economics. Harvard Business Review, 5, 79-85. 
Francis, C. U. (2016). Rational model of decision making. College of Management and Social 
Science, Department of Psychology, Redeemers University, Ede, Osun State, Nigeria. 
Frankl, M. (2010). Heuristics-based decision-making in small and medium Canadian businesses. 
Doctoral Dissertation, University of Victoria. 
Fredrickson, J. W. (1983). Strategic process research: Questions and recommendations. Academy 
of Management Review, 8(4), 565-757.  
Fredrickson, J.W. (1984). The effect of structure on the strategic decision process. Academy of 
Management Proceedings, 1, 12-16. 
Fredrickson, J.W. (1985). Effects of decision motive and organizational performance level on 
strategic decision processes. Academy of Management Journal, 28(4), 821-843. 
Fredrickson, J. W., & Mitchell, T. R. (1984). Strategic decision processes: Comprehensiveness 
and performance in an industry with an unstable environment. Academy of Management 
Journal, 27(2), 399-423. 
Frisk, J.E. and Bannister, F. (2021). "Applying design thinking to the decision-making process: a 
field study in Swedish local authorities", Management Decision, (ahead-of-print). 
Gal, T., Stewart, T., & Hanne, T. (Eds.). (2013). Multicriteria decision-making: Advances in 
MCDM models, algorithms, theory, and applications, 21, Springer Science & Business 
Media. 
Gallagher, C. R. (2016). Muddling Leadership and Management in the United States Army. 
Military Review, The Professional Journal of the U. S. Army. 
Gause, F. G. (1994). Oil monarchies: Domestic and security challenges in the Arab Gulf states. 
New York, NY, Council on Foreign Relations. 
Ghauri, P., & Gronhaug, K. (2005). Research Methods in Business Studies. Harlow, FT/Prentice 
Hall. 
Ghazali, N. H. MD. (2016). A Reliability and validity of an instrument to evaluate the school-
based assessment system: A Pilot study. International Journal of Evaluation and Research 
in Education (IJERE), 5(2), 148-157. 
General Staff of Armed Forces (2008). Reference requirements on training cadets and future 
officers. Bratislava: Ministry of Defense Printing Office. 
Gigerenzer, G. (2001). Decision-making: Nonrational theories. International Encyclopedia of the 
Social and Behavioral Sciences, 5, 33043309.  
Gigerenzer, G. (2007). Gut feeling: The intelligence of the unconscious. Viking Press. 
Gigerenzer, G., Todd, P. M, & Group, A. R. (1999). Simple heuristics that make us smart. Oxford 
University Press. 
Gigerenzer, G., & Goldstein, D. G. (2011). The recognition heuristic: A decade of research. 
Judgment and Decision Making, 6(1), 100121 
Ginsberg A. (1988). Measuring and modelling changes in strategy: Theoretical foundations and 
empirical directions. Strategic Management Journal, 9, 559-575. 
Glaister, K. W. (2014). The contribution of management to economic growth: A review. 
Prometheus, 32(3), 227- 424. 
Goldstein, D. G., & Gigerenzer, G. (1996). Reasoning the fast and frugal way: Models of bounded 
rationality. Psychological Review, 103, 650-66. 
Goldstein, D. G.& Gigerenzer, G. (2002). Models of ecological rationality: The recognition 
heuristic. Psychological Review, 109, 75-90, 2002. 
Goll, I., & Rasheed, A.M.A. (1997). Rational decision-making and firm performance: The 
moderating role of environment. Strategic Management Journal, 18, 583591.  
GSDP. (2008). Qatar National Vision 2030. Doha, QA: General Secretariat for Development 
Planning. 
Haensel, Heuch, Schweitzer (2002). Erfolgsfaktor Intuition. Geistesblitze in Organizationen, 
Zeitschrift fr Organizationsen twicklung. 
Hafenbrdl, S., Waeger, D., Marewski, J. N., Gigerenzer, G. (2016). Applied decision making with 
fast-and-frugal heuristics. Journal of Applied Research in Memory and Cognition, 5(2), 
215-231. 
Hambrick, D. C. (2007). Upper Echelons theory: an update. Academy of Management Review, 
32(2), 334343. 
Hammond, K. R., Hamm, R. M., Grassia, J., & Pearson, T. (1997). Direct comparison of the 
efficacy of intuitive and analytical cognition in expert judgment. In W. M. Goldstein & R. 
M. Hogarth (Eds.), Research on judgment and decision making: Currents, connections, and 
controversies (144-180). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Hammond, J. S., Keeney, R., & Raiffa, H. (2006). The hidden traps in decision-making. Harvard 
Business Review, 84(1), 118. 
Hansson, P., & Andersen, J. A. (2001). The Swedish vicar and change. A problematic mismatch. 
The Journal of Empirical Theology, 12(1), 4356. 
Hariri, H., Monypenny, R., & Prideaux, M. (2014). Leadership styles and decision-making styles 
in an Indonesian school context. School Leadership and Management, 34 (3). 284-298.  
Harren, V. A. (1979). A model of career decision making for college students. Journal of 
Vocational Behavior, 14(2), 119133. 
Harrison, E.F. (1996). A process perspective on strategic Decision-making, Management 
Decision, 34(1), 46  53. 
Harrison, E. F. (1999). The managerial decision-making process. Boston, MA: Houghton. 
Harteis, C., Koch, T., & Morgenthaler, B. (2008). How intuition contributes to high performance: 
An educational perspective. US-China Education Review, 5(1), 68-80. 
Harvey, L. (2021). Constructivism  Social Research Glossary, Quality Research International/ 
Available at: 
https://www.qualityresearchinternational.com/socialresearch/constructivism.htm 
(Accessed 20: February 2022). 
Hassen, T. (2020). The state of the knowledge-based economy in the Arab world: Cases of Qatar 
and Lebanon, EuroMed Journal of Business, ISSN: 1450-2194. Hammersley, M., & 
Atkinson, P. (1995). Ethnography: Principles in Practice, London: Routledge. 
Hauser, J. (2011). A marketing science perspective on recognition-based heuristics (and the fast-
and-frugal paradigm). Judgment and Decision Making, 6(5), 396-408. 
https://www.qualityresearchinternational.com/socialresearch/constructivism.htm
https://www.emerald.com/insight/publication/issn/1450-2194
Hauser, J. R. (2014). Consideration-set heuristics. Journal of Business Research, 67(8), 1688
1699. 
Hellriegel, D., Slocum, J. W., & Woodman, R. W. (2001). Organizational Behavior. United States, 
South. Western College Publishing. 
Hendry, J. (2000). Strategic decision making, discourse, and strategy as social practice. The 
Journal of Management Studies, 37(7), 955977. 
Heracleous, L. T. (1994). Rational Decision-making: myth or reality? Management Development 
Review, 7(4), 16-23.  
Herrmann P., & Datta D. K. (2002). CEO successor characteristics and the choice of foreign 
market entry mode: an empirical study. Journal of International Business Studies 33(3), 
55169. 
Hickson, D. J., Butler, R. J., Cray, D., Mallory, G. R., & Wilson, D. C. (1986). Strategic Decision-
Making in Organizations, Oxford: Basil Blackwell.  
Hilbig, B. E. (2014). On the role of recognition in consumer choice: a model comparison. Judgment 
and Decision Making, 9(1), 5157. 
Hilbig, B. E., Erdfelder, E., & Pohl, R. F. (2012). A matter of time: Antecedents of one-reason 
decision making based on recognition. Acta Psychologica, 141(1), 916.  
Hilbig, B. E., & Pohl, R. F. (2008). Recognizing users of the recognition heuristic. Experimental 
Psychology, 55(6), 394401.  
Hilbig, B. E., Pohl, R. F., Brder, A. (2009). Criterion knowledge: a moderator of using the 
recognition heuristic? J Behavioral Decision-making 22(5), 510522.  
Hitt, M. A., & Tyler, B. B. (1991). Strategic decision models: Integrating different perspectives. 
Strategic Management Journal, 12, 327351. 
Hodgkinson, G. P., & Healey, M. P. (2008). Cognition in Organizations. The Annual Review of 
Psychology, 387-417. 
Hoffman, E., & Carment, D. (2013). Introduction. Canadian Foreign Policy Journal 19 (1), 6-12; 
William I. Zartman, Mediation Roles for Large Small Countries, Canadian Foreign 
Policy Journal 19(1), 13-25. 
Hoffrage, U., & Reimer, T. (2004). Models of bounded rationality: The approach of fast and frugal 
heuristics. Management Revue, 15(4),437459. 
Hogarth, R.M., & Karelaia, N. (2006). Take-the-best and other simple strategies: why and when 
they work well with binary cues. Theory Decision, 61(3),205249. 
Hukoomi. (2016a). About Qatar. Available at: www.gov.qa (Accessed 20: February 2022). 
Hukoomi. (2016b). Government and legislatives. Available at: www.gov.qa (Accessed 20: 
February 2022). 
Hukoomi. (2016c). The constitution. Available at:  www.gov.qa (Accessed 20: February 2022). 
Ingebritsen, C., Neumann, I., & Gsthl, S. (2012). Small states in international relations. Seattle: 
University of Washington. 
http://www.gov.qa/
http://www.gov.qa/
http://www.gov.qa/
Jackson, S. L. (2003). Research methods and statistics, A Critical thinking approach. USA, 
Thomson Wadsworth. 
Janis, I. L. (1989). Crucial Decisions: Leadership in Policy and Crisis Management. New York: 
The Free Press.  
Johnson, B., & Christensen, L. (2012). Educational research, qualitative, quantitative and mixed 
approach. (4th ed). California: SAGE Publication. 
Jones, R. E., Jacobs, L.W., & Spijker, W. V. (1992). Strategic decision processes in international 
firms. Management International Review, 32, 219237.  
Jones, G. (2013). Organizational Theory, Design, and Change. 7th Edition, Pearson Education, 
Joshi M, Anand V. (2018). Small business owners external information-seeking behaviors: The 
role of perceived uncertainty and organizational identity complexity. Journal of Small 
Business Strategy, 28(3),48-68. 
Judge, T. A., & Robbins, S. P. (2006). Organizational behavior (12th ed.). Canada: Prentice Hall. 
Kahneman, D., & Tversky, A. (1979) Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk. 
Econometrica, 47 (2), 263291. 
Kahneman, D. (2011). Thinking, Fast and Slow. New York, NY: Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 
Macmillan.  
Kamrava, M. (2009). Royal factionalism and political liberalization in Qatar. Middle East Journal, 
63(3), 401420. 
Kamrava, M. (2015). Qatar: Small state, big politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press. 
Katsikopoulos, K. V., & Fasolo, B. (2006). "New tools for decision analysts" IEEE transactions 
on systems, man and cybernetics, Part A. System and Humans, 36, 960, 967. 
Kaufmann, L., Kreft, S., Ehrgott, M., & Reimann, F. (2012). Rationality in supplier selection 
decisions: The effect of the buyers national task environment. Journal of Purchasing and 
Supply Management, 18(2), 7691. 
Keating, M. (2001). Public Management Reform and Economic and Social Development. OECD 
Journal on Budgeting, 1-2, 141-212. 
Keith W. G. (2014). The contribution of management to economic growth: a review. Prometheus, 
32(3), 227244.  
Khatri N. (1994). Strategic decision processes and organizational performance. The State 
University of New York: Buffalo. 
Khatri, N., & Ng, H. A. (2000). The role of intuition in strategic Decision-making. Human 
Relations, 53(1), 5786. 
Kim, W. C., & Mauborgne, R. (2014). Blue ocean strategy: how to create uncontested market 
space and make the competition irrelevant. Harvard Business Review Press. 
Kitjacharoenchai, P., Ventresca, M., Moshref-Javadi, M., Lee, S., Tanchoco, J. M., & Patrick A. 
Brunese, P. A. (2019). Multiple traveling salesman problems with drones: Mathematical 
model and heuristic approach. Computer and industrial engineering, 129, 14  30. 
Klaczynski, P. A. (2001). Analytic and heuristic processing influences on adolescent reasoning 
and decision-making. Child Development,72, 844861. 
Klein, G. (2003). The Power of Intuition, Random House. 
Knekta, E., Runyon, C., & Eddy, S. (2019). One Size Doesnt Fit All: Using Factor Analysis to 
Gather Validity Evidence When Using Surveys in Your Research, CBELife Sciences 
Education, 18(1). 
Koen, P., Ajamian, G., & Boyce, S. (2002). Fuzzy front end: Effective methods, tools and 
techniques, in The PDMA tool book for new product development, A. G. P. Belliveau, and 
S. Somermeyer, Ed. New York: John Wiley & Sons, 5-35. 
Krabuanrat, K. (1997). Strategic Decision-making for Thai Executive Managers, PhD Thesis, 
University of Surrey. 
Langley, A., Mintzberg, H., Pitcher, P., Posada, E., & Saint-Macary, J. (1995). Opening up 
decision-making: The view from the black stool. Organization Science, 6(3). 260-279. 
Langner, T., Krengel, M. (2013). The mere categorization effect for complex products: the 
moderating role of expertise and affect. Journal of Business Research, 66(7), 924932. 
Lazo A, Strider SH. (2015). Preparing students to be ethical decision makers. International Journal 
of Research in Social Sciences, 5(1),388-409. 
Lee, H-W. (2018). Impacts of Performance Management:  Comparison between Private and Public 
Organizations. Academy of Management Proceedings (1). 
Leoveanu, A. C. (2013). Rationalist model in public decision-making. Journal of Public 
Administration, Finance and Law, 4 (12), 43-54. 
Levin, I. P., Weller, J. A., Pederson, A. A., & Harshman, L. A. (2007). Age-related differences in 
adaptive Decision-making: Sensitivity to expected value in risky choice. Judgment and 
Decision-making, 2(4), 225233. 
Levitt, B., & Nass. C. (1989). The Lid on the garbage can: Institutional constraints on decision-
making in the technical core of college-text publishers. Administrative Science Quarterly 
34, 190207. 
Le Wang, Hai-Hua Hu, Jie Yan & Maggie Qiuzhu Mei (2019). Privacy calculus or heuristic cues? 
The dual process of privacy decision making on Chinese social media. Journal of 
Enterprise Information Management, 33(2), 353-380. 
Lindblom, C. E. (1959). The science of "muddling through". Public Administration Review, 19(2), 
79-88. 
Lockett, G. (1986). Modeling a research portfolio using AHP: A group decision process. Research 
and Development Management, 16(2), 151 - 160. 
Long, T., & Johnson, M. (2000). Rigour, reliability and validity in qualitative research. Clinical 
Effectiveness in Nursing, 4(2), 30-37.  
Loo, R. (2000). A psychometric evaluation of the general decision-making style inventory. 
Personality and Individual Differences, 29(5), 895905. 
Loock, M., & Hinnen, G. (2015). Heuristics in organizations: A review and a research agenda. 
Journal of Business Research, 68(9), 20272036. 
Luan, S., Reb, J., & Gerd Gigerenzer (2019). Ecological rationality: Fast-and-frugal heuristics for 
managerial decision making under Uncertainty. Academy of management journal, 62(6). 
Luthans, F, (2000). Organizational behaviour. (19th ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Mador, M. (2000). Strategic decision-making process research: Are entrepreneur and owner 
managed firms different? Journal of Research in Marketing and Entrepreneurship, 2(3), 
215-234. 
Maitland, E., & Sammartino, A. (2015). Decision making and uncertainty: The role of heuristics 
and experience in assessing a politically hazardous environment. Strategic Management 
Journal, 36(10), 15541578. 
Malewska, K. (2018). The profile of an intuitive decision maker and the use of intuition in 
decision-making practice. Management, 22(1), 31-44. 
Mangalindan, M. (2004). The grow-up at Google. The Wall Street Journal. March 29, p. B1. 
Marakas, G. (2003). Decision Support Systems in the 21st century, 2nd edition. Prentice Hall, New 
Jersey. 
March, J. G. (1994). A Primer on decision-making: How decisions happen. Simon and Schuster.  
March, J., & Simon, H. (1958). Cognitive Limits on Rationality. 136-171 in Organizations. New 
York, NY: Wiley-Blackwell. 
Marewski, J. Gaissmaier, W., Schooler, L., Goldstein, D., & Gigerenzer, G. (2010). From 
recognition to decisions: Extending and testing recognition-based models for multi 
alternative inference. Psychonomic Bulletin and Review, 17(3), 287309.  
Marshall, C., & Rossman, G. B. (2010). Designing qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.  
Martignon L., & Hoffrage U (2002) Fast, frugal, and fit: Simple heuristics for paired comparison. 
Theory Decision, 52(1), 2971. 
Mason, R. O., & Mitroff, I. I. (1981). Challenging strategic planning assumptions. New York: 
Wiley. 
Matzler, K., Bailom, F., & Mooradian, T. O. (2007). Intuitive Decision Making. MIT Sloan 
Management Review. 
Maule, A. J., & Hodgkinson, J. B. (2002). Heuristics, biases and strategic Decision making. The 
Psychologist, 15(2), 68-71. 
McDermott, R. M. (1991). Risk-taking in international politics: Prospect Theory in Postwar 
American Foreign Policy. PhD Thesis, Stanford University. 
McLaughlin, D. I. (1995), Strengthening executive decision-making, Human Resource 
Management, 31(3), 443-61. 
Miller, D. (1991). Stale in the saddle: CEO tenure and the match between organization and 
environment, Management Science, 37(1), 3452. 
Miller, G. (2003). The magical number seven, plus or minus two: some limits on our capacity for 
processing information, in essential sources in the scientific study of consciousness, 
Psychological Review, 101(2), 343-352. 
Mintzberg, H. (1973). The Nature of Managerial Work. New York, Harper & Row. 
Mintzberg, H., Raisinghani, D. and Thoret A. (1976). The structure of unstructured decision 
processes. Administrative Science Quarterly, 21(2), 246275. 
Mitroff, I., & Kilmann, R. H. (1975). Stories managers tell: A new tool for organizational problem 
solving. Management Review, 64, 18 28. 
Mohtar, R. H. (2016). Integrated water, energy, and food governance: A Qatari perspective. In M. 
E. Tok, L. R. M. Alkhater, & L. A. Pal (Eds.), Policymaking in a transformative state. The 
case of Qatar (295397). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Moini, J. S., Bikson, T. K., Neu, C. R., & DeSisto, L. (2009). The Reform of Qatar University, 
Santa Monica, CA: RAND Corporation. 
Morgan, G., & Smircich, L. (1980). The case for qualitative research. The Academy of 
Management Review, 5(4), 491-500. 
MOPH (2022).  Qatari Ministry of Public Health, Covid 19 Statistics. Available at: 
https://covid19.moph.gov.qa/EN/Pages/default.aspx (Accessed 20: February 2022). 
Muijs, D. (2004). Doing qualitative research in education with SPSS. London: SAGE Publication. 
Muijs, D. (2011). Doing Quantitative Research in Education with SPSS. 2nd Edition. London, 
SAGE Publications Ltd.  
https://covid19.moph.gov.qa/EN/Pages/default.aspx
Musso, F., & Francioni, B. (2012). The influence of decision-maker characteristics on the 
international strategic decision-making process: An SME perspective SME perspective. 
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 58 (2012), 279  288. 
ODonnell, N., & Osborne, J. W. (1988). Decision-Making: Managerial perspectives. Thought, 
Fordham University Quarterly, 63(1), 32-51.  
Organized Change (2022) The Authority Matrix: a Tool for Empowerment and Role 
Clarification. Available at: https://www.organizedchange.com/using-an-authority-
matrix-to-empower-employees.htm (Accessed 20: February 2022). 
Newell, B. R., Weston, N. J., Shanks, D. R. (2003). Empirical tests of a fast-and-frugal heuristic:  
not everyone takes-the-best. Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 
91(1), 8296. 
Newell, B. R., & Fernandez, D. (2006). On the binary quality of recognition and the 
inconsequentiality of further knowledge: Two critical tests of the recognition heuristic. 
Behavioral Decision Making, 19(4), 333-346. 
Niittymies, A. (2020). Heuristic decision-making in firm internationalization: The influence of 
context-specific experience. International Business Journal, 29(6), 101752. 
Nunnally, J. C. (1978). Psychometric theory (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Nygren, T. E., & White, R. J. (2002). Assessing individual differences in decision making styles: 
Analytical vs. intuitive. Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 46th Annual Meeting, 
Baltimore, MD, HFES. 
https://www.organizedchange.com/using-an-authority-matrix-to-empower-employees.htm
https://www.organizedchange.com/using-an-authority-matrix-to-empower-employees.htm
Ofstad, H. (1961). An inquiry into the freedom of decision, Oslo: Norwegian Universities Press. 
Ogarca, R. (2015). An investigation of decision-making styles in SMEs from South-West Oltenia 
Region (Romania), 7th International conference on globalization and higher education in 
economics and business administration, GEBA 2013. Procedia Economics and Finance, 
20 (2015), 443  452. 
Oliveira, A. (2007). A discussion of rational and psychological decision-making theories and 
models: The search for a cultural-ethical decision-making model. Electronic Journal of 
Business Ethics and Organization Studies, 12(2), 1213. 
Omotola, O. (2012). An investigation into Decision Making Styles practices and preferences of 
human resource managers in the Banking Industry in Southwestern Nigeria. European 
Journal of Business and Management, 4(11), 1-6. 
Pachur, T., Brder, A., & Marewski, J. N. (2008). The recognition heuristic in memory-based 
inference: is recognition a non-compensatory cue? Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 
21(2),183  210.  
Pachur, T., & Hertwig, R. (2006). On the psychology of the recognition heuristic: retrieval primacy 
as a key determinant of its use. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, 
and Cognition, 32(5), 9831002. 
Pacini, R., & Epstein, S. (1999). The interaction of three facets of concrete thinking in a game of 
chance. Thinking & Reasoning, 5(4), 303325. 
Papadakis, V. (2006). Do CEOs shape the process of making strategic decisions? Evidence from 
Greece. Management Decision, 44(3), 367-394. 
Papadakis, V. M., & Barwise P. (1997). What can we tell managers about making strategic 
decisions? In VM Papadakis, P Barwise (Eds.). Strategic decisions, 267-287. Kluwer: 
London. 
Papadakis, V. M., Thanos, I.C., & Barwise, P. (2010). Research on strategic decisions: Taking 
stock and looking ahead, in Nutt, P.C., & Wilson, D.C. (eds.) Handbook of Decision 
Making. John Wiley: Chichester, UK, 31-70.  
Papula, J., & Papulova, Z. (2015). Strategy and Strategic Management. Wolters Kluwer. 
Paradice, D. B., & Dejoie, R. M. (1991) The ethical decision-making processes of information 
systems workers. Journal of Business Ethics, 10, 1-21. 
Passer, M. W., & Smith, R. E. (2004). Psychology: The science of mind and behavior (2nd ed.). 
McGraw-Hill. 
Patton, J. R. (2003). Intuition in decisions. Management Decision, 41(10), 989996.  
Payne, J. W., Bettman, J. R., & Johnson, E. J. (1993). The adaptive decision maker. Cambridge 
University Press.  
Mitroff, I., & Kilmann, R. H. (1975). Stories managers tell: A new tool for organizational problem 
solving. Management Review, 64, 18 28. 
Perkins, D. N., & Salmon, G. (1989). Are cognitive skills context-bounded? Educational 
Research, 18, 16-25, 1989. 
Perry, B. E. (2008). "Fast and Frugal Conflict Early Warning in Sub-Saharan Africa: The role of 
Intelligence Analysis," in Department of Intelligence Studies, Master of Science in Applied 
Intelligence Erie. Pennsylvania: Mercyhurst College. 
Perry, C. (1998). A structured approach to presenting theses: Notes for students and their 
supervisors. Australasian Marketing Journal, 6(1), 63- 86.  
Peters, E., Dieckmann, N. E., & Weller, J. (2010). Age differences in complex Decision-making. 
In Handbook of the Psychology of Aging. 7th ed. S.K. Warner & S.L. Willis, Eds.: 133
148. Elsevier Academic Press. San Diego, CA. 
Phillips, S. D., Pazienza, N. J., & Ferrin, H. H. (1984). Decision making styles and problem-
solving appraisal. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 31, 497-502. 
Plummer, J. D., & Tanis Ozcelik, A. (2015). Preservice teachers developing coherent inquiry 
investigations in elementary astronomy. Science Education, 99(5), 932957.  
Polya, G. (1957). How to Solve It: A New Aspect of Mathematical Method (2nd ed.). Doubleday & 
Company, Inc, Garden City, New York. 
Powell, J. J. (2014). University roots and branches between Glocalization and Mondialisation: 
Qatars (Inter) national Universities. Qatar Foundation Annual Research Forum 
Proceedings 24(2013), SSHO 02.  
Prietula, M. J., & Simon, H. (1989). The Experts in your Midst. Harvard Business Review. 
PSA. (2021). Monthly figures on total population. Doha, QA: Planning and Statistics Authority. 
Qatar National Vision 2030 (2022). "Planning and Statistics Authority: National Development 
Strategy". Available at: https://www.psa.gov.qa (Accessed 20: February 2022). 
QTA (2015). National profile, introduction to our country. www.qatartourism.gov.qa 
Raab, M., & Gigerenzer, G. (2015). The power of simplicity: a fast-and-frugal heuristics approach  
to performance science. Frontiers in Psychology, 6, 1672. 
Radaoui, M., Ben Abdallah Ben Lamine, S., BaazaouiZghal, H., Ghedira Guegan, C., & Kabachi, 
N. (2019). Knowledge Guided Integration of Structured and Unstructured Data in Health 
Decision Process. 28th International Conference On Information Systems Development 
(Isd2019 Toulon, France).  
Reimer, T., & Rieskamp, J. (2007). Fast and Frugal Heuristics. Encyclopedia of Social Psychology, 
SAGE Publications Inc, Thousand Oaks, CA. 
Riaz, M. N. (2009). Leadership styles as predictors of decision making styles. Unpublished M. 
Phil dissertation, National Institute of Psychology, Quaid-i-Azam University Islamabad, 
Pakistan. 
Ritter, S., & Dijskterhuis, A. (2014). Creativity: The unconscious foundation of the incubation 
period. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 8, 110. 
Robbins, S. P., & Coulter, M. (2013). Management (12th ed.). Harlow, UK: Pearson. 
Roberts, A., Engel, J., Raffel, C., Hawthorne, C., & Eck, D. (2018). A Hierarchical latent vector 
model for learning long-term structure in music. International Conference on Machine 
Learning, Stockholm, Sweden, PMLR 80. 
https://www.psa.gov.qa/
http://www.qatartourism/
Rowe, A. J., & Boulgarides, J. D. (1992). Managerial decision making: A guide to successful 
business decisions. New York: McMillan. 
Russ, F. A., McNeilly, K. M., & Comer, J. M. (1996). Leadership, decision making and 
performance of sales managers: A multi-level approach. Journal of Personal Selling & 
Sales Management, 16, 115. 
Saaty, T. L. (1982). Decision-making for Leaders: The analytical hierarchy process for decisions 
in a complex world. Quantitative Assessment in Arms Control, 285-308. 
Sadler-Smith, E. (2004). Cognitive style and the management of small and medium-sized 
enterprises. Organization Studies, 25, 155181.  
Sadler-Smith, E. (2008). The role of intuition in collective learning and the development of shared 
meaning. Advances in Developing Human Resources, 10(4),494508. 
Saini S. K. (2008). Role of intuition in military command. Journal of Defense Studies, 2(2).  
Available at: https://idsa.in/jds/2_2_2008 (Accessed 20: February 2022). 
Salas E., Rosen M.A., & DiazGrandos D. (2010). Expertise based intuition and decision making  
in organizations. Journal of Management, 36, 941973. 
Saunders, S., Lewis P., & Thornhill, A. (2009). Research Methods for Business Students. Harlow, 
England: Pearson Education Limited.  
Saunders, M., Lewis, P., & Thornhill, A. (2012). Research methods for business students, Harlow: 
Pearson Education Limited. 
Sauter, V. L. (1999). Intuitive decision-making. Communications of the ACM June 1999, 42(6). 
https://idsa.in/jds/2_2_2008
Schmitt, N. (1996). Uses and abuses of coefficient alpha. Psychological Assessment, 8(4), 350
Schoemaker, A. F. (2010). The Relationship between decision-making style and negative affect in 
college students. Drexel University, Drexel, Philadelphia, United States of America.  
Schultz, J. V. (1997). A Framework for military decision making under risks. Air University Press, 
Maxwell Air Force Base, Alabama. 
Schumpeter, J. A. (1954). History of economic analysis. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Scott, S., & Bruce, R. (1955). Decision-making Style: The development and assessment of a new 
measure. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 55 (5), 818-831. 
Seal, K. (1990). Decision-makers rely on honed intuition. Hotel and Motel Management, 205, 104. 
Shirley, R. C. (1982). Limiting the Scope of Strategy: A Decision Based Approach. Academy of 
Management Review, 7(2), 262-268. 
Simon, H.A. (1957). Models of man: Social and rational. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Simon, H.A. (1960). The New science of management decision. New York: Harper & Row. 
Simon, H.A. (1978). Rationality as process and product of thought. Journal of the American 
Economic Association, 68(2), 116.  
Simon, H. (1979). Rational decision making in business organizations. American Economic 
Review, 69(4), 493-513. 
Simons, T., Pelled, L.H & Smith K.A. (1999). Making use of difference: Diversity, debate, and 
decision comprehensiveness in top management teams. Academy of Management Journal 
42(6), 66273. 
Sinclair, M., & Ashkanasy, N. M. 2005. Intuition: Myth or a Decision-Making Tool? Management 
Learning, 36(3), 353370. 
Singh, A. (2014). Supplier evaluation and demand allocation among suppliers in a supply chain. 
Journal of Purchasing and Supply Management, 20(3), 167176. 
Smith, G. F. (2003). Beyond Critical Thinking and Decision-making: Teaching Business Students 
How To Think. Journal of Management Education, 27(1), 24-51. 
Smith, L., & Gilhooly, K. (2006). Regression versus fast and frugal models of Decision-making: 
The case of prescribing for depression. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 20, 265-274. 
Smolka, K. M., Verheul, I., Burmeister-Lamp, K., & Heugens, P. (2018). Get it together 
Synergistic effects of causal and effectual decision-making logics on venture performance. 
Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice, 42(4), 571-604. 
Snoj, J. (2013). Population of Qatar by nationality. BQ magazine. Available at: www.bq-
magazine.com (Accessed 20: February 2022). 
Snyman, J. H., & Drew, D. V. (2003). Complex strategic decision processes and firm performance 
in a hypercompetitive industry. Journal of American Academy of Business, 2(2), 293298. 
http://www.bq-magazine.com/
http://www.bq-magazine.com/
Song, J., Wang, L., Gool, L. V., & Hilliges, O. (2017). Thin-slicing network: A deep structured 
model for pose estimation in videos. The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 4220-4229. 
Song, X. M., Di Benedetto, C. A., & Song, L. C (2000). Pioneering advantage in new service 
development: A multi-country study of managerial perceptions. Journal of Product 
Innovation Management, 17(5), 37892. 
Sopci, M., & Pikiewicz, Z. D. (2016). Leaders or managers to the army. Management Studies, 
4(4), 176-182.  
Spetzler, C. S. (2007). Building decision competency in the organization. Advances: building 
decision competency, 1-31. 
Spicer, D. P., & Sadler-Smith, E. (2005). An examination of the general decision-making style 
questionnaire in two UK samples. Journal of Managerial Psychology, 20(2), 137149.  
Stanovich, K. E., & West, R. F. (2000). Individual differences in reasoning: Implications for the 
rationality debate. Behavioural and Brain Sciences, 23, 645726. 
Starbuck, W. H. (1976). Organizations and Their Environments, in Dunnette, M.D. (ed.), 
Handbook of Industrial Psychology. Chicago: Rand McNally, 10691123. Dess and Beard, 
Dimensions of Organizational Task Environments. 
Sternberg, R. J. (1997). Thinking styles. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Steward, B. (2004). Writing a Literature Review. British Journal of Occupational Therapy, 67, 
495-500. 
Strough, J., Karns, T. E., & Schlosnagle, L. (2011). Decisionmaking heuristics and biases across 
the life span. Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, 1235(1), 57-74. 
Sullivan, G. M. (2011). A Primer on the validity of assessment instruments. Journal of Graduate 
Medical Education, 3(2), 119120.  
Taber, K. S. (2018). The use of Cronbachs alpha when developing and reporting research 
instruments in science education. Research in Science Education, 48, 12731296. 
Papamichail, K. N., & Rajarm, V. (2007). Framework for assessing best practice in decision-
making. Manchester Business School, The University of Manchester Booth Street West, 
Manchester, M15 6PB, U.K. International DSI Conference 2007 & APDSI Conference. 
Teradata (2006). Enterprise Decision Making Survey 2006 Report. 
Tetlock, P. E., Peterson, R. S., & Berry, J. M. (1993). Flattering and unflattering personality 
portraits of integratively simple and complex managers. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 64(3), 500511. 
The Heritage Foundation. (2016). Qatar. Available at: www.heritage.org (Accessed 20: February 
2022). 
Thoma, V., & Williams, A. (2013) The devil you know: The effect of brand recognition and 
product ratings on consumer choice. Judgment and Decision Making, 8(1), January 2013, 
3444. 
Thorne, P. (1990). Another critique of pure reason. International Management, 45, 68. 
http://www.heritage.org/
Thunholm, P. (2004). Decision-making style: habit, style or both? Personality and Individual 
Differences, 36, 931-944. 
Tok, M. E., Alkhater, L. R. M., & Pal, L. A. (2016). Policymaking in a transformative state: The 
case of Qatar. In M. E. Tok, L. R. M. Alkhater, & L. A. Pal (Eds.), Policymaking in a 
transformative state. The case of Qatar (135). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Townsend, P. L., & Gebhardt, J. E. (1997). Five-star leadership. New York: John Wiley & Sons. 
Tranel, D., Damasio, A. R., Damasio, H., & Brandt, J. P. (1994). Sensorimotor skill learning in 
amnesia: Additional evidence for the neural basis of nondeclarative memory. Learning & 
Memory, 1(3), 165179. 
Tsang, E. W. (2013). Case study methodology: Causal explanation, contextualization, and 
theorizing. Journal of international management, 19(2), 195-202. 
Tversky, A., & Kahneman, D. (1988). Rational Choice and the Framing of Decisions, in Decision 
Making: Descriptive, Normative, and Prescriptive Interactions, eds. David E. Bell, Howard 
Raiffa, and Amos Tversky. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Tyebjee, T. T. (1994). Internationalization of high-tech firms: initial vs. extended involvement. 
Journal of Global Marketing, 7(4), 5981. 
Ulrichsen, K. C. (2016). The Gulf states in international political economy. Basingstoke, UK: 
Palgrave Macmillan. 
United Nations (2012). The United Nations Guidance for Effective Mediation. Available at: 
https://peacemaker.un.org/sites/peacemaker.un.org/files/GuidanceEffectiveMediation_U
NDPA2012%28english%29_0.pdf (Accessed 20: February 2022). 
UK Joint Doctrine Publication 04 (2016). Understanding and Decision-making, 2nd edition.  
Ministry of Defense. 
Uzelac, B., Bauer, F., Matzler, K., & Waschak, M. (2016). The moderating effects of decision-
making preferences on M&A integration speed and performance. The International 
Journal of Human Resource Management, 27(20), 2436-2460. 
Uzonwanne, F. (2016). Rational Model of Decision-making. Global Encyclopedia of Public 
Administration, Public Policy, and Governance, 1-6. 
Vaughn, D. (1998). Rational Choice, Situated Action, and the Social Control of Organizations. 
Law & Society Review,  32(1) (1998), 23-61. 
Verma, D. (2014). Study and analysis of various decision-making models in an organization. IOSR 
Journal Of Business And Management, 16(2), 171-175. 
Wray, C. (2017). A proposed new psychological model for judgement and decision-making: 
Integrating the tri-partite model with hemispheric difference. Leadership & Organization 
Development Journal, 38(4), 549563. 
Weick, K. E. (1970). Enactment and Organizing. 265-279 in The Sociology of Organizations: 
Basic Studies by Oscar Grusky and George Miller (eds.). The Free Press: New York, NY. 
https://peacemaker.un.org/sites/peacemaker.un.org/files/GuidanceEffectiveMediation_UNDPA2012%28english%29_0.pdf
https://peacemaker.un.org/sites/peacemaker.un.org/files/GuidanceEffectiveMediation_UNDPA2012%28english%29_0.pdf
https://www.jstor.org/stable/i234205
Wilkinson, S., Joffe, H., & Yardley, L. (2004). Qualitative data collection: interviews and focus 
groups.  In D. Marks, & L. Yardley (Eds.). Research Methods for Clinical and Health 
Psychology (39-55). London: SAGE Publications. 
Williams, B. S. (2010). Heuristics and biases in military decision making. Available at: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/235094230_Heuristics_and_Biases_in_Military
_Decision_Making (Accessed 20: February 2022). 
Wilson D. (2003). Strategy as decision making. In S Cummings, D Wilson (Eds.), Images of 
strategy: 383-410. Blackwell: Oxford. 
Wu, G., Zhang, J., & Gonzalez, R. (2004). Decision under risk. In N. Harvey & D. Koehler (Eds.), 
Blackwell handbook of judgment and decision making (399-423). New York: Blackwell 
Publishing Ltd. 
Xiao, M., Wang, R., & Chan-Olmsted, S. (2018). Factors affecting YouTube influencer marketing 
credibility: A heuristic-systematic model. Journal of media business studies, 15(3), 188  
Yang, B. (2003). Political Factors in Decision Making and Implications for HRD. Advances in 
Developing Human Resources 5(4), 458479.  
Yin, R. K. (1994). Case study research: Design and methods. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, 
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research: Design and method. SAGE Publications. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/235094230_Heuristics_and_Biases_in_Military_Decision_Making
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/235094230_Heuristics_and_Biases_in_Military_Decision_Making
Yin, R. K. (2010). Analytic generalization. In Albert J. Mills, G. Durepos, & E. Wiebe (Eds.), 
Encyclopedia of case study research. (21-23). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications, 
Yin, R. K., Bateman, P.G., & Moore, G.B. (1983). Case studies and organizational innovation: 
Strengthening the connection. COSMOS Corporation, Washington DC.  
Zakhidov, D. (2015). K-12 education in Qatar. In Ulrichsen, K. C., & Marnicio, A. (Eds.), The 
2015 Doha conference: Findings from the student-led public diplomacy program (913). 
Doha, QA: Rice Universitys Baker Institute for Public Policy. 
Zander, T., Horr, N. K., Bolte, A., & Volz, K. G. (2016). Intuitive decision making as a gradual 
process: Investigating semantic intuition-based and priming based decisions with fMRI. 
Brain & Behavior, 6(1).  
Zhang, Y., Tokmakov, P., Hebert, M., & Schmid, C. (2019). A structured model for action 
detection. The IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition 
(CVPR), 9975-9984. 
APPENDICES  
APPENDIX 1: QUANTITATIVE RESEARCH QUESTIONNAIRE  
Research Questionnaire Keys 
Items 1-5 DMS Scott and Bruce (1995) 
Rational decision-making style: Rational 
decision-makers conduct an extensive search for 
alternatives and make a logical choice between 
them. 
Items 6-10 DMS Scott and Bruce (1995) 
Intuitive decision-making style: Intuitive 
decision-makers use their intuition to make 
decisions 
Items 11-15 DMS Scott and Bruce (1995) 
Dependent decision-making style: Dependent 
decision-makers rely on others to guide their 
decision-making. 
Items 16-20 DMS Scott and Bruce (1995) 
Avoidant decision-making style: Avoidant 
decision-makers avoid making a decision 
whenever possible. 
Item 21-25 DMS Scott and Bruce (1995) 
Spontaneous decision-making style: Spontaneous 
decision-makers have a sense of urgency and 
make rapid decisions. 
Items 26-40 EHDM Custom Designed Expert Heuristic Decision Making Scale  
Number 
Items 
Strongly 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither Agree 
Nor Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
I plan my important 
decisions carefully. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I double-check my 
information sources to be 
sure I have the right facts 
before making decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I make decisions in a 
logical and systematic way. 
1 2 3 4 5 
My decision-making 
requires careful thought. 
1 2 3 4 5 
When making a decision, I 
consider various options in 
terms of a specific goal. 
1 2 3 4 5 
When making decisions, I 
rely upon my instincts. 
1 2 3 4 5 
When I make decisions, I 
tend to rely on my 
intuition. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I generally make decisions 
which feel right to me. 
1 2 3 4 5 
It is more important for me 
to feel that the decision is 
right than to have a rational 
reason for it 
1 2 3 4 5 
When I make a decision, I 
trust my inner feelings and 
reactions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I often need the assistance 
of other people when 
making important 
decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
When I make important 
decisions, I consult other 
people. 
1 2 3 4 5 
If I have the support of 
others, it is easier for me to 
make important decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I use the advice of other 
people in making my 
important decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I like to have someone to 
steer me in the right 
direction when Im faced 
with important decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I avoid making important 
decisions until the pressure 
is on. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I postpone decision-
making whenever possible. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I often procrastinate when 
it comes to making 
important decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I generally make important 
decisions at the last minute. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I put off making many 
decisions because thinking 
about them makes me 
uneasy. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I generally make snap 
decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I often make decisions on 
the spur of the moment. 
1 2 3 4 5 
23 I make quick decisions. 1 2 3 4 5 
I often make impulsive 
decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
When making decisions, I 
do what seems natural at 
the moment. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I talk to a lot of people 
when there is a decision to 
make. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I discuss how to make 
decisions a lot with senior 
managers. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I always consider how 
decisions made can be 
applied in wider situations. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I often consider the wider 
implications of decisions 
outside the current 
situation. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I think about the whole 
business when making 
decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I often challenge the views 
of experts when making 
decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I draw on my personal 
experiences to make 
decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I consider the costs when 
making decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I consider many outcomes 
and possibilities when 
making decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I look for patterns that I 
have seen before when 
making decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I use rules of thumb to 
make decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I use some short cuts when 
making decisions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I often compare the current 
situation with similar ones 
already in my memory. 
1 2 3 4 5 
I assess characteristics of 
the current situation to 
match it with others. 
1 2 3 4 5 
Once I have made a 
decision, I may change my 
original assumptions. 
1 2 3 4 5 
The decisions I make usually concern the following (Please tick "YES" to all that apply to you 
Day to day activities of the 
business. 
YES NO 
42 Short term activities. YES NO 
Immediate payment 
decisions. 
YES NO 
The allocation of 
resources. 
YES NO 
45 The use of resources. YES NO 
Managers across the 
organization. 
YES NO 
47 Long term activities. YES NO 
How many people to 
deploy on tasks. 
YES NO 
Broad organizational 
issues. 
YES NO 
50 Top executives. YES NO 
51 Strategic decisions. YES NO 
Demographic Questions 
52 Age 
Years 
Number of Years in the 
current Business.    
Years 
Please select your highest level of 
Education. 
HND Degree 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
55 Your Business Organization/Unit. 
Public 
Sector 
Private Sector 
APPENDIX 2: AGENDA SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEWS  
Agenda for the Semi-Structured Interviews 
Name of the Interviewee: 
Company: 
Position: 
Specialty: 
Years of experience: 
Introduction  
1. What is your position in the company and what is your role?  
2. What is the organizational structure in your company?  
3. How is your company performing?  
4. Do you consider the external environment stable or unstable?  
5. Can you describe what could be a strategic decision for your company?  
6. What type of strategic decisions you are required to make?  
Successful Decision-Making Case  
7. Can you describe a successful strategic decision you made in the past?  
8. Who were the people involved in the decision-making process?  
9. What is the level of importance for the decision made?  
10. What is the level of uncertainty for the decision made?  
11. Would you say that the decision was motivated by an opportunity or by a crisis?  
Rational elements 
12. How thoroughly did the group search and analyse information in making this decision?  
13. Did you use analytic techniques in making the decision? If so, how important were they in 
the process?  
14. How efficient was the group at focusing its attention on crucial information, ignoring 
irrelevant information?  
15. Would you investigate the situation within the company as well as doing a site visit? Then 
would you make a decision on how to proceed based on your findings? 
16. To what extent was the decision affected by the use of authority and influence among group 
members?  
Heuristic elements 
17. Was your professional experience crucial while deliberating for the decision?  
18. Did your personal judgments influence you when making this decision? If so, to what extent?  
19. Did your gut-feeling influence you when making this decision? If so, to what extent? 
20. Are you trying to be as sensitive and as supportive as possible to employees?  
21. Did group members primarily care about their own goals, or with the goals of the 
organization? Did your own personal goals affect the decision?  
Thank you very much for your time. Is there anything you would like to add? 
The following follow up questions can be used during the interview for more clarifications: 
22. Can you explain that further? 
23. Can you give an example of that? 
24. Was there anything unexpected that happened? 
APPENDIX 3: FACTOR ANALYSIS 
FACTOR 
  /VARIABLES Q2 Q3 Q4 Q6 Q7 Q13 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q19 Q33 Q34 Q38 
  /MISSING LISTWISE 
  /ANALYSIS Q2 Q3 Q4 Q6 Q7 Q13 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q19 Q33 Q34 Q38 
  /PRINT INITIAL CORRELATION SIG DET KMO EXTRACTION ROTATION 
  /FORMAT SORT BLANK(.4) 
  /PLOT EIGEN 
  /CRITERIA MINEIGEN(1) ITERATE(25) 
  /EXTRACTION PC 
  /CRITERIA ITERATE(25) 
  /ROTATION VARIMAX 
  /METHOD=CORRELATION. 
Factor Analysis 
Correlation Matrixa 
 Q2  Q3  Q4  Q6  Q7  Q13  Q15  Q16  Q17  Q19  Q21  Q22  Q33  Q34  Q38  
Correlation Q2  1.000 .580 .556 .123 .109 -.041 -.060 -.352 -.227 -.215 .085 .031 .111 .126 .101 
Q3  .580 1.000 .685 .121 .053 -.025 -.022 -.133 .050 -.053 -.014 -.024 .011 .065 .062 
Q4  .556 .685 1.000 .255 .165 .030 .081 -.175 -.125 -.140 -.078 .020 .093 .031 .046 
Q6  .123 .121 .255 1.000 .735 -.013 -.059 -.204 -.131 -.245 .033 .167 .060 .133 .082 
Q7  .109 .053 .165 .735 1.000 .050 .043 -.147 .007 -.068 .122 .150 -.009 .001 -.019 
Q13  -.041 -.025 .030 -.013 .050 1.000 .675 .038 .001 .105 -.143 -.034 .110 .140 .097 
Q15  -.060 -.022 .081 -.059 .043 .675 1.000 .202 .096 .215 -.045 .029 -.032 .022 .059 
Q16  -.352 -.133 -.175 -.204 -.147 .038 .202 1.000 .597 .517 .060 .122 .041 -.035 -.019 
Q17  -.227 .050 -.125 -.131 .007 .001 .096 .597 1.000 .644 .085 .061 .033 -.008 -.032 
Q19  -.215 -.053 -.140 -.245 -.068 .105 .215 .517 .644 1.000 .109 .123 .001 -.101 -.109 
Q21  .085 -.014 -.078 .033 .122 -.143 -.045 .060 .085 .109 1.000 .479 -.080 -.012 .019 
Q22  .031 -.024 .020 .167 .150 -.034 .029 .122 .061 .123 .479 1.000 .029 .024 .051 
Q33  .111 .011 .093 .060 -.009 .110 -.032 .041 .033 .001 -.080 .029 1.000 .539 .400 
Q34  .126 .065 .031 .133 .001 .140 .022 -.035 -.008 -.101 -.012 .024 .539 1.000 .832 
Q38 .101 .062 .046 .082 -.019 .097 .059 -.019 -.032 -.109 .019 .051 .400 .832 1.000 
Sig. (1-tailed) Q2  
.000 .000 .011 .021 .223 .130 .000 .000 .000 .056 .282 .019 .009 .030 
Q3  .000 
.000 .012 .159 .317 .341 .006 .177 .162 .400 .328 .421 .111 .123 
Q4 .000 .000 
.000 .001 .290 .066 .000 .009 .004 .074 .356 .042 .282 .194 
Q6  .011 .012 .000 
.000 .402 .134 .000 .007 .000 .269 .001 .132 .006 .064 
Q7  .021 .159 .001 .000 
.177 .213 .003 .448 .103 .011 .003 .431 .495 .362 
Q13  .223 .317 .290 .402 .177 
.000 .239 .490 .025 .004 .262 .020 .004 .036 
Q15  .130 .341 .066 .134 .213 .000 
.000 .037 .000 .200 .294 .278 .340 .134 
Q16  .000 .006 .000 .000 .003 .239 .000 
.000 .000 .133 .011 .223 .256 .365 
Q17 .000 .177 .009 .007 .448 .490 .037 .000 
.000 .056 .126 .272 .440 .274 
Q19  .000 .162 .004 .000 .103 .025 .000 .000 .000 
.020 .011 .495 .030 .021 
Q21  .056 .400 .074 .269 .011 .004 .200 .133 .056 .020 
.000 .067 .410 .365 
Q22  .282 .328 .356 .001 .003 .262 .294 .011 .126 .011 .000 
.293 .327 .169 
Q33  .019 .421 .042 .132 .431 .020 .278 .223 .272 .495 .067 .293 
.000 .000 
Q34  .009 .111 .282 .006 .495 .004 .340 .256 .440 .030 .410 .327 .000 
Q38  .030 .123 .194 .064 .362 .036 .134 .365 .274 .021 .365 .169 .000 .000 
a. Determinant = .002 
Total Variance Explained 
Component 
Initial Eigenvalues 
Extraction Sums of Squared 
Loadings 
Rotation Sums of Squared 
Loadings 
Total 
Variance 
Cumulative 
% Total 
Variance 
Cumulative 
% Total 
Variance 
Cumulative 
1 2.972 19.815 19.815 2.972 19.815 19.815 2.269 15.126 15.126 
2 2.264 15.091 34.906 2.264 15.091 34.906 2.229 14.862 29.988 
3 1.920 12.800 47.706 1.920 12.800 47.706 2.225 14.836 44.824 
4 1.742 11.614 59.320 1.742 11.614 59.320 1.759 11.725 56.549 
5 1.599 10.661 69.981 1.599 10.661 69.981 1.706 11.371 67.920 
6 1.201 8.006 77.987 1.201 8.006 77.987 1.510 10.067 77.987 
7 .681 4.541 82.528       
8 .597 3.980 86.507       
9 .455 3.034 89.541       
10 .370 2.470 92.011       
11 .352 2.345 94.356       
12 .268 1.787 96.143       
13 .227 1.512 97.655       
14 .214 1.424 99.079       
15 .138 .921 100.000       
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. 
Component Matrixa 
Component 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Q2 I double-check my information sources to be sure I have the right facts 
before making decisions 
Q16 I avoid making important decisions until the pressure is on -
Q4 My decision-making requires careful thought 
.631  .427 
Q19 I generally make important decisions at the last minute -
.302 .429    
Q17 I postpone decision-making whenever possible -
.345 .438   
Q3 I make decisions in a logical and systematic way 
.535  .435 
Q6 When making decisions, I rely upon my instincts 
.517  .347 .423 
Q34 I consider many outcomes and possibilities when making decisions 
.338 .780 
Q38 I often compare the current situation with similar ones already in my 
memory 
.313 .737 
Q33 I consider the costs when making decisions  .623     
Q7 When I make decisions, I tend to rely on my intuition 
.352  .484 .395 
Q22 I often make decisions on the spur of the moment   .452 .499  .489 
Q13 If I have the support of others, it is easier for me to make important 
decisions 
Q15 I like to have someone to steer me in the right direction when Im 
faced with important decisions 
Q21 I generally make snap decisions   .399 .506  .558 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis. 
a. 6 components extracted. 
Rotated Component Matrixa 
Component 
1 2 3 4 5 6 
Q17 I postpone decision-making whenever possible .901      
Q19 I generally make important decisions at the last minute .818      
Q16 I avoid making important decisions until the pressure is on .794      
Q34 I consider many outcomes and possibilities when making decisions  .937     
Q38 I often compare the current situation with similar ones already in my 
memory 
Q33 I consider the costs when making decisions  .727     
Q3 I make decisions in a logical and systematic way   .902    
Q4 My decision-making requires careful thought   .857    
Q2 I double-check my information sources to be sure I have the right facts 
before making decisions 
Q7 When I make decisions, I tend to rely on my intuition    .922   
Q6 When making decisions, I rely upon my instincts    .912   
Q15 I like to have someone to steer me in the right direction when Im faced 
with important decisions 
Q13 If I have the support of others, it is easier for me to make important 
decisions 
Q21 I generally make snap decisions      .868 
Q22 I often make decisions on the spur of the moment      .828 
Extraction Method: Principal Component Analysis.  
 Rotation Method: Varimax with Kaiser Normalization.a 
a. Rotation converged in 5 iterations. 
APPENDIX 4: FREQUENCIES 
Frequencies 
Statistics 
Number of years in 
the current business 
Highest level of 
Education 
Business 
Organization/Unit 
N Valid 350 350 350 350 
Missing 0 0 0 0 
FREQUENCIES VARIABLES=Q53 Q54 Q55 Q56 
  /ORDER=ANALYSIS. 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent Cumulative Percent 
Valid 20-29 29 8.3 8.3 8.3 
30-39 87 24.9 24.9 33.1 
40-49 127 36.3 36.3 69.4 
50-59 91 26.0 26.0 95.4 
60-69 16 4.6 4.6 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Number of years in the current business 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent Cumulative Percent 
Valid 1-9 138 39.4 39.4 39.4 
10-19 94 26.9 26.9 66.3 
20-29 80 22.9 22.9 89.1 
30-39 30 8.6 8.6 97.7 
40-49 8 2.3 2.3 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Highest level of Education 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid A high national Diploma (HND) 17 4.9 4.9 4.9 
Bachelor Degree 164 46.9 46.9 51.7 
Postgraduate Degree 169 48.3 48.3 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Business Organization/Unit 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent Cumulative Percent 
Valid Public Sector 241 68.9 68.9 68.9 
Private Sector 109 31.1 31.1 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
FREQUENCIES VARIABLES=Q2 Q3 Q4 Q6 Q7 Q13 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q19 Q33 Q34 Q38 
  /ORDER=ANALYSIS. 
Frequencies 
Statistics 
 Q2  Q3 Q4  Q6  Q7  Q13  Q15  Q16  Q17  Q19  Q33  Q34  Q38  
N Valid 350 350 350 350 350 350 350 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Missing 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
Frequency Table 
Q2 I double-check my information sources to be sure I have the right facts before making decisions 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Strongly Disagree 29 8.3 8.3 8.3 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 8 2.3 2.3 10.6 
Agree 138 39.4 39.4 50.0 
Strongly Agree 175 50.0 50.0 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Q3 I make decisions in a logical and systematic way 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Strongly Disagree 13 3.7 3.7 3.7 
Disagree 5 1.4 1.4 5.1 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 26 7.4 7.4 12.6 
Agree 183 52.3 52.3 64.9 
Strongly Agree 123 35.1 35.1 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Q4 My decision-making requires careful thought 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Strongly Disagree 13 3.7 3.7 3.7 
Disagree 5 1.4 1.4 5.1 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 27 7.7 7.7 12.9 
Agree 188 53.7 53.7 66.6 
Strongly Agree 117 33.4 33.4 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Q6 When making decisions, I rely upon my instincts 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Strongly Disagree 16 4.6 4.6 4.6 
Disagree 65 18.6 18.6 23.1 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 100 28.6 28.6 51.7 
Agree 132 37.7 37.7 89.4 
Strongly Agree 37 10.6 10.6 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Q7 When I make decisions, I tend to rely on my intuition 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Strongly Disagree 5 1.4 1.4 1.4 
Disagree 57 16.3 16.3 17.7 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 101 28.9 28.9 46.6 
Agree 161 46.0 46.0 92.6 
Strongly Agree 26 7.4 7.4 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Q13 If I have the support of others, it is easier for me to make important decisions 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Strongly Disagree 2 .6 .6 .6 
Disagree 31 8.9 8.9 9.4 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 73 20.9 20.9 30.3 
Agree 143 40.9 40.9 71.1 
Strongly Agree 101 28.9 28.9 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Q15 I like to have someone to steer me in the right direction when Im faced with important decisions 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Strongly Disagree 1 .3 .3 .3 
Disagree 51 14.6 14.6 14.9 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 91 26.0 26.0 40.9 
Agree 129 36.9 36.9 77.7 
Strongly Agree 78 22.3 22.3 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Q16 I avoid making important decisions until the pressure is on 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Strongly Disagree 56 16.0 16.0 16.0 
Disagree 132 37.7 37.7 53.7 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 61 17.4 17.4 71.1 
Agree 87 24.9 24.9 96.0 
Strongly Agree 14 4.0 4.0 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Q17 I postpone decision-making whenever possible 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Strongly Disagree 42 12.0 12.0 12.0 
Disagree 164 46.9 46.9 58.9 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 79 22.6 22.6 81.4 
Agree 62 17.7 17.7 99.1 
Strongly Agree 3 .9 .9 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Q19 I generally make important decisions at the last minute 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Strongly Disagree 64 18.3 18.3 18.3 
Disagree 185 52.9 52.9 71.1 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 49 14.0 14.0 85.1 
Agree 50 14.3 14.3 99.4 
Strongly Agree 2 .6 .6 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Q33 I consider the costs when making decisions 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Disagree 1 .3 .3 .3 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 23 6.6 6.6 6.9 
Agree 213 60.9 60.9 67.7 
Strongly Agree 113 32.3 32.3 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Q34 I consider many outcomes and possibilities when making decisions 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Disagree 2 .6 .6 .6 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 6 1.7 1.7 2.3 
Agree 222 63.4 63.4 65.7 
Strongly Agree 120 34.3 34.3 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
Q38 I often compare the current situation with similar ones already in my memory 
 Frequency Percent Valid Percent 
Cumulative 
Percent 
Valid Disagree 2 .6 .6 .6 
Neither Agree Nor Disagree 10 2.9 2.9 3.4 
Agree 213 60.9 60.9 64.3 
Strongly Agree 125 35.7 35.7 100.0 
Total 350 100.0 100.0  
APPENDIX 5: GLM YES NO ANALYSIS 
GLM F1 F2 F3 F4 F5 F6 BY Q41 Q42 Q43 Q44 Q45 Q46 Q47 Q48 Q49 Q50 Q51 
  /METHOD=SSTYPE(3) 
  /INTERCEPT=INCLUDE 
  /CRITERIA=ALPHA(.05) 
  /DESIGN=Q41*Q42*Q43*Q44*Q45*Q46*Q47*Q48*Q49*Q50*Q51. 
General Linear Model 
Between-Subjects Factors 
 Value Label N 
Q41 The decisions I make usually concern day to day activities of the business 1.00 YES 297 
2.00 NO 53 
Q42 The decisions I make usually concern short term activities 1.00 YES 278 
2.00 NO 72 
Q43 The decisions I make usually concern immediate payment decisions 1.00 YES 258 
2.00 NO 92 
Q44 The decisions I make usually concern the allocation of resources 1.00 YES 293 
2.00 NO 57 
Q45 The decisions I make usually concern the use of resources 1.00 YES 330 
2.00 NO 20 
Q46 The decisions I make usually concern managers across the organization 1.00 YES 307 
2.00 NO 43 
Q47 The decisions I make usually concern long term activities 1.00 YES 316 
2.00 NO 34 
Q48 The decisions I make usually concern how many people to deploy on tasks 1.00 YES 287 
2.00 NO 63 
Q49 The decisions I make usually concern broad organizational issues 1.00 YES 264 
2.00 NO 86 
Q50 The decisions I make usually concern top executives 1.00 YES 252 
2.00 NO 98 
Q51 The decisions I make usually concern strategic decisions 1.00 YES 295 
2.00 NO 55 
Multivariate Testsa 
Effect Value F Hypothesis df Error df Sig. 
Intercept Pillais Trace .990 4464.882b 6.000 274.000 .000 
Wilks Lambda .010 4464.882b 6.000 274.000 .000 
Hotellings Trace 97.771 4464.882b 6.000 274.000 .000 
Roys Largest Root 97.771 4464.882b 6.000 274.000 .000 
Q41 * Q42 * Q43 * Q44 * Q45 
* Q46 * Q47 * Q48 * Q49 * 
Q50 * Q51 
Pillais Trace 2.523 2.892 420.000 1674.000 .000 
Wilks Lambda .031 3.093 420.000 1648.114 .000 
Hotellings Trace 5.156 3.343 420.000 1634.000 .000 
Roys Largest Root 2.092 8.336c 70.000 279.000 .000 
a. Design: Intercept + Q41 * Q42 * Q43 * Q44 * Q45 * Q46 * Q47 * Q48 * Q49 * Q50 * Q51 
b. Exact statistic 
c. The statistic is an upper bound on F that yields a lower bound on the significance level. 
Tests of Between-Subjects Effects 
Source Dependent Variable 
Type III Sum 
of Squares df 
Square F Sig. 
Corrected 
Model 
F1 (Avoidant) 1134.828a 70 16.212 3.861 .000 
F2 (Heuristic) 381.129b 70 5.445 4.702 .000 
F3 (Rational) 580.049c 70 8.286 1.479 .015 
F4 (Intuitive) 457.629d 70 6.538 2.700 .000 
F5 (Dependent) 427.639e 70 6.109 2.555 .000 
F6 (Spontaneous) 329.187f 70 4.703 2.412 .000 
Intercept F1 (Avoidant) 7512.101 1 7512.101 1789.223 .000 
F2 (Heuristic) 21484.644 1 21484.644 18554.051 .000 
F3 (Rational) 20824.953 1 20824.953 3716.487 .000 
F4 (Intuitive) 5943.500 1 5943.500 2454.517 .000 
F5 (Dependent) 7823.477 1 7823.477 3272.317 .000 
F6 (Spontaneous) 4158.630 1 4158.630 2132.540 .000 
Q41 * Q42 
* Q43 * 
Q44 * Q45 
* Q46 * 
Q47 * Q48 
* Q49 * 
Q50 * Q51 
F1 (Avoidant) 1134.828 70 16.212 3.861 .000 
F2 (Heuristic) 381.129 70 5.445 4.702 .000 
F3 (Rational) 580.049 70 8.286 1.479 .015 
F4 (Intuitive) 457.629 70 6.538 2.700 .000 
F5 (Dependent) 427.639 70 6.109 2.555 .000 
F6 (Spontaneous) 329.187 70 4.703 2.412 .000 
Error F1 (Avoidant) 1171.389 279 4.199   
F2 (Heuristic) 323.068 279 1.158   
F3 (Rational) 1563.348 279 5.603   
F4 (Intuitive) 675.586 279 2.421   
F5 (Dependent) 667.035 279 2.391   
F6 (Spontaneous) 544.073 279 1.950   
Total F1 (Avoidant) 21354.000 350    
F2 (Heuristic) 58793.000 350    
F3 (Rational) 56681.000 350    
F4 (Intuitive) 16979.000 350    
F5 (Dependent) 21038.000 350    
F6 (Spontaneous) 11771.000 350    
Corrected 
Total 
F1 (Avoidant) 2306.217 349    
F2 (Heuristic) 704.197 349    
F3 (Rational) 2143.397 349    
F4 (Intuitive) 1133.214 349    
F5 (Dependent) 1094.674 349    
F6 (Spontaneous) 873.260 349    
a. R Squared = .492 (Adjusted R Squared = .365) 
b. R Squared = .541 (Adjusted R Squared = .426) 
c. R Squared = .271 (Adjusted R Squared = .088) 
d. R Squared = .404 (Adjusted R Squared = .254) 
e. R Squared = .391 (Adjusted R Squared = .238) 
f. R Squared = .377 (Adjusted R Squared = .221) 
APPENDIX 6: RELIABILITY ANALYSIS  
RELIABILITY 
  /VARIABLES=Q2 Q3 Q4 
  /SCALE(ALL VARIABLES) ALL 
  /MODEL=ALPHA 
  /SUMMARY=TOTAL. 
Reliability 
Scale: ALL VARIABLES 
Case Processing Summary 
Cases Valid 350 100.0 
Excludeda 0 .0 
Total 350 100.0 
a. Listwise deletion based on all variables in the procedure. 
Reliability Statistics 
Cronbachs Alpha N of Items 
.813 3 
Item-Total Statistics 
Scale Mean if Item 
Deleted 
Scale Variance if 
Item Deleted 
Corrected Item-
Total Correlation 
Cronbachs Alpha 
if Item Deleted 
Q2 I double-check my 
information sources to be sure I 
have the right facts before 
making decisions 
8.2543 2.683 .619 .813 
Q3 I make decisions in a logical 
and systematic way 
8.3457 3.104 .710 .704 
Q4 My decision-making requires 
careful thought 
8.3657 3.167 .690 .724 
RELIABILITY 
  /VARIABLES=Q6 Q7 
  /SCALE(ALL VARIABLES) ALL 
  /MODEL=ALPHA 
  /SUMMARY=TOTAL. 
Reliability 
Scale: ALL VARIABLES 
Case Processing Summary 
Cases Valid 350 100.0 
Excludeda 0 .0 
Total 350 100.0 
a. Listwise deletion based on all variables in the procedure. 
Reliability Statistics 
Cronbachs Alpha N of Items 
.842 2 
Item-Total Statistics 
Scale Mean if Item 
Deleted 
Scale Variance if 
Item Deleted 
Corrected Item-
Total Correlation 
Cronbachs Alpha 
if Item Deleted 
Q6 When making decisions, I 
rely upon my instincts 
3.4171 .805 .735 . 
Q7 When I make decisions, I 
tend to rely on my intuition 
3.3114 1.075 .735 . 
RELIABILITY 
  /VARIABLES=Q13 Q15 
  /SCALE(ALL VARIABLES) ALL 
  /MODEL=ALPHA 
  /SUMMARY=TOTAL. 
Reliability 
Scale: ALL VARIABLES 
Case Processing Summary 
Cases Valid 350 100.0 
Excludeda 0 .0 
Total 350 100.0 
a. Listwise deletion based on all variables in the procedure. 
Reliability Statistics 
Cronbachs Alpha N of Items 
.806 2 
Item-Total Statistics 
Scale Mean if Item 
Deleted 
Scale Variance if 
Item Deleted 
Corrected Item-
Total Correlation 
Cronbachs Alpha 
if Item Deleted 
Q13 If I have the support of 
others, it is easier for me to 
make important decisions 
3.6629 .981 .675 . 
Q15 I like to have someone to 
steer me in the right direction 
when Im faced with important 
decisions 
3.8857 .892 .675 . 
RELIABILITY 
  /VARIABLES=Q16 Q17 Q19 
  /SCALE(ALL VARIABLES) ALL 
  /MODEL=ALPHA 
  /SUMMARY=TOTAL. 
Reliability 
Scale: ALL VARIABLES 
Case Processing Summary 
Cases Valid 349 99.7 
Excludeda 1 .3 
Total 350 100.0 
a. Listwise deletion based on all variables in the procedure. 
Reliability Statistics 
Cronbachs Alpha N of Items 
.803 3 
Item-Total Statistics 
Scale Mean if 
Item Deleted 
Scale Variance if 
Item Deleted 
Corrected Item-
Total Correlation 
Cronbachs Alpha if 
Item Deleted 
Q16 I avoid making important 
decisions until the pressure is 
4.7457 2.924 .615 .783 
Q17 I postpone decision-making 
whenever possible 
4.8914 3.278 .709 .673 
Q19 I generally make important 
decisions at the last minute 
5.1171 3.479 .642 .740 
RELIABILITY 
  /VARIABLES=Q33 Q34 Q38 
  /SCALE(ALL VARIABLES) ALL 
  /MODEL=ALPHA 
  /SUMMARY=TOTAL. 
Reliability 
Scale: ALL VARIABLES 
Case Processing Summary 
Cases Valid 350 100.0 
Excludeda 0 .0 
Total 350 100.0 
a. Listwise deletion based on all variables in the procedure. 
Reliability Statistics 
Cronbachs Alpha N of Items 
.808 3 
Item-Total Statistics 
Scale Mean if Item 
Deleted 
Scale Variance if 
Item Deleted 
Corrected Item-
Total Correlation 
Cronbachs Alpha 
if Item Deleted 
Q33 I consider the costs when 
making decisions 
8.6314 1.087 .489 .908 
Q34 I consider many outcomes 
and possibilities when making 
decisions 
8.5686 .905 .815 .571 
Q38 I often compare the current 
situation with similar ones 
already in my memory 
8.5657 .957 .691 .699 
RELIABILITY 
  /VARIABLES=Q21 Q22 
  /SCALE(ALL VARIABLES) ALL 
  /MODEL=ALPHA 
  /SUMMARY=TOTAL. 
  Case Processing Summary 
Cases Valid 350 100.0 
Excludeda 0 .0 
Total 350 100.0 
a. Listwise deletion based on all variables in the procedure. 
Reliability Statistics 
Cronbachs Alpha N of Items 
.647 2 
Item-Total Statistics 
Scale Mean if Item 
Deleted 
Scale Variance if 
Item Deleted 
Corrected Item-Total 
Correlation 
Cronbachs Alpha if 
Item Deleted 
Q21 I generally make snap 
decisions 
2.8343 .889 .479 . 
Q22 I often make decisions on the 
spur of the moment 
2.7457 .803 .479 . 
APPENDIX 7: LINEAR REGRESSION YES NO QUESTIONS 
F1 (Avoidant Decision-making Style)  F2 (Heuristic Decision-making Style)  F3 (Rational Decision-making 
Style)  F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style)  F5 (Dependent Decision-making Style)  F6 (Spontaneous 
Decision-making Style)   * Q41 The decisions I make usually concern day to day activities of the business 
Q41 The decisions I make usually 
concern day to day activities of the 
business 
(Avoidant 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Heuristic 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Rational 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Intuitive 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Dependent 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Spontaneous 
Decision-
making Style) 
YES Mean 7.4983 12.8956 12.4815 6.7811 7.6094 5.5960 
N 297 297 297 297 297 297 
Std. Deviation 2.56553 1.38008 2.50280 1.82769 1.76173 1.52846 
NO Mean 6.6981 12.8113 12.4906 6.4340 7.2075 5.4906 
N 53 53 53 53 53 53 
Std. Deviation 2.51599 1.64149 2.35848 1.63507 1.80127 1.86695 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 6.7286 7.5486 5.5800 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 1.80195 1.77105 1.58183 
F1 (Avoidant Decision-making Style)  F2 (Heuristic Decision-making Style)  F3 (Rational Decision-making 
Style)  F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style)  F5 (Dependent Decision-making Style)  F6 (Spontaneous 
Decision-making Style)   * Q42 The decisions I make usually concern short term activities 
Q42 The decisions I make usually 
concern short term activities 
(Avoidant 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Heuristic 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Rational 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Intuitive 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Dependent 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Spontaneous 
Decision-
making Style) 
YES Mean 7.5971 12.7986 12.4101 6.8381 7.5432 5.6187 
N 278 278 278 278 278 278 
Std. Deviation 2.64294 1.41768 2.58380 1.80024 1.78540 1.58693 
NO Mean 6.5278 13.2083 12.7639 6.3056 7.5694 5.4306 
N 72 72 72 72 72 72 
Std. Deviation 2.07583 1.39352 2.01049 1.75739 1.72656 1.56391 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 6.7286 7.5486 5.5800 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 1.80195 1.77105 1.58183 
F1 (Avoidant Decision-making Style)  F2 (Heuristic Decision-making Style)  F3 (Rational Decision-making 
Style)  F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style)  F5 (Dependent Decision-making Style)  F6 (Spontaneous 
Decision-making Style)   * Q43 The decisions I make usually concern immediate payment decisions 
Q43 The decisions I make usually 
concern immediate payment decisions 
(Avoidant 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Heuristic 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Rational 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Intuitive 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Dependent 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Spontaneous 
Decision-
making Style) 
YES Mean 7.4961 12.9109 12.3682 6.7946 7.5659 5.6124 
N 258 258 258 258 258 258 
Std. Deviation 2.50641 1.40725 2.59903 1.79072 1.73023 1.57712 
NO Mean 7.0435 12.8043 12.8043 6.5435 7.5000 5.4891 
N 92 92 92 92 92 92 
Std. Deviation 2.72922 1.46189 2.08205 1.83023 1.88982 1.60010 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 6.7286 7.5486 5.5800 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 1.80195 1.77105 1.58183 
F1 (Avoidant Decision-making Style)  F2 (Heuristic Decision-making Style)  F3 (Rational Decision-making 
Style)  F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style)  F5 (Dependent Decision-making Style)  F6 (Spontaneous 
Decision-making Style)   * Q44 The decisions I make usually concern the allocation of resources 
Q44 The decisions I make usually 
concern the allocation of resources 
(Avoidant 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Heuristic 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Rational 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Intuitive 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Dependent 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Spontaneous 
Decision-
making Style) 
YES Mean 7.3276 13.0034 12.5017 6.6894 7.5427 5.5734 
N 293 293 293 293 293 293 
Std. Deviation 2.60567 1.40571 2.58370 1.86601 1.84383 1.56336 
NO Mean 7.6316 12.2632 12.3860 6.9298 7.5789 5.6140 
N 57 57 57 57 57 57 
Std. Deviation 2.38770 1.34332 1.85890 1.42503 1.34891 1.68771 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 6.7286 7.5486 5.5800 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 1.80195 1.77105 1.58183 
F1 (Avoidant Decision-making Style)  F2 (Heuristic Decision-making Style)  F3 (Rational Decision-making 
Style)  F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style)  F5 (Dependent Decision-making Style)  F6 (Spontaneous 
Decision-making Style)   * Q45 The decisions I make usually concern the use of resources 
Q45 The decisions I make usually 
concern the use of resources 
(Avoidant 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Heuristic 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Rational 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Intuitive 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Dependent 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Spontaneous 
Decision-
making Style) 
YES Mean 7.3667 12.9333 12.5606 6.7485 7.5515 5.6000 
N 330 330 330 330 330 330 
Std. Deviation 2.60968 1.37115 2.46143 1.82529 1.77933 1.56053 
NO Mean 7.5500 12.0500 11.2000 6.4000 7.5000 5.2500 
N 20 20 20 20 20 20 
Std. Deviation 1.84890 1.93241 2.46235 1.35336 1.67017 1.91600 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 6.7286 7.5486 5.5800 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 1.80195 1.77105 1.58183 
F1 (Avoidant Decision-making Style)  F2 (Heuristic Decision-making Style)  F3 (Rational Decision-making 
Style)  F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style)  F5 (Dependent Decision-making Style)  F6 (Spontaneous 
Decision-making Style)   * Q46 The decisions I make usually concern managers across the organization 
Q46 The decisions I make usually 
concern managers across the 
organization 
(Avoidant 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Heuristic 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Rational 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Intuitive 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Dependent 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Spontaneous 
Decision-
making Style) 
YES Mean 7.3583 12.8567 12.4430 6.7818 7.6026 5.5863 
N 307 307 307 307 307 307 
Std. Deviation 2.67559 1.39992 2.61578 1.81351 1.77447 1.62342 
NO Mean 7.5116 13.0698 12.7674 6.3488 7.1628 5.5349 
N 43 43 43 43 43 43 
Std. Deviation 1.65288 1.56442 1.04283 1.68867 1.71728 1.26017 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 6.7286 7.5486 5.5800 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 1.80195 1.77105 1.58183 
F1 (Avoidant Decision-making Style)  F2 (Heuristic Decision-making Style)  F3 (Rational Decision-making 
Style)  F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style)  F5 (Dependent Decision-making Style)  F6 (Spontaneous 
Decision-making Style)   * Q47 The decisions I make usually concern long term activities 
Q47 The decisions I make usually 
concern long term activities 
(Avoidant 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Heuristic 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Rational 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Intuitive 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Dependent 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Spontaneous 
Decision-
making Style) 
YES Mean 7.2816 12.9019 12.5411 6.7184 7.5696 5.6108 
N 316 316 316 316 316 316 
Std. Deviation 2.60520 1.42089 2.51501 1.77812 1.78483 1.57472 
NO Mean 8.2647 12.7059 11.9412 6.8235 7.3529 5.2941 
N 34 34 34 34 34 34 
Std. Deviation 2.04952 1.42551 2.05885 2.03709 1.64929 1.64279 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 6.7286 7.5486 5.5800 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 1.80195 1.77105 1.58183 
F1 (Avoidant Decision-making Style)  F2 (Heuristic Decision-making Style)  F3 (Rational Decision-making 
Style)  F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style)  F5 (Dependent Decision-making Style)  F6 (Spontaneous 
Decision-making Style)   * Q48 The decisions I make usually concern how many people to deploy on tasks 
Q48 The decisions I make usually 
concern how many people to deploy 
on tasks 
(Avoidant 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Heuristic 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Rational 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Intuitive 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Dependent 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Spontaneous 
Decision-
making Style) 
YES Mean 7.4948 12.9861 12.6132 6.6934 7.7108 5.6516 
N 287 287 287 287 287 287 
Std. Deviation 2.61099 1.43866 2.57073 1.83690 1.78670 1.52503 
NO Mean 6.8413 12.4127 11.8889 6.8889 6.8095 5.2540 
N 63 63 63 63 63 63 
Std. Deviation 2.32245 1.23960 1.91017 1.63738 1.50115 1.79577 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 6.7286 7.5486 5.5800 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 1.80195 1.77105 1.58183 
F1 (Avoidant Decision-making Style)  F2 (Heuristic Decision-making Style)  F3 (Rational Decision-making 
Style)  F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style)  F5 (Dependent Decision-making Style)  F6 (Spontaneous 
Decision-making Style)   * Q49 The decisions I make usually concern broad organizational issues 
Q49 The decisions I make usually 
concern broad organizational issues 
(Avoidant 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Heuristic 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Rational 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Intuitive 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Dependent 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Spontaneous 
Decision-
making Style) 
YES Mean 7.3750 13.0227 12.5795 6.8295 7.7538 5.6364 
N 264 264 264 264 264 264 
Std. Deviation 2.64207 1.46163 2.72318 1.84713 1.79458 1.65354 
NO Mean 7.3837 12.4535 12.1860 6.4186 6.9186 5.4070 
N 86 86 86 86 86 86 
Std. Deviation 2.35231 1.19466 1.46738 1.62673 1.54322 1.33176 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 6.7286 7.5486 5.5800 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 1.80195 1.77105 1.58183 
F1 (Avoidant Decision-making Style)  F2 (Heuristic Decision-making Style)  F3 (Rational Decision-making 
Style)  F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style)  F5 (Dependent Decision-making Style)  F6 (Spontaneous 
Decision-making Style)   * Q50 The decisions I make usually concern top executives 
Q50 The decisions I make usually 
concern top executives 
(Avoidant 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Heuristic 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Rational 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Intuitive 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Dependent 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Spontaneous 
Decision-
making Style) 
YES Mean 7.3452 13.0794 12.6270 6.8413 7.6190 5.6270 
N 252 252 252 252 252 252 
Std. Deviation 2.69644 1.34847 2.64871 1.83552 1.77794 1.58295 
NO Mean 7.4592 12.3776 12.1122 6.4388 7.3673 5.4592 
N 98 98 98 98 98 98 
Std. Deviation 2.22529 1.48196 1.93653 1.68723 1.74915 1.58061 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 6.7286 7.5486 5.5800 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 1.80195 1.77105 1.58183 
F1 (Avoidant Decision-making Style)  F2 (Heuristic Decision-making Style)  F3 (Rational Decision-making 
Style)  F4 (Intuitive Decision-making Style)  F5 (Dependent Decision-making Style)  F6 (Spontaneous 
Decision-making Style)   * Q51 The decisions I make usually concern strategic decisions 
Q51 The decisions I make usually 
concern strategic decisions 
(Avoidant 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Heuristic 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Rational 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Intuitive 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Dependent 
Decision-
making 
Style) 
(Spontaneous 
Decision-
making Style) 
YES Mean 7.3085 12.9763 12.5492 6.7525 7.5254 5.5763 
N 295 295 295 295 295 295 
Std. Deviation 2.65277 1.40557 2.57079 1.80413 1.78005 1.59083 
NO Mean 7.7455 12.3818 12.1273 6.6000 7.6727 5.6000 
N 55 55 55 55 55 55 
Std. Deviation 2.05677 1.40753 1.88615 1.80123 1.73263 1.54680 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 6.7286 7.5486 5.5800 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 1.80195 1.77105 1.58183 
COMPUTE FS4= (Q6 + Q7)/2*3. 
EXECUTE. 
COMPUTE FS5=(Q13 + Q15)/2*3. 
EXECUTE. 
COMPUTE FS6=(Q21 + Q22)/2*3. 
EXECUTE. 
DATASET ACTIVATE DataSet1. 
MEANS TABLES=FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 BY Q41 Q42 Q43 Q44 Q45 Q46 Q47 Q48 Q49 
Q50 Q51 
  /CELLS=MEAN COUNT STDDEV. 
FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6  * Q41 The decisions I make usually concern 
day to day activities of the business 
Q41 The 
decisions I 
make usually 
concern day to 
day activities of 
the business FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 
YES Mean 7.4983 12.8956 12.4815 10.1717 11.4141 8.3939  
N 297 297 297 297 297 297  
Deviation 
2.56553 1.38008 2.50280 2.74154 2.64260 2.29269 
NO Mean 6.6981 12.8113 12.4906 9.6509 10.8113 8.2358  
N 53 53 53 53 53 53  
Deviation 
2.51599 1.64149 2.35848 2.45260 2.70190 2.80042 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 10.0929 11.3229 8.3700  
N 350 350 350 350 350 350  
Deviation 
2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 2.70293 2.65657 2.37274 
FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6  * Q42 The decisions I make usually concern 
short term activities 
Q42 The 
decisions I 
make usually 
concern short 
term activities FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 
YES Mean 7.5971 12.7986 12.4101 10.2572 11.3147 8.4281  
N 278 278 278 278 278 278  
Deviation 
2.64294 1.41768 2.58380 2.70035 2.67810 2.38040 
NO Mean 6.5278 13.2083 12.7639 9.4583 11.3542 8.1458  
N 72 72 72 72 72 72  
Deviation 
2.07583 1.39352 2.01049 2.63608 2.58985 2.34586 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 10.0929 11.3229 8.3700  
N 350 350 350 350 350 350  
Deviation 
2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 2.70293 2.65657 2.37274 
FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6  * Q43 The decisions I make usually concern immediate payment decisions 
Q43 The decisions I make usually concern 
immediate payment decisions FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 
YES Mean 7.4961 12.9109 12.3682 10.1919 11.3488 8.4186 
N 258 258 258 258 258 258 
Std. Deviation 2.50641 1.40725 2.59903 2.68607 2.59535 2.36568 
NO Mean 7.0435 12.8043 12.8043 9.8152 11.2500 8.2337 
N 92 92 92 92 92 92 
Std. Deviation 2.72922 1.46189 2.08205 2.74534 2.83473 2.40015 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 10.0929 11.3229 8.3700 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 2.70293 2.65657 2.37274 
FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6  * Q44 The decisions I make usually concern the allocation of resources 
Q44 The decisions I make usually concern the 
allocation of resources FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 
YES Mean 7.3276 13.0034 12.5017 10.0341 11.3140 8.3601 
N 293 293 293 293 293 293 
Std. Deviation 2.60567 1.40571 2.58370 2.79901 2.76575 2.34503 
NO Mean 7.6316 12.2632 12.3860 10.3947 11.3684 8.4211 
N 57 57 57 57 57 57 
Std. Deviation 2.38770 1.34332 1.85890 2.13754 2.02336 2.53157 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 10.0929 11.3229 8.3700 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 2.70293 2.65657 2.37274 
FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6  * Q45 The decisions I make usually concern the use of resources 
Q45 The decisions I make usually concern the 
use of resources FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 
YES Mean 7.3667 12.9333 12.5606 10.1227 11.3273 8.4000 
N 330 330 330 330 330 330 
Std. Deviation 2.60968 1.37115 2.46143 2.73794 2.66900 2.34080 
NO Mean 7.5500 12.0500 11.2000 9.6000 11.2500 7.8750 
N 20 20 20 20 20 20 
Std. Deviation 1.84890 1.93241 2.46235 2.03004 2.50526 2.87400 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 10.0929 11.3229 8.3700 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 2.70293 2.65657 2.37274 
FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6  * Q46 The decisions I make usually concern managers across the organization 
Q46 The decisions I make usually concern 
managers across the organization FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 
YES Mean 7.3583 12.8567 12.4430 10.1726 11.4039 8.3795 
N 307 307 307 307 307 307 
Std. Deviation 2.67559 1.39992 2.61578 2.72026 2.66171 2.43513 
NO Mean 7.5116 13.0698 12.7674 9.5233 10.7442 8.3023 
N 43 43 43 43 43 43 
Std. Deviation 1.65288 1.56442 1.04283 2.53300 2.57592 1.89026 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 10.0929 11.3229 8.3700 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 2.70293 2.65657 2.37274 
FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6  * Q47 The decisions I make usually concern long term activities 
Q47 The decisions I make usually concern long 
term activities FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 
YES Mean 7.2816 12.9019 12.5411 10.0775 11.3544 8.4161 
N 316 316 316 316 316 316 
Std. Deviation 2.60520 1.42089 2.51501 2.66717 2.67724 2.36209 
NO Mean 8.2647 12.7059 11.9412 10.2353 11.0294 7.9412 
N 34 34 34 34 34 34 
Std. Deviation 2.04952 1.42551 2.05885 3.05563 2.47393 2.46418 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 10.0929 11.3229 8.3700 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 2.70293 2.65657 2.37274 
FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6  * Q48 The decisions I make usually concern how many people to deploy on 
tasks 
Q48 The decisions I make usually concern how 
many people to deploy on tasks FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 
YES Mean 7.4948 12.9861 12.6132 10.0401 11.5662 8.4774 
N 287 287 287 287 287 287 
Std. Deviation 2.61099 1.43866 2.57073 2.75534 2.68005 2.28755 
NO Mean 6.8413 12.4127 11.8889 10.3333 10.2143 7.8810 
N 63 63 63 63 63 63 
Std. Deviation 2.32245 1.23960 1.91017 2.45607 2.25173 2.69365 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 10.0929 11.3229 8.3700 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 2.70293 2.65657 2.37274 
FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6  * Q49 The decisions I make usually concern broad organizational issues 
Q49 The decisions I make usually concern broad 
organizational issues FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 
YES Mean 7.3750 13.0227 12.5795 10.2443 11.6307 8.4545 
N 264 264 264 264 264 264 
Std. Deviation 2.64207 1.46163 2.72318 2.77070 2.69187 2.48031 
NO Mean 7.3837 12.4535 12.1860 9.6279 10.3779 8.1105 
N 86 86 86 86 86 86 
Std. Deviation 2.35231 1.19466 1.46738 2.44009 2.31483 1.99765 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 10.0929 11.3229 8.3700 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 2.70293 2.65657 2.37274 
FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6  * Q50 The decisions I make usually concern top executives 
Q50 The decisions I make usually concern top 
executives FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 
YES Mean 7.3452 13.0794 12.6270 10.2619 11.4286 8.4405 
N 252 252 252 252 252 252 
Std. Deviation 2.69644 1.34847 2.64871 2.75328 2.66691 2.37442 
NO Mean 7.4592 12.3776 12.1122 9.6582 11.0510 8.1888 
N 98 98 98 98 98 98 
Std. Deviation 2.22529 1.48196 1.93653 2.53084 2.62373 2.37091 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 10.0929 11.3229 8.3700 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 2.70293 2.65657 2.37274 
FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6  * Q51 The decisions I make usually concern strategic decisions 
Q51 The decisions I make usually concern 
strategic decisions FS1 FS2 FS3 FS4 FS5 FS6 
YES Mean 7.3085 12.9763 12.5492 10.1288 11.2881 8.3644 
N 295 295 295 295 295 295 
Std. Deviation 2.65277 1.40557 2.57079 2.70619 2.67007 2.38624 
NO Mean 7.7455 12.3818 12.1273 9.9000 11.5091 8.4000 
N 55 55 55 55 55 55 
Std. Deviation 2.05677 1.40753 1.88615 2.70185 2.59895 2.32020 
Total Mean 7.3771 12.8829 12.4829 10.0929 11.3229 8.3700 
N 350 350 350 350 350 350 
Std. Deviation 2.57062 1.42048 2.47821 2.70293 2.65657 2.37274 
APPENDIX 8: QUESTIONNAIRE RESPONSES 
Items 1-10 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
4 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
6 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
9 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
10 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
15 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
18 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
21 Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
22 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Disagree 
23 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
31 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
# Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q10 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
33 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
34 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
35 Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
37 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
39 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
40 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
45 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
47 Agree Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
48 Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
50 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
51 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
56 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
59 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
62 Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
63 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Disagree 
64 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
72 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
74 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
75 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
76 Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
78 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
80 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
81 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
86 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
88 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
91 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
92 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
97 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
100 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
103 Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
104 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Disagree 
105 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
113 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
115 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
116 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
117 Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
119 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
121 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
122 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
127 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
129 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
132 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
133 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
138 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
141 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
144 Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
145 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Disagree 
146 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
154 Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
156 Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
159 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
160 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
# Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4 Q5 Q6 Q7 Q8 Q9 Q10 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
165 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
168 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
171 Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
172 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
173 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
181 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
183 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
184 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
185 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
187 Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
189 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
190 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
195 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
197 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
200 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
201 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
206 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
209 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
212 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
213 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree 
214 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
222 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
224 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
225 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
226 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
228 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
230 Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
231 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
236 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
238 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
241 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
242 Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
247 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
250 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
253 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
254 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
255 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
263 Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
265 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
266 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
267 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
269 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
271 Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
272 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
277 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
279 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
282 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
283 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
288 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
291 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
294 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
295 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
296 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
301 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
304 Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
305 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
306 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
314 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
316 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
317 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
318 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
320 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree 
322 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
323 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
328 Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
330 Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
333 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
334 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
339 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
342 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
345 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
346 Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
347 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Items 11-20 
# Q11 Q12 Q13 Q14 Q15 Q16 Q17 Q18 Q19 Q20 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
4 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
5 Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
9 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
10 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
11 Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
13 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
20 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
21 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
22 Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
24 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
27 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
29 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
30 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
32 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
33 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
34 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
35 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
38 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
40 Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
41 Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
45 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
46 Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
50 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
51 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
52 Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
54 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
61 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
62 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
63 Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
65 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
68 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
70 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
71 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
73 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
74 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
75 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
76 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
79 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
81 Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
82 Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
86 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
87 Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
91 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
92 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
93 Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
95 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
102 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
103 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
104 Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
106 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
109 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
111 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
112 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
114 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
115 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
116 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
117 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
120 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
122 Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
123 Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
127 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
128 Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
132 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
133 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
134 Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
136 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
143 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
144 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
145 Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
147 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
150 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
154 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
155 Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
159 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
160 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
161 Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
163 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
170 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
171 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
172 Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
174 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
177 Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
179 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
180 Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
182 Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
183 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
184 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
185 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
188 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
190 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
191 Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
195 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
196 Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
200 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
201 Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
202 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
204 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
211 Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
212 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
213 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
215 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
218 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
220 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
221 Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
223 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
224 Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
225 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
226 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
229 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
231 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
232 Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
236 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
237 Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
241 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
242 Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
243 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
245 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
252 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
253 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
254 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
256 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
261 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Disagree 
262 Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
266 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
267 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
268 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Neither,  
270 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
277 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
278 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
279 Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
281 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
284 Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
286 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
287 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
289 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
290 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
291 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
292 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
295 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
297 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
298 Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
302 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
303 Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
307 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
308 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree 
309 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
311 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
318 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
319 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
320 Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
322 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree 
325 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
327 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
328 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
330 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
331 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
332 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
333 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
336 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
338 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Disagree 
339 Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
343 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
344 Agree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
348 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
349 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
350 Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Items 21-30 
# Q21 Q22 Q23 Q24 Q25 Q26 Q27 Q28 Q29 Q30 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
5 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
8 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
11 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
12 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
15 Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
18 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
22 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
23 Disagree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
24 Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
25 Agree Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
27 Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
29 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
30 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
31 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
32 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
33 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
38 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
39 Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
40 Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
41 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
46 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
49 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
52 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
53 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
56 Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
59 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
63 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
64 Disagree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
65 Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
66 Agree Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
68 Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
70 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
71 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
72 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
73 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
74 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
79 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
80 Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
81 Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
82 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
87 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
90 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
93 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
94 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
97 Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
100 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
104 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
105 Disagree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
106 Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
107 Agree Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
109 Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
111 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
112 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
113 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
114 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
115 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
120 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
121 Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
122 Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
123 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
128 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
131 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
134 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
135 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
138 Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
141 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
145 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
146 Disagree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
147 Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
148 Agree Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
150 Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
155 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
158 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
161 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
162 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
165 Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
168 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
172 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
173 Disagree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
174 Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
175 Agree Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
177 Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
179 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
180 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
181 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
182 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
183 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
188 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
189 Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
190 Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
191 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
196 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
199 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
202 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
203 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
206 Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
209 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
213 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
214 Disagree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
215 Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
216 Agree Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
218 Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
220 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
221 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
222 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
223 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
224 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
229 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
230 Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
231 Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
232 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
237 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
240 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
243 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
244 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
247 Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
250 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
254 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
255 Disagree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
256 Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
257 Agree Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
259 Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
261 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
262 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
263 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
264 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
265 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
270 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
271 Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
272 Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
273 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
278 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
281 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
284 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
285 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
291 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
294 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
297 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
298 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
301 Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
304 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
308 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
309 Disagree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
310 Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
311 Agree Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
313 Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
315 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
316 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
317 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
318 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
319 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
324 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
325 Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
326 Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
327 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
332 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
335 Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
338 Disagree Disagree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
339 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
342 Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
345 Disagree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Neither,  Nor Disagree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
349 Disagree Disagree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
350 Disagree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Items 31-40 
# Q31 Q32 Q33 Q34 Q35 Q36 Q37 Q38 Q39 Q40 
1 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
2 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
4 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
5 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
6 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
7 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
8 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
9 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
12 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
13 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
14 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
15 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
19 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
20 Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
21 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
22 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
23 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
24 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
27 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
28 Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
29 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
30 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
31 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
33 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
35 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
36 Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
37 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
38 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
40 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
41 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
42 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
43 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
45 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
46 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
47 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
48 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
49 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
50 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
53 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
54 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
55 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
56 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
60 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
61 Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
62 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
63 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
64 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
65 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
68 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
69 Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
70 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
71 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
72 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
74 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
76 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
77 Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
78 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
79 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
81 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
82 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
83 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
84 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
86 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
87 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
88 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
89 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
90 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
91 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
94 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
95 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
96 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
97 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
101 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
102 Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
103 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
104 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
105 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
106 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
109 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
110 Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
111 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
112 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
113 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
115 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
117 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
118 Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
119 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
120 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
122 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
123 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
124 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
125 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
127 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
128 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
129 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
130 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
131 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
132 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
135 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
136 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
137 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
138 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
142 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
143 Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
144 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
145 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
146 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
147 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
150 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
151 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
152 Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
154 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
155 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
156 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
157 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
158 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
159 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
162 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
163 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
164 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
165 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
169 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
170 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
171 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
172 Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
173 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
174 Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
177 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
178 Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
179 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
180 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
181 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree 
183 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
185 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
186 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
187 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
188 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
190 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
191 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
192 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
193 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
195 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
196 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
197 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
198 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
199 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
200 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
203 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
204 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
205 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
206 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
210 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
211 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
212 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
213 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
214 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
215 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
218 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
219 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
220 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
221 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
222 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
224 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
226 Disagree Agree Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
227 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
228 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
229 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
231 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
232 Agree Agree Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
233 Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
234 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
236 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
237 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
238 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
239 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
240 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
241 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
244 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
245 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
246 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
247 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
251 Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
252 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
253 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
254 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
255 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
256 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
259 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
260 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
261 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
262 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
263 Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
265 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
267 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
268 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
269 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
270 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
272 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
273 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
274 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
275 Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
277 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
278 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
279 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
280 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
281 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
282 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
285 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
286 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
287 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
288 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  Nor 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
290 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
291 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
292 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
293 Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
294 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
295 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
298 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
299 Disagree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
300 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
301 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
305 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
306 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
307 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Disagree Agree 
308 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
309 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
310 Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
313 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
314 Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
315 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
316 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
317 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
319 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
321 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
322 Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
323 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
324 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Disagree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
326 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
327 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
328 Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
329 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree 
Neither,  
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
331 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
332 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
333 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree 
334 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
335 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
336 Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree 
339 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
340 Disagree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
341 Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
342 Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree Disagree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Disagree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
346 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree 
Neither,  
347 Agree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
348 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Agree 
349 Disagree Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree 
Neither,  
Neither,  
Strongly 
Agree 
Agree Agree 
350 Agree Agree Agree Agree Agree Disagree Disagree Agree Disagree Agree 
Items 41-50 
# Q41 Q42 Q43 Q44 Q45 Q46 Q47 Q48 Q49 Q50 Q51 
1 NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
2 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
3 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
4 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
5 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
6 NO YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
7 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO 
8 YES YES NO NO NO YES NO NO YES NO NO 
9 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES 
10 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO 
11 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
12 NO YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
13 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES NO YES 
14 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
15 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
16 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES NO YES 
17 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
18 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
19 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
20 YES NO YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
21 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES NO YES 
22 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
23 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO 
24 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
25 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES NO 
26 YES YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
27 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
28 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
29 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
30 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES NO NO YES 
31 NO YES NO YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES 
32 YES YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
33 YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES NO NO NO 
34 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
35 YES YES NO YES YES NO YES NO NO YES YES 
36 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
37 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO 
38 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
39 YES YES NO NO YES NO NO NO NO NO NO 
40 YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO NO NO 
41 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
42 NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
43 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
44 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
45 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
46 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
47 NO YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
48 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO 
49 YES YES NO NO NO YES NO NO YES NO NO 
50 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES 
51 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO 
52 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
53 NO YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
54 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES NO YES 
55 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
56 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
57 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES NO YES 
58 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
59 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
60 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
61 YES NO YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
62 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES NO YES 
63 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
64 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO 
65 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
66 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES NO 
67 YES YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
68 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
69 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
70 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
71 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES NO NO YES 
72 NO YES NO YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES 
73 YES YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
74 YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES NO NO NO 
75 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
76 YES YES NO YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES 
77 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
78 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO 
79 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
80 YES YES NO NO YES NO NO NO NO NO NO 
81 YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO NO NO 
82 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
83 NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
84 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
85 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
86 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
87 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
88 NO YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
89 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO 
90 YES YES NO NO NO YES NO NO YES NO NO 
91 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES 
92 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO 
93 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
94 NO YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
95 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES NO YES 
96 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
97 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
98 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES NO YES 
99 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
100 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
101 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
102 YES NO YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
103 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES NO YES 
104 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
105 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO 
106 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
107 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES NO 
108 YES YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
109 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
110 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
111 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
112 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES NO NO YES 
113 NO YES NO YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES 
114 YES YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
115 YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES NO NO NO 
116 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
117 YES YES NO YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES 
118 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
119 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO 
120 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
121 YES YES NO NO YES NO NO NO NO NO NO 
122 YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO NO NO 
123 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
124 NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
125 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
126 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
127 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
128 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
129 NO YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
130 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO 
131 YES YES NO NO NO YES NO NO YES NO NO 
132 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES 
133 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO 
134 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
135 NO YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
136 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES NO YES 
137 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
138 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
139 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES NO YES 
140 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
141 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
142 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
143 YES NO YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
144 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES NO YES 
145 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
146 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO 
147 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
148 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES NO 
149 YES YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
150 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
151 NO YES YES NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO 
152 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
153 NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
154 YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES YES 
155 NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES 
156 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES YES 
157 NO NO NO NO NO YES YES YES NO YES YES 
158 YES YES NO NO NO NO YES YES NO NO YES 
159 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
160 NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
161 YES YES YES YES NO NO NO YES NO NO YES 
162 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
163 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
164 NO NO NO NO YES NO YES YES YES YES YES 
165 YES YES NO YES YES NO YES YES YES NO YES 
166 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
167 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
168 YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO YES YES YES 
169 NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
170 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO 
171 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
172 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES NO YES 
173 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES 
174 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES 
175 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
176 YES NO YES YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES 
177 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
178 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
179 NO YES YES NO NO YES YES NO YES YES YES 
180 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
181 NO NO NO YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES 
182 YES YES NO YES NO YES YES YES YES NO NO 
183 NO NO YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES 
184 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
185 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
186 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
187 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
188 YES YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
189 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
190 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
191 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
192 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
193 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
194 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
195 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
196 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES NO NO NO 
197 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
198 YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES NO YES YES 
199 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
200 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
201 NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
202 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
203 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
204 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
205 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
206 NO YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
207 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO 
208 YES YES NO NO NO YES NO NO YES NO NO 
209 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES 
210 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO 
211 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
212 NO YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
213 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES NO YES 
214 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
215 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
216 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES NO YES 
217 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
218 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
219 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
220 YES NO YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
221 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES NO YES 
222 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
223 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO 
224 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
225 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES NO 
226 YES YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
227 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
228 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
229 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
230 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES NO NO YES 
231 NO YES NO YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES 
232 YES YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
233 YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES NO NO NO 
234 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
235 YES YES NO YES YES NO YES NO NO YES YES 
236 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
237 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO 
238 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
239 YES YES NO NO YES NO NO NO NO NO NO 
240 YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO NO NO 
241 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
242 NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
243 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
244 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
245 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
246 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
247 NO YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
248 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO 
249 YES YES NO NO NO YES NO NO YES NO NO 
250 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES 
251 NO NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
252 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
253 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
254 NO YES NO NO YES YES NO YES YES NO YES 
255 NO YES YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES 
256 NO YES NO YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES 
257 YES NO NO YES YES YES NO NO YES YES YES 
258 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
259 NO YES YES NO NO NO NO NO NO NO NO 
260 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
261 NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
262 YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES YES 
263 NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES 
264 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES YES 
265 NO NO NO NO NO YES YES YES NO YES YES 
266 YES YES NO NO NO NO YES YES NO NO YES 
267 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
268 NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
269 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO YES 
270 NO NO NO YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES 
271 YES YES NO YES NO YES YES YES YES NO NO 
272 NO NO YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES 
273 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
274 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
275 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
276 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
277 YES YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
278 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
279 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
280 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
281 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES 
282 YES NO YES YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES 
283 NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
284 YES YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
285 YES YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO 
286 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
287 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
288 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
289 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES 
290 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
291 NO NO NO NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES 
292 YES NO NO YES YES YES NO YES NO YES YES 
293 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
294 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
295 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
296 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES 
297 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
298 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
299 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES NO NO NO 
300 YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES YES 
301 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
302 YES NO YES YES YES NO YES YES NO NO YES 
303 NO YES NO YES YES NO NO NO NO NO NO 
304 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
305 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
306 YES YES NO YES YES YES NO YES YES YES YES 
307 NO NO NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
308 YES YES NO NO YES YES NO YES YES YES YES 
309 NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
310 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
311 NO NO NO NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES 
312 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
313 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES 
314 NO NO NO YES YES NO YES YES YES NO YES 
315 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
316 YES NO YES YES YES NO YES YES YES NO NO 
317 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
318 NO NO YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
319 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES NO NO YES 
320 NO NO YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES YES 
321 YES YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
322 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
323 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
324 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
325 YES YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
326 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
327 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
328 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
329 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
330 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
331 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
332 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
333 YES YES YES YES YES NO YES YES NO NO NO 
334 YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
335 YES YES YES YES YES YES NO YES NO YES YES 
336 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
337 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
338 YES YES NO NO YES YES YES YES YES YES NO 
339 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
340 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
341 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
342 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
343 NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
344 YES YES YES YES NO NO NO YES NO NO YES 
345 YES NO YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
346 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
347 NO NO NO NO YES NO YES YES YES YES YES 
348 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
349 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
350 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES 
 Items 51-60  
# Q52 Q53 Q54 Q55 # Q52 Q53 Q54 Q55 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
A high national 
Diploma (HND) 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Bachelor Degree 
Public 
Sector 
1-9 Bachelor Degree 
Private 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Public 
Sector 
Postgraduate 
Degree 
Private 
Sector 
APPENDIX 9: LIST OF VARIABLES 
# Variable 
Type of 
Decision 
1 I plan my important decisions carefully. 
Rational 
Decision-making 
Style 
I double-check my information sources to be sure I have the right facts 
before making decisions. 
3 I make decisions in a logical and systematic way. 
4 My decision-making requires careful thought. 
When making a decision, I consider various options in terms of a 
specific goal. 
6 When making decisions, I rely upon my instincts. 
Intuitive 
Decision-making 
Style 
7 When I make decisions, I tend to rely on my intuition. 
8 I generally make decisions which feel right to me. 
It is more important for me to feel that the decision is right than to 
have a rational reason for it 
10 When I make a decision, I trust my inner feelings and reactions 
I often need the assistance of other people when making important 
decisions. 
Dependent 
Decision-making 
Style 
12 When I make important decisions, I am consulting other people 
If I have the support of others, it is easier for me to make important 
decisions 
14 I use the advice of other people in making my important decisions 
I like to have someone to steer me in the right direction when Im 
faced with important decisions. 
16 I avoid making important decisions until the pressure is on. 
Avoidant 
Decision-making 
Style 
17 I postpone decision-making whenever possible. 
18 I often procrastinate when it comes to making important decisions 
19 I generally make important decisions at the last minute. 
I put off making many decisions because thinking about them makes 
me uneasy. 
21 I generally make snap decisions. 
Spontaneous 
Decision-making 
Style 
22 I often make decisions on the spur of the moment. 
23 I make quick decisions. 
24 I often make impulsive decisions. 
25 When making decisions, I do what seems natural at the moment 
# Variable 
Type of 
Decision 
26 I talk to a lot of people when there is a decision to make 
Expert Heuristic 
Decision-making 
Style 
27 I discuss how to make decisions a lot with senior managers 
28 I always consider how decisions made can be applied in wider situations 
I often consider the wider implications of decisions outside the current 
situation 
30 I think about the whole business when making decisions 
31 I often challenge the views of experts when making decisions 
32 I draw on my personal experiences to make decisions 
33 I consider the costs when making decisions 
34 I consider many outcomes and possibilities when making decisions 
35 I look for patterns that I have seen before when making decisions 
36 I use rules of thumb to make decisions 
37 I use some short cuts when making decisions 
I often compare the current situation with similar ones already in my 
memory 
39 I assess characteristics of the current situation to match it with others 
40 Once I have made a decision I may change my original assumptions 
# Variable 
Level of 
Decision 
41 Day to day activities of the business Low 
42 Short term activities 
43 Immediate payment decisions 
44 The allocation of resources 
45 The use of resources 
46 Managers across the organization 
47 Long term activities 
48 How many people to deploy on tasks 
49 Broad organizational issues 
50 Top executives 
51 Strategic decisions High 
# Demographic Variables 
52 Age  
53 Number of Years in the current Business  
54 Highest level of Education 
55 Business Organization/Unit  
APPENDIX 10: SEMI STRUCTURED INTERVIEWS RESPONSES  
SEMI STRUCTURED INTERVIEW-1 
Introduction  
1. What is your position in the company and what is your role?  
My profession is primarily in educational and instructional development, with part-time 
assignment in administration.  
2. What is the organizational structure in your company?  
It is both, functional and divisional structure. 
3. How is your company performing?  
It is performing well and efficiently in light of some semi-restructuring environment.  
4. Do you consider the external environment stable or unstable?  
Very dynamically stable.  
5. Can you describe what could be a strategic decision for your company?  
Restructuring units and outcomes to meet Market and society needs.   
6. What type of strategic decisions you are required to make?  
We are required to provide bottom-up action plans to meet strategic goals.  
Successful Decision Making Case  
7. Can you describe a successful strategic decision you made in the past?  
A successful strategic decision represents the restructuring of units goals and objectives to meet 
international standards, but focus on local needs. 
8. Who were the people involved in the decision-making process?  
The decisions are made at the various divisional levels and are cascaded to units. 
9. What is the level of importance for the decision made?  
Very important. 
10. What is the level of uncertainty for the decision made?  
Moderate uncertainty  
11. Would you say that the decision was motivated by an opportunity or by a crisis?  
The decision was made by opportunity, growth and development. 
Rational elements 
12. How thoroughly did the group search and analyse information in making this decision?  
Very thoroughly and comprehensively  
13. Did you use analytic techniques in making the decision? If so, how important were they 
in the process?  
Yes, and very highly important.  
14. How efficient was the group at focusing its attention on crucial information, ignoring 
irrelevant information?  
Very efficient and effective.  
15. Would you investigate the situation within the company as well as doing a site visit? Then 
would you make a decision on how to proceed based on your findings? 
16. To what extent was the decision affected by the use of authority and influence among 
group members?  
Not very affected.  
Heuristic elements 
17. Was your professional experience crucial while deliberating for the decision?  
Vey crucial.  
18. Did your personal judgments influence you when making this decision? If so, to what 
extent?  
Somewhat. Less than 5%. 
19. Did your gut-feeling influence you when making this decision? If so, to what extent? 
20. Are you trying to be as sensitive and as supportive as possible to employees?  
Yes, but in areas outside performance output.  
21. Did group members primarily care about their own goals, or with the goals of the 
organization? Did your own personal goals affect the decision?  
Primary care was for the organizational needs. My personal goals and needs were seen as part of 
the Organizational needs.  
SEMI STRUCTURED INTERVIEW QUESTIONS-2 
Introduction  
1. What is your position in the company and what is your role?  
My current position title is Director of the Core Curriculum Program (CCP) at Qatar University 
(QU). My roles and responsibilities in brief are:  
 Providing strategic oversight and direction of the Program  
 Acts as a focal point with all stakeholders to ensure maintaining an educational 
environment and progression towards achieving CCP mission, objectives and learning 
outcomes  
2. What is the organizational structure in your company?  
The CCP mostly follows a flat or semi flat organizational structure with no middle management 
now existing between CCP Leadership (CCP Director) and employees (faculty and staff). The 
CCP is employing 21 employees in full-time equivalent (FTE) terms. A number of 11 internal 
committees are involved in the CCP governance structure. These committees provide support to 
the Program leadership in areas of curriculum, strategic planning, assessment, visibility and 
branding, media presence, scheduling, preparing for final exams, student engagement and 
outreach, professional development, updating and revising Program policies and procedures, 
among others. Moreover, a university-wide committee has been formed comprising 
representatives from colleges as well as students from the QU Student Representative Board. This 
committee is also involved in the CCP governance and programmatic oversight.    
3. How is your company performing?  
The achievement of CCP initiatives is regularly evaluated against the set objectives as part of 
strategic planning process. The CCP-established KPIs and initiatives are directly linked to the 
CCPs as well as QUs organizational goals. The CCP is generally performing well and advancing 
towards the achievement of set goals. Specifically, 90% of all actions have been successfully 
implemented, while 10% of them are still in progress for last years initiatives.     
 4. Do you consider the external environment stable or unstable?  
Let me say that the external environment for the CCP can be considered stable. Although the CCP 
has undergone overall enhancement process during the last two years, drastic changes to the 
Program have been avoided. Moreover, the CCP has consolidated collaboration and partnership 
opportunities with key stakeholders, which minimized any potential types of conflict. Although 
blockade on Qatar created some issues with student registration at first, such issues were properly 
managed by QU Leadership. 
5. Can you describe what could be a strategic decision for your company?  
In my viewpoint, a strategic decision is a decision that consequently drives the entire human and 
all other resources toward the achievement of one or more end strategic goals. In my case, the 
Programs vision, mission and objectives guide and harmonize this process. Such a decision is 
taken following an analysis of the Programs status quo, a SWOT analysis for instance. The 
progression towards the achievement of these goals are closely monitored and measured.     
 6. What type of strategic decisions you are required to make?  
At the onset of my ongoing journey with the CCP, most of the strategic decisions I was required 
to make were of analytical nature. I was new to the Program and was required to initiate a very 
complex process to advance the CCP and propose an enhancement plan to address some of the 
Programs shortcomings in a form of a CCP Enhancement Proposal. After two years of experience 
with the Program and with developed relations with stakeholders being built and consolidated, 
most of my decisions took  however controlled  an expertise and intuitive decision-making 
nature. Developing an overall enhancement proposal for our Program was not an easy task; it 
required a very well-structured analytical process yielding into many findings and proposed 
enhancement actions that are now in the process of implementations, hopefully by the beginning 
of Fall 2021 semester.  
Successful Decision Making Case  
7. Can you describe a successful strategic decision you made in the past?  
One of the successful strategic decisions I made was to prepare a CCP enhancement proposal 
involving no drastic changes or imply challenges that might hinder the implementation of 
enhancement actions. By investing quality time studying some previous reports and convening 
meetings with some people in the Program, I recognized many issues with the Program. 
Accordingly, I have met with all the members of my new team and assigned tasks among them. I 
started to contact and convene series of meetings with all stakeholders, including Vice President 
for Academic Affairs, colleges deans, associate deans for academic affairs, heads of departments, 
Program Directors and student representative boards, among others. I had access to a wide volume 
of information. To have all stakeholders involved in the enhancement process, I recommended 
forming a University-wide committee. I have formed an internal Program Review Taskforce to 
prepare the groundwork needed. A SWOT (Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, Threats) 
analysis of the current Core Curriculum Program was conducted in light of the QU new strategic 
plan 2018-2022 and QU graduate attributes as well as the benchmarking of our program with top 
universities in the region and the world. The purpose of the SWOT analysis was to examine 
internal and external factors that both positively and negatively affect the program in terms of 
curriculum, assessment, students, faculty, and administrative. 
8. Who were the people involved in the decision-making process?  
A committee consisting of representatives from all colleges  
9. What is the level of importance for the decision made?  
Extremely important as it would affect the whole university 
10. What is the level of uncertainty for the decision made?  
I would say medium 
11. Would you say that the decision was motivated by an opportunity or by a crisis?  
By both 
Rational elements 
12. How thoroughly did the group search and analyse information in making this decision?  
It was a long process 
13. Did you use analytic techniques in making the decision? If so, how important were they 
in the process?  
Yes (e.g., the blue ocean strategic framework) It was instrumental.  
14. How efficient was the group at focusing its attention on crucial information, ignoring 
irrelevant information?  
Very efficient  
15. Would you investigate the situation within the company as well as doing a site visit? 
Then would you make a decision on how to proceed based on your findings? 
It might be not relevant in our case, but I can say that we scanned the external environment  
16. To what extent was the decision affected by the use of authority and influence among 
group members?  
It was a group decision 
Heuristic elements 
17. Was your professional experience crucial while deliberating for the decision?  
18. Did your personal judgments influence you when making this decision? If so, to what 
extent? Somewhat influenced me 
19. Did your gut-feeling influence you when making this decision? If so, to what extent? 
Not really. I would say my intuition helped to some extent.  
20. Are you trying to be as sensitive and as supportive as possible to employees?  
SEMI STRUCTURED INTERVIEW QUESTIONS-3 
Introduction  
1. What is your position in the company and what is your role?  
Director of Research Planning and Development: 
 Coordinates the implementation and reporting on the research and graduate studies strategy. 
 Responsible for the implementation of core strategic initiatives, such as QU Research 
Priorities, Research Impact Framework, Undergraduate Research, Innovation and Research 
Commercialization. 
 Handles research and graduate studies sector annual reporting and planning. 
 Responsible for the enhancement and support for ethics committees: human subjects, animal 
research, and bio-hazardous material. 
 Oversees the quality assurance procedures in research centers (i.e., ISO). 
 Oversees the development of the research sector policies and procedures. 
 Responsible for the annual performance review of university research centers, the review of 
new research center proposals and the review of change requests from existing centers. 
2. What is the organizational structure in your company?  
http://www.qu.edu.qa/about/organization-structure  
3. How is your company performing?  
Not bad 
 4. Do you consider the external environment stable or unstable?  
External environment is changing rapidly. New universities are being established in Qatar. 
Research funding is changing every year without clear direction. It is a changing environment. 
5. Can you describe what could be a strategic decision for your company?  
We have various decisions on what needs to be done to reach the vision of the university. In 
research sector, we need to decide what areas of research are more important to invest in, for 
example. 
6. What type of strategic decisions you are required to make?  
We make various strategic decisions. Some decisions help us research our vision and achieve the 
university strategy. We have various new initiatives to enhance the university research impact 
(commercialization, national needs). We have also important decision enhancing reputation and 
finding strong partners.    
Successful Decision Making Case  
7. Can you describe a successful strategic decision you made in the past?  
I was responsible for developing the new internal grants systems. We designed new grants to have 
more impact by encouraging faculty to work in groups which include faculty, students, and for 
high impact grant should include the industry. We established KPIs per grant and proposed an 
annual review for the performance of internal grants. This worked and we now have much more 
robust system for internal grants. 
8. Who were the people involved in the decision-making process?  
Stakeholders: representative from colleges and research centers in the university research 
committee 
http://www.qu.edu.qa/about/organization-structure
Related Offices: Research Support office, research planning and development, and college of 
graduate studies 
Higher administration: President and vice president 
9. What is the level of importance for the decision made?  
Extremely important as it affects all research active faculty interested in funding.  
10. What is the level of uncertainty for the decision made?  
Medium as we have benchmarked existing models and looked at success regionally and internally. 
Our main task was to customize it for QU model and ensure it is implemented correctly. 
11. Would you say that the decision was motivated by an opportunity or by a crisis?  
Opportunity. Internal grants were being offered every year without big issues. But the strategic 
direction required a new way of looking at these grants.   
Rational elements 
12. How thoroughly did the group search and analyse information in making this decision?  
I would say we had some bias in looking at different model as some group members had experience 
in certain places. I would say we looked at regional models carefully and did not look deeply 
internationally. 
13. Did you use analytic techniques in making the decision? If so, how important were they 
in the process?  
No analytics except simple statistics were used. Other decision like choosing the research priorities 
we used more sophisticated analytics. 
14. How efficient was the group at focusing its attention on crucial information, ignoring 
irrelevant information?  
We were efficient due to our previous experiences as administrators and researchers. 
15. Would you investigate the situation within the company as well as doing a site visit? Then 
would you make a decision on how to proceed based on your findings? 
Yes, I visited universities in Saudi and Oman to understand their general research governance and 
funding schemes. Also, for research priorities we had various sites visits to our industrial 
stakeholders as well as large events with industry consultation sessions. These experience shape 
the different proposals we develop and then we make decisions. 
16. To what extent was the decision affected by the use of authority and influence among 
group members?  
We have enough time to look at the evidence and collect data. But after some discussion, we need 
to reach a decision so sometimes as a group leader I used my authority to move in certain direction. 
Heuristic elements 
17. Was your professional experience crucial while deliberating for the decision?  
Yes, most committee members had excellent experience and more experienced members had 
larger contribution.  
18. Did your personal judgments influence you when making this decision? If so, to what 
extent?  
Definitely, personal judgements play a role. It is hard to say the extent. Each person has his own 
opinion and background. We tried to look at the same data and make things standard but always 
personal backgrounds of each member is present. 
19. Did your gut-feeling influence you when making this decision? If so, to what extent? 
Not at all. It is a discussion with input from various members. 
20. Are you trying to be as sensitive and as supportive as possible to employees?  
I try to be supportive to the team in providing information and facilitating a platform to share data 
and discuss. I am not sure what sensitive means but we consider each person time and effort to 
ensure tasks can be comfortably. 
21. Did group members primarily care about their own goals, or with the goals of the 
organization? Did your own personal goals affect the decision?  
I think most members care about the organization goal and their unit goal. Personal goals are 
always present as well but working in a group reduces it. 
Thank you very much for you time. Is there anything you would like to add? 
Each project is handled differently depending on the level of impact, the relationship with the 
stakeholders, and expected outcomes. 
The following follow up questions can be used during the interview for more clarifications: 
1) Can you explain that further? 
Some projects are hard to discuss widely with all the stakeholder as you have strong resistance. If 
resistance and access to information is not managed well it can lead to the project failure before 
starting.   
2) Can you give an example of that? 
The new system for faculty and center appraisal. We took high level input from stakeholders. But 
with benchmarking and extensive work, we have developed a complete proposal within a 
committee and presented the final outcome. It was hard to have representatives from these center 
as they was some resistance to change.  
3) Was there anything unexpected that happened? 
No. The systems were refined with stakeholders and we gave them a year to adapt so 
implementation went fine. 
21. Did group members primarily care about their own goals, or with the goals of the 
organization? Did your own personal goals affect the decision?  
I tried to get everyone in my team think beyond their personal goals and focus on the organization 
goal.  
SEMI STRUCTURED INTERVIEW QUESTIONS-4 
Introduction  
1. What is your position in the company and what is your role?  
2. What is the organizational structure in your company?  
3. How is your company performing?  
4. Do you consider the external environment stable or unstable?  
5. Can you describe what could be a strategic decision for your company?  
6. What type of strategic decisions you are required to make?  
 Im the Chief Administrative Officer in Aspetar. As top executives, Im in charge of all hospital 
administrative matters such as strategic planning, communication management, financial 
planning, and analysis, includes working for critical to check on project implementation and 
business performance. 
 Our hospital is performing the global leader in Sports Medicine & Exercise Science. 
 I believe that the external environment is stable as you can see how fast-paced environment 
Qatar become now by the support of our country leader. 
 We are concentrating on overall strategic planning to make our vision as global leader in Sports 
Medicine be fulfilled and so far, Aspetar is emerging to be a leading hospital in terms of Sports 
Medicine and Exercise Science.  
 Strategic decisions are taken in accordance with organizational mission, and vision, patient 
experience and safety and as per Authority Matrix. 
Successful Decision Making Case  
7. Can you describe a successful strategic decision you made in the past?  
8. Who were the people involved in the decision-making process?  
9. What is the level of importance for the decision made?  
10. What is the level of uncertainty for the decision made?  
11. Would you say that the decision was motivated by an opportunity or by a crisis?  
 One of the strategic decisions Ive made in the recent past is prioritizing employees and 
enhanced their well-being that approach resulting in the right conditions for all our employees 
to give of their best each day, committed to the hospital goals and values, motivated to 
contribute to hospitals success. 
 Key leadership members, data, and our employees: by employee-for employee. 
 It is especially important to have engagement in healthcare in our hospital as this is the key to 
perform their capabilities and potentials. It is a two-way commitment and communication 
between the hospital and its employees. This also the extension to which employees feel 
passionate about their work and how committed they are in the hospital that impacts patient 
experience.  
 There is no uncertainty in making this decision because the employees are ones that drive the 
success of your organization. 
 Decisions is always weighed on how to pursue your organizations mission and vision and 
work environment. 
Rational elements 
12. How thoroughly did the group search and analyse information in making this decision?  
13. Did you use analytic techniques in making the decision? If so, how important were they 
in the process?  
14. How efficient was the group at focusing its attention on crucial information, ignoring 
irrelevant information?  
15. Would you investigate the situation within the company as well as doing a site visit? Then 
would you make a decision on how to proceed based on your findings? 
16. To what extent was the decision affected by the use of authority and influence among 
group members? 
 I always make sure that I meet my team every week to focus on our goals, discuss our 
objectives, analyse our date and make our decisions possible. 
 Yes, we use analytical techniques as one of our methods to help us to see it also in different 
perspectives by brainstorming ideas, focusing on our goals, doing surveys. 
 We are effectively efficient in focusing our attention to details especially the cruciality of the 
information as one of our values is accountability and integrity. 
 Yes, we have investigation committee and we do detailed procedure in investigation within 
our hospital when theres a need to do so and ensure it is legally compliant.  
 The decision is used to manage conflict peacefully and fairly. 
Heuristic elements 
17. Was your professional experience crucial while deliberating for the decision?  
18. Did your personal judgments influence you when making this decision? If so, to what 
extent?  
19. Did your gut-feeling influence you when making this decision? If so, to what extent? 
20. Are you trying to be as sensitive and as supportive as possible to employees?  
21. Did group members primarily care about their own goals, or with the goals of the 
organization? Did your own personal goals affect the decision?  
 Yes, as we have policies and procedures to be compliant with.  
 Yes, it is also one of the factors that influence us in making decisions as a responsible leader; 
as you have to live your values, build trust, listen to understand, add value to others, 
demonstrate courage and shared power and control to drive engagement. 
 Im very supportive as much as possible to our employees as Ive said earlier, employees is 
our drive to success.  
APPENDIX 11: COVID-19 IMPACTING ON RESEARCH IN QATAR 
According to the Qatari Ministry of Public Health, the total number of infected people who 
recovered from COVID 19 since the start of the epidemic is 329,853 with 652 deaths (MOPH, 
2021) within a total population of 3,138,210 residents including almost 320.000 Qatari nationals 
and 87% of all residents have had two vaccine doses. The Ministry of Public Health dedicated 
three facilities to accommodate COVID-19 patients: including the Communicable Disease Centre, 
the Cuban Hospital, and Hazm Mebaireek General Hospital. The government allowed partial 
functioning of some workplaces. Yet, a few key workplace settings remained relatively fully 
operational such as the health sector and the airport.  
The Qatari Ministry of Public Health stated Qatar is currently administering the Pfizer/BioNTech 
vaccine and the Moderna vaccine after approving it for emergency use by the Department of 
Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Control in the Ministry of Public Health noting that it will be free 
of charge for everyone. All citizens and residents aged (12 years and above) could be vaccinated 
regardless of their health conditions although people with a history of severe allergic reaction to 
any component of the vaccine should not take it. During the pre-vaccination assessment carried 
out before each vaccination, the medical team will ask the patient about any allergies and discuss 
this with them. Monitoring everyone receiving the vaccines for a period of up to 15 minutes 
following the vaccination to ensure there are no adverse reactions. The vaccine will be also 
available for recovered people who have been infected although research to date indicates that 
people who have been infected with COVID-19 build-up natural immunity it is unclear how long 
this immunity last for and how effective it is. Pregnant or breastfeeding women have the freedom 
to postpone the vaccine upon doctors request; the third booster dose will be eligible after 6 months 
from the second dose especially for some categories that are in high risk, including: 
 Those receiving cancer treatments to treat tumors or leukemia 
 Those with advanced or untreated HIV infection 
 Those with chronic conditions such as asplenia and chronic kidney disease 
 Those who have had an organ transplant and are using drugs that suppress the immune 
system 
 Those with moderate or severe primary immunodeficiency 
 Those who have had a stem cell transplant within the past two years or are using 
immunosuppressive drugs.  
At the date of writing 931, 418 booster doses have been administered (MOPH, 2022). 
The pandemic decreased the work efficiency due to the restricted lockdown and the way work has 
changed from offices to online from home, even though the researcher had more time to work on 
the research, but still working from the office was preferable so that thoughts could be shared with 
colleagues, keeping in touch with their teams, and collecting data, whereas at home it was better 
to work on the manuscript, reading the literature, and analyse their data. These results draw 
attention to how working from home became a major element of researchers life and those new 
ways of working had to be learnt: along with coping strategies in order to obtain any interviews 
Data collection through interviews was made impossible because of rapidly changing schedules of 
the researcher and any potential interviewee executives. due to the pandemic and the spreading of 
the Covid 19 virus in Qatar. All interviews were initially cancelled due to the quarantine or people 
being afraid to meet and the requirement of social distancing - even the ones that were pushed to 
another date depended on the governmental procedures to deal with the circumstancing and 
interviews were completed with caution. Face to face interviews proved to be very comfortable 
because of the requirement to wear face masks the whole time and social distancing and due to the 
anxiety of participants little deep information was obtained. 
People remain under lockdown and enacted social distancing; making it impossible to have 
relationships as they were before COVID 19. At the most basic level, the way people relate to 
other people outside our households is unlike anything that had ever been experienced. People 
used to engage closely with others in business, recreational, retail and religious settings, but in 
COVID times they now never shake hands and move more rapidly to distance themselves from 
each other. Oral communication proceeds at a distance or preferably via an electronic device. Most 
schools closed and have changed to online teaching and people everywhere, who had always relied 
on teachers and the school infrastructure, now had to use computers and home life became 
increasing difficult. Some parents stopped paying tuition fees for higher education students and 
students become less interested in studying because there is no physical contact with tutors. Parents 
faced difficulties in making their younger children finish any schoolwork and daycare providers 
were closed or were reduced to 20% of their intake. The government decided to stop all incoming 
flights to Doha, from Monday, March 16, 2020 and applied the governmental quarantine laws so 
that home quarantine was mandatory on arrival for all people coming to Qatar from any destination 
and for a period of 14 days. While it is possible to move within the country, public transport 
services, including the Doha metro service and public transport bus services were stopped. Most 
of the industrial area was closed starting on March 17, 2020 and testing for the virus was increased, 
in an attempt to prevent the virus spreading further. However, the government was keen not to 
affect the daily life of the residents of the industrial areas, and the Ministry of Administrative 
Development, Labor and Social Affairs along with the Qatar Charity, provided masks, sterilizers, 
and other protective equipment. Salaries continued to be paid. From March 17, 2020, retail stores 
and bank branches in malls were closed, as were shopping centers (excluding food stores and 
pharmacies), other shops, gyms, salons and club activities in hotels. On March 21, 2020, the Prime 
Minister, the minister of the interior and the chairman of the Supreme Committee for Crisis 
Management issued a decree to impose precautionary measures to prevent all forms of assembly, 
by the authority of the law (such as meeting in parks, public beaches, and all forms of social 
gatherings), in an effort to stop the spread of the Corona virus (Covid-19). The Council of Ministers 
decided (on 18th March, 2020 and strengthen further on 1st April, 2020) to reduce the number of 
employees in government agencies, and workers present at workplaces in the private sector were 
limited to 20% of the total number of employees.  At least 80% of people worked from home.  
Further, The Ministry of Commerce and Industry, in coordination with the relevant authorities, 
also decided to reduce working hours to six working hours per day for essential employees and 
workers who are at their workplace in both the public and private sectors. On April 22, 2020, the 
Council of Ministers decided that employees and workers in the government sectors where most 
workers are in close contact with patients, clients or customers should wear masks to carry out 
their work and tasks, bearing in mind that officials in this sector also provide those masks. On May 
18, 2020, the Council of Ministers decided that all citizens and residents were obligated to install 
and use the EHTERAZ app on smartphones when leaving the house for any reason. EHTERAZ 
tracks the transmission chains of the spread of the Corona virus, providing users with accurate 
information and assisting the medical teams involved in providing health care as and when 
necessary. The app alerts users in the event of a contact with an infected case, ensuring that testing 
and medical care could be administered in a timely manner. Similar measures were undertaken in 
the UK and supervision was restricted to zoom and phone calls rather than face to face. 
Additionally detailed face to face research conversations and discussions over hard copies of 
printed drafts were no longer possible. 
