This thesis entitled Deformation of 113Cs from Proton-emission and Electro-
magnetic Transition Rates was submitted by Mr Duncan Hodge on the 5th
of December 2016 to the University of Manchester for the degree of Doctor of
Philosophy.
Studying nuclei beyond the proton dripline can provide valuable information on
the structure of nuclei at the limits of stability, where the strong nuclear force
starts to be overcome by Coulomb repulsion between protons. Simple experi-
mental observables, such as excitation energies and lifetimes of excited states in
these proton-unbound nuclei can provide information on the nuclear wavefunc-
tion. Experimental data, such as that presented in this work, can then be used
to improve models of nuclear structure at the proton dripline.
This thesis presents data from a recoil-decay tagged differential plunger experi-
ment undertaken at the University of Jyvaskyla in 2014. A fusion-evaporation
reaction was used to populate excited states in the deformed ground-state proton
emitter 113Cs. The JUROGAM-RITU-GREAT experimental setup was used to
correlate  rays emitted from these excited states with protons emitted from 113Cs
and the differential plunger for unbound nuclear states (DPUNS) was placed at
the target position to measure the excited state lifetimes.
The lifetime of the (11/2+) state in the most intense rotational band of 113Cs was
measured to be  = 24(6) ps, while a limit of   5 ps was found for the lifetime
of the higher energy (15/2+) state. The lifetime of proton emission was measured
to be  = 24.2(2) s.
The experimental data were used to test the predictions of a nonadiabatic quasi-
particle model for proton-emitting nuclei, which was employed to deduce the
deformation of the states in 113Cs. Wavefunctions from the nonadiabatic quasi-
particle model were used to independently calculate proton-emission rates, -ray
transition rates and excited state energies as functions of deformation. The de-
formation of 113Cs could then be extracted from the intersection of the different
theoretical values and experimental observables. A deformation of 2 = 0.22(6)
was extracted from the (11/2+) excitation energy and lifetime. The deforma-
tion values taken from the proton-emission rate and the lifetime limit of the
(15/2+) state were also consistent with this value. The consistency of the different
deformations calculated shows the effectiveness of the nonadiabatic quasiparticle
method when used to calculate the properties of deformed ground-state proton-
emitters.