As sessile organisms, plants must be able to adapt to and exploit their 
environment in order to survive. A key aspect of this is the ability of plants to 
remodel their root system architecture in order to carry out the essential 
functions of providing anchorage and nutrient and water uptake from the 
surrounding soil. Soil typically contains a huge variety of microorganisms 
which will likely include species which are potentially harmful or beneficial to 
the plant, as well as a range of abiotic conditions.  
 One way in which plants can adapt their root systems in response to 
their environment is via the formation of new lateral roots. Lateral roots 
generally emerge perpendicularly to the primary root or other lateral roots and 
increase the surface area of the root system and the range of exploration. 
Genes involved in the regulation of lateral root formation in Arabidopsis 
thaliana were investigated by using fluorescence activated cell sorting over a 
timecourse. Gene expression changes over time in response to nitrogen 
application or Sinorhizobium meliloti inoculation, both of which are associated 
with the regulation of lateral root development, were investigated in cells of the 
pericycle, from which lateral roots derive, and an overlaying cell type, the 
cortex. Gene expression was found to be highly cell-type specific between the 
two cell types and this was conserved during environmental responses. 
 The formation of root nodules by legumes represents another 
quintessential example of a modification of the root to adapt to the 
environment. During conditions of nitrogen starvation, the plant can form 
structures on the root which can be colonized by symbiotic nitrogen-fixing 
bacteria in the soil called rhizobia. In the nodule, atmospheric nitrogen is 
reduced by the bacteria and utilized by the host plant. The intersection 
between plant defence responses and symbiosis was investigated in the 
model legume Medicago truncatula to try and identify genes involved in 
distinguishing rhizobia as symbionts rather than as pathogens. Putative novel 
markers of defence and symbiosis were identified that may underpin this 
transition.