Leguminous plants (or legumes) are well-known for their symbiotic relationship 
with nitrogen (N) fixing soil bacteria (rhizobia). Through providing a niche to rhizobia in 
specialized root organelles called nodules and in exchange for plant sugars and nutrients, 
leguminous plants gain access to the nitrogen fixed by the bacteria. As a result, nodulating 
plant species can grow in N-depleted soil while most non-legume crop plants require N-
fertilizers to reach significant yields. A family of peptides, called Nodule-specific Cysteine-
Rich (NCR) peptides, play important roles in rhizobial differentiation and nodulation in 
certain legumes (e.g., Medicago truncatula) belonging to the Inverted-Repeat Lacking Clade 
(IRLC). Interestingly, a subset of these NCR gene promoters contain the Evening 
Element (EE), a cis-regulatory motif which acts as a binding site for a number of plant 
circadian transcription factors including LATE-ELONGATED HYPOCOTYL (LHY). 
In order to characterize a potential LHY-NCR-nodulation mechanism, a free-running 
time-course experiment was carried out where M. truncatula A17 nodules, roots and leaves 
were sampled over 48 hours. Gene expression analysis through RNA sequencing revealed 
around 5% of all M. truncatula genes were diurnally oscillating in nodules, including 45 
NCRs genes. More than half of these NCRs were highly expressed in the evening period 
and a significant number of them contain EE motif in their promoters. This supports the 
hypothesis that these NCRs are negatively regulated by the morning expressed circadian 
transcription factor, LHY. Furthermore, we have shown that the loss of LHY function 
leads to reduced nodulation and plant growth. In line with a regulatory role for the clock 
in nodule metabolic activity, when we clustered different rhythmically expressed plant and 
rhizobial genes in nodules into four time-of-day groups, we found that modulation of 
metabolism occurs in waves. This elaborated our understanding of the function of known 
rhythmic processes (inc. photosynthesis, carbohydrate metabolism) and identified novel 
functional links. In parallel to the LHY-NCR gene expression study, two cortex-specific 
GFP expression vectors were prepared and analyzed that could be useful for cell-type 
specific gene expression in future since the cortex is a site of nodule development. 
Application of our data is likely to enable us to maximize symbiotic N-fixation and 
potentially help us to employ such features in non-legume crop plants, bringing 
considerable benefits.